 January 1, 1959 President Fulgencio Batista flees Cuba and Fidel Castro assumes power . Fidel Castro assumed power in Santiago after a six-year long revolution .
 Cuba declares Fidel Castro to be the new premier and president February 2, 1959 . Fidel Castro declared Cuba's first Cuban prime minister and president in 1959 . Cuba declared Fidel Castro's government in 1959 after the death of Fidel Castro .
 Turkey and the U.S. agree to deploy fifteen nuclear-tipped Jupiter missiles in Turkey starting on June 1, 1961 . The missiles were deployed in Turkey by the United States in 1959 .
 Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan negotiates economic and trade agreements that help Fidel Castro to deccrease Cuba's economic dependence on the U.S. February 4-13, 1960 .
 The United States stops the import of Cuban sugar, effectively cutting off 80 percent of Cuban exports to the U.S. July 8, 1960 . The U.K. stops the imports of sugar .
 The Soviet Union agrees to buy sugar previously destined for the United States market . July 9, 1960, Soviet Union buys sugar previously bound for the U.S. market .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev supports Cuba in dispute with United States over Guatanamo Bay military base . July 12, 1960 Soviet leader supported Cuba over dispute with U.S. over Guantanamo Bay . July 13, 1960 .
 August 28, 1960 The United States imposes a trade embargo against Cuba . The U.S. imposed the embargo on Cuba in 1960 .
 September 1960 The first large Soviet Bloc arms shipment arrives in Cuba . September 1960 was the first large arms shipment to arrive in Cuba from the Soviet bloc . September 1961 was the start of the Cuban revolution .
 Czech and Soviet technicians are reportedly assisting the Cuban military in assembling equipment and installing weapons such as anti-aircraft batteries . The Cuban military is said to be assembling equipment .
 Soviet Bloc personnel also begin to be employed as military instructors, advisers and technicians . The Soviets are now employed as instructors and technicians for the first time since the Cold War .
 Cuba nationalizes U.S. private investments on the island worth approximately one billion dollars . October 6, 1960 Cubans nationalize United States private investments worth approximately $1 billion . Cuba also nationalizes United States investments worth $1billion .
 Cuba openly aligns itself with the domestic and foreign policies of the Soviet Union . Cuba indicates its solidarity with the Sino-Soviet Bloc. December 19, 1960 .
 The U.S. is trying to present the case as though rocket bases of the Soviet Union are being set up or are already established in Cuba . What is more is more, they are trying to . present . as though . they are . setting up or establishing rocket bases in Cuba
 January 3, 1961 The United States and Cuba sever diplomatic and consular relations . The U.S. and Cuba cut diplomatic relations in 1961 . The two countries have been at odds for decades .
 January 20, 1961 John F Kennedy is inaugurated as the thirty-fifth president of the U.S. John F. Kennedy was inaugurated in 1961 .
 On the eve of the invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs, President Kennedy decides that U.S. armed forces will not take part in the operation . President Kennedy decided not to participate in the invasion .
 B-26 bombers piloted by Cuban exiles attack air bases in Cuba . April 14, 1961, was the day of the attacks .
 The raid, coordinated by the CIA, is designed to destroy as much of Castro's air power as possible before the scheduled landing of a force of U.S.-trained Cuban exiles . The raid is scheduled to take place before a planned landing of exiles from Cuba .
 An additional set of airstrikes on Cuban airfields is canceled . However, to keep the United States connection from becoming public, the U.S. connection is not being kept secret .
 Cuban aircraft which survived the earlier airstrikes are able to pin the invasion force on the beachhead . Without additional supplies of ammunition, the invaders are quickly crushed by Cuban ground forces .
 Sarper objects to Rusk's suggestion, pointing out that the Turkish Parliament has just approved appropriations for the missiles . He says it would be embarrassing for the Turkish government to inform Parliament that the Jupiters now are to be withdrawn .
 Rusk briefs President Kennedy on his discussion with Sarper . President Kennedy accepts the idea of some delay in removing the Jupiters .
 June 3-4, 1961 President Kennedy meets with Premier Khrushchev in Vienna . President Kennedy met with Premier Khrushchev in Vienna . Kennedy and Khrushchchev met in 1961 .
 Khrushchev delivers an ultimatum on the status of Berlin, a continuing source of tension between the two superpowers . On the second day of the summit, the Soviet-Russian summit was held in Berlin . The two nations met for the first time in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev threatens to ""normalize"" the situation in Berlin if the city's status is not resolved within six months . The situation is not expected to be normalised if the status of Berlin does not improve .
 General Maxwell Taylor submits a report on limited war programs that President Kennedy had ordered following the Bay of Pigs invasion . President Kennedy ordered a limited war program following the invasion .
 Taylor calls for the creation of a new program of action against Cuba, possibly employing the full range of political, military, economic, and psychological tactics . Taylor says there is no long term living with Castro as a neighbor .
 Nikita Khrushchev allows his ""deadlines"" on resolving the Berlin question to pass . However, the construction of the Berlin Wall staunches the destabilizing flow of East Germans to the West, and Nikita allows his "deadlines" to pass wi thai .
 National Intelligence Estimate 11-8/1/1-61 is disseminated within the government . September 21, 1961 inter-agency report on Soviet nuclear capabilities is published in Washington .
 The NIE and later intelligence reports show for the first time that the Soviet ICBM program is far behind previous U.S. estimates . NIE: NIE shows that the Soviets ICBM is far ahead of previous estimates .
 Only some ten to twenty-five Soviet ICBMs on launchers are believed to exist, with no major increase in Soviet ICBM strength expected in the near future .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric publicly deflates the ""missile gap"" hypothesis . The theory that the U.S. is dangerously behind the Soviet Union in its nuclear capabilities .
 Gilpatric says the U.S. actually possessed a substantially larger nuclear arsenal than the Soviet Union . He says the United States actually had a larger arsenal than Russia did . The United States has a much larger arsenal of nuclear weapons than Russia, he says .
 President Kennedy authorizes a major new covert action program aimed at overthrowing the Cuban government . November 30, 1961, President Kennedy authorized the program to take on Cuba .
 The new program, codenamed Operation MONGOOSE, will be directed by counterinsurgency specialist Edward G Lansdale under the guidance of Attorney General Robert Kennedy .
 Task Force W operates under guidance from the SGA and will involve approximately four hundred Americans at CIA headquarters and its Miami station . About two thousand Cubans, a private navy of speedboats, and an annual budget of some $50 million .
 Task Force W carr ies out a wide range of activities, mostly against Cuban ships and aircraft outside Cuba . Activities include contaminating shipments of sugar from Cuba and tampering with industrial products .
 The New Year's Day parade in Cuba provides U.S. intelligence sources with the first reliable intelligence on the extent of Soviet Bloc arms deliveries to Cuba .
 Aircraft in the possession of the Cuban Revolutionary Air Force are estimated to include around sixty Soviet-built jet fighters, primarily MiG-15 and MiG17 aircraft with a limited number of more advanced aircraft .
 Small numbers of helicopters and light transport aircraft are also believed to have been provided to Cuba . Cuba is believed to be one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 January 18, 1962 Edward Lansdale outlines ""The Cuba Project,"" a program under Operation MONGOOSE aimed at the overthrow of the Castro government . Lansdale outlined the program in 1962 .
 The program is designed to develop a ""strongly motivated political action movement" within Cuba capable of generating a revolt eventually leading to the downfall of the Castro government . The program was designed to encourage a revolt against the government .
 Lansdale envisioned that the U.S. would provide overt support in the final stages of an uprising, including, if necessary, using military force . Lansdale: "If necessary, the United States would use military force"
 January 19, 1962 A meeting of the SGA is held in Robert Kennedy 's office . Robert Kennedy was President of the United States .
 McManus attributes the phrase ""top priority in the United States government--no time, money...to be spared"" to Attorney General Kennedy .
 OAS members are prohibited from selling arms to Cuba . OAS also set measures for collective defense against Cuban activities in the hemisphere .
 February 1962 The Joint Chiefs of Staff establishes a ""first priority basis" for the completion of all contingency plans for military action against Cuba . February 1962 Joint Chiefs establish a "first priority" basis for all military action plans .
 At a meeting of the SGA , the scale of Lansdale 's ""Cuba Project"" is sharply reduced . Lansdale is directed to develop a detailed plan for an intelligence-gathering program only .
 On March 1, the SGA confirms that the immediate objective of the program would be intelligence collection . All other actions would be inconspicuous and consistent with the U.S. overt policy of isolating Castro and neutralizing Cuban influence in the hemisphere .
 April 1962 United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey become operational . April 1962 U.S. Jupiter missiles were launched in Turkey by the United States in 1962 .
 All positions are reported ""ready and manned"" by United States personnel . U.S. personnel are reported to be in the United States .
 Khrushchev reflects on Turkish missiles and reportedly conceives the idea of deploying similar weapons in Cuba . While vacationing in the Crimea, across the Black sea from Turkey .
 Soviet sources have identified three reasons that might have led Khrushchev to pursue the idea seriously . Soviet sources identify three reasons to consider the idea .
 Khrushchev asks a group of his closest advisers, including Frol Kozlov, Commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces Sergei Biryuzov, Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, and Marshal Malinovsky to evaluate the idea . Mikoyan is opposed to the idea, but
 The group proposes that a mission be sent to Cuba to see if Fidel Castro would agree to the deployment . The mission would determine whether the deployment could be undertaken without being detected by the U.S.
 Moscow considers installation of missiles in Cuba . May 1962: Deliberations regarding the possible installation of missile missiles continue .
 Khrushchev informs the newly designated ambassador to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseyev, of the plan . In early May, the plan was revealed to the newly-designated ambassador to the island nation .
 Alekseyev and Marshal Biryuzov should secretly travel to Cuba to explore the question with Castro . Although Aleksyev expresses concern over the idea, it is decided to secretly travel there to explore it .
 Khrushchev authorizes Soviet military officials to decide on the exact composition of nuclear forces to be deployed in Cuba . Following further discussions in May and June, Khrushchen authorizes the decision to decide independently .
 The military proposes a force of twenty-four medium-range ballistic missile launchers and sixteen intermediate-range launchers . Each of the launchers would be equipped with two missiles and a nuclear warhead . The force would be armed with missiles and warheads .
 Soviet officials decide that a large contingent of Soviet combat forces should be sent to Cuba . Soviet officials also decide to send combat forces into Cuba .
 The proposed Soviet contingen t includes four elite combat regiments, twenty-four advanced SA-2 surface-to-air missile batteries and forty-two MiG-21 interceptors . The proposed contingen . includes . twenty-twenty-twelve advanced SA .2 surface
 A multi-service military exercise designed to test contingency planning for Cuba begins in 1962 . May 8, 1962, was the first major military exercise to take place in Cuba since 1961 .
 Another U.S. military exercise in the Caribbean known as JUPITER SPRINGS is planned for sometime in the spring or summer . The exercise will take place in the early spring or early summer .
 Soviet and Cuban sources have suggested that the series of U.S. military exercises conducted in the region throughout the year are perceived as additional evidence of United States intentions to invade Cuba . The exercises are believed to be part of a series of exercises conducted by the United States .
 Sharif Rashidov, an alternate member of the Soviet Presidium, arrives in Cuba with a delegation on a ten-day mission to study irrigation problems . May 29, 1962, was the first Soviet delegation to visit Cuba .
 The presence of the ambassador-designate in Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseyev, Marshal Biryuzov, and two or three military experts is not known to the U.S. The presence is unknown to the United States .
 Khrushchev tells Presidium members that Soviet Union plans to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . Soviet Union will broach the idea with the Cuban government . Biryuzov and Alekseyev are expected to broach idea with government .
 The Soviet delegation meets with Fidel Castro and his brother Raul, the Cuban Minister of Defense . Fidel Castro is the leader of the Soviet delegation .
 Castro responds by calling the idea ""interesting,"" but tells the group that he will need to consult with his colleagues before providing a final answer . Castro says he will consult with colleagues before making a final decision .
 Fidel Castro tells Soviet officials that Cuba will accept the deployment of nuclear weapons . Che Guevara, Osvaldo Dorticos and Blas Roca were also present at the ceremony .
 Since the crisis, Castro and other Cuban sources have suggested that this decision was made not only because the missiles would serve to deter a U.S. invasion but also because the Cuban government wished to shift the ""correlation of forces"" in favor of socialism .
 Havana felt indebted to the Soviet Union for its support of the Cuban revolution . Havana felt also indebted to Russia for support of its revolution in Cuba .
 Marshal Biryuzov seeks to determine if deployment could be done without detection by the U.S. or others . Marshal: Deployment could be accomplished without detection from the United States .
 Khrushchev is told that Castro has accepted the offer to place missiles in Cuba . Biryuzov reports that he believes such a deployment could be carried out covertly .
 During these discussions, detailed arrangements are made for the missile deployment .
 The agreement is renewable every five years, and is renewable . The missiles and their servicing will be under the jurisdiction of the Soviet military command .
 Raul Castro spends a total of two weeks consulting with Soviet officials before returning to Cuba on July 17 . Castro returns to Cuba for two weeks before returning home to Cuba .
 Soviet cargo ships begin moving out of the Black Sea for Cuba with false declarations of their destinations and reporting tonnages well below their capacities .
 Aerial reconnaissance would confirm that the vessels carried unusually light cargo, typically a sign that military equipment is being transported . Aerial reconnaissance of the ships in the following months showed them ""riding high in the water"
 Raúl Castro leaves Moscow after two weeks of secret talks with Nikita Khrushchev and other high-ranking Soviet officials on the scheduled deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 The United States intelligence community at first thought that the mission had failed . Although aware of the military make-up of the Cuban delegation, the fact that no public communiqué is issued after the visit leads the U.S. intelligence community to believe the mission failed .
 President Kennedy had already made up his mind to invade Cuba, he asserts . Cuba has acquired new arms to beat back such a direct attack, he says .
 August 1962 United States intelligence receive several reports of Soviet missiles in Cuba during the month . All of the reports were either linked to SAM or cruise missiles or shown to be incorrect . August 1962
 CIA Director John McCone dictates a memorandum for the President expressing the belief that Soviet MRBMs are destined for Cuba . After late August, numbers of such reports increase, as do reported sightings of MiG-21s and IL-28 .
 McCone's memorandum is sent over the objections of subordinates concerned that McCone has no hard evidence to back up his suspicions . McCone sends memo over objections that he lacks hard evidence .
 Aleksandr Alekseyev was the Soviet ambassador to Cuba in 1962 . He arrived in Havana to take up his post in Havana . He was the first Soviet diplomat to head to Cuba .
 Alekseyev delivers to Fidel Castro the text of the agreement governing missile deployment . Raúl Castro had worked out the deal during his June visit to Moscow . The deal was signed by the Castro brothers .
 Castro makes a few corrections in the text and gives it to Che Guevara to take to Moscow in late August . Castro makes it to Moscow to take it to the city . Castro gives the text back to the original version of the text .
 CIA Director John McCone states that circumstantial evidence suggests that the Soviet Union is constructing offensive missile installations in Cuba . August 17, 1962 .
 Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara disagree with McCone, arguing that the build-up is purely defensive . McNamara and Rusk argue that the building-up of the U.S. military response is defensive .
 August 20, 1962 Maxwell Taylor informs President Kennedy in a memo that the SGA sees no likelihood that the Castro government can be overthrown without direct U.S. military intervention . The memo was sent to the White House by Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the .
 Taylor reports that the SGA recommends a more aggressive OPERATION MONGOOSE program . Taylor says the program should be more aggressive . Taylor: The SGA has recommended a 'more aggressive' program .
 President Kennedy calls a meeting of the National Security Council to air John McCone's concerns that Soviet missiles were in the process of being introduced into Cuba . August 23, 1962 President Kennedy called the meeting to air concerns .
 Kennedy concludes the meeting by saying that a contingency plan should be drawn up to deal with a situation in which Soviet nuclear missiles are deployed .
 Kennedy requests that the Defense Department investigate what actions could be taken to remove U.S. Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey . Kennedy also wants to investigate what could be done to remove the missiles from the country .
 Che Guevara, Cuba's Minister of Industries, and Emilio Aragonés Navarro, a close associate of Fidel Castro, arrive in the Soviet Union in 1962 . August 26, 1962, was the Cuban ambassador to the USSR .
 On August 30, Guevara and Aragonés meet with Nikita Khrushchev at his dacha in the Crimea, where he delivers Castro's amendments to the Soviet-Cuban agreement governing the deployment of missiles in Cuba . The two men meet in Crimea at Khrush
 Guevara urges Khrushchev to announce missile deployment publicly, but he declines to do so . The Soviet premier declines to announce the deployment of the missiles publicly . Guegara was assassinated in 1968 .
 The agreement is never signed by Khrushchev . Possibly to preclude the Cuban government from leaking it . The agreement never signed .
 Guevara and Aragonés return to Cuba on September 6 . Following additional talks in Prague, they will meet again in Cuba .
 A high-altitude U-2 surveillance flight provides conclusive evidence of the existence of the SA-2 SAM missile sites at eight different locations in Cuba . August 29, 1962 .
 Additional reconnaissance shortly thereafter also positively identifies coastal defense cruise missile installations for the first time . Additional reconnaissance later identified coastal defense missile installations .
 U-2 photography of the area around San Cristóbal, Cuba, where the first nuclear missile sites were later detected, reveals no evidence of construction at this time .
 Kennedy repeats that he has seen no evidence that Soviet troops were stationed in Cuba . Kennedy says there is no information as yet regarding the possible presence of air defense missiles in Cuba. Kennedy says he has no evidence of Soviet troops in Cuba and that there is still no information regarding possible air defense
 President Kennedy is informed that the August 29 U-2 mission has confirmed the presence of SAM batteries in Cuba . August 31, 1962 President Kennedy was informed by the U.2 mission .
 Keating urges President Kennedy to take action and proposes that the OAS send an investigative team to Cuba . Keating: OAS should send a team to investigate .
 Keating made firm declarations based on rumors and reports that U.S. intelligence officials consider too "soft" to be definitive . Keating's sources of information remain unclear .
 Soviet troops belonging to four elite armored brigades are believed to have begun arriving in Cuba at this time . Soviet troops believed to be believed to arrive in Cuba this month .
 Troops belonging to the combat groups continue to embark through the second week of October . Troops from combat groups will embark on the mission through October .
 At President Kennedy 's request, Walt Rostow submits his assessment of the Soviet military build-up . September 3, 1962 .
 Rostow recommends that current OPERATION MONGOOSE activities be intensified . Rostow also suggests studying the possibility of having independent anti-Castro groups oust Castro with minimal U.S. assistance . He recommends that the United States should study the possibility .
 Dobrynin tells the attorney general that he has been instructed by Premier Khrushchev to assure President Kennedy that there would be no surface-to-surface missiles or offensive weapons placed in Cuba . Dobrynhinin says he was instructed to assure Kennedy that no weapons would be placed in
 Robert Kennedy suggests issuing a statement making it clear that the U.S. will not tolerate the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba . Robert Kennedy relates the conversation to the president and suggests a statement .
 SAMs and substantially more military personnel than previously estimated have been detected in Cuba . President Kennedy releases a statement revealing the discovery . SAMs, military personnel and SAMs were detected .
 September 7, 1962 Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin assures United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson that ""only defensive weapons are being supplied"" to Cuba . The U.S. ambassador to the U.N. said that only defensive weapons were being supplied .
 The United States Tactical Air Command establishes a working group to begin developing plans for a coordinated air attack against Cuba . The U.S. will launch an airborne assault and amphibious landing on Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff military planners have, until then, made no provision for such an operation . Joint chiefs of Staff had made no preparations for such a possible attack .
 September 11, 1962 TASS releases an authorized Soviet government statement condemning U.S. overseas bases and denying any intention of introducing offensive weapons into Cuba . The statement was issued by the Soviet government in response to a request from TASS .
 The Poltava, a Soviet large-hatch cargo ship, docks at the port of Mariel, Cuba, apparently carrying the first MRBMs . September 15, 1962 .
 The United States Intelligence Board approves a report on the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba . September 19, 1962 The U.S. Intelligence Board approved of the report .
 Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62: Some intelligence indicates the ongoing deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba . The assessment is based on intelligence from the U.S. intelligence services .
 A Senate resolution on Cuba sanctioning the use of force, if necessary, to curb Cuban aggression and subversion in the western hemisphere, passes the Senate by a vote of eighty-six to one . September 20, 1962, A Senate Resolution on Cuba was passed by an overwhelming majority of
 In the House of Representatives, a foreign aid appropriations bill is approved with three amendments . The amendments are designed to cut off aid to any country permitting the use of its merchant ships to transport arms or goods of any kind to Cuba .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko accuses the U.S. of whipping up "war hysteria" and threatening to invade Cuba . In a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, Soviet foreign minister accuses the United States of threatening Cuba .
 Any U.S. attack on Cuba or on Cuba-bound shipping would mean war, says Gromyko . Grophyko further warns that any United States attack would be war-like . He says any attack by the United States on Cuba will mean war .
 The plan for a coordinated tactical air attack on Cuba in advance of an airborne assault and amphibious landing is presented to Curtis LeMay, the Air Force chief of staff .
 October 20, is set as the date when all preparations needed to implement such an attack should be completed . The concept is approved and October 20 is set to be the date for all preparations .
 Navy air reconnaissance aircraft observing Cuba-bound ships photograph ten large shipping crates on the decks of the Soviet vessel Kasimov . September 28, 1962 Navy air . aircraft .
 Photoanalysts determine that the containers hold Soviet IL-28 light bomber aircraft .
 IL-28 s are over twelve years old and have been removed almost entirely from the Soviet Air Force in 1960 . IL-27 s were removed from the USSR in 1960 and are now retired from the air force .
 Although technically capable of carrying nuclear payloads, the aircraft have never been given a nuclear delivery role . The aircraft have been used to carry nuclear weapons but never carried nuclear warheads .
 Secretary McNamara meets with the JCS for a briefing on the latest intelligence on Cuba and to discuss intensified Cuban contingency planning . McNamara was secretary of state of state at the time of the attack .
 Some intelligence points to the possibility that MRBMs have been positioned in Pinar del Río Province . Defense Intelligence Agency analysts inform the group that some intelligence .
 The commanders-in-chief of the U.S. Navy and the Air Force under the Atlantic Command are directed to pre-position military equipment and weapons needed to execute the airstrike plan .
 Evidence that the Castro regime has permitted the positioning of offensive weapons on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors . Evidence of the presence of bloc offensive weapons in Cuba is not clear .
 An attack against the Guantanamo Naval Base or against U.S. planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters . d. An attack on the Guantanamo naval base or against . United States planes or . vessels outside Cuba's territorial air . space .
 A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, the leaders of which request assistance... e. e. Cuba, Cuba . The leaders of Cuba request assistance, e. Havana .
 Cuban armed assistance to subversion in other parts of the Western Hemisphere f. f. Cuba's armed assistance was used to subvertize the Cuban government .
 A decision by the President that the affairs in Cuba have reached a point inconsistent with continuing U.S. national security . A decision to remove Fidel Castro from power would be inconsistent with national security, says McNamara . McNamara asks that future military planning cover a variety of these contingencies
 The attorney general also expresses the president's ""concern over developing situation" and urges that ""massive activity"" be undertaken within the MONGOOSE framework .
 The group agrees that plans for the mining of Cuban harbors and for capturing Cuban forces for interrogation should be considered . The group also agrees that the mining plan for the harbors should be discussed .
 October 6, 1962 CINCLANT directs increased readiness to execute an invasion of Cuba . The U.S. plans to invade Cuba .
 On October 1, CINCLANT orders military units to increase their readiness posture to execute Oplan 312, the airstrike on Cuba . The U.S. military says it is increasing readiness posture for the airstrike .
 Cuban President Dorticós calls upon the United Nations to condemn the U.S. trade embargo against Cuba . October 8, 1962, Cuban President called for U.N. to condemn trade embargo . Cuba's trade embargo was imposed by the United States .
 U.S. had some evidence indicating Soviet nuclear missiles were in Cuba, says Bowles . Bowles was briefed by Thomas Hughes of the State Department Bureau of Intelligence and Research .
 Dobyrnin had not been told of the missile deployment by the Kremlin . He repeatedly denies that the Soviet Union harbored any intention of placing such weapons in Cuba . Dobyrin says he had no idea of the deployment of the missiles .
 The mission is the first Strategic Air Command mission after authority for the flights is transferred from the CIA to the Air Force . The reconnaissance mission is piloted by Major Richard Heyser .
 The photographs obtained by the mission provide the first hard evidence of MRBM sites in Cuba . The photographs were taken during a mission to Cuba .
 Quick readout teams at the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington analyze photos taken by Richard Heyser's U-2 mission . The U.2 mission was the first to carry out a mission to the U.S. mission in the 1960s .
 Photographs show the main components of a Soviet MRBM in a field at San Cristóbal .
 Analysis of reconnaissance photos identifies all but one of the remaining twenty-four SAM sites in Cuba . Analysis of photos during the day also identifies the remaining 24 SAM sites . The images also identify all but two of Cuba's SAM sites.
 Photographs show IL-28 light bombers being uncrated at San Julián airfield . IL-27 light bombers are being uncrateed . IL28 light bomber was being used in World War II .
 NPIC phones CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence Ray Cline to inform him of the discovery . NPIC senior officer at NPIC calls CIA deputy director of intelligence to inform Cline of discovery . CIA official: "It's a good thing that the CIA has done so far"
 NPIC officials have tried to contact CIA Director McCone but are unable to reach him en route to Los Angeles . The officials at NPIC have been unable to contact McCone . McCone is currently in Los Angeles, California .
 Cline requests that NPIC completely recheck the photographs and consult with missile experts outside of the agency . Cline: NPIC needs to consult with experts outside the agency outside of agency .
 Cline asks that he be called again between 8:00 and 10:00P.M. to be informed of the results of these additional analyses . Cline asked for the results between 8 and 10 p.m.
 Key Kennedy administration officials are tracked down in Washington and briefed about the discovery of the missiles . Key Kennedy officials were tracked down and briefed on the discovery .
 Bundy later states that he chose to wait because he feared that a hastily summoned meeting at night would jeopardize secrecy . Bundy says he waited until the morning to prepare a presentation information until morning . Bundy states he did not want to make a presentation until the next day . Bundy: "I
 A major United States military exercise named PHIBRIGLEX-62 is scheduled to begin . The exercise is a major U.S. military exercise called PHIBriglex-62 .
 The two-week long maneuver was to have employed twenty thousand Navy personnel and four thousand Marines in an amphibious assault on Puerto Rico's Vieques Island . The overthrow of the imaginary tyrant, ""Ortsac""--""Castro"" spelled backwards .
 PHIBRIGLEX-62 is used primarily as cover for troop and equipment deployments . It is aimed at increasing military readiness for a strike on Cuba .
 McGeorge Bundy informs President Kennedy that "hard photographic evidence" has been obtained showing Soviet MRBMs in Cuba . Bundy informs him that hard photographic evidence had been obtained .
 Kennedy immediately calls an 11:45A.M. meeting and dictates the names of the 14 advisers he wants present . Kennedy calls the meeting to be held at 11.45 a.m. and dictates who he wants to attend .
 This is the group that becomes known as the "" ExComm ""--the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The ExComm is the Executive Committee . This is known as "ExComm"
 Later that morning, President Kennedy briefs his brother Robert, who expresses surprise at the news . President Kennedy tells Robert that his brother is in a coma .
 Kennedy also telephones John McCloy , a Republican lawyer who acted as a private adviser to the president . Kennedy also calls McCloy .
 McCloy recommends that the president take forceful action to remove the missiles, even if that involves an airstrike and an invasion . McCloy: The president should take action even if an airstrike or an invasion is needed .
 President Kennedy confers for half an hour with Charles Bohlen, the former U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union . Bohlen has just been appointed ambassador to France .
 Bohlen participates in the first ExComm meeting later that morning but leaves for France on the following day . Bohlen takes part in ExComm but leaves the next day to fly to France .
 Photographic evidence presented to the group, including pictures of missile sites under construction with canvas-covered missile trailers . The group also presented pictures of missiles under construction .
 The missiles are initially identified by photoanalysts as nuclear tipped SS-3s by their length . The MRBMs are correctly identified as longer range SS-4 missiles by evening .
 The first part of the noon meeting covers questions regarding the validity and certainty of the evidence . The meeting also covers Soviet military capabilities in Cuba and what additional U.S. surveillance might be required .
 Further U-2 flights are ordered, and six reconnaissance missions are flown during the day . Further flights of the U.2 are ordered .
 In a freewheeling discussion, participants cover a number of different options for dealing with the Cuban situation . Participants cover a variety of options for handling the situation .
 Preliminary discussions lean toward taking some form of military action, officials say . Preliminary talks lean toward military action against Syria .
 McNamara and Roswell Gilpatric hold a luncheon meeting to begin preparing the military for any actions that might be ordered . McNamara, Deputy Secretary of Defense and JCS hold a lunch meeting .
 The USIB meets to examine U-2 photographs and coordinate intelligence on the crisis . The U.2 photographs were taken by the U.S. Air Force in the 1980s .
 During the meeting, the USIB directs the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee to prepare an immediate evaluation of Soviet missile sites .
 The GMAIC concludes that the missiles are clearly under Soviet control and that there is no evidence that nuclear warheads are present in Cuba . There are no nuclear warheads in Cuba, the report says .
 It concludes that the missile installations thus far identified do not appear to be operational . The missile installations are not operational, the report says .
 The SGA convenes in the White House prior to the second ExComm meeting . The meeting follows a meeting of the SGA and ExComm members .
 Robert Kennedy expresses President Kennedy's "general dissatisfaction" with progress under the MONGOOSE program . Richard Helms's notes were written by Robert Kennedy .
 The SGA discusses but rejects several alternatives for eliminating the newly discovered Soviet missile sites in Cuba . A proposal to have Cuban emigrés bomb the missile sites was rejected . The proposal was rejected by the SGA .
 Robert McNamara outlines three broad options for action . After the intelligence report presented, he outlines three options for military action .
 The first is ""political,"" involving communications with Fidel Castro and Premier Khrushchev . The second is ""part political, part military" involving a blockade of weapons and open surveillance . The third is ""military"" involving an attack on Cuba and the missile sites .
 ExComm members debate, but do not resolve, which option should be used . ExComm does not resolve which option will be used in the future .
 Premier Khrushchev receives U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union Foy Kohler for three-hour conversation . U.Krushchev and Kohler discussed a variety of subjects in the interview .
 Khrushchev reassures Kohler that the Cuban fishing port that the Soviet Union has recently agreed to help build will remain non-military . Kohler: The port will remain entirely non-Military. Khrushche: It will be the first of its kind .
 Khrushchev insists that all Soviet activity in Cuba was defensive and sharply criticizes U.S. bases in Turkey and Italy . Once again, he criticizes the United States bases in Italy and Turkey .
 A U-2 spy plane returns with pictures that show Soviet missiles being installed on Cuba . In Two Sections, 10/16/62; Sorensen, 691; Hilsman 1, 166)
 Adlai Stevenson writes to President Kennedy that world opinion would equate the U.S. missiles stationed in Turkey with Soviet bases in Cuba . Stevenson: World would equate missiles with Cuban bases in Turkey .
 Warning that United States officials could not ""negotiate with a gun at our head,"" he states, ""I feel you should have made it clear that the existence of nuclear missile bases anywhere is negotiable before we start anything"
 Further debate on the Cuban situation takes place at the State Department . The State Department is debating the situation at the U.S. Embassy in Cuba .
 Dean Acheson and John McCone attend discussions for the first time . President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson are absent from the discussions . Kennedy and Johnson were absent .
 By this time, Robert McNamara has become the strongest proponent of the blockade option . McNamara: "By the time of this time of the year, it has become clear"
 McNamara reports that a ""surgical"" airstrike option is militarily impractical in the view of the JCS . Any military action would have to include attacks on all military installations in Cuba, eventually leading to an invasion . McNamara: Airstrikes on Cuban military installations would lead to
 McNamara urges seeking alternative means of removing missiles from Cuba before embarking on such a drastic course of action . McNamara: "We need to find a way to get rid of the missiles"
 Critics of the blockade argue that a blockade would have no effect on missiles already in Cuba . However, critics argue that the blockade would not affect the missiles already there .
 Airstrike proponents also express concern that a U.S. blockade would shift the confrontation from Cuba to the Soviet Union . Soviet counteractions including a Berlin blockade might result .
 United Nations ambassador Adlai Stevenson's opinion against an airstrike on Cuba . U.N. ambassador: Airstrike should not have been allowed to take place in Cuba .
 Khrushchev told Robert Kennedy that arms being sent to Cuba were only for defensive purposes . Bolshakov was an authoritative back channel for communications between Soviet and U.S. leaders .
 Bolshakov had not been told by Khrushchev that the Soviet Union is actually in the process of installing MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba . The Soviet Union had not told Bolshkov that the Soviets are installing MR and IRbMs .
 By the time Bolshakov's message reaches President Kennedy, he has been fully briefed on the Soviet missile deployment . The message is sent to the White House by President Kennedy .
 An SS-5 IRBM site, the first of three to be identified in Cuba, was detected in Cuba . The site was detected by Cuban state TV news agency .
 The GMAIC estimates that IRBM sites would not become operational before December . 16 and possibly as many as thirty-two MRBMs would be operational in about a week, the organization says .
 No SS-5 missiles actually reach Cuba at any time, although this is not completely confirmed by U.S. officials during the crisis . This is not entirely confirmed by United States officials during this time .
 The JCS recommends that President Kennedy order an airstrike on the missiles and other key Cuban military installations . JCS: President Kennedy should have ordered a strike on Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy asks if a surprise air attack would be morally acceptable course of action . Robert Kennedy responds by asking whether a surprise attack is morally acceptable . Kennedy: A surprise air strike would be a morally acceptable option .
 More discussions take place in Dean Rusk 's conference room at the State Department . The U.S. State Department is hosting a series of high-profile discussions .
 During the day, Kennedy also meets privately with Dean Acheson for over an hour . Kennedy also met privately with the former Secretary of State for more than two hours .
 Acheson again voices his opinion that the surgical airstrike was the best U.S. option . The surgical airstrike is the best United States option, he says .
 Acheson, however, is in the minority in dismissing the Pearl Harbor analogy . He is not the only person to dismiss the comparison .
 Paul Nitze also recalls thinking that the analogy was ""nonsense,"" others like George Ball find it persuasive . George Ball finds the analogy persuasive . Ball: The analogy is "nonsense"
 In some cases, as with Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, the moral argument becomes the deciding factor behind their support for the blockade . The moral argument is often the basis for their support .
 Khrushchev plans to visit the United Nations following the U.S. elections in November . Gromyko states that he believes a meeting with Kennedy at that time would be useful .
 After Kennedy agrees to meet the Soviet Premier, Gromyko turns the discussion to Cuba, charging that the U.S. is ""pestering"" a small country . The Soviet Union says that the United States is "pestigating" a small nation .
 Kennedy decided not to discuss U.S. awareness of missiles with Gromyko . Kennedy has decided to not discuss United States awareness of the missiles . Kennedy: "I don't want to talk about the missiles"
 Kennedy responds by reading a portion of his September 4 statement warning against the deployment of offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy responds to Gromyko's claim .
 Kennedy directs Llewellyn Thompson to inform Ambassador Dobrynin that a summit would not be appropriate at that time . Gromyko was a diplomat for the United States .
 Kennedy meets with Robert Lovett, a former government official brought in to give advice in the crisis . Kennedy then meets with Lovett to discuss the crisis in Washington DC .
 An airstrike would appear to be an excessive first step, Lovett says . Lovett warns that an airstrike would be a "excessive first step"
 He argues that a blockade is a better alternative to a blockade . He expresses a preference for blocking the movement of all materials into Cuba except for food and medicine .
 By this time, most members of the committee support the blockade option . Most members of committee support blockade . Most of committee members support blockade option.
 As the meeting progresses however, individual opinions begin to shift and the consensus behind the blockade brakes down . Individual opinions on the blockade are slowly shifting as a result .
 A request for a brief establishing the legal basis for a blockade of Cuba is requested . The request is made by a German attorney for the U.S. State Department .
 The legality of a blockade is also examined independently at the State Department by Leonard C Meeker, the deputy legal adviser . Meeker is also examining the legality of the blockade by State Department .
 The first of a series of daily ""Joint Evaluation"" intelligence reports is disseminated . Report: Joint Evaluation" intelligence reports are disseminated daily .
 The evaluation is the product of collaboration between the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee and the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee . The evaluation states that the MRBMs in Cuba could probably be launched within eighteen hours .
 At the State Department, Nicholas Katzenbach and Leonard Meeker provide legal opinions regarding a blockade of Cuba . They provide the ExComm with their legal opinions on a blockade .
 As the meeting progresses, it becomes apparent that sharp disagreements about how the U.S. should proceed still exist . The United States is meeting in Washington, D.C.
 ExComm decides independent working groups should be established to provide clear options to President Kennedy . Independent working groups will be established .
 Separate groups are to develop the blockade and airstrike options, drafting speeches for each plan and outlining possible contingencies . Separate teams are to draft speeches, draft speeches and outline potential contingencies, including a possible contingency plan .
 The papers developed by the separate working groups are exchanged and critiqued by the different working groups . The papers were developed by different groups of researchers .
 In the course of this process, airstrike proponents begin to shift their support to the blockade option . "Airstrikes will continue to be carried out, but the blockade is not the only option," says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The airstrike speech is abandoned . Theodore Sorensen agrees to put together a speech for President Kennedy on the blockade .
 U. Alexis Johnson and Paul Nitze meet to develop a specific timetable for carrying out all of the diplomatic and military actions required by the airstrike or the blockade plan .
 The schedule includes raising military alert levels, reinforcing Guantanamo naval base and briefing NATO allies . NATO allies will be briefed on the situation .
 All timing revolves around the ""P Hour"" -- the time when President Kennedy would address the nation to inform Americans of the crisis . The timing of the "P Hour" is based on the timing of President Kennedy's address .
 The Pentagon has no information indicating that there are missiles in Cuba, a spokesperson says . The Pentagon is responding to questions about an article by Paul Scott and Robert Allen .
 Reports that emergency military measures are being implemented are also denied . Reports that military forces are being deployed in the country are denied .
 SNIE projects would ""almost certainly"" lead to ""strong direct pressures"" elsewhere by the Soviet government . On the other hand, a total blockade of Cuba would lead to strong pressure from the government, SNIE says .
 Any form of direct military action against Cuba would result in an even greater chance of Soviet military retaliation . The U.S. military action would be even more likely to be followed by a Soviet retaliation .
 SNIE is read by President Kennedy and most of the main policy planners the following day . The SNIE was read by most of Kennedy's policy planners, including the president .
 Theodore Sorensen's draft speech for President Kennedy is amended and approved . Final planning for the implementation of a naval blockade is completed .
 As McNamara leaves the conference room, he reportedly phones the Pentagon and orders four tactical squadrons to be readied for a possible airstrike on Cuba .
 He notes that the airstrike plan as presented is not a ""surgical"" strike but a massive military commitment that could involve heavy casualties on all sides . The airstrike plan is not "surgical" strike, he says .
 One member of the JCS reportedly suggests the use of nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union would use its nuclear weapons in an attack on Cuba, the report says .
 President Kennedy directs attention be focused on implementing the blockade option, calling it the only course of action compatible with American principles . Kennedy directs that attention be directed to implement the blockade .
 The scenario for the full quarantine operation, covering diplomatic initiatives, public statements, and military actions, has been reviewed and approved . The scenario is covered by diplomatic initiatives and public statements .
 He proposes that the quarantine be accompanied by a U.S. proposal for a settlement involving the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey and the evacuation of Guantanamo . The United States is proposing a deal involving withdrawal of missiles and Guantanamo .
 The proposal is promptly attacked by several of the participants who believe it concedes too much . The proposal was then attacked by some of the attendees .
 President Kennedy tells Theodore Sorensen that he is canceling the remainder of his midterm election campaign trip . President Kennedy cancels the rest of his midterms campaign trip to Washington, D.C.
 Kennedy instructs Sorensen to redraft the quarantine speech . He notes that he would not make a final decision on whether to opt for a quarantine or an airstrike until he has consulted one last time with Air Force officials .
 Reston is given a partial briefing on the Cuban situation but is requested to hold the story in the interests of national security . Reston was briefed on the situation by the U.S. National Security Council .
 The intelligence community prepares another SNIE reviewing possible consequences of certain courses of action that the U.S. could follow with regard to Cuba . The SNIE is the latest SNIE to be prepared by the intelligence community to look at Cuba .
 It is estimated that sixteen launchers for SS-4 MRBMs are operational and that these operational missiles could be fired within eight hours of a decision to launch .
 A nuclear warhead storage bunker is identified at one of the Cuban MRBM sites for the first time . The bunker is located at the site of one of Cuba's largest MRBM facilities .
 U.S. intelligence is unable to establish definitively whether warheads are actually in Cuba at any time . The ExComm believes it prudent simply to assume that they are .
 Soviet sources have recently suggested that twenty of a planned deployment of forty nuclear warheads reached the islands but that none of the warheads were ever actually ""mated"" to the missiles .
 Kennedy gives final approval to quarantine plan after brief discussion . Kennedy says quarantine plan is necessary to protect public health .
 The Tactical Air Command commander meets with President Kennedy and other top officials to discuss the air attack concept . General Sweeney is shown in the Oval Office meeting .
 TAC believes that at a minimum, Soviet SAM sites and MiG airfields are needed to eliminate missiles in Cuba . Several hundred bombing sorties would be required to eliminate the missiles . Sweeney tells the group that to eliminate missile missiles, additional strikes are needed .
 After carrying out all these strikes, Sweeney says he can only guarantee that 90 percent of the Soviet missiles would be destroyed . Sweeney: "I can't guarantee" that 90 per cent of Soviet missiles will be destroyed.
 Kennedy directs the military be prepared to carry out an airstrike anytime after the morning of October 22 . Kennedy has apparently finalized plans for the quarantine before Sweeney's briefing .
 The president convenes a formal meeting of the National Security Council . The meeting takes place at the White House .
 Admiral George Anderson briefs the gathering on the quarantine plans and procedures that he has drawn up earlier in the day . Admiral Anderson says quarantine plans have been drawn up .
 Each ship approaching the quarantine line will be signaled to stop for boarding and inspection . Anderson explains that each ship approaching will be stopped for boarding .
 If there is still no response, a shot will be fired into the rudder to cripple the vessel . A shot will also be fired if there is no response to the vessel's response .
 President Kennedy expresses concern that such an action might unintentionally destroy the boat . Anderson reassures the president that it is possible to cripple a ship without sinking it . Anderson: "It is possible that it could be done without sinking"
 Kennedy and Robert Lovett leave the room briefly to hold a private conversation . Kennedy and Lovett are in the room for a private discussion .
 Kennedy asks Lovett if he thinks Adlai Stevenson is capable of handling negotiations at the U.N. Lovett: "I don't think he would be able to handle negotiations" Lovett says Stevenson would be a good negotiator .
 Lovett arranges to have McCloy flown from Germany to the United States . Kennedy agrees to fly McCloy back to the U.S.
 Several newspapers have by this time pieced together most of the details of the crisis . Despite White House precautions, several newspapers have pieced through most of it .
 Pierre Salinger notifies President Kennedy in four separate calls during the day that security is crumbling . Salinger calls President Kennedy four separate times to warn of crumbling security in four calls .
 The State Department transmits a special ""go"" message to most U.S. diplomatic posts abroad . envoys to brief foreign heads of government or foreign ministers about the Cuban missile crisis .
 Dean Acheson briefs Charles de Gaulle and delivers President Kennedy's letter on the Cuban situation . Achesons briefs Charles De Gaulle on the situation .
 Acheson is not able to provide de Gaulle with a copy of Kennedy's speech because only part of the text has arrived . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1944 .
 U.S. Ambassador to Great Britain briefs Prime Minister Harold Macmillan and Lord Home, British foreign minister . David Bruce briefs PM and UK foreign minister at about the same time .
 Bruce al so fails to receive a complete copy of Kennedy's speech and briefs MacMillan without it . Bruce al . fails to get a copy of the speech .
 He hastens to assure Bruce that he will assist and support the U.S. in any way possible .
 The President directs that personal messages be sent to commanders of Jupiters missiles in Italy and Turkey instructing them to destroy or render inoperable the missiles . If any attempt is made to fire the missiles without Kennedy's authorization, the missiles would be destroyed .
 State Department Legal Advisor Abram Chayes successfully suggests changing the legal justification for the blockade presented in Kennedy's speech . State Department legal advisor suggests changing legal justification .
 Chayes suggests citing the right of the OAS to take collective measures to protect hemispheric security . Instead of basing the action on the U.N. charter, he says, the UAS should cite the right to act in collective measures .
 SAC initiates a massive alert of its B-52 nuclear bomber force, guaranteeing that one-eighth of the force is airborne at any given time . SAC: SAC begins massive alert to one-in-a-half of its bomber force .
 B-52 flights begin around the clock, with a new bomber taking off each time another bomber lands . Bodies take off from the ground every time another plane lands . The planes take off at around 6 a.m. ET .
 The alert is directed to take place quietly and gradually and to be in full effect by October 23 . It will take place slowly and gradually .
 For the first time in ADC history, all aircraft are armed with nuclear weapons . The first time all aircraft have nuclear weapons in their history .
 Norstad confers with Harold MacMillan, who strongly argues against ""mobilizing" European forces . During the day, Norstad confers with Harvard MacMillan .
 Norstad decides not to put European forces on higher alert status . President Kennedy had personal message from President Kennedy stressing the need to keep the alliance together .
 The President reviews the crisis in a formal meeting of the National Security Council . The crisis is the first to be reviewed by the President .
 Seventeen congressional leaders from both parties gathered at the White House for a briefing . President Kennedy, Secretary of State Rusk and an intelligence officer briefed them on the situation .
 Others argue that the quarantine will not compel the Soviet Union to remove the missiles from Cuba . Others say an airstrike or invasion should be employed instead .
 Rusk hands the Soviet ambassador an advance copy of President Kennedy 's speech . Calling the Soviet missile deployment ""a gross error,"" Rusk .
 U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union Foy Kohler calls the Kremlin to deliver a letter from President Kennedy and the text of the speech . The letter was delivered to the Kremlin in Moscow in 1963 .
 State Department receives a letter addressed to President Kennedy from British Prime Minister Macmillan . The State Department received the letter from the British prime minister . The letter was addressed to the president by President Kennedy .
 MacMillan warns that Khrushchev may try to escort his ships into the Caribbean and force you to attack them . Macmillan: 'In reaction to the blockade, ...may try to ...force you to ... attack them' He warns that in reaction to blockade, Khrush
 "We have always hoped to impale the Russians on this horn. This `fire-first' dilemma has always worried us," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . This 'fire first' dilemma is always worried by Putin, says Putin .
 We must be ready for retaliatory action against Berlin pressure on the weaker parts of the Free World defense system . We must also be ready to respond to Berlin pressure, says German Foreign Minister .
 During the crisis, the two leaders remain in close contact, speaking with each other over the telephone as often as three times a day . The two leaders have been speaking regularly during the crisis .
 President Kennedy addresses the nation in a televised seventeen-minute speech . Kennedy's speech was a televised address to the nation . The speech was broadcast on October 25, 1963 .
 A strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment is being put into effect, he says . Announces that evidence has established the presence of Soviet MRBM and IRBM sites and nuclear capable bombers in Cuba .
 Khrushchev 's order was reportedly reversed at the prompting of Anastas Mikoyan as the Soviet ships approached the quarantine line .
 U.S. military forces worldwide, with the exception of the United States Air Forces in Europe, are placed on DEFCON 3 . United States military forces in Europe are also placed on deFCON .
 ICBM missile crews are alerted and Polaris nuclear submarines in port are dispatched to preassigned stations at sea . Polaris nuclear subs in port will be dispatched to their preassignments at sea at sea. ICBM missiles are alerted .
 During the president's speech, twenty-two interceptor aircraft go airborne in the event the Cuban government reacted militarily .
 Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin conducts a further closed-door briefing for Latin American ambassadors at the State Department . The State Department has been briefed on the situation in Latin America .
 At around 8:00P.M. Rusk speaks to a meeting of all other ambassadors in Washington .
 The first U.S. Jupiter missile site is turned over to the Turkish Air Force for maintenance and operation . The site is now being used to maintain and operate .
 U.S. decision-makers apparently not aware of the action . The move is publicized in Turkey and probably detected by Moscow . Russia is likely to have detected the move .
 From April 1961 to the end of August 1962, Penkovsky has been a spy for British and U.S. intelligence services, providing them with material on Soviet military capabilities, including important technical information .
 Penkovsky had been given a few telephonic coded signals for use in emergency situations . One to be used if he is about to be arrested and one to be . used in case of imminent war . One of the codes is to use in case he is arrested .
 When he learns he was about to be arrested, Penkovsky apparently chose to use the signal for an imminent Soviet attack . When he learned he was being arrested he chose to make the signal .
 Western intelligence analysts decide, however, not to credit Penkovsky's final signal, and the ExComm is not informed of his arrest or its circumstances . The ExComm does not know of the arrest or circumstances .
 In a TV broadcast President John F Kennedy informs the American public about Soviet nuclear missiles stationed on Cuba . President Kennedy tells the public about the missiles stationed in Cuba .
 The armaments which are in Cuba, regardless of the classification to which they may belong, are intended solely for defensive purposes in order to secure Republic of Cuba against the attack of an aggressor . We reaffirm that the armaments . are . in Cuba .
 At a meeting of the ExComm, President Kennedy approves plans for signing an official quarantine proclamation . President Kennedy signs a quarantine proclamation for the first time .
 Kennedy directs John McCone to prepare an analysis of the effects of a similar blockade on Berlin . The blockade was a response to a possible reaction from the Soviet government . The Berlin blockade was the first of its kind .
 ExComm examines the question of how the U.S. will respond if a U-2 aircraft is shot down . The ExComm also examines how the United States would respond if it was shot down by a U.2 aircraft .
 If such an event occurs and evidence of hostile Cuban action has been established, the ExComm decides that the SAM site responsible for the downing will be attacked and destroyed . The ExComm also decides that if such a occurrence occurs, the SAM site responsible will be
 Continued harassment of U-2 flights, it is agreed, would probably result in attacks on all SAM sites in Cuba . Continued harassment would probably lead to attacks on SAM sites, experts say .
 Zorin submits a draft resolution demanding an end to U.S. naval activity near Cuba . The draft resolution calls for negotiations to end the crisis . It also calls for a resolution calling for negotiations .
 Adlai Stevenson urges U.N. Security Council to support resolution stopping flow of weapons to Cuba . Stevenson urges United Nations to stop weapons flow to Cuba from going to the island nation .
 Fidel Castro announces a combat alarm, placing the Cuban armed forces on their highest alert . Fidel Castro declares the alarm at the height of the Cuban military alert .
 Cuban armed forces subsequently reach a size of 270,000 men, following a massive mobilization effort . The Cuban armed force was then called Cuba's first major military operation in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The ExComm holds a brief meeting prior to the president's signing of the quarantine proclamation . The quarantine proclamation was signed by the president .
 ExComm members are informed that an ""extraordinary number"" of coded messages have been sent to Soviet ships on their way to Cuba, although the contents of these messages are not known . ExComm . members are told that an 'extraordinary' number of coded . messages were sent to
 John McCone states that Soviet submarines have unexpectedly been found moving into the Caribbean . McCone says Soviet submarines were found in the Caribbean in recent years .
 President Kennedy sends message to Premier Khrushchev via U.S. embassy in Moscow . Message from President Kennedy is transmitted via the United States embassy in Russia . President Kennedy's message was sent via the embassy of Moscow .
 Kennedy asks the Soviet Premier to direct Soviet ships to observe the quarantine zone . Kennedy says it is important that both sides ""show prudence and do nothing to allow events to make the situation more difficult to control"
 In a ceremony at the White House, the president signs Proclamation 3504, formally establishing the quarantine . The quarantine was established at the start of the year .
 CINCLANT is directed to enforce the blockade beginning at 10:00 the following morning .
 Fidel Castro tells the Cuban public in a ninety-minute television speech that Cuba will never disarm while the U.S. persists in its policy of aggression and hostility . Castro: Cuba will not disarm while U. States persists in an aggressive policy of hostility .
 At a Soviet embassy reception in Washington, D.C., Lieutenant General Vladimir A Dubovik appears to suggest that the captains of the Soviet ships heading for Cuba are under orders to defy the blockade . The incident occurred at the Soviet embassy in Washington .
 Ambassador Dobrynin declines to refute Dobovik's comments, saying, ""he is a military man, I am not. I am ... not. He is a ... military man," he says . The ambassador arrives late at the reception .
 United States intelligence also notes a statement by the president of TASS during the day warning that U.S. ships would be sunk if any Soviet ships were attacked . The statement also notes that United States ships would not be attacked by Soviet ships .
 State Department debriefing for State Department officials on Cuban exile groups . U. Alexis Johnson: "It's important to not create an incident in Cuba during the crisis"
 Robert Kennedy meets with Anatoly Dobrynin in the latter's office at the Soviet embassy . Robert Kennedy, at the suggestion of the president, meets with Dobrynins .
 Dobrynin tells Kennedy that, as far as he knows, there are still no missiles in Cuba, and said that he is not aware of any change in instructions to captains of Soviet ships steaming toward Cuba . He says he does not know any change of instructions to Soviet ships .
 Robert Kennedy relates his conversation with Dobrynin to President Kennedy and British Ambassador David Ormsby-Gore . Robert Kennedy tells the president about Dobrynins' role in the assassination of the Soviet Union .
 Ambassador Ormsby-Gore reportedly expressed concern that the naval quarantine line reportedly has been set at eight hundred miles from Cuba . Ambassador reportedly expressed his concern .
 Ormsby-Gore recommends drawing the interception line closer to the island in order to give the Soviet government more time to analyze their position . The Soviet government will be analyzing their position at the time .
 President Kennedy agrees to shorten the line to five hundred miles . President Kennedy calls Secretary of Defense McNamara to shorten it . President McNamara agrees and calls for a five hundred mile line .
 Low-level reconnaissance flights over Cuba begin for the first time, supplementing high-altitude U-2 photoreconnaissance . U.S. aircraft will be able to fly low-level missions over Cuba for first time . Low-low-level reconnaissance flights will be
 The Soviet government defers the scheduled release of troops in the Strategic Rocket Forces, air defense units, and the submarine fleet . The government also announces that ""the battle readiness and vigilance of all troops"" has been raised .
 Gallup poll: 84 percent of the U.S. public who know about the Cuban situation favor the blockade . Only 4 percent of Americans oppose the action .
 A CIA report based on information as of 6:00A.M. says the communist reaction to the U.S. quarantine against Cuba has not gone beyond the statement issued by the Soviet government on October 23 .
 Official world reaction is reported to be generally favorable, particularly in Latin America . World reaction to the move is generally favorable .
 No new offensive missile sites have been discovered, but nuclear storage buildings are being assembled with great speed . The U.S. government has no plans to build new missile sites .
 Soviet ships en route to Cuba capable of carrying military cargoes appear to have slowed down, altered or reversed their courses .
 Sixteen of the nineteen Soviet ships en route to Cuba at the time the naval quarantine is announced, including five large-hatch vessels, reverse course and are returning to the Soviet Union .
 William Knox, a U.S. businessman, has a 3 1/4-hour interview with Premier Khrushchev . Knox was asked to give the interview at the request of the Soviet leader . Knox's interview lasted at least three hours .
 Khrushchev states that it is now too late for the U.S. to take over Cuba, and that he will eventually give orders to sink a United States vessel enforcing the blockade if Soviet ships are stopped . He says he plans to sink the United States ship enforcing a blockade if
 The U.S. naval quarantine of Cuba officially goes into effect . The United States naval quarantine officially goes to effect .
 Robert McNamara tells group that Soviet ships approaching quarantine line show no indications of stopping . Two Soviet ships, the Gagarin and the Komiles, are within a few miles of the quarantine line .
 Naval intelligence reports that a Soviet submarine has moved into position between the two ships . Naval intelligence then reports that the Soviet submarine is moving into position .
 McNamara states that the aircraft carrier USS Essex has been directed to make the first interception, and that antisubmarine tactics including the use of small explosives have been ordered .
 President Kennedy directs that no ship be intercepted for at least another hour while clarifying information is sought . Kennedy directs no ship intercepted for another hour . No ship intercepted during that time .
 A cable drafted by George Ball is transmitted to United States Ambassador to Turkey Raymond Hare and U.S. Ambassador to NATO Thomas Finletter . The United States is considering a Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade .
 The cable states that while the comparison of missiles in Turkey with those in Cuba was ""refutable,"" it is nonetheless possible that a negotiated solution to the crisis might ""involve dismantling and removal"" of the Jupiters .
 Each diplomat is requested to assess the political consequences of the removal of the Jupiters in a variety of different circumstances . Each diplomat has been asked to assess political consequences .
 U Thant's plea, made at the request of more than forty non-aligned states, calls for the voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba . The request is also called for the suspension of naval quarantine for between two and three weeks .
 Some of the Soviet Bloc vessels proceeding toward Cuba appear to have altered their course . A Defense Department spokesperson announces publicly that some of the vessels appear to be changing their course.
 Khrushchev warns that the Soviet Union views the blockade as ""an act of aggression" and that, as a consequence, he will not instruct Soviet ships bound for Cuba to observe the quarantine . Khruschev says that the blockade is an act of 'aggression'
 At the direction of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, SAC increases its alert posture to DEFCON 2 for the first time in history . SAC is at the center of the military's highest alert posture ever .
 Powers decides on his own authority to transmit uncoded messages to SAC commanders noting that SAC plans were well prepared and that the alert process was going smoothly . Powers decides to transmit messages to commanders . Powers decided to do so .
 Defense Department drafts two separate plans to increase civil defense preparations during a possible military engagement with Cuba . At the request of President Kennedy, the plans were drafted by the Defense Department .
 The first outlines civil defense measures which could be taken in the vicinity of targets close to Cuba under attack with conventional weapons . The second suggests measures which are possible to take in response to possible nuclear attack within MRBM range .
 Kennedy message from President Kennedy for Premier Khrushchev is transmitted to U.S. embassy in Moscow . Kennedy's message was sent to the United States embassy in the Russian capital .
 Kennedy notes that he had received ""solemn assurances" that no missiles bases would be established in Cuba . Kennedy notes he received no assurances that no missile bases were established in the country .
 The aircraft carrier USS Essex and the destroyer USS Gearing hail and attempt to intercept the Soviet tanker Bucharest . The two aircraft carriers were involved in the battle .
 Bucharest is allowed to continue its voyage to Cuba . Since there is no reason to suspect the ship carries contraband, the Bucharest will continue its journey .
 The United States would agree to remove Jupiters from Turkey in return for a Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba . A syndicated column by the influential journalist Walter Lippman proposes a ""face-saving"" agreement .
 Many in the U.S. and the Soviet Union mistakenly interpret the proposal as a trial balloon . The proposal was floated by the Kennedy administration, but many in the United States and Soviet Union believe it was a mistake .
 President Kennedy authorizes the development of a program to drop propaganda leaflets over Cuba . During the morning ExComm meeting, ExComm meets with President Kennedy .
 The program, later christened ""Bugle Call,"" is never actually carried out . Although leaflets are produced and approved by the ExComm, they are never carried out.
 President Kennedy avoids responding directly to U.N. proposal that Soviet arms shipments to Cuba and the U.S. quarantine be suspended for several weeks .
 Adlai Stevenson prepared to begin preliminary negotiations regarding crisis . Concerned that acceptance of the proposal would allow Soviet military personnel to continue work on missiles already in Cuba .
 Khrushchev writes to U. Thant to say that he welcomes and agrees with his proposal . Khrushche writes to Thant: "I welcome and agree with U Thant's proposal"
 At the prompting of the United States, U Thant sends a second message to Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy asking them to avoid direct confrontations between Soviet and U.S. ships .
 CIA Director McCone indicates that some of the missiles deployed in Cuba are now operational . Some missiles in Cuba have been operational, he says .
 Admiral Alfred Ward orders the USS Kennedy to proceed toward a Lebanese freighter, the Marucla . The commander of United States quarantine forces orders the ship to proceed .
 During the day, the freighter has been selected by President Kennedy as the first ship to be boarded by quarantine forces . The freighter was selected by the President Kennedy during the day .
 USS Kennedy informs the Marucla that night by radio that the ship will be boarded the following morning . The USS Kennedy then informs the USS Kennedy that night that he is being boarded the next morning .
 The State Department receives a cable from United States Ambassador to NATO Thomas Finletter relaying Ankara's position on the possible withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The cable was sent from the U.S. ambassador to the United States .
 Turkey regards the missiles as a symbol of the alliance's determination to use atomic weapons against either a Soviet conventional or nuclear attack on Turkey . The Turkish representative to NATO has made it clear that his government sets ""great store"" by the Jupiters .
 Finletter states that any arrangement that fails to substitute some other form of nuclear capability in Turkey would be rejected by the Turkish government . Finletter says any arrangement without replacing some other nuclear capability would not be accepted by the government .
 A CIA sabotage team was dispatched to Cuba to destroy facilities at the Matahambre copper mine in Cuba . The team was prevented from executing the sabotage attack by Cuban authorities .
 CIA memorandum: Construction of IRBM and MRBM bases in Cuba is proceeding without interruption . CIA memorandum notes that construction is continuing without interruption.
 President Kennedy tells the ExComm that he believes the quarantine by itself will not cause the Soviet government to remove the missiles from Cuba . Only an invasion or a trade of some sort will succeed, Kennedy says .
 Kennedy agrees to increase the frequency of low-level flights over Cuba from twice per day to once every two hours . Kennedy also agrees to apply further pressure by increasing the frequency to once a two-hour flights .
 ExComm also decides not to undertake any emergency civil defense programs at this time . Preliminary measures have been initiated .
 President Kennedy orders the State Department to proceed with preparations for a crash program . The crash program aimed at establishing a civil government in Cuba after an invasion and occupation of the country .
 CINCLANT estimates that up to 18,484 U.S. casualties might occur during the first ten days of fighting .
 John Scali, State Department correspondent for ABC News, lunches with Aleksandr Fomin at the Occidental Restaurant in Washington at Fomin's urgent request . Fomin: "I'm not going to go crazy, I'm going crazy, and I'm not afraid to go
 Fomin, officially the Soviet Embassy public affairs counselor, is known to be the KGB's Washington station chief . Fomin is officially the official Soviet Embassy official affairs counselor at the embassy .
 Noting that ""war seems about to break out,"" he asks Scali to contact his ""high-level friends" in the State Department to ascertain whether the United States would be interested in a possible solution to the crisis .
 Scali goes directly to the State Department to report on the meeting to Roger Hilsman . Following the lunch, Scali heads to the White House .
 The State Department receives a cable from United States Ambassador to Turkey Raymond Hare warning that Turkish officials will ""deeply resent"" any Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade . The cable also warns that Turkey will "deeply resume" any trade deal .
 Hare expresses his opinion that the most satisfactory resolution to the crisis would avoid the Jupiter issue altogether . Hare suggests that if the missiles have to be removed, it should be done gradually . Hare also suggests that the removal of the missiles should be gradual .
 U.S. Ambassador to Brazil requested to ask Brazilian ambassador in Havana to meet privately with Fidel Castro to relay a message from the United States government . Lincoln Gordon asked to ask the Brazilian ambassador to Havana, Luis Batian Pinto, meet private with Castro .
 Pinto is to give Castro reassurances that the U.S. is unlikely to invade Cuba if the missiles are removed . The message is to be given to Castro .
 The message arrives in four sections, with the final portion arriving at 9:00P.M. Some twelve hours after it has been delivered to the U.S. embassy .
 Khrushchev 's newly arrived letter in light of Fomin's offer that the Soviet Union remove its missiles under United Nations inspection in return for a U.S. non-invasion pledge . United States officials assume that the message has been initiated by the Kremlin and interpret Khrush
 Recent information from Soviet sources suggests that, contrary to United States assumptions at the time, Fomin's proposal was not in fact authorized by Moscow . U.S. assumptions were incorrect when Fomin proposed the proposal .
 The ExComm reconvenes in extraordinary session to consider Premier Khrushchev's letter . The letter was signed by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Further textual analysis of the letter is ordered, and two Soviet specialists, Helmut Sonnenfeldt and Joseph Neubert, are directed to analyze the letter alongside the proposal from Aleksandr Fomin .
 Unknown to any of the ExComm members, Robert Kennedy and Anatoly Dobrynin meet at the Soviet embassy . It was one of a series of secret meetings the two held during the crisis . The two held secret meetings at the embassy in Moscow .
 Khrushchev 's statement may refer to a cable from Fidel Castro that was transmitted on the evening of October 26 . The cable is believed to be from a cable that was sent by Fidel Castro .
 Fearing that a United States invasion is imminent, Castro reportedly composes the message in Spanish to Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev, who translates the letter into Russian . Castro reportedly spends the night in a bomb shelter in the Soviet embassy in Havana .
 Khrushchev understood the cable both as a warning of an impending invasion and as an attempt to get him to launch the missiles in Cuba against the U.S. The cable was believed to be a warning to the Soviets and to get them to launch missiles .
 Khrushchev recalls Castro warning that "an American invasion would take place within a few hours" According to an unpublished portion of Khrushvich 's memoirs, the Soviet leader recalls Castro saying that the U.S. would invade within hours .
 Castro states he was suggesting that if Cuba was invaded, the Soviet Union would need to defend itself from attack by using nuclear weapons . Castro states that his letter was mistranslated . At the Havana Conference in January 1992, Castro says he was trying to protect Cuba from invasion .
 Fidel Castro orders Cuban anti-aircraft forces to open fire on all U.S. aircraft flying over the island . Fidel Castro also orders Cuban forces to shoot down all United States aircraft . The Cuban leader orders the Cuban government to fire on U.N. aircraft over Cuba .
 Castro's order reportedly replaces his standing orders to fire only on groups of two or more low-altitude airplanes . Castro reportedly replaces those orders with the order to shoot only on group of two aircraft groups . The order was reportedly issued by Castro, a source says .
 When Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alekseyev asks Castro to recind his order, he apparently is rebuffed . The Soviet ambassador to Cuba was reportedly rebuffed by the Castro .
 The airstrike plan now includes three massive strikes per day until Cuban air capability is destroyed . The Cuban air force is believed to be capable of destroying Cuban air strikes .
 Some 1,190 bombing sorties are planned for the first day of operations . The operation is scheduled to begin on Monday .
 Nikita Khrushchev demands from the United States a removal of nuclear missiles in Turkey as well as a promise to not invade Cuba as preconditions for his removal of Soviet missiles on Cuba . The U.S. would have to remove nuclear missiles from Turkey and promise not to invade
 President Kennedy says all work in Cuba must stop prior to any negotiations . President Kennedy replies that all work must stop before any negotiations begin . Kennedy: "All work in the Cuban government must stop"
 Three of the four MRBM sites at San Cristóbal and two sites at Sagua la Grande appear to be fully operational . The CIA intelligence memorandum contains information compiled as of 6:00A.M. reports .
 The mobilization of Cuban military forces is reported to be continuing at a high rate . CIA advises that Cuban forces remain under orders not to engage in hostilities unless attacked .
 In contrast to the private message of the day before, the new message calls for the dismantling of U.S. missile bases in Turkey in return for the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The new message was released by President Vladimir Putin .
 Khrushchev's last letter to President Kennedy is delivered to U.S. embassy in Moscow . Original copy of the last letter delivered to the United States embassy in Russia .
 The Russians would then be in a position to decide whether to turn back their tanker or allow her to enter the quarantine zone . The Russian government would then decide whether the tanker should be turned back or allowed into a quarantine zone later today .
 The U-2 pilot apparently enters Soviet airspace as a result of a navigational error . The pilot apparently entered Soviet airspace due to a navigation error .
 The pilot radios for assistance and a United States F-102 fighter aircraft in Alaska scrambles and head toward the Bering Sea . The pilot radioed for help and a U.S. fighter aircraft scrambles to help him .
 Soviet MiGs take off from a base near Wrangel Island to intercept the U-2 . Eventually manages to fly out of Soviet territory with no shots being fired .
 Alaskan Air Command records suggest that the U.S. fighter planes are armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles . The records show that the United States has nuclear missiles .
 U-2 reconnaissance plane shot down over Cuba and its pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, killed . Major Anderson was the pilot of the U.2 reconnaissance aircraft .
 Anderson had flown one of the first U-2 missions responsible for detecting Soviet missiles . Anderson had also flown a mission to detect Soviet missiles in the U.S. Anderson was a U.2 pilot .
 The ExComm assumes that the attack had been ordered by the Kremlin and speculates that the move is designed to escalate the crisis . ExComm speculates .
 Soviet and Cuban officials have only recently revealed that the attack is the result of a decision made by local Soviet commanders . In fact, as Soviet officials have said, the decision was made by Soviet commanders in Cuba .
 Soviet major general Igor I Statsenko claims responsibility for the decision in 1987 . Other Soviet sources have suggested that Lt. Lt. Statsenko may have been responsible .
 Marshal Malinovsky mildly reprimands the officers and orders that no other U-2s be attacked . After the incident, the marshal reprimands them and orders them to leave .
 Several ExComm members consider possible options in light of the deteriorating crisis situation . George Ball, George Ball and other members of the ExComm discuss possible options .
 F8U-1P low-level reconnaissance planes take off for afternoon missions over Cuba . F8P reconnaissance planes are often used to carry out reconnaissance missions in Cuba .
 Two of the six planes forced to abort their mission due to mechanical problems . Two planes were forced to abandon their mission because of mechanical problems.
 Cuban troops open fire with anti-aircraft guns and small arms . The remaining planes fly over San Cristóbal and Sagua la Grande, Cuba says .
 One of the U.S. aircraft is hit by a 37mm anti-aircraft shell but manages to return to its base . The aircraft was hit by the shell but managed to return safely to their base .
 President Kennedy orders the immediate dispatch of a message to U Thant asking urgently whether he would ascertain if the Soviet government is willing to stop work on the bases while negotiations continue to find a solution .
 Maxwell Taylor brings in a late report confirming that the missing U-2 had been shot down over Cuba, probably by a SAM site . In the middle of the meeting, Maxwell Taylor confirms that the report confirms that a SAM shot down the plane .
 President Kennedy decides not to retaliate but agrees that if any more surveillance planes are fired on over Cuba, SAM sites would be attacked . President Kennedy says he will not retaliate, but agrees to attack SAM sites .
 Kennedy's order to call off the planned reprisal is reportedly received with disbelief in the Pentagon . The Pentagon is reportedly in disbelief at the decision .
 Most of the long meeting, however, centers on formulating a response to Nikita Khrushchev 's most recent proposal .
 President Kennedy favors trading away missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba as Khrushchev has offered . Kennedy has hinted to the Soviet government through Robert Kennedy and Anatoly Dobrynin .
 Most of the group argues that an open trade could fragment the NATO alliance . However, most of them argue that it could fragment NATO alliance members .
 McNamara argues that the Jupiters in Turkey should be removed, but only as a prelude to an invasion of Cuba . Maxwell Taylor forwards the JCS recommendation simply to initiate the airstrike and invasion plans; and the State Department drafts a letter flatly rejecting the Soviet proposal .
 The idea of ignoring Khrushchev 's new proposal and responding only to the October 26 letter gradually begins to emerge . As the meeting progresses, the idea of the proposal slowly emerges .
 President Kennedy initially reluctant to accept the idea because he does not believe Khrushchev would accept such a deal . Kennedy finally agrees when Soviet specialist Llewellyn Thompson argues that he might . Kennedy initially agreed to the deal, but was initially reluctant .
 Theodore Sorensen and Robert Kennedy leave the meeting to compose the proposed response . Robert Kennedy: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to make it happen"
 President Kennedy, McNamara, Bundy, Rusk, Thompson, Thompson and Sorensen meet in the Oval Office . After the ExComm meeting, a smaller group meets with President Kennedy .
 Dobrynin should be informed that if the Soviet missiles are not withdrawn, there will be military action against Cuba . They further agree that Dobrynins should be told that if Russia does not withdraw, military action will be launched against Cuba.
 If they are removed, the U.S. will be willing to give a non-invasion pledge . If they're removed, however, the United States will give them the pledge . The United States is willing to talk to the United Nations if they remove them .
 The proposal quickly gains the approval of the group and the president . The proposal is quickly accepted by the group .
 Concern is so acute that the assurance not be leaked to the public or to NATO that not even other ExComm members are told of the additional assurances . Concerns are so acute they not be told of additional assurances regarding the Jupiters . The assurance is so high it is not
 At Dean Rusk 's request, ABC News correspondent John Scali and Soviet embassy official Fomin meet once again . At the request, Dean Ruski and Fomin met at the request of ABC News Correspondent Dean Scali .
 Premier Khrushchev 's new message had been drafted before his report on the favorable U.S. reaction to the October 26 proposal had arrived . He states that Premier Khruschev had drafted the new message before he had received his report .
 Fomin says he and Ambassador Dobrynin are expecting a reply from Khrushchev at any moment . He urges Scali to report to United States officials that there is no treachery . Fomin: Fomin and Scali are expecting reply .
 Scali replies that he does not think anyone will believe Fomin's assurances but that he will convey the message in any case . Scali: "I'm not sure if anyone will be able to believe me"
 President Kennedy had been anxious to remove missiles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of time, he said . However, he added that President Kennedy was anxious to . remove those missiles .
 Anatoly Dobrynin has recently contradicted Robert Kennedy 's account of the meeting in several ways . Dobrynins has contradicted Kennedy's account of meeting with Kennedy .
 Dobrynin: Kennedy did not in fact threaten military action against the missiles sites . Kennedy threatened military action if Soviet government did not remove the missiles . Dobrynins: Kennedy threatened to take action if the Soviet government didn't remove missiles .
 Kennedy reportedly did not say that the Jupiters had been ordered removed earlier . Instead he suggested that an explicit deal on the Turkish missiles could be struck . Kennedy reportedly didn't say that he had ordered the removal of the missiles .
 The attorney general returns to the White House after a meeting with Dobrynin . After the meeting, the attorney general meets with the president .
 McNamara instructs Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert to order to active duty 24 Air Force Reserve units totaling 14,200 personnel . At President Kennedy 's direction, McNamara 'says . McNamara instructed Secretary of . the Air . Force . Secretary of Air Force
 President Kennedy 's letter to Premier Khrushchev drafted earlier in the day is transmitted to Moscow . President Kennedy's letter is sent to the Soviet Union in Moscow . The letter is drafted by President Kennedy .
 The letter is also released directly to the press to avoid any communications delays . The letter was also released to avoid delays .
 Fidel Castro indicates in a letter to the United Nations acting secretary general that he would order work to cease, provided the U.S. lifted the blockade . Castro indicates he would stop work on missile sites while negotiations continue . The U.N. has not responded to the request that Cuba
 U Thant informs Adlai Stevenson that Soviet representative Zorin has refused to accept information about the exact location of the quarantine interception area that the U.S. passed on earlier in the day . The United States passed on the information to the Soviet representative .
 President Kennedy and Dean Rusk prepare a contingency plan to facilitate a public Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade . Unknown to other members of the ExComm, President Kennedy planned a public trade with Cuba .
 At Kennedy's instruction, Rusk phones Andrew Cordier, a former United Nations undersecretary, and dictates a statement that Cordier is to give to U Thant upon further instructions from Washington . Rusk dictates the statement to Cordier .
 The statement is a proposal to be made by U Thant calling for the removal of both the Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Kennedy also asks Roswell Gilpatric to draw up a scenario for the early removal of the missiles from Turkey . During the day, Kennedy also asked Roswell Gilbert to create a scenario to remove missiles .
 Fidel Castro meets with Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev for lengthy discussions in the Soviet embassy in Havana . Fidel Castro met with Ambassador Aleksander Aleksandr Aleksandev in Havana, Cuba, in the 1960s .
 Alekseyev: Castro briefed by him on each of the messages sent back and forth between Moscow and Washington during the crisis . Castro had been briefed on each message sent back to Moscow from Moscow .
 Instructions are sent to Ambassador Finletter to review the deepening crisis with NATO allies . Instructions are also sent to the ambassador to the United States .
 Soviet technicians have succeeded in making fully operational all twenty-four MRBM sites in Cuba . The CIA's daily update as of 6:00A.M. reports that Soviet technicians succeeded in . making fully . operational all . twenty-eight MRBM Sites in Cuba are now fully operational
 Construction of one nuclear bunker reportedly has been completed but none are believed to be in operation . None of the bunkers is believed to have been operational .
 A new message from Nikita Khrushchev effectively terminates the missile crisis . The message was broadcast on Radio Moscow . It effectively ended the crisis in Moscow .
 Some members of the JCS are less enthusiastic about Khrushchev's decision . ExComm members feel relief and exultation among most of them .
 Castro apparently goes to San Antonio Air Force Base to shoot down a U.S. low-altitude aircraft . Castro met with high military leaders during the morning, meeting with military leaders .
 Robert Kennedy meets with Anatoly Dobrynin at the Soviet ambassador's request . Kennedy met with Dobrynins at the request of the Russian ambassador . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Dobrynin notes that Premier Khrushchev has agreed to withdraw missiles . He tells Kennedy that Soviet leader wants to send his best wishes to him and the president .
 Khrushchev 's message announcing the decision to dismantle the missiles in Cuba is available . By this time, the full text of the message has been published .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara reports that the Soviet ship Grozny is standing still . No other Soviet Bloc ships will be entering the quarantine zone during the day .
 President Kennedy directs that no air reconnaissance missions be flown during the day, and that no action be taken against any Soviet Bloc ships with regard to the unresolved question of the IL-28 bombers in Cuba .
 Kennedy agrees that the U.S. should consider the IL-28 s ""offensive weapons" and press for their removal . Kennedy also suggests that the United States should not ""get hung up" on this issue .
 Fidel Castro declares that the U.S. assurance of non-aggression against Cuba is unsatisfactory unless it includes additional measures . Fidel Castro says the United States. guarantee of non.-aggression . against Cuba must be met with additional measures, he says .
 An end to the economic blockade against Cuba, an end to all subversive activities carried out from the U.S. against Cuba . A halt to all attacks on Cuba from the United States military bases on the island of Puerto Rico, and the return of Guantanamo naval base to Cuba .
 The JCS asks CINCLANT to re-evaluate Oplan 316, the invasion plan of Cuba, and determine what modifications should be made to the plan . The plan is based on recent intelligence estimates on military equipment in Cuba .
 CINCLANT is directed to consider whether tactical nuclear weapons, both air and ground, should be included in the arsenal of U.S. forces invading Cuba .
 John Scali meets with Soviet embassy official Fomin for the fourth time during the crisis . Fomin is the fourth official to meet with Scali at the request of the U.S. State Department officials .
 Fomin then adds, ""And that includes your explosion of Saturday""--indicating that United States anger, as conveyed by Scali, toward the broadening of Soviet demands had reinforced Khrushchev's decision to accept the United States proposal for ending the crisis .
 The Soviet embassy in Havana receives a lengthy telegram from the Kremlin explaining the decision to withdraw the missiles . The Kremlin withdraws the missiles from Havana .
 Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev passes on the telegram to Cuban President Dorticós, who is reportedly somewhat reassured by it . The Soviet-Cuban President reportedly feels reassured by the message .
 Khrushchev agrees to dismantle the sites after the United States promises to stop the blockade of Cuba, withdraw the missiles in Turkey, and to not invade Cuba . The U.S. also promised not to invade Cuba and to withdraw missiles from Turkey . The sites were dismantled after Khrush
 Kuznetsov proposes that when the dismantling is completed, the Soviet Union report to the Security Council . The Soviet Union would then authorize a United Nations team to visit Cuba for ""on-site"" verification .
 An interdepartmental task force convenes under Defense Department General Counsel John McNaughton . The task force was ordered by Robert McNamara to remove Jupiter missiles .
 President Kennedy orders that U.S. Navy ships maintain their quarantine stations . President Kennedy ordered that the quarantine stations be maintained .
 Low-level reconnaissance flights are directed to resume, but no U-2 missions are authorized . The U.2 mission is not authorized to carry out .
 U. Thant briefs Adlai Stevenson, John McCloy and Charles Yost on his meeting with Vasily Kuznetsov . U Thant meets with Russian President Vladimir Putin in New York .
 U Thant tries to convince Americans that the quarantine should now be suspended . McCloy and Stevenson disagree, linking the end of the quarantine to the actual removal of offensive weapons from Cuba .
 The quarantine could be suspended for the duration of U Thant's visit to Cuba, scheduled to begin on October 30 . They do agree, however, that the quarantine may be suspended .
 JCS intends to modify invasion plans so that U.S. air and ground forces engaged in operations against Cuba would also be armed with tactical nuclear weapons . Cuban forces have nuclear-capable short-range missiles, JCS says .
 JCS assures JCS that nuclear weapons would be employed only if Cuban or Soviet forces initiated the use of nuclear weapons . CINCLANT assures the JCS the weapons would only be used if Cuban forces initiated nuclear weapons use .
 The JCS agrees to allow U.S. invasion forces to be armed with nuclear-capable weapons . But the actual nuclear warheads should not be introduced into Cuba without further JCS authorization .
 Soviet Union attempts to hammer out a formal agreement with the U.S. on the settlement of the missile crisis . The Soviet Union and the United States were involved in the crisis in Moscow .
 An unsigned letter from Premier Khrushchev explicitly spelling out the terms of the arrangement, including Robert Kennedy's pledge that the Jupiter IRBMs will be removed .
 The attorney general takes the letter with him to consider the proposal . Attorney general makes no immediate response but takes the proposal to consider .
 Kennedy rejects the idea of a written agreement involving the Jupiter missiles . When he meets Dobrynin the following day, Kennedy rejects idea of written agreement . Kennedy says he will continue to pursue the deal .
 Garthoff writes that the U.S. can't "reasonably insist" on withdrawal of MiG aircraft, SAMs or non-missile ground force weapons . He says that the United States can not ""reasonably" insist on the withdrawal of aircraft and SAMs .
 U Thant and his aides meet with Fidel Castro, Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós and Foreign Minister Raúl Roa . Shortly after his arrival in Havana, U. Thant's aides meet Fidel Castro .