 Today’s toughest nuclear challenges have deep roots in the past, NPIHP seeks to transcend the East vs. the West vs. East . Recognizing the challenges of nuclear power in the U.S. has deep roots .
 West needs to work to work towards an integrated international history of nuclear weapon proliferation . The West has been accused of trying to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation in the past .
 The continued proliferation of nuclear weapons is one of the most pressing security issues of our time . Yet the empirically-based study of international nuclear history remains in its infancy .
 The Woodrow Wilson Center takes no position on the historical interpretations and opinions offered by the authors . As a non-partisan institute of scholarly study, the Wilson Center does not endorse these interpretations .
 The Elephant in the Room: The Soviet Union and India’s nuclear program, 1967–89 Balazs Szalontai 2. The Russian-India nuclear program was the subject of much of the world's most famous nuclear tests .
 Between Aid and Restriction Changing Soviet Policies toward China’s Nuclear Weapons Program 1954–60 . Zhihua Shen and Yafeng Xia 3. Between aid and restrictions changing Soviet policies toward China's nuclear weapons program 1954 .
 Indo-French nuclear relations during the Cold War, 1950–1974 Jayita Sarkar 4. From the Peaceful Atom to the . Peaceful Explosion, Indo-France nuclear relations . Indo-Indonesia nuclear relations between 1950-1974 .
 Russia’s Policy in the Run-Up to the First North Korea Nuclear Crisis, 1991–93 Sergey Radchenko 5.5.5 . 5.6.5: The First North Korean nuclear crisis was in 1991-93 .
 Germany’s Place in the Nuclear Order Andreas Lutsch 6. The Persistent Legacy Germany has a place in the nuclear order . Lutsch: "I’m not sure what I’ve done with nuclear power. It’ll be interesting to see if we
 The Imagined Arsenal India’s Nuclear Decision-making, 1973–76 Yogesh Joshi 7.7.6.5.5 . Yogesh . Joshi: India's nuclear decision-making .
 Tlatelolco Tested The Falklands/Malvinas War and Latin America’s Nuclear Weapon Free Zone . Ryan Alexander Musto 8.0.0 .
 The Neutron Bomb Affair, the Netherlands, and the ‘Defeat of the Strangeloves’ 1977–78 Ruud van Dijk 9.5.7.5 . The ‘defeat’ of the . Strangelove’ was the
 The Effect of ROK-Canada Reactor Deals on Korea’s Ratification of the NPT Se Young Jang 11. The effect of the Canada-South Korea deal will be seen in the U.S. on the Korean peninsula .
 PN Haksar and India’s Nuclear Policy in the 1960s . Yogesh Joshi 12.5 years later, he wrote a book about India's nuclear policy .
 Polina Sinovets and Mariana Budjeryn 13.13. Interpreting the Bomb Ownership and Deterrence in Ukraine’s Nuclear Discourse in Ukraine's nuclear discourse . The authors conclude that the nuclear crisis in Ukraine is a serious problem .
 The Influence of J Robert Oppenheimer on American Nuclear Policy after the Second World War . Marco Borghi 15. The influence of J. Oppenheim on American nuclear policy after World War was a major influence .
 The African National Congress and Apartheid South Africa’s Nuclear Weapons Program . Jo-Ansie van Wyk and Anna-Mart van Wyks. 17.17. The South Africa's nuclear weapons program .
 The papers draw on a range of primary sources from Egypt, the United States, the U.N., the United Nations, the Soviet Union, and elsewhere .
 These papers developed from their authors' work for the Cairo conference, discussions between them, and their earlier research on aspects of the missile crisis and Egyptian foreign policy . The papers were developed from discussions between the authors and discussions .
 James Hershberg has a long-standing interest in the crisis and published extensively on various aspects of its history . He has published extensively about the crisis .
 Hassan Elbahtimy assessed Egypt’s understanding of nuclear vulnerability during the crisis . He wrote a chapter on the topic for a book edited by Benoit Pelopidas . The book was edited by Pelopida .
 The complementary papers both draw on sources from Egypt, the US, UN, Soviet Union, and elsewhere . They provide new insights and information on Cairo’s experience of the crisis .
 Egyptian Foreign Ministry archives are currently not open for consultation . We still hope to be able to draw on more sources in the future .
 Such evidence could enhance the picture the two papers offer, and perhaps more fully portray, the papers offer .
 Traditionally, the confrontation between the two biggest ideological and military adversaries, the United States and USSR, has dominated the period's diplomatic history . The U.S. and USSR have been the biggest ideological, military adversaries .
 Non-aligned powers are often overlooked or marginalized in the Middle East . The experiences, actions, and influence of non-aligned countries, many newly independent powers, often overlooked .
 The history of the missile crisis has focused on how the conflict was experienced in Washington and Moscow, the two poles of the Cold War, and to a lesser extent Havana .
 Studies have paid far less attention to the role of the decolonized and non-aligned states . Studies have focused on the decolonialism of non-Arabic states .
 Two new contributions surf the ""third wave" of missile crisis historiography . They explore the event's global dimensions, particularly “Third World” and neutralist as opposed to East-West .
 Our papers seek to contribute to the history of the crisis through augmenting a still fresh global perspective beyond the superpowers and their respective blocs .
 The crisis occurred one year after the inauguration of the Non-Aligned Movement at the September 1961 Belgrade conference hosted by Yugoslavia's Tito . Nasser was a leading voice at the conference, at which he was a prominent voice .
 Cairo was presented with the challenge of how to position itself in the crisis drawing on non-aligned principles while supporting Cuba’s right to self-determination . In 1962, Cairo faced the challenge to find a way to deal with the Cuban crisis .
 The result was an attempt to walk a thin line between U.S. and Soviet positions while trying to divide the blame . The result of the United States and the Soviet Union's efforts to blame each other is not clear .
 Hershberg’s paper shows how Cairo's stand irritated Washington, particularly when its UN representative openly denounced the American blockade imposed on Cuba . The paper relied on United States and Soviet reports .
 The UN had become a platform that the U.S. and the USSR could not ignore . But it also had to share influence with a growing number of independent-minded actors . The UN was a platform for the United States and the Soviet Union, the author says .
 Cairo, then occupying one of six non-permanent seats on the then 11-member Security Council, canvassed the views of many of the neutral and recently decolonized states to push for deescalation and greater UN involvement in the crisis . Cairo was then occupying a non-
 The transformed face of the UN meant that new coalitions emerged that pushed the organization to intervene . The U.S. and the Soviet Union presented a draft resolution on the crisis .
 Both papers see evidence that behind Cairo’s public support for Cuba, some Egyptian officials privately criticized Havana’S conduct . Both papers also see evidence of support for the Cuban government .
 As seen from Cairo, Havana allowed the deployment of Soviet nuclear capable missiles on the island . Cuba relied too heavily on the Soviet Union in the management of the crisis, in the process straying away from principles of non-alignment .
 The intriguing topic of relations between Cairo and Havana, and relations between Nasser and senior Cuban revolutionaries such as Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara and Fidel Castro, merits further investigation when significant Egyptian and Cuban archives and sources become more accessible .
 In autumn 1962, governments around the world followed the unfolding of the crisis in the Caribbean . Hassan Elbahtimy led the Non-aligned Diplomacy in the Face of Global Crisis Hassan Elbtimy .
 The crisis had pitted Cuba, the USSR, and the U.S. against one another . It soon evolved to engulf the whole world in fear . The crisis pitted Cuba and the USSR against each other .
 The United States instituted a self-styled “quarantine” on Cuba after discovery of Soviet missile bases there . The U.S. instituted a "quarantine" on Cuba in response to discovery .
 Cuba and the USSR both objected to U.S. measures, describing them as illegal while refusing to change course . The USSR and Cuba called the measures illegal and refused to change direction .
 For many states around the world, the crisis was more than just a superpower confrontation . For many, it was more important than just an American confrontation .
 It raised questions about sovereignty, global governance, and the imprudent danger of nuclear brinkmanship . It also raises questions about the impenudentity of global governance and sovereignty .
 The crisis has been the focus of a vast and still growing body of literature . Yet our understanding of the global dimensions and implications of the crisis remain limited .
 The book contributes to a growing body of literature that seeks to open up the examination of the crisis to new and global perspectives . In doing so, it contributes to the . .
 This new literature adds to the now familiar narratives that has presented the crisis through the prism of the US, Soviet Union, and/or Cuba as the direct protagonists . This is the latest in a long line of stories that have been presented by the U.S. and Soviet Union as
 Three sources of overconfidence in the manageability of nuclear crises,"" European Journal of International Security 2, no. 2, is published in Europe's journal of international security .
 This included mobilizing the Afro-Asian bloc, submitting a draft Security Council resolution on the crisis, and backing the UN Secretary General in his mediation efforts . This included sending a draft resolution to the Security Council .
 In Egypt, the events were seen as a serious, and potentially catastrophic, international crisis . Egypt was seen as an example of a serious international crisis in the country .
 It triggered internal debate on nuclear issues and significantly increased domestic interest in global nuclear politics . It triggered an internal debate with nuclear issues .
 This study primarily relies on Egyptian and Arabic primary sources, many of which have not been previously used in studying the crisis or on Egypt’s foreign policy .
 Documents provide a detailed account of Egypt’s proactive multilateral diplomacy at a time when it held a seat in the Security Council . Egypt held a post in the UN Security Council during the early 1980s .
 The archives of Egypt’s two main official dailies Alahram and Al-akbar provide a window into the public discourse in Egypt on the crisis .
 Experts provide insights on elite views and commentaries related to nuclear politics and deterrence . They also provide interesting insights on nuclear politics .
 The Egyptian National Archives and British Library in London contain comprehensive archives relating to how the October events were reported in government-controlled press . Egypt's government-run newspapers reported the events in October .
 To understand Egypt's position in the Cuban crisis of 1962, understanding of how Cairo situated itself on the international scene is crucial . Cairo, Non-alignment, and the Cuban Revolution of 1962 is crucial to understanding Cairo's position .
 Cairo at the time was a prominent advocate for both decolonization and non-alignment between the Soviet Union and the U.S. Cairo was a leading advocate for decolonialization . Cairo was also an advocate for non-aligned relations with the United States .
 Cairo rejected military alliances functioning within the communist East or the capitalist West . Cairo therefore rejected military alliance between communist East and capitalist Westerns . Cairo rejected the idea of a military alliance within communist East .
 Egypt sought to chart an independent course for itself in the Cold War and advocated for others to follow the same approach . Egypt sought the same path in the 1950s and 1960s .
 It was an active contributor to the Afro-Asian Conference in Bandung in 1955 . A few years later became a founding member of Non-Aligned Movement in 1961 .
 Cairo actively opposed the establishment of the Baghdad Pact . Cairo fiercely pushed back against any extension of Cold-War-style defense pacts in the Middle East .
 Non-alignment as a foreign policy orientation carried a nuclear dimension too . Non-aligned as a policy orientation carries a nuclear aspect too, writes David Frum .
 Egypt’s foreign policy towards Cuba can be understood as a function of its relationship with the U.S. and the Soviet Union, but what is frequently overlooked is that this policy was a product of Cairo's experience of, and later advocacy for, decolonization .
 Cairo invested in good relations with the new Cuban regime under the leadership of Fidel Castro . Cairo invested heavily in Cuba's new regime .
 In many cases, parallels were seen and explicitly highlighted between Egypt's and Cuba’s respective struggles for decolonization . In many of these cases, the parallels were explicitly highlighted .
 The Cuban Revolution was seen as part of a global wave of national liberation movements reversing the injustices inflicted by decades of colonization and control of European and Western powers on vast swaths of the world . The Cuban revolution was therefore seen as a global, historic wave of liberation movements .
 Cairo was ready to open its arms for the new Cuban regime . It is hardly surprising then that Cairo was willing to embrace the new regime .
 Che Guevara visited Cairo in 1959 soon after the new regime had established itself on the Caribbean island . The new regime established itself in 1959 after Che GUEvara's visit .
 Cairo was able to provide modest and symbolic assistance to Havana with the aim of supporting the new regime . The warming of relations also meant that Cairo was . able to . provide some modest . assistance to Cuba . It is in defiance of United States efforts to isolate it internationally .
 Nasser also lent the new regime his support openly and frequently drew connections between Egypt’s struggle for independence against colonial and dominating powers . Nasser highlighted the importance of solidarity between Third-World powers .
 We believe that we ought to support the cause of freedom in every part of the world . For this reason, we believe that . we believe . that we should support the causes of freedom . in every country .
 In 1961, Nasser harshly denounced U.S. attempts to invade the Caribbean island during the Bay of Pigs operation . Nasser quickly and harshly denounced United States attempts to invasion the island .
 Nasser sent a private message to Castro through the Egyptian ambassador in Havana expressing Egypt’s support . Nasser drew parallels with Egypt's own fights during the Suez Crisis of 1956, drawing parallels .
 The movement provided an umbrella for states around the world, the vast majority of them newly decolonized, to assert different positions on world affairs than those advocated by the U.S. or Soviet Union .
 It was through NAM and other similar channels that Cairo projected its voice in support of Cuba and anti-colonialism more broadly . Cairo sought to build international coalitions with like-minded countries .
 As the crisis was picking up pace in the Caribbean, Cairo was heavily engaged with foreign policy priorities elsewhere . Cairo's experience of the Cuban Crisis of 1962 was an important lesson .
 Only a month earlier, Egypt had started its active, and later costly, engagement in Yemeni affairs . Egypt had begun its active engagement in Yemen .
 Cairo supported a group of Yemeni officers in removing the conservative Imamate dynasty from power to establish a republic inspired by Egypt’s own free officers movement in 1952 .
 With time, Egypt became heavily involved in the Yemeni civil war that followed between the traditional leadership and the republican officers – picking the side of the republicans . Egypt was heavily involved .
 By October 1962, around 20,000 Egyptian troops were reported to have been deployed in Yemen in what later came to be known as “Nasser’s Vietnam” due to the great loss in blood and treasure suffered by Cairo .
 Egyptian President Mohamed Abd Abd Abdadi has been involved in Yemen's military involvement in the country's conflict with Yemen . He has also been criticized for his role in the Yemeni crisis . The Egyptian government has been criticized in the past for its intervention in Yemen .
 In the fall of 1962, China and India went to war over a border dispute . In 1962, the two countries were at odds over a disputed border .
 The conflict risked a deep fissure in the anti-colonial camp and caused significant alarm in Cairo . The conflict was the first of its kind and risked significant alarm from Cairo .
 As the situation in the Caribbean heated up, Nasser was engaged in efforts to mediate between the Chinese and Indian leadership to de-escalate and resolve the conflict .
 Cairo did not foresee an imminent escalation in Cuba . Preoccupied with Yemen and the Sino-Indian conflict on the international stage, Cairo was not concerned .
 Egypt had no access to information on the intensions of the Soviet Union to introduce the missiles, nor did Cairo have any privileged access to the U2 photographs available to the Americans before the blockade . Egypt did not know about the plans to introduce missiles .
 Kennedy’s Middle East and the Making of the U.S.-Israel Alliance , 162 . Kennedy's Mideast chronicles the rise of the Israeli-American alliance in Israel .
 As events in the Caribbean kicked off, Cairo was commemorating the sixth anniversary of the Suez Crisis . Cairo commemorated the anniversary .
 The connection between Cuba’s struggle and its own prominent in Egyptian perceptions . This timing coincidence made the connection .
 Cuba’s defiance in the face of U.S. subversive efforts symbolized the struggle many post-colonial countries experienced to achieve independence . Cuba's defiance symbolizes the struggle of postcolonial countries to achieve freedom .
 On the 22nd of October 1962, Nasser received a private letter from Kennedy informing him of the Soviet efforts to introduce missiles in Cuba and of the U.S. decision to impose a quarantine on the island .
 Kennedy emphasized that the offensive Soviet ballistic build-up in Cuba was beyond ‘any doubt’ Kennedy stressed how recent actions by the Soviet Union were in flagrant contradiction with earlier commitments by Khrushchev and Gromyko that the USSR will only provide defensive weapons to Cuba .
 It focused almost entirely on the Soviet Union and its leadership as the main culprits . The Soviet Union was heavily criticized for its role in the collapse of Yugoslavia .
 Egypt’s default position was to think that the US measures were a new attempt to compromise the Cuban regime and aimed at re-instating US control over the Caribbean Island . With the Bay of Pigs in recent memory, Egypt's default position thought that the measures were an attempt to
 Cairo's acknowledgement of the Cuban regime’s vulnerability in the face of what was perceived as determined efforts by its mighty neighbor to undermine its government would continue to overshadow Egypt's early attitude toward the situation in the Caribbean .
 Only later with the escalation of the crisis and the US-Soviet standoff did the alarming nuclear dimension of that crisis gain salience in Cairo . The risk of nuclear war became clear in Cairo after the escalation and the U.S.-Soviet standoff .
 This was no longer strictly a US-Cuban affair where the Cuban island was subjected to the risk of a ground invasion or subversive action aimed at destabilising Castro’s government . The Cuban island is now at risk of ground invasion and subversive action .
 The newly formed “Presidential Council,” the highest political body in Egypt at the time, discussed the issue in at least two meetings on the 24th October and 1st of November .
 After the first meeting, a statement was released calling for negotiations between the US, USSR and Cuba to resolve the crisis peacefully . The first meeting was held in Cuba in 1961 .
 Cairo rejects the measures to establish a quarantine on Cuba and establish foreign military bases . The statement also rejects the establishment of foreign military military bases in Cuba .
 Undersecretary Hafez Ismail arranged a crisis group of seven departments, meeting every hour, to examine and analyze the latest information coming from embassies abroad and news cables .
 A report in Al-ahram describes “tens of diplomats that have not left their offices” in the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs since the very start of the crisis . The report describes ‘tens’ of diplomats not leaving their offices .
 Even religious authorities in Egypt accorded some attention to the matter .
 Grand Imam of Al-azhar, one of the biggest and oldest institutions in the Muslim world, issued a statement calling on all nations to stand against nuclear war . On the 24th of October, the Grand Imam called for the end of nuclear war.
 Al-azhar’s statement referred to the self-defeating nature of nuclear war and its global consequences . The statement was made in response to the threat of a nuclear war .
 The Council was in contact with the Egyptian representative in the UN who was instructed to coordinate a common position with countries from the Afro-Asian bloc and the non-aligned states .
 Al-ahram, Egypt's government-controlled and widest distributed daily, reported on its front page how the US was close to wiping North Carolina off the map when two nuclear weapons were dropped on the state by accident .
 As the USSR showed early signs that it might challenge the US-imposed quarantine, Alahram’s headlines announced the advent of ‘the danger of atomic war’ and a “world rolling down an abyss of hell” in a crisis unseen since the Second World
 The paper even started publishing a serialized version of “Fail Safe,” an American novel that vividly described how the world can step into a nuclear war by accident . The paper also published a serialization of ‘Fail Safe’
 The danger is described as unprecedented in its seriousness and global in nature . The danger was described as 'unprecedented' and 'global'
 Quotes from politicians and intellectuals expressed a doomsday scenario . Politicians and intellectuals have expressed their fear of a nuclear war .
 The pope was quoted as warning of war that would exterminate humankind . The pope has been quoted as saying war would kill all of humanity .
 Egypt joined the Security Council as an elected non-permanent member of the most consequential body of the UN . This was a reflection of Cairo’s growing international clout; particularly within the Non-Aligned Movement .
 As the Cuban crisis escalated in 1962, Cairo focused on the Security Council as its main vehicle to engage with the crisis . Egypt put into action its support for nonalignment principles and anti-nuclear positions .
 By the 23rd of October, Egypt had fully mobilized its diplomats and foreign service in support of its UN mission . Egypt has fully mobilized all of its foreign service and diplomats .
 Al-ahram publishes the book the world is talking about with fear and concern’ 2 November 1962, Alahram 24 ‘Pope warns of nuclear war that would exterminate mankind,’ 24 October 1962 . Al-a-jahram archives: Pope warns of war
 The first meeting of the 11 members of the Security Council on the crisis took place on the 23rd of October 1962 . The meeting took place in 1962 and 1962 .
 The US, supported by its Western allies, accused the Soviet Union of secretly building “launching bases and the installation of long range ballistic missiles capable of carrying thermonuclear warheads to most of North and South America” and stressing their ‘offensive’ nature .
 More controversially, it laid out the rationale for its imposition of a quarantine on Cuba . The US government has imposed a quarantine of Cuba's Cuba .
 Cuba, supported by the USSR and the Eastern bloc, focused on the illegality of the U.S. actions under international law . Cuba, on the other hand, was supported by Russia and the Soviet Union .
 Two radically different draft resolutions, presented by the U.S. and by the USSR, were tabled for the Council’s membership to consider and vote on . The United States and the USSR presented the draft resolutions .
 To many states on the Security Council and in the UN more broadly, their position was dictated by their respective places in the Cold War divide . The UN has been involved in the Middle East since the 1950s and '60s .
 Western powers and allied governments expressed support for the US draft . Romania, the only communist regime on the Council, supported the Soviet draft . The UK, France, Ireland, Chile, Venezuela, and Republic of China expressed support .
 For Egypt, the dominance of the East versus West shadow over international diplomacy had to be challenged . Egypt is buoyed by the recently established non-aligned platform .
 Recently decolonized Afro-Asian countries should be able to chart their own foreign and domestic policy, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: Decolonized countries should chart own foreign, domestic policy .
 ‘Urgent instructions sent to Mahmoud Riad,’ 24 October 1961, Al-ahram archives . They should deflect pressure from both the East and the West to automatically align with their 26 ‘urgent instructions .’ Al-Ahram archives.
 China’s Security Council seat was held by the anti-communist Republic of China . The anti-Communist republic of China was elected to the council .
 Egypt sought ways to bypass the pressure of East-West antagonism on the wider UN membership . Using its membership in the Security Council, Egypt bypassed the pressure . Egypt sought to bypass pressure from the West to join the UN .
 The following days showed Egypt’s proactive role in leveraging the non-aligned and decolonized states into an independent position . Egypt's proactive role was shown in the following days . Egypt has shown a positive role in the role of leveraging non-alleged states .
 These efforts centered on giving the UN, as the embodiment of global will, a prominent place in the world . The UN has been the focus of efforts to give the UN a prominent role .
 Egypt coordinated a meeting of 50 such states to drive greater and more proactive UN involvement in resolving the crisis . After the first day of the Security Council debate, Egypt coordinated the meeting .
 Egypt with Ghana and Cyprus formed a troika that represented the group . They met with the Acting Secretary General of the UN U Thant to press on him the will of a significant section of the international community for the UN to play a mediatory role in the conflict .
 Egypt’s diplomatic position in the UN was, in large part, built on two principles that started to play an increasingly visible role in Egyptian foreign policy at the time . Egypt's diplomatic position was built on these principles, and they became increasingly visible in Egypt's foreign policy .
 The first was active advocacy of the non-alignment of newly independent states . This was the first advocacy of an independent state .
 U.S. and Soviet Union were meant to protect the sovereignty of smaller and newly independent states . Alongside other leading non-aligned voices, this advocacy was meant to produce a loose umbrella under which a diverse set of countries could deflect pressure from the United States .
 Egypt’s support of Irish proposals in 1961 for an international instrument addressing the spread of nuclear weapons . The second was a growing inclination toward an anti-nuclear stance that had been in development during the preceding years .
 U.S. used UN and Security Council membership to advocate de-escalation while denouncing nuclear brinkmanship . On the ground, this transpired into a position .
 Meeting lasted for three hours on the night of the 23rd of October followed by another meeting next day morning . This was done in parallel with stressing 31 According to Riad .
 Cairo's interventions show a deliberate effort to distance itself from American and Soviet positions . These interventions also show a desire not to be identified with any of the competing Cold War camps, says Cairo .
 Egypt’s representative Riad emphasized the importance that states desist from intervening in the internal affairs of other states . Each state had the freedom to choose its own political system and to defend its political and territorial integrity .
 Egypt described the U.S. quarantine as illegal under international law, but interestingly opted to phrase this opposition in a controlled and restrained manner . Egypt said the quarantine was illegal but said it was not illegal under the law .
 Egyptian Ambassador used “quarantine,” the term adopted by the US, rather than “blockade” as used by Cuba and the USSR, which had more serious legal connotations . “Quarantine’s” use of the term was adopted by
 Egyptian position too close to the Cuban and Soviet narrative that stressed Havana’s right to fend off American efforts to subvert its new regime . On the face of it, and in the middle of a polarizing crisis, this position was too close .
 Egyptian Ambassador mentioned Egypt’s firm opposition to the establishment of foreign military bases, conceding to the U.S. narrative that placement of Soviet missiles on Cuban territory was a destabilizing act and detrimental to regional and global security .
 Egypt also came out with a strong and vocal antinuclear position that it shared with the Security Council . Egypt also shared a strong antiinuclear stance with the UN .
 The Egyptian ambassador Riad said that he received direct instructions from his government to reaffirm Egypt’s opposition in principle to the spread of nuclear weapons . The ambassador said he was told by the Egyptian government that he had been instructed to do so .
 Egypt and Ghana drafted a draft for a Security Council resolution that sought to provide a mandate for a larger UN role . The two countries are pushing for a more proactive approach by the UN .
 This was a direct attempt by the smaller powers to find a way out of the crisis through a coordinated multilateral approach using the United Nations . The smaller powers were trying to find out how to deal with the crisis using the UN .
 Ghana’s representative to the UN described the draft as the ‘peace resolution’ and asked Council members to support it . The draft is being drafted by Ghana's representative to UN in a bid to support the draft .
 Ghana and the U.A.R. feel it imperative to ask the Security Council to act urgently and resolutely to save international peace . In the same vein, the Egyptian Ambassador said, “Ghana and the United Arab Republic, as non-aligned countries, feel it .
 The resolution would provide a mandate for the ASG to play a mediatory role in the crisis was not universally welcomed . The diplomatic cover and the mandate the resolution was provided for ASG was not welcomed .
 The United States and some of the Western countries were not comfortable that the resolution did not address the dismantlement of the missiles in Cuba . The U.S. and some Western countries weren't comfortable with the resolution .
 The Soviet Union would have wanted to see a denunciation of the unilaterally imposed quarantine . Equally, the Soviet Union . would have . wanted to . see the unilateral imposed quarantine as a matter of principle .
 Non-aligned sought to directly urge the ASG to play such a role . Through tabling the resolution, the non-aligned wanted the ASGs to play a role.
 Diplomatic actions have yielded some results in getting the UN to step in . However, these diplomatic actions seem to have resulted in getting some results .
 President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev urged them to adhere to two or three weeks of reciprocal and “voluntary suspension” of all arms shipments to Cuba . U Thant told the Security Council that “at the request of a large number of member states,” he
 The aim for such suspension was to give time for the parties involved to discuss an enduring resolution of the crisis . The aim of the suspension was given time for such a solution to the crisis was to be discussed .
 The next day the Council was informed of the encouraging, if not conclusive, replies by the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Council was told of the replies .
 The ASG followed up with letters to Khrushchev and Kennedy asking the first to keep Soviet ships away from the quarantine area and the second to avoid direct confrontation with Soviet ships . The Egyptian representative was among the delegations that welcomed the responses and called for direct negotiations .
 In separate letters received on the 25th and 26th of October, both powers accepted the ASG proposals . In so doing the crisis looked like it was on its way toward containment .
 Egyptian mission in the UN was vocal in its support for negotiations under the UN Umbrella . Egyptian government has been vocal in support for the negotiations . The Egyptian government is expected to be in talks with the UN to resolve the crisis .
 In Cairo, Egypt’s biggest daily dedicated considerable coverage to ASG efforts to mediate, including publishing the complete record of letters exchanged between Kennedy, Khrushchev, and U. Thant .
 These were celebrated as a consequence of non-aligned mediation diplomacy . These are celebrated as the result of the non-interference diplomacy .
 By 28 October, the parameters of a compromise were reached that involved the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba and a secret promise by Kennedy to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The parameters of the deal were reached in October .
 The UN was also involved in efforts to verify the dismantlement and the removal of the missiles, including efforts to get Cuba to agree on an international verification .
 By early November the worst of the crisis was over . Despite differences between Cuba, the US and the Soviet Union over verifying the removal of the Soviet missiles, by early November .
 De-escalation was not universally welcomed in the Cold War era . It was against background of Cold War antagonism .
 Voices at the margins of each alliance were pushing to establish deterrence credibility . Voices from the margins were pushing for credibility .
 China used the crisis to accuse the Kremlin of capitulation . On the other hand, China used it to accuse Russia of capitulating . The crisis has been described as a 'humanitarian crisis'
 Egypt, along with the non-aligned states, sided with de-escalation . In this landscape, Egypt has sided with the anti-Assad regime . Egypt's government has been critical of the Syrian conflict .
 Nasser exchanged correspondences with Kennedy and Khrushchev in support of the outcome . Nasser sent letters to Kennedy in support for the outcome of the war .
 When it came to Cuba, a more complicated picture started to emerge in Cairo about Havana’s conduct during the crisis and its non-aligned credentials, Cairo officials say .
 Nasser’s messages to Kennedy and Khrushchev praised their restraint, but also highlighted the importance of the role played by the UN and the Acting Secretary General . Nasser's messages also highlight the important role of the UN .
 Nasser’s letter ended by highlighting that the U.S. “with all its might and prestige” can’t be trusted . Nasser: The United States with all its “might” and “prestige” it can be
 Egyptian press picked up on Chinese dissatisfaction . 'U Thant arrives today to Cuba,’ 30 October 1962, Al-ahram 47 Egyptian press .
 Chinese press print abridged version of Khrushchev's decision and Albania’s radio ignores it’ Al-ahram 30 October .
 He mentioned Egypt’s appreciation of the ‘wise and prudent” positions the USSR and Khrushchev personally had shown during the crisis . Egypt's appreciation of 'wise' and 'pradical' positions the Soviets showed during crisis, he said .
 Nasser ended by telling Khrushchev that “true courage is to perform one’s duties.” “True courage is not to be afraid,” Nasser said .
 Nasser's close adviser Heikal wrote an editorial reflecting some unusual criticism in Cairo directed at Cuba’s handling of the crisis . As the crisis was receding, Nasser wrote that Cuba's handling of it was criticized .
 Cuba criticized for allowing the Soviet Union to completely run the show on its behalf during the crisis . Cuba was criticized for not acting in an independent and non-aligned way . The Cuban government was criticized by some for allowing Russia to run its own affairs .
 Heikal compared the Cuban experience of 1962 and the Egyptian experience in 1956 during the Suez crisis . The Cuban experience was similar to that of Egypt in 1956, he said .
 In 1956, Nasser challenged the British, French, and Israeli invaders, Khrushchev responded to Kennedy’s letters . It was the Soviet leader who made the commitment to dismantle the missile bases, not the Cuban leadership .
 Underneath the sympathy and public support to Cuba, lurked a skepticism in its ability to chart a truly independent and non-aligned course like the one Cairo was advocating at the time . Such criticism shows that underneath the sympathy for Cuba, there was a skepticism .
 The influence that the Cuban missile crisis had on enforcing Nasser’s position on neutrality is noteworthy . The influence of the crisis was noteworthy .
 One of the lessons Nasser took away from the crisis was that a Cuba-like situation was something to be avoided . Nasser: A Cuba-style situation is something to avoid .
 Nasser’s fear of entrapment into a global nuclear confrontation exceeded any benefits that might accrue from hosting nuclear forces in Egypt . Increasingly, Nasser feared the risks would outweigh any benefits .
 When proposals were made that Egypt should consider hosting Soviet nuclear forces to counter Israeli nuclear potential, Nasser would fiercely reject the idea, citing the events in the Caribbean in 1962 .
 Egypt's policy against hosting foreign nuclear forces remained a solid component of Nasser’s approach to the nuclear question . Nasser's policy was a solid part of his approach to hosting foreign forces .
 Cairo’s diplomacy pulled into the Cuban crisis primarily through its presence on the Security Council and its prominent role among the non-aligned and decolonized states in the United Nations .
 The ambition to carve an independent and non-aligned course is instrumental to understanding Cairo’s approach to the crisis and its diplomacy in the U.N. Cairo's approach to crisis and diplomacy in United Nations is key to understanding its approach .
 Behind Cairo’s proactive role in the Security Council was a sense that Egypt and other neutral and decolonized states are entitled to play an active international role . Behind Cairo's proactive role is a sense of Egypt's sense that it is entitled to take on an active role .
 Their new status as independent states and full members of the United Nations and its bodies presented a window to challenge the bipolar structure and represent their own interests . The U.N. has been criticized by some of the world's most powerful powers .
 Egypt was keen to present non-aligned states as a constructive and independent actor on the world stage . Egypt was also keen to show non-alarmed states as an independent actor in the world .
 Cairo aspired for a proactive role through the UN and groups of like-minded states . However little influence it had on shaping the course of events in the Caribbean, Cairo had little influence .
 Cairo was at the heart of efforts by a group of heterogeneous, neutral and mostly Afro-Asian states to press for de-escalation . Using its membership in the Security Council and its clout among the newly independent states, Cairo used its clout to push for a bigger role for
 Egypt was part of a UN troika that pressed U Thant to use his offices for mediation . Egypt was also part of the troika pressed to use the Egyptian president's office to mediate .
 Samy Sharaf, Nasser’s Chief of Staff, is the Egyptian President of Egypt . Sharaf is the country's chief of staff . He is also the president of the country of Ghana .
 Egypt’s perceptions of the crisis were built on an entrenched foreign policy identity/orientation around neutrality, which Nasser championed since his assumption of power in Egypt in Egypt . Nasser's policies have been built on the idea of neutrality .
 Establishing foreign missile or military bases was one aspect of the Cold War that Nasser was vehemently opposed to . Nasser opposed to establishing foreign missile bases .
 What happened in Cuba showed how an added nuclear dimension can make these bases a source of serious international confrontation and tension . The Cuban military base is a major source of tension in the world, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Heated competition between the U.S. and the USSR to gain global influence can come at the expense of smaller states seeking independent foreign policy . The United States and the Soviet Union are at odds with each other .
 In a sense, the crisis reinforced both Egypt’s Cold War neutrality and its emerging antinuclear sentiments that were starting to take shape at the time . The crisis reinforced Egypt's anti-nuclear sentiments, says author .
 The crisis demonstrated the dangers of being entangled in alliances that can ultimately turn to great power confrontations chipping away the sovereignty and independence of smaller states .
 In a way, the crisis was a practical demonstration of the dangerous risks associated with global nuclear confrontations . Nasser's own fears of entrapment in such conflicts fed into Nasser’s own fears, he says .
 Nasser's Gamble was undertaken with Khrushchev's avid and ""remarkably fast"" support . Operation Anadyr covertly transported nuclear arms to Cuba, launched a costly and ultimately unsuccessful five-year involvement that some have likened to Egypt's Vietnam .
 Hassan Elbahtimy’s essay delves deeply into the attitudes of Egyptian policymakers and elites, especially regarding nonalignment and nuclear weapons, as well as Cairo's UN diplomacy . The essay, featured above, delves deep into the views of Egypt's elites and policymakers .
 Ostermann, Malcolm Byrne, Kian Byrne, and Leila Afzal are among the stars of this week's Top 10 .
 Khrushchev reacted speedily in late September and early October by sending transport planes, pilots, and other aid to Egypt to defend the new Yemeni regime . Ferris shows that, contrary to the ""traditional, and not illogical,"" view that Moscow singlemindedly focused on the
 As the missile crisis erupted, Khrushchev discussed the Yemen situation with Romanian visitors, explaining Soviet military help for the ""progressive"" Yemenis via Egypt .
 It is hoped that the two inquiries may, therefore, be complementary and mutually informative .
 UAR could hardly avoid reacting to and participating in the diplomacy of the Cuban crisis, which, after all, raised the prospect of an apocalyptic thermonuclear conflagration . Despite its urgent military entanglement closer to home in Yemen, the UAR couldn't avoid reacting .
 Gamal Abdel Nasser had boosted Egypt's stature as a major international and not merely regional actor . Since helping to oust King Farouk a decade earlier, he had helped Egypt's rise to prominence in the Middle East . Gamal Nasser was assassinated in November 1963 .
 In the Arab world, his electrifying rhetoric had promoted unity, opposition to Israel, and anti-imperialism . His pan-Arab aspirations suffered a blow when Syria withdrew from the ""United Arab Republic"" he had created as a first step toward a broader Arab entity .
 Nasser had ardently backed anti-colonial movements and leaders, from Patrice Lumumba in the former Belgian Congo to Kwame Nkrumah in Ghana . Nasser belonged to the radical ""Casablanca Group" forged in 1961 by Morocco, the UAR, Ghana
 At the same time, along with Yugoslavia's Tito, India's Nehru, and Indonesia's Sukarno, Nasser was a pillar of the emerging ""neutralist"" or ""nonaligned"" group . At the time of the 1950s and 1960s, he was a
 He participated actively in AfroAsian gathering in Bandung and Non-Aligned Movement heads of state founding summit in Belgrade . He also hosted several NAM meetings in Serbia .
 In 1962, Egypt's UAR held one of the six non-permanent seats on the U.N. Security Council, a scene of continuous and intense negotiating and maneuvering related to the superpower confrontation . Nasser's and Egypt's handling of the missile crisis was especially pertinent was
 Nasser, reported his confidant, Mohamed Heikal, had initial ""suspicions"" toward the Cuban revolutionaries but soon overcame them . Nasser's confidant had initial 'suspections' toward the revolutionaries .
 In mid-1959, he had welcomed Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara to Egypt and compared notes on land reform and revolution . In mid-'60s, he met Ernesto "Che" Guegara to discuss land reform .
 Defense minister Raul Castro visited Egypt the following year, but a dispute ensued when the Egyptians pressured him to tone down a speech . Castro's visit was the first since his visit to Egypt in 1978 .
 Nasser appreciated Eisenhower's refusal to support the British-French-Israeli Suez adventure in 1956 . JFK had made a concerted effort to lure Nasser into closer relations with Egypt .
 In 1966 the non-permanent UNSC membership was raised from six to ten . Chile, Ghana, Ireland, Romania, and Venezuela were the first members of the UNSC in 1966 .
 Loutfi reported in some form to Cairo, but details are not known . Presumably he is reporting to Cairo .
 A career diplomat, he was later Egypt's ambassador to Sweden and the People's Republic of China . He was Egypt's Ambassador to Sweden, China and Sweden among others .
 The Egyptian invited Castro to join the ""neutrals"" in their incipient movement to form a buffer between the rival superpower blocs . Khrushchev famously bear-hugged Castro in the same Hotel Theresa in Harlem where the Cuban had famously bear hugged him .
 Cuba did, in fact, join NAM from the start, the only Latin American nation to do so . At the same time, Havana's delegation annoyed some relative moderates, including Tito, Nehru, and presumably Nasser .
 Heikal sensed a mutual admiration between Castro and Nasser . Diplomatically, Cairo supported Havana, and Cairo supported Cairo . Nasser was a strong ally of Castro and Egypt .
 In March 1962, at the Security Council, the UAR, along with Ghana and the Soviet bloc, supported a resolution aimed at blocking actions passed by the recent Organization of American States foreign ministers' meeting in Punta del Este .
 In late August 1962, an Egyptian journalist told a UAR diplomat that bilateral relations were ""more than cool,"" citing the UAR government's decision to block reporters from visiting Cuba . An Egyptian journalist said in August 1962 that relations were more than cool . The UAR had blocked reporters
 Nasser first learned of the crisis through an ostensibly personal letter from JFK . The letter was timed to coincide with Kennedy's televised speech announcing the discovery of the missiles on Monday, October 22 .
 Due to the time difference, Kennedy spoke after midnight Cairo time, so serious deliberations there could not begin until the next day . Kennedy spoke to the nation's representatives in Cairo on Sunday night .
 Ambassador to Egypt John S Badeau to relay positive news on a different topic of considerable concern to Egypt's leader . Ambassador to Egyptian President Mohamed El Morsi to discuss the situation in Cairo .
 JFK's letter was sent to Bangkok, Canberra, Manila, Taipei, Seoul, Djakarta, Wellington, Phnom Penh, Saigon, Tokyo, Karachi, Tehran, Ankara, Athens, Cairo, Dublin, Accra, and Lagos .
 Nasser was also vying to mediate the SinoIndian border conflict, writing Zhou Enlai and Nehru to urge a cease-fire and negotiations . Nasser did not immediately respond to JFK's letter .
 On Tuesday, October 23, Washington concentrated its diplomacy on securing an endorsement of its imminent blockade from the OAS . Washington also anticipated the action soon moving to the UN Security Council . The U.S. is expected to move to the Security Council on Tuesday .
 UN Acting Secretary-General U. Thant called on neutral states to take immediate steps to alleviate the confrontation . Zorin also reported that neutral states were drafting a resolution calling on interested parties to cease actions that could ""directly or indirectly aggravate the situation"
 The Security Council Noting with grave concern the threat to international peace and security . Having listened to the parties directly concerned, 1.1.2.3.4.5.5 .
 Calls upon parties concerned to refrain from any action which may directly or indirectly further aggravate the situation . Calls upon the parties to take the necessary steps to bring the situation in the Caribbean back to the state of affairs existing prior to 22 October 1962 .
 3. Requests the Acting Secretary General to promptly confer with the parties directly concerned on the immediate steps to take to remove the existing threat to world peace . Requests that the Secretary of State Secretary General should promptly confer on the . immediate steps, 3.3.4 .
 Calls upon parties concerned to comply forthwith with this resolution and provide every assistance to the Acting Secretary General in performing this task . 4. Calls upon the parties concerned for compliance forthwith . Call upon the Secretary of State to provide assistance .
 Requests Acting Secretary General to report to the Council on the implementation of paragraph 2 of this resolution . Requests the Acting Secretary general to report .
 Nasser presided over a Presidential Council meeting at the AlQubbah Palace in north Cairo . The meeting was to discuss the international situation resulting from the blockade against Cuba, not the Soviet missile deployment .
 The statement, echoed the next day by all Egyptian media, explicitly criticized the U.S. blockade . Most importantly – the headline news for Americans28 – the statement was that Egypt's statement of support for the blockade .
 At the same time, it ""equally"" opposed foreign military bases and demanded their liquidation, ""wherever they may be,"" implicitly referring both to the US Guantanamo Bay naval base and to the Soviet missile installations in Cuba .
 Sabri repeated Cairo's support for the principle of disarmament, including the idea that states that did not produce nuclear weapons should not be supplied with them . The idea could be read as rapping the Soviet nuclear deployment to Cuba, supporting the creation of nuclear weapon free zones .
 Diplomats were briefed on the ambassador's contacts with Thant and fellow diplomats . Emergency Security Council meeting is set to re-convene around 5m.
 At the Egyptian foreign ministry, deputy foreign minister Hafez Ismail organized a round-the-clock crisis group . The crisis group monitors developments and coordinate communications with various diplomatic outposts .
 Ghana's ambassador impressed colleagues as capable and energetic . Ambassador had a strong interest in Cuba and impressed colleagues .
 Quaison-Sackey acknowledged that ""perhaps...things had gone too far"" with the recent Soviet military build-up in Cuba and new U.S. shipping embargo .
 Quaison-Sackey, who doubled as Ghana's ambassador to Havana, had mixed views . He was Ghana's first ambassador to Cuba .
 Mahoney was unhappy with Quaison-Sackey's October 24 UNSC speech on the Cuban matter, however, however .
 Quaison-Sackey briefly briefly briefly became Ghana's foreign minister shortly before Nkrumah's overthrow in early 1966 . He was Ghana's first foreign minister .
 Riad also proclaimed that the UAR, as a ""loyal"" UN member, believed all countries should refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity of any State .
 The UAR and Ghana co-sponsored a resolution to promote negotiations . The resolution called on UN Acting Secretary-General Thant to intervene between superpowers .
 That morning, Riad, Quaison-Sackey and Cyprus' Rossides, who that month chaired the UN's Asian-African group, effectively representing NAM nations, had seen Thant to explain the resolution and urge him to move briskly .
 The state-run Cairo daily Al Akhbar listed a ""proclamation of neutrality"" as the first element of the UAR government's position on the crisis . The state media cited ""informed circles" on October 25 .
 Riad later told Stevenson he had asked the Soviet delegate Zorin whether Moscow could accept Cuba's neutralization, but received no concrete reply . Riad said he asked Zorins whether Moscow would accept Cuba neutralization .
 Requests the Acting Secretary-General to promptly confer with the parties directly concerned on the immediate steps to remove the existing threat to world peace, and to normalize the situation in the Caribbean . 2. Requests that immediate steps be taken on the current threat of world peace . 3.
 Calls upon parties concerned to refrain meanwhile from any action which may directly or indirectly further aggravate the situation . Calls upon the parties concerned not to take any further action .
 The proposed resolution triggered some urgent diplomacy, and, fittingly for a measure advanced by two NAM stalwarts, dissatisfied both Moscow and Washington . The resolution was proposed by Russia and the U.S. in March .
 U.S. officials were ambivalent about interjecting U Thant into US-Soviet diplomacy . They feared a distraction from the exchanges between Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 The Americans wanted to avoid any protracted diplomacy that might delay a prompt resolution to the crisis . The U.S. wants to avoid a protracted diplomatic effort to resolve the situation .
 Moscow's UN delegate, Valerian Zorin, told Thant his proposal was ""incorrect and wrong-headed" for putting the U.S. actions on the same level as the measures Cuba is taking for self-defense .
 Moscow's Zorin faulted the draft resolution for failing to directly call on Washington to lift its ""quarantine"" on Cuba . But he said the speeches by Riad and Quaison-Sackey clearly implied a demand that Kennedy revoke such measures .
 Zayyat said the General Assembly was unlikely to approve a more favorable step, since a majority of ""the Afro-Asian group"" supported the UAR/Ghana resolution – exactly the dynamic ZayYat discerned .
 A previously declassified version of this cable redacted all references (both names and nationalities) to the identities of the Soviet, Egyptian, and Yugoslav diplomats . The cable was declassified in 2007 .
 The Soviet Presidium endorsed Zorin's plan on Thursday, October 25 . Khrushchev's top associate urged supporting the UAR/Ghana proposal rather than abstaining .
 Kuznetsov: Afro-Asian nations' statements were ""good and strong"" and the ""neutral nations"" exerted ""strong"" pressure on Washington . In contrast to that ambiguous act, Washington acted ambiguous act .
 Moscow's own retreat from threatening to veto the UAR/Ghana resolution showed that it was occasionally susceptible to NAM's diplomatic muscle-flexing . Yet, Moscow's withdrawal from threatening vetoing of the resolution shows that it too was susceptible .
 State Department summoned Nasser's ambassador to Washington, Mostafa Kamel, for a detailed briefing on the U.S. actions in the Cuban crisis . State-controlled media followed the lead provided by Sabri's statement, indicating ""disapproval"" of the American position51 –
 Talbot was annoyed that some Egyptians were skeptical of the U.S. claim . Talbot also laid out the evidence to blame Moscow for deploying offensive nuclear weapons to Cuba .
 Merely stopping delivery of additional offensive arms and suspending the quarantine (as Thant had proposed in letters to Kennedy and Khrushchev) was hence unacceptable . Merecely stopping . delivery of . additional offensive weapons and suspending . quarantine was unacceptable .
 Talbot vowed not to fall into trap of letting USSR take something to which not entitled, then stop and bargain for payment of something else . Khrushchev offered to swap Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. missiles in Turkey . Talbot: 'US not prepared to let USSR
 Talbot's briefing, apparently the most substantial personal US-UAR official interaction during the crisis, seems to have had its intended effect . Talbot was the most significant personal interaction between the U.S. and the Chinese government .
 Fleming, "United Nations Neutrals Seek 'Freeze' In Caribbean," Washington Post, 25 October 1962, A1. Fleming, "" United Nations Neutsrals Seek "Freeze" in Caribbean,"" Washington Post .
 Kamel advised that the ""neutrals"" could be more helpful if Washington did not press them to "subscribe 100% to United States position" Kamel said if some Americans did not like Riad's remarks, well, neither did Zorin .
 Talbot agreed the ""neutral"" countries might be helpful in verifying the missiles' dismantling and removal . Talbot directed the immediate sending of U-2 photographs to the embassy in Cairo to use in briefing UAR leaders .
 Stevenson-Zorin colloquy in which Stevenson challenged his Soviet counterpart to admit the presence of the missiles in Cuba . UAR and Ghana ambassadors proposed that the Security Council adjourns sine die to allow the contacts and negotiations to proceed .
 Zorin, chairing the session, gaveled it to a close – without calling to a vote any of the earlier introduced resolutions, either the US, the Soviet, or the one put forward the night before by the UAR and Ghana .
 By this time, another idea to resolve or mitigate the crisis was circulating around the Security Council . The idea was circulating with special implications for the UAR and Nasser .
 Poland's foreign minister, Adam Rapacki, recently proposed to create a NWFZ in the heart of Europe that would bar such arms from either East or West Germany . Poland and Czechoslovakia would also be barred from nuclear weapons .
 The Rapacki Plan had failed to enter into force, facing determined U.S. opposition . It generated much discussion about whether such atomic weapons-free areas might make sense elsewhere .
 In the Western Hemisphere, Brazil, aspiring to a larger role in international affairs, was investigating the idea . Brazil was looking to become an international power player in the world .
 When Cuban crisis ignited, some Brazilian diplomats thought making Latin America a NWFZ might offer a face-saving method to get missiles out of Cuba – and even had hopes of gaining Soviet support .
 Brazil's ambassador in Moscow had recently heard positive words on the subject from a senior Soviet figure . The USSR had, after all, backed the Rapacki Plan, signed an accord with the United States and others to make Antarctica nuclear-free .
 Brazil's ambassador in Washington, Roberto Campos, suggested organizing a movement at the United Nations of Latin American and African nations to denuclearize their continents . Campos: "Avoid humiliation for both sides"
 " NWFZs. An International History"" is part of his forthcoming international history of NWZs . He has also written a book about the history of the World War Zs .
 At the Excomm, United States officials approved cooperating with the Brazilian concept at the UN if it would yield the verified eviction of the Soviet missiles from Cuba . Military officials worried about potential restrictions on the stationing or transit of nuclear weapons in such U.S. territories as the Panama Canal
 This once-promising effort collapsed in late November and early December, mostly due to opposition from Cuba, which had earlier sounded interested . Havana backed away, so did the Soviets and their allies, and the Brazilians grudgingly withdrew the proposal .
 A UAR aide to Riad approached a United States UN delegation member to explain the UAR's objections to the Brazilian proposal . The UAR says it is concerned about the proposal . Riad's office says the proposal is a "non-discriminatory solution"
 Ahmed stressed that the UAR was both an African and Middle Eastern country, with commitments in both areas . Ahmed said while Cairo's African concerns and commitments might accommodate an NWFZ, the same could not be said for the Middle East .
 The UAR would be grateful if Washington could press the Brazilians to water down their resolution, perhaps reducing its African aspect to a mere appeal, alluding to a previously passed measure . Washington would hence be grateful for the UAR .
 On Nasser's nuclear ambitions, which remain unclear, remain unclear . See Elbahtimy, Nasser, Egypt and the Arrival of the Nuclear Age, 1955-1970 .
 Israel was secretly developing nuclear weapons, with French help, at its Dimona research station . Nasser and Kennedy were conducting an intense secret dialogue about Israeli nuclear work at Dimona .
 In the mid 1960s, Israeli Premier Levi Eshkol also raised the idea of a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East . Nasser's reassurances, in his private dialogue with JFK and LBJ, that he did not intend to develop nuclear weapons .
 In the Middle East, Israel raced ahead, secretly completing, it now appears, an operable atomic bomb by the time of the June 1967 war .
 In 1968, Nasser's Egypt, unlike Israel, signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, officially forswearing nuclear weapons . Nasser signed the N.N.Nasser's Egyptian government signed the treaty, but unlike Israel and Egypt, Egypt did not use nuclear weapons
 Egyptians learned about events through a combination of wire service reports relayed by local and international media, and commentary and headlines reflecting the state policy laid out by Ali Sabri following Wednesday evening's Presidential Council .
 The Cuban crisis inspired widespread fears of nuclear war, which diminished somewhat after the Soviets opted not to challenge the blockade .
 Monitoring media, U.S. embassy officials discerned a ""comparatively mild" tone to reports that by the weekend grew ""perceptibly more anti-American""73 – and collected more favorable views of United States actions from consulates in Alexandria and Port Said .
 Other than presiding over the Presidential Council on Wednesday evening, he did not appear to play any visible role in trying to influence public opinion or international diplomacy .
 Despite his well-known talents as a fiery speaker, he did not make any pronouncements at the height of the crisis . He was able to whip up public opinion with his fiery rhetoric .
 JFK held off on replying to JFK's October 22 letter . No available evidence suggests he met either U.S. or Soviet officials .
 Cuba would be willing to remove missile bases in return for a UN guarantee against a USbacked invasion . The UAR ambassador heard Castro's rep, Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui, state that Cuba would remove the missile bases .
 Riad met with Stevenson, Zorin, Thant, and the Cubans on October 27 – arguably the most perilous day in human history – on the same day .
 Zorin called the United States UN ambassador and relayed the substance of his exchange with the Soviet delegate and Burmese statesman . Later that evening, he called on the U.S. ambassador to recount the exchange .
 The USSR diplomat had appealed to the ""neutrals"" for support to resolve the crisis, arguing that Moscow had accepted the terms of Thant's appeal while Washington had rejected them or attached conditions .
 A bit ruefully, Riad told Stevenson that, especially since the Soviets had introduced Turkey into the negotiations, the neutrals felt they were not in a position to push substantive proposals on the superpowers, only to urge both to resolve the matter peacefully .
 The UAR ambassador promised to urge the Cubans, when he saw them in the coming hours, to stop missile construction . The ambassador was less explicit about the ""inoperability"" question .
 It could be useful to know, if Egyptian archives opened, if Riad, after seeing JFK's rep, saw the Cubans that Saturday night and if so what took place between them . Riad's rep says Riad was JFK's representative .
 Zorin also reported to Moscow that he had met with Riad that Saturday, as part of his efforts to appeal to ""exert pressure"" on Thant and UN delegates from the ""neutral countries"" to back Soviet proposals . The United States.
 Boland tried to preempt Riad on October 30 by calling for the Council to reconvene as soon as Thant returned from Havana to hear his report . The UAR delegate firmly objected, saying that the first priority is resolving the matter of guarantees for Cuban security .
 The U.S. can consolidate peace more than any other nation, the authors say . We believe that the United States, with its might and prestige, can consolidate the peace, they say .
 Peace based on justice is a human need that takes precedence over all others, for it not only preserves but dignifies life . In this respect it bears a historic responsibility before all mankind . Peace is a 'human need' for all mankind, says President Obama .
 Nasser aide Samy Sharaf delivered the letter to the U.S. embassy in Cairo on November 1 . The letter was not released publicly by the UAR government89 . It was viewed relatively positively by the United States .
 State saw the letter as Nasser's attempt to ""redress any grievance" the U.S. felt towards Cairo due to the UAR's ""equivocal position"" during the crisis . Suggested Badeau orally convey JFK's appreciation to Cairo .
 U.S. ambassador to Cairo to meet with Fawzi to elaborate the American view of the crisis . U-2 photographs had been dispatched to the embassy after Talbot's October 25 conversation with Kamel . The photos were intended to quell any doubts that the Soviets had deployed offensive
 UAR officials had conveyed interest in learning the ""intelligence basis" of the U.S. assessment, not until November 1 . Badeau met the UAR's ""most seasoned diplomat"" – his ""old friend,"" experienced , but not especially influential with Nasser .
 JFK-Khrushchev deal must be promptly and fully implemented, Badeau told Nasser . Nasser's foreign minister welcomed the briefing since he had been traveling as the crisis sharpened . The U-2 photographs were handed to Nasser as he was traveling .
 On October 29, the US ambassador saw Nkrumah to review Washington's handling of the crisis, reviewing and handing over blown-up U-2 photos . The US ambassador was scorning Quaison-Sackey's UNSC speech .
 Ghana's leader, ""aware that he could get into deep water if he veers too far from a neutral position on Cuba,"" sounded convinced by the presentation, reinforcing his ""fairly moderate stance"" on the crisis .
 Badeau urged the UAR to avoid destabilizing Saudi Arabia and cooperate with Washington to promote stability and more progressive government on the peninsula . The two then discussed Yemen, with the two then discussing the country .
 Badeau thought the Cuban crisis might have usefully enhanced Cairo's perception of U.S. determination to protect its interests . Cairo agreed to keep talking, and the two sides agreed to talk again .
 Badeau doubted the crisis had sufficiently improved Washington's standing to compel Arab states and Israel to begin direct negotiations . However, he said he doubted that it had improved the U.S. standing .
 The State Department recommended against publicizing the still-secret NasserJFK correspondence . The White House agreed, and the State Department later agreed .
 Nasser's letter to Khrushchev had attracted no notice in the United States . State would not mind if the UAR divulged the exchange, but UAR eschewed any initiative to release it publicly .
 Cuba State Department Cables, Section 3: 1962: 31 October 19 November . RFK/AG, RFKAG-202-201-005-p0110. Cuba State Dept. Cables: 31 Oct. 19 November 1962 .
 On November 8, a State Department official dined with Kamel and UAR official Tewfiq AbdulFattah, on his way to Havana to take up residence as Cairo's ambassador . Kamel will be Cairo's new ambassador to Havana .
 Egypt's foreign minister was traveling during the crisis, so the American took the opportunity to talk to him about the UAR's role in the crisis . The UAR was criticized by some in the U.S. for its role in Syria .
 The UAR's well-known hope of somehow luring Cuba ""out of the Soviet orbit and into the non-aligned orbit"" appeared ""totally impossible"" in the view of informed Americans and Latin Americans, the American said .
 Mr Abdul-Fattah said the UAR had learned a lot from the Cuban crisis and realized the futility of its former policy .
 He implied that the UAR had no further interest in the Castro government, and that his mission in Havana would be a holding operation . The UAR implied that he would not be interested in Cuba .
 Rusk reviewed the state of play in the negotiations with the Soviets over Cuba, noting continuing disputes over on-site inspections and bombers .
 Sabri said that at one time the UAR looked upon Cuba as a country trying to live its own life . Sabri: At one time, Cuba was looked upon as a nation trying to . live its . own life.
 Since the Cuban crisis, the UAR regarded Cuba simply as part of the Warsaw Pact . Since the crisis, however, the United Arab Republic regarded Cuba .
 He said, he could not tie the hands of his government, but implied that the UAR was washing its hands of Castro . The UAR would simply concentrate on non-aligned efforts to bring about a compromise between the two great power blocs .
 Havana agreed that even non-alignment would be better for Havana than the policy it was pursuing .
 The UAR deputy foreign minister elaborated Egyptian scorn for the Cubans . Egypt's foreign minister said the UAR had no sympathy for Cubans in Egypt .
 At the time of the Suez crisis, some Soviet advisers were in Egypt but Nasser pointedly ""shipped them all off"" to Khartoum, Sudan, for its duration . Nasser wanted to avoid any insinuation he was acting under Moscow's influence .
 Ambassador Badeau escorted a powerful delegation of United States senators to see Nasser at his personal residence in the eastern Cairo suburb of Heliopolis . Senators Richard Russell, Claiborne Pell, Benjamin Smith, and Benjamin Smith were among the delegation .
 Asked about the recent crisis, Nasser, in a ""relaxed, vocal, and friendly"" mood, quickly unloaded on Cuba . Nasser was in a relaxed mood and relaxed mood .
 Nasser said he had warned Havana's ambassador in Cairo that the Soviets could not be trusted in the pinch . He said recent events had amply borne out that assessment . Nasser: "that Russia would not fight a World War"
 Nasser rejected the idea because it would sacrifice Egypt's independence . Despite receiving domestic pressure to 'conclude a 'special arrangement' with the USSR' Nasser said he had firmly rejected the proposal .
 Senior UAR figures, i.e. Kamel, Sabri, and most importantly Nasser in contacts with high-level U.S. officials, sought to dispel or at least mitigate American resentment over Egypt's behavior .
 Nasser never visited the U.S. during Kennedy's presidency, much to Badeau's regret . Kennedy apparently discussed with his ambassador to Cairo when he briefly returned to Washington in mid-December .
 Cairo's missile crisis diplomacy at the UN quickly dissipated . As for Cairo's crisis diplomacy, it also dissipated.
 Khrushchev's discussions with UAR leaders prior to his ouster in October 1964 . In their absence, another promising source could be Soviet records of discussions with Soviet leaders .
 Heikal briefly quotes Khrushchev's remarks to Nasser, but full zapis besedy of these conversations could illuminate both men's views of the missile crisis and its ramifications .
 So far, unfortunately, they have not been found in Moscow archives, or published .
 Komer said Kennedy at least twice "approved in principle specifically going ahead with the Nasser visit 'at some future date’,"" but that circumstances arose to postpone an invitation .
 Cyprus had been a founding member of NAM, with its president, Archbishop Makarios, attending the September 1961 heads of state summit in Belgrade . Cyprus also attended the 1961 summit, in which the then-head of state met with other members of the world .
 Intermittent commerce also continued, e.g., in early 1963, when a sudden sugar shortage prompted the UAR to seek the bulk of the needed sweetener from Cuba .
 Nasser and Castro never visited each other's country while the two were alive . Cuba remained a full NAM member, attending all meetings .
 In early 1965, Guevara paid a return trip to Egypt and conversed extensively with Nasser . In 1965, around the time of his ill-fated venture to rouse Congolese revolutionaries, Lumumba's successors, against the USbacked Mobuto regime,
 Che seemed troubled by the course of Cuba's revolution, his relationship with Fidel Castro, and his own personal and political direction . Divulging his clandestine mission to the Congo, which Nasser advised him against, Che was troubled .
 Nasser stressed the pragmatic importance of governing effectively and building structures after taking power, while Guevara remained attracted to the romantic, purist challenge of making revolution .
 When Guevara met his fate in Bolivia on a doomed mission to do that two years later, Nasser felt he had warned him in vain . Nasser said he felt he'd warned him of the dangers of Bolivia .
 Nasser kept relatively positive relations with Nikita Khrushchev's Soviet Union, as well . Relations reached a high point when the USSR leader visited Egypt in May 1964, five months before he was ousted .
 Nasser's attempt to maintain decent relations with Washington also persisted, but he instinctively distrusted Lyndon B Johnson . Tensions over Yemen and Israel, culminating in 1967, sent bilateral relations downward .
 The missile crisis and Cuba, however, appeared to have had relatively little effect on the trajectory of Cairo's relations with either Washington or Moscow .
 The experience may have slightly enhanced Nasser's appreciation for U.S. might as wielded by JFK as compared to Soviet power handled by Khrushchev, as Komer suspected . The experience did not change the UAR's basic nonaligned orientation, as Elbahtimy demonstrates .
 Regarding Cuba, there may have been a slight chill in what remained friendly and mutually supportive relations with the U.S.
 Quaison-Sackey claims this UN non-aligned effort had a ""decisive role""118 – but the Burmese statesman undoubtedly would've felt obliged to do his utmost in any case . As for Cairo's missile crisis diplomacy, it had a moderate impact, on
 Brazil's denuclearization proposal triggered internal Egyptian debate over the broader concept of regional NWFZs, including, possibly, in the Middle East .
 He has published extensively on international politics and arms control issues including in Foreign Affairs, Journal of Strategic Studies and Nonproliferation Review .
 In 2019, his research was awarded the McElveny Grand Prize by the Nonproliferation Review Journal . The prize was awarded by the nonpro-nuclear weapons journal in 2019 .
 Dr Elbahtimy is director for the Masters programme Science and International Security at King’s College London . He is also director of the Science and Security Masters programme at the university .