 His research and publications focus on post Civil War developments and race relations in the Confederate South .
 Conservatives in Post-Civil War South Carolina examines how traditional thinkers adjusted and clung to their beliefs long after the war .
 There is a political cartoon of Kennedy arm wrestling Khrushchev, and they are both sitting on hydrogen bombs . There is also a Cold War Wrestling Match Question .
 I would like to know who drew that, when it was drawn, and where was it first seen . I'm not sure who drew it, but I want to know where it was first seen, where it first appeared .
 Welsh-born cartoonist Leslie Gilbert Illingworth drew the famous cartoon of John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev arm wrestling while sitting on hydrogen bombs .
 It appeared in the October 29, 1962 edition of the British newspaper The Daily Mail .
 Illingworth started drawing cartoons for the famous news magazine Punch in 1927 . Born in 1902, he was born in 1902 .
 The Daily Mail hired him as well in 1937 and he continued to provide cartoons for both publications for the rest of his career . He was also hired by the Daily Mail in 1937 .
 He gained a measure of national fame for the effective cartoons he drew during England's dogged stand against Nazi Germany . The cartoonist's cartoons were published in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Illingworth was not an overtly political cartoonist and this is evident in this arm wrestling cartoon . The cartoonist was not overtly political .
 Illingworth prefers for detail rather than commentary on who is right or wrong . One notices the characteristic Illingwworth preference .
 The intensity of the struggle is captured both by the energy that radiates out of Kennedy and Khrushchev's gripped hands, but also by the fact that each is sweating profusely .
 Each man still has his finger on the button that will detonate the bombs . Each man's finger still has a key to detonating the bomb .
 Illingworth's cartoon reminded readers that the superpower struggle would continue and that the possibility of nuclear annihilation remained .
 Illingworth's drawings contrast sharply with those of Edmund Valtman, the Pulitzer Prize-winning and fiercely anti-communist cartoonist for The Hartford Times . The Hartford paper's cartoonist was a fierce opponent of the Communist Party .
 On October 30, after the crisis had seemingly passed, his paper published a Valtman cartoon of Khrushchev yanking missile-shaped teeth out of Castro's mouth .
 The caption above the illustration reads, “This Hurts Me More Than It Hurts You” and the cartoon clearly represents a moment of American gloating over the communists . The caption of the cartoon reads, "This Hurting Me More than It Hurted You"
 Khrushchev announced that he was withdrawing missiles out of Cuba on October 28 . The publication date of October 29 is also significant since the crisis seemed to have passed .