 Story of Cuban missile crisis in the month of October . Havana Cuba date: 1928 . Havana Havana Cuba Date: 1928. Havana Cuba .
 Old Havana, Cuba. United States USA Date: 1962 . Clip: 11 min 5 sec .
 Scenes of activity around the Iglesia de la Cathedral in Old Havana, Cuba . Street scenes, Castillo de la Fuerza and Oriental Park Race Track, Marianao .
 Soldiers marching into the ancient ""Castillo De La Fuerza"" in Old Havana . Soldiers marching in the ancient fortress .
 The Castillo De La Fuerza is located on the water in the port of Havana . The military garrison is located in the area of the city .
 Street scenes of Old Havana show the Prado Promenade, with automobiles and a little black dog .
 Oriental Park Race Track, Marianao, Havana, Cuba, is a popular race track in Cuba's capital .
 Havana Cuba date: 1938 . The National Capitol Building,Havana telephone exchange,Morro Castle,Presidential Palace and other buildings in Havana,Cuba . Havana Cuba .
 Anastas Mikoyan, vice-prime minister of the Soviet Union, visits Cuba soon after the Castro revolution . Havana Cuba date: 1936 .
 Statue of José Marti was designed by Enrique Luis Varela and sculpted by Juan José Sicre . Marti memorial monument in Revolution Square, Havana, Cuba .
 Cuban flag on the Ministry of Interior building, across the square . Cuban flag flies over the Cuban government building .
 Camilo Cienfuegos addresses people and Fidel Castro smiles in Havana, Cuba . Fidel Castro's son Fidel Castro was assassinated by the CIA in 1992 .
 Fidel Castro and leading revolutionary figures attend a formal reception for Mikoyan . Fidel Castro was in attendance at the event .
 The French freighter La Coubre exploded on March 4,1960, while being unloaded in Havana harbor, Cuba .
 Fire fighters trying to extinguish flames are captured by the camera . Similar events are captured on camera .
 Post accident scenes of Castro speaking to the populace and of mourners walking along the street in Havana . Castro spoke to the people in Havana after the accident .