 In 1945, the United States dropped two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, shocking the world . Background: The Arms Race in the Cold War .
 The USSR raced with the United States to stockpile, test and develop weapons . The USSR and the U.S. raced with each other to stockpile and test weapons .
 After that incident, it was quickly followed by the USSR testing their first atomic bomb . The USSR tested their own atomic bomb in the early 1950s .
 The U.S. stockpiled H-bombs, while the USSR stockpiled more conventional weapons such as missiles . Witnessing such a situation, the United States began to stockpile H-bomb stockpiles .
 Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles were then developed by both countries . The threat of mutually assured destruction was an imminent threat of mutual assured destruction . Both countries developed the missiles .
 In the later 1950s, the USSR was circled by United States missiles based in Europe . The USSR circled by U.S. missiles in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev found out that Eisenhower has sent spy planes to photograph USSR’s ICBMs . The Cold War escalated even more after the discovery of the spy planes .
 He proceeded to nationalize institutions and redistributed land back to the peasants . The land was redistributed back to peasants .
 The richer people in Cuba fled to Miami and Florida, waiting to strike back . As such, the richer people fled to Florida and Miami, waiting for an attack .
 Eisenhower broke all relations with Cuba just before Kennedy took over . The United States began to show hostility towards Cuba, starting with an oil blockade .
 Exiles were prepared to invade Cuba in April 1961 . However, these assassination attempts failed, and the exiles failed .
 Kennedy approved of this, but denied air support for the actual invasion as he did not want evidence against the U.S. for this illegal act . Kennedy did not approve of the invasion, but wanted evidence against him .
 The United States hoped that this “invasion’d spark civil unrest, leading to a civil war in Cuba itself, and eventually overthrowing Castro . The U.S. hoped that the invasion would lead to civil unrest and eventually overthrow Castro .
 By 19 April, the exiles were crushed by Castro’s force of tanks and aircraft . Castro's force was crushed by a force of troops and planes .
 Castro realizes that the U.S. is hostile towards him . The actions taken by the United States have made Castro realize that they were hostile . Foreshadowing is foreshadowing .
 Khrushchev suggested measures to assist Cuba after the Bay of Pigs fiasco . Both parties had similar ideologies such as nationalizing companies and distributing land to the poor .
 To Khrushchev, Cuba was a very eligible candidate to join the “Communist empire” to spread Communism . It meant that it was an opportunity to spread the Communism . To the end of the Cold War, Cuba became a very attractive candidate for membership .
 Castro finally declared himself as a communist on 1 May 1961 . Affected under this newly-found friendship, Castro declared himself to be a communist . Castro declared his communist status in 1961 .
 On 24 June 1961, Castro received intelligence from the Soviet ambassador in Havana about a planned assassination on him . Castro received the intelligence from a Soviet ambassador . Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 With this information, arrangements could be made in order to protect Castro . Castro's name could be used to protect him from the public .
 Operation AnadyrKhrushchev, too, felt that an U.S. invasion was imminent . The Soviet Union felt that the United States was coming to war with Russia .
 Khrushchev thought that Cuba was of great importance to him, as it was part of the communist cause . In fact, he thought it was important to him as a communist country .
 In May 1962, he discussed the plan of secretly placing nuclear warheads in Cuba with his Defence Minister Malinovsky and Chief of Staff Zakharov .
 Khrushchev felt that words were not strong enough to deal against the US, and the next available choice would be missiles . The next step was to launch missiles, and they were launched by the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy gained confidence in this plan partly from the Bay of Pigs invasion, which showed that Kennedy would accept the missiles in Cuba as a fact that cannot be changed .
 US U-2 spyplanes were sent on reconnaissance missions over Cuba in September 1962 .
 Soviet forces were set up there, with 42 nuclear warheads present . They reported that Soviet forces had been set up with 42 warheads .
 In another reconnaissance mission on 14 October, pictures showed that missile bases and pads were under construction .
 This caused great distress in the US, which was not prepared for such circumstances . The US, not prepared to cope with such circumstances, is not prepared, it's said .
 On 16 October, Kennedy got wind of the reconnaissance pictures . The Thirteen Days of True Crisis: Kennedy’s response after knowing about the missiles .
 On that very same day, he assembled the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . Kennedy assembled the committee, comprised of 14 officials and his brother, Robert Kennedy .
 EXCOMM proposed five possible responses to Kennedy's comments . Kennedy's response would have been different from one to one . Kennedy was the first person to speak directly to the White House . Kennedy would be the first to speak to the President .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously voted for either the invasion of the air strike or an air strike . Joint chiefs of Staff voted unanimously for the decision . Joint Chiefs voted unanimously to either the strike or the invasion .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff still believe that the bombing of the missile bases was the most viable option . McNamara suggested that a blockade or quarantine should be carried out instead . This was a powerful move that gave the U.S. control over Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff are unable to guarantee destruction of all missile sites, and hence the idea was scrapped . The idea of destroying all the missile sites was scrapped on 22 October .
 At 7:00 pm on the same day, Kennedy made a public speech over the radio informing the people of the nuclear crisis . Kennedy made the speech to the public over the same night .
 The United States has decided to employ option of naval blockade, says President Obama . He also tells the people that the U.S. has also decided to use the option of the naval blockade .
 The quarantine is applied to all Soviet ships and ships from the countries under the Warsaw pact that are sailing to Cuba . The quarantine will be applied to those ships sailing under the pact .
 On 24 October, 9,24pm, Khrushchev sent a telegram to Kennedy regarding the negotiations .
 Just imagine, Mr. President, that we had presented you with the conditions of an ultimatum which you have presented us by your action .
 In presenting us with these conditions, you, Mr President, have flung a challenge at us. And this would have been understandable to us, says Mr President . But this would be understandable to them, he says .
 You are not declaring a quarantine, but rather are setting forth an ultimatum and threatening that if we do not give in to your demands you will use force . But in this case the question is in no way one of quarantine but rather of far more serious things, and you yourself
 "You are no longer appealing to reason, but wish to intimidate us," she says . "No, Mr President, I cannot agree to this, and I think that in your own heart you recognize that I am correct," she adds .
 Reference to the decision of the Organization of American States cannot substantiate the demands now advanced by the United States . I am convinced that in my place you would act the same way. I'm convinced that . in my . place, I'm sure that in . my place, you would
 You are trying to legislate in questions of international law, and you are violating the universally accepted norms of that law . We observe these norms and enjoy the rights recognized by all states, the UK says .
 The United States has completely lost its former isolation with the advent of modern types of armament . Unfortunately, such folly can bring grave suffering to the peoples of all countries, and to no lesser degree to the American people .
 The Soviet Government considers that the violation of the freedom to use international waters and international air space is an act of aggression which pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war . And we also say--no. The Soviet government considers that .
 The USSR viewed the blockade as an act of aggression, and their ships were ordered to ignore the blockade . The telegram also stated that the USSR viewed their ships to ignore it .
 The next day, at 1:45am, Kennedy replied to Khrushchev’s telegram, stating that the U.S. was forced into the blockade . The sequence of events is clear. The United States was forced to blockade since there were offensive missiles placed on Cuba
 In September, Tass issued a statement saying that Tass had assurances of Tass support . The statement was issued by Tass in September, and I urged restraint .
 The naval blockade was more of a selective one. I hope that your Government will take the necessary action to permit a restoration of the earlier situation .
 Aleksandr Fomin, the KGB Station Chief in the US, met up with John Scali from ABC News . Fomin: Kennedy was tempted to conduct the invasion to remove the Cuban missiles, but was persuaded against doing so .
 The Soviet Union would remove the missiles, Castro would announce that he would not accept any more nuclear weapons, and the U.S. would never invade Cuba . The United States would also announce that it would never invasion Cuba .
 Scali passed this message to the United States government . The U.S. government responded by asking the Brazillian government to inform Castro that an invasion would be unlikely if missiles were removed .
 At 9:00 am on 27 October, Radio Moscow broadcasted a new message from Khrushchev . This formed the basis for the final agreement later on .
 He offered that the Cuban missiles would be removed if the U.S. Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey were removed . He offered to remove the missiles if the United States removed .
 U.S. President Kennedy writes to Acting Secretary General of the U.N. He has studied with great satisfaction your reply to Mr Thant .
 Ministers say they are concerned solely with having the country develop and be a worthy place among all peoples of the world in competition .
 The main thing that must be done is to normalize and stabilize the state of peace among states and among peoples, says President Obama . "I understand your concern for the security of the United States, Mr President," she says .
 "No one can dispute the humanity of our motives, which are oriented toward enabling Cuba to live peacefully and develop in the way its people desire," he says . "You wish to ensure the security of your country, and this is understandable," he adds .
 The United States will respect the inviolability of Cuba's borders and its sovereignty . It will pledge not to interfere in Cuba's internal affairs, not to invade Cuba itself or make its territory available as a bridgehead for such an invasion .
 The means situated in Cuba, of which you speak and which disturb you, are in the hands of Soviet officers . Let us agree to some period of time, but without unnecessary delay--say within two or three weeks .
 "Our position and yours on this issue are very close together," says President Obama . "All of this could possibly serve as a good impetus toward the finding of mutually acceptable agreements on other controversial issues," he says .
 Khrushchev: "You are disturbed over Cuba. You are disturbed about Cuba. It is a matter of concern. You were disturbed .
 At 12:00 pm, a U-2 was shot down by a surface to air missile over Cuba, and its pilot was killed .
 Diplomats sent from both Kennedy and Khrushchev met up to discuss about the solution to the crisis . Kennedy knew that a resolution must quickly be written in order to prevent a nuclear war from erupting .
 Kennedy was advised to ignore the harsher and more aggressive demands of the second message, and only reply to the first one . Kennedy was told to ignore these two messages and reply only to one .
 Text has been handed Soviet Embassy in Washington and has been released to press . Text was handed to Soviet embassy in Washington by Soviet Embassy .
 U.N. should remove promptly quarantine measures now in effect, says Cuban president . U.S. should also give assurances against an invasion of Cuba, he says .
 If you will give your representative similar instructions, there is no reason why we should not be able to complete these arrangements and announce them to the world within a couple of days . I am confident that other nations of the Western Hemisphere would be prepared to do likewise .
 Scali became suspicious of the fact that the first and second message from Khrushchev was drastically different . Scali later became suspicious that the message was not the same as the others .
 Fomin blamed it on ‘poor communications’, but Scali accused that it was a double-cross and betrayal . Fomin blames it on "poor communications" and said it was 'poor communications' Scali accuses Fomin of 'betrayal' and 'double
 Scali claimed that an invasion on Cuba was imminent, and at that point Fomin stated that Khrushchev’s reply would arrive soon, and assured him that there was no treachery involved . It turned out that the letter was only received by Khushchev at 8:
 The USSR was to dismantle and remove its missiles in Cuba, while the U.S. was not to invade Cuba . The United States was to not invade Cuba, and the USSR to dismantle its missiles .
 The U.S. secretly dismantled missiles in Italy and Turkey . The United States also secretly dismantled the missiles in Turkey and Italy .
 The removal of U.S. missiles in Italy and Turkey was secret . They were not made known to the public . The removal was not made public .
 The USSR failed to finish what it had started in the first place – influence Cuba to join the communist empire . As such, it seemed like the USSR failed .
 The circumstances that they themselves had started – the placement of missiles in Cuba to defend against a U.S. invasion – were retreated . The circumstances themselves had been started .
 Despite being young and inexperienced, he has proven himself to be an efficient negotiator, as seen in negotiations with Khrushchev, an experienced verteran .
 Castro thought that the Soviets had partially betrayed him . He has also been shown to make good decision, which averted a nuclear war, solving the crisis .
 They promised to protect him against an U.S. invasion by using their missiles, but they were dismantled in the end . The missiles were dismantled by the United States .
 The Hotline Agreement was formed, leading to the Moscow-Washington hotline . He was awarded with many military honours .
 This allowed the leaders of both countries to contact each other directly via the telephone, should such a crisis happen again . This was a allowed . The leaders were able to call each other via the . telephone .
 Kennedy realised how nuclear weapons could threaten the world . It is still in use today . Kennedy realised the dangers of nuclear weapons .
 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968 and Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban-Ban Treaty in 1996 . This sparked a chain of treaties regarding bans on nuclear weapons testing . Treaty was followed by Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Agreement in 1996, signed by the U.S.
 Khrushchev demonstrated to the world how dangerous it could get when the destructive potential of nuclear weapons fell into the hands of humans .
 A weapon that could wipe everything off the face of the earth combined with humans that dared to use it was a very hairy situation . The weapon could wipe out everything from the earth .
 Nuclear weapons let the world know that there would be no winners in a nuclear war , especially one based on a power struggle . Nuclear weapons have been used in the past to warn against nuclear war .
 This History blog belongs to Ryan You, Tan Shan and Yen Yan . The Cold War and End of Communism In USSR is the focus of this History blog .