 In the past half century presidents have surrounded themselves with a vast national security apparatus . But it is not at all clear that presidents have been effective as crisis managers, says Julian Zelizer .
 They often lack crucial information, use incomplete or misleading analogies to understand crisis situations, find it difficult to micromanage events, and are unable to project force effectively . They often don't use crucial information to understand crises situations, and often lack a sense of urgency .
 Even when successful, it is often in spite of, rather than because of, the resources of the institutionalized presidency at their disposal . Even when they are successful, they often come from behind, they are often successful .
 The White House defused the crisis without revealing to the world how they had defused it . The decision to maintain confidentiality with far reaching consequences for subsequent presidential crisis decision making .
 The illusion that crisis management can compel an adversary to submit and that a nuclear crisis can be successfully managed left Kennedy's successors with impossible burdens of public expectations . The illusion of presidential crisis management has left Kennedy successors with .
 The American Presidency is written by The American President and co-author of the President, Congress and the Constitution .
 The resolution of the crisis was trumpeted in the United States as a great victory-""Reds Back Down"" and ""Retreat to Moscow"" blared headlines in U.S. newspapers . Scholars of international relations and of the presidency attempted to learn lessons about crisis management .
 Kennedy's speechwriter Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. wrote that Kennedy was well satisfied by the performance of his government . Kennedy was "well satisfied" by the government's performance .
 According to the conventional accounts, the Soviets backed down because Kennedy understood their psychology, and his national security advisers had had I Roger Hilsman, To Move a Nation , xii. The Soviets had to back down .
 Experts wanted Kennedy to hang tough and make few if any concessions . Kennedy has been criticized for his actions in the wake of his death .
 Llewellyn ""Tommy"" Thompson intervened at various points in ExComm meetings to take a hard line . Thompson was a former ambassador to the Soviet Union . Thompson is a former diplomat to Russia .
 Crisis managers stayed course against ExComm hawks, who otherwise would have led the nation into a nuclear war . Adlai Stevenson, who wanted to negotiate with, rather than confront, the Soviets .
 Kennedy had given the Soviets room to retreat, had not rubbed salt in their wounds, and had allowed them to back away from confrontation . Kennedy had allowed the Soviets to retreat and had given them room to .
 According to this version of events, Khrushchev had been emotional and frightened, while Kennedy had been cool and collected . Kennedy was cool, collected, according to the story . Khrushchevitch had been angry and frightened .
 The Soviets had not understood Kennedy at all, thinking him weak and irresolute . But Kennedy had understood the Soviets and knew how to manipulate them in the desired direction .
 U.S. military superiority was a decisive factor in ending the crisis without accepting Soviet terms, analysts say . Not the proposed trade of missiles was a key factor in the end of the crisis .
 It gives us a distorted view of presidential capabilities in crisis decision making, says President Obama . It's not a good idea of the president's ability to make crisis decisions, says Obama .
 An adequate understanding of the resolution of the crisis must begin with the fact that for the U.S. side it was not primarily a question of the military balance between the two superpowers . The resolution of this crisis was not military balance, it was a matter of the balance between super
 Republicans had claimed that the Soviets had put offensive missiles in Cuba . Republicans had said that the missiles were put in Cuba by the Soviets .
 Republicans would have exploited his lack of foresight, his intelligence lapses, and his irresolution in the forthcoming elections, much as they had attempted to do between August and mid-October before Kennedy had challenged the Soviets .
 The U.S. was required to confront the Soviets publicly out of political rather than military necessity, says McNamara . McNamara and his brother felt that the United States needed to confront them publicly .
 Kennedy had drawn a line publicly, and the Soviets had stepped over it in a deceptive and disrespectful manner . The Soviets stepped over Kennedy's line in a "deception and disrespect," he said .
 The law was drawn in terms of a nuclear balance of power had been less important than the fact that a line had been drawn in the Western Hemisphere . The Soviets had pretended to respect it and then had pretended it and left him politically vulnerable .
 He deployed, not because he thought Kennedy was weak or irresolute, but because he knew that the U.S. had strategic nuclear superiority and was beginning to act accordingly . He deployed not because of Kennedy's weakness but because of the United States' strategic superiority .
 The United States had just begun its satellite reconnaissance of the USSR in the summer of 1961 . With its new Corona satellites it had learned that it had four times the number of land based ICBMs as the Soviets .
 The Soviet missile sites were soft and vulnerable to an American first strike . They were vulnerable to a U.S. first strike in the Cold War .
 Once the U.S. knew that it had the numerical advantage, the Soviets were at a strategic disadvantage . Once the United States knew that the Soviet Union was vulnerable, it was able to gain a strategic advantage . The United States had a numerical advantage over the Soviets .
 Presumably the United States would soon act to exploit its proclaimed advantage . Presumably the U.S. would act soon to exploit it .
 Sending missiles to Cuba was a temporary stop-gap measure to counter this perceived American threat . The U.S. sent missiles in Cuba in response to a perceived U.K. threat .
 The Soviets had a large supply of 1,000-mile-range MRBMs and of 2,000 mile-range IRBMs . If launched from Cuba, the U.S. could cover most of the United States if launched .
 The Soviets may have had 24 ICBMs operational, and the 24 SS-4s in Cuba doubled their total of missiles capable of hitting U.S. targets . The Soviets also had 24 Soviet-made missiles in Cuba, doubling the total of their ICBM capabilities .
 There was a missile gap, and the Soviets were on the wrong side of it, with or without the Cuba deployment . The gap was created with or with the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 From the Soviet point of view, Kennedy's strength and firmness-not his weakness-were the problem that the deployment of missiles was intended to address . From the . Soviet point-of-view, the . problem was the problem, not his weakness, the Soviet .
 Had that been true, he would have had no objection to making the deployment public, as the Cubans wished, he said .
 Soviet Minster of Defense Roman Malinovskii told Fidel Castro the U.S. had bases in Turkey that could wipe out Soviet cities . Castro recalled that he was on vacation in Varna, Bulgaria on the Black Sea, walking on the beach with Soviet Minister of Defense
 Khrushchev asked Malinovskii if missiles in Cuba could do the same to the U.S. He was assured they could, and was assured that they could . Khrushchevskii asked if missiles could be used to attack the United States .
 The Jupiters in Turkey became operational in April 1962, the same month Khrushchev decided to put missiles in Cuba . Jupits were operational in Turkey in 1962 . The missiles were deployed in Turkey .
 This was not the first time the question of Jupiters had preoccupied Khrushchev . The question of whether or not they were Jupits was preoccupied by the Soviet Union .
 Hilsman has the number at 44 ICBMS for the Soviets at the time of the missile crisis in the Soviet Union and the U.S. with 140 . The number of ICBMs was 44 . The United States had 140 .
 The State and Defense Departments agreed that the missile deployment in Turkey should not be canceled . It would send the wrong message to the Soviets, they said .
 In May 1962, Kennedy told Dean Rusk to raise the issue with the Turks . Kennedy told Rusk that before the missiles were removed, the new Polaris submarines should be deployed in the Mediterranean . The Turks responded that before they removed the missiles, they should deploy Polaris submarines .
 In August, Kennedy told his diplomats to persuade the Turks to allow the missiles to be removed . Kennedy again told his diplomatic team to persuade Turks to remove the missiles .
 The missile crisis was not settled with a Soviet capitulation, but rather through political horsetrading . The real deal was a political deal, not a capitulation .
 McNamara raised the possibility of a trade of missiles as early as 19 October . McNamara said the deal could be made as soon as next month .
 He then recommended that Turkey be notified to dismantle the missiles so that they would not be subject to a Soviet preemptive strike . The missile strike would have left Turkey at risk of being struck by the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy himself kept coming back to the logic of Johnson's question, "Save all the invasion, lives . "Save lives. Save all of the invasion . Save lives . .
 On 25 October he broached the possibility of a trade of Turkish and Cuban missiles to British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan . The deal was discussed by the British prime minister .
 The President said we will get Soviet strategic missiles out of Cuba only by invading Cuba or by trading . The following day at an Ex Comm meeting, ""The President said . We will get . Soviet strategic missile out of . Cuba only . by invading . Cuba or . by trading, the
 Robert Kennedy's account of the crisis taken from his diaries and published posthumously in 1969, he related that in talking to Soviet Ambassador Anatolii Dobrynin at 7:45 PM (before Kennedy's acceptance of terms had been sent to Khrushchev) he had told
 The account offered by Robert Kennedy in his posthumous memoirs of his meeting with Dobrynin was incomplete and misleading . There was more to it than Kennedy or his literary executors had let on. Kennedy's account was incomplete .
 No decision had been made about the status of the missiles, and there had been no orders to dismantle them . No decision has been made on whether the missiles will be dismantled .
 Kennedy was neither surprised nor angry at the fact that they had not been removed . Kennedy said he was neither angry nor disappointed at the decision to keep them .
 The statement would be given to Thant on a signal from President Kennedy, with assurances that if Thant called for the trade, the U.S. would immediately announce its acceptance . Thant would have to make a statement on the proposal .
 Rusk was sure Kennedy would trip the circuit breaker rather than take the country to war . Rusk: "I'm not going to go to war. I don't think it's a good idea"
 In doing so, Kennedy bypassed the ExComm, which was unaware of the Cordier channel . Kennedy was acting with his own prerogative powers .
 In working out ways to end the crisis, he didn't try to forge a consensus among his advisers, most of whom were strongly against making a trade . Most of the advisers were strongly opposed to making a deal .
 To resolve the missile crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev relied on their own prerogative powers . Kennedy: 'To resolve the crisis, we rely on our prerogates'
 Most important ""backchannel"" involved KGB officer Georgii Bolshakov, Ambassador Dobrynin, and Attorney General Kennedy . The most important "backchannel" involved a KGB officer .
 President Kennedy could bypass the ExComm and Khrushchev as they worked out a deal to trade missiles in Turkey for missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy was able to bypass the Presidium as the deal was worked out .
 President Kennedy convened a meeting in the Oval Office with Robert Kennedy, Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Theodore Sorensen, George Ball, Tommy Thompson, and Roswell Gilpatric .
 Robert Kennedy and Dobrynin met to set terms of terms of reference for meeting . The meeting was intended to set the terms of agreement for the meeting .
 Kennedy probably had gone beyond the terms of reference and offered an explicit deal . Kennedy may have gone beyond terms of agreement and offered explicit deal, sources say .
 Rusk may have provided a paper trail for Rusk that could be used to deny such a deal . He may then have provided the paper trail to deny the deal .
 Dobrynin may have offered assurances based on Rusk's ""no quid pro quo"" limitations, but couched in language he took as an explicit deal . Alternatively, he may have . offered assurances .
 The preponderance of evidence seems to indicate that at the very least the Soviets assumed they had a real deal . The Soviets assumed it was real .
 The following day, acting on Kremlin instructions, Dobrynin was able to reassure Kennedy that the Soviets agreed to the U.S. insistence that the dismantling in Turkey would not occur immediately . Instead, it would take place four to five months after the crisis had been resolved .
 Khrushchev agreed that the terms for ending the crisis should be considered confidential . Khrushchchev noted that ""it is somewhat difficult for you at the present time to publicly discuss the question of eliminating the United States missile bases in Turkey"
 The Soviet version of what was agreed to was not denied by the administration . The Soviet government did not deny the agreement, however .
 He insisted that Dobrynin take back the letter from Khrushchev, so there would be no evidence of the exchange in the files of the U.S. government . The letter was taken back by Dobrynlinin, a Russian diplomat, so no evidence would be in the
 Fidel Castro and Khrushchev exchanged heated discussions of missile trade . Castro accused Khruschev of betraying Cuban interests . Castro later claimed Khrushchev had betrayed Cuban interests in missile talks .
 Even a hunting trip in Russia arranged to mollify Castro did little to soothe the Cuban leader's anger . Even hunting trips in Russia did not soothe Castro .
 Robert Kennedy's posthumous recollections did not include the specifics of the deal . Robert Kennedy was killed in 1968, but the deal was never finalized .
 At that time it was still a secret even on the American side, except for the six of us who had been present at that meeting . And his diary was very explicit that this was part of the deal; but at that .
 On 25 April 1963, the last missile was taken down in Turkey . It was almost six months to the date the arrangement was reached, six months later .
 In the ExComm transcripts, there is no mention of any deal negotiated by the president as of the 27th . Kennedy had on numerous occasions talked about the probability that a deal would be the only way to end the crisis .
 In discussions that occurred within the ExComm after Robert Kennedy returned from meeting with Dobrynin, it still seemed as if there were no explicit arrangement . In the discussions, Robert Kennedy still seemed to be unaware of the arrangement .
 Kennedy bypassed the ExComm, the Turks, the NATO allies, and everyone else that a consultative process would have required . It may be that Turkish intransigence about removal of the missiles led him to bypass a NATO Council meeting, he says .
 Kennedy employed his own diplomatic prerogative powers, using his brother as a confidential intermediary . Instead, he used his brother to act as an intermediary . Kennedy's brother was also an intermediary for the president .
 Kennedy bypassed a cumbersome State Department bureaucracy for routine business . He used a variant of the ""invisible presidency" to settle the issue just as the crisis was spinning out of control .
 Castro the Missile Crisis, and the Soviet Collapse, are the subject of a new book . The book, "The Crisis Years," is published by Michael Beschloss .
 Whatever else the Cuban missile crisis might have been, it was certainly not an example of successful crisis management . Whatever else, the Cuban crisis was not a success .
 No crisis can be managed until one or both parties redefine the issue to the point at which it no longer remains a crisis and gamesmanship can be supplanted by traditional diplomacy and political deal making . The term itself makes no sense in this context, because no crisis can't be managed
 In nuclear crisis management, the nuclear confrontation is treated by participants as a game in which pieces or territory can be won or lost, and a strategic balance can improve or deteriorate . In nuclear crises management, participants treat nuclear confrontation as games they can win or lose, say experts .
 A success in the game is supposed to establish an equilibrium of power based on the existing balance . It is up to the president to manage the United States side of the game to the nation's best advantage .
 A game has rules that are understood, even if broken by one or the other side . A game must be understood, and rules are understood by both sides .
 A game with an equilibrium point has predetermined outcomes, or scores, with values known to the participants . The equilibrium point is known as a game with a predetermined outcome .
 The missile crisis itself was precipitated when the Soviets broke the rules by placing missiles in Cuba . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviets in violation of rules .
 The Soviet response is that the U.S. broke the rules with an illegal blockade . The United States says the blockade is an illegal act of aggression .
 The interactions between players on the two sides are unpredictable and not fully controllable . The interaction between players and coaches is unpredictable, not fully controlled .
 There may be no equilibrium points, no preferred solutions once a game is underway . None make sense when some outcomes involve a strategic or tactical nuclear exchange . There may not be equilibrium points that make sense in nuclear warfare .
 Crisis management requires reasonably high capabilities to acquire, manage, and process data rationally in accordance with effective theories about how the world works . Crisis management can be described as 'crisis management'
 The United States was surprised that the Soviets placed missiles in Cuba . The U.S. was surprised by the Soviet Union's presence in Cuba.
 Its theories about Soviet capabilities and intentions were wrong, and its data about the missiles came in late-almost too late . The U.S. intelligence community came to terms with the Soviet missile program .
 The Soviets were stunned at the U.S. response, clearly expecting that at worst it would lead to a protest and negotiations, and at best to acquiescence to a fait accompli . The Soviets expected that at least one of them would protest and negotiate, but at best it
 The United States expected and was surprised at the absence of a countermeasure from the Soviets . The U.S. was surprised that the Soviets did not respond to the request .
 Crisis management and game playing require effective control over the pieces on the board . Crisis management requires effective control of the pieces in the board, says CNN.com .
 Any one of these pieces might have caused a cascading set of events to result in a nuclear holocaust . Yet consider the number of near misses in the crisis involving these pieces .
 When Soviet MIGS went to intercept it, fighter aircraft from Galena Air Force base in Alaska went to its rescue . The rescue mission was the first of its kind in Alaska .
 The United States planes were armed with nuclear weapons that could be fired on the pilot's own authority . The U.S. planes were equipped with nuclear arms that could not be fired .
 Atlas missile test launched from Vandenberg Air Force base in California on 26 October . Atlas missile was test launched at Vandenberg base in October .
 It was launched from a site next to other missiles that had already been mated with nuclear weapons and were on full alert . The missile was launched next to a site where other nuclear weapons were already on alert .
 Had the Soviets monitored the launch (with the kind of reconnaissance they were to have only a few years later), they might have thought a preemptive strike was beginning and reacted accordingly .
 A Soviet submarine was disabled by a low-level depth charge and forced to the surface . Had it been sunk, naval hostilities might have ensued . The submarine was forced to surface .
 The Soviet submarine had nuclear armed torpedoes and was authorized to fire them if attacked . The submarine had been authorized to use the torpedoes if attacked by Soviet forces .
 The Navy sent its ships far out to sea to establish its interception line to enforce the blockade . The blockade was established by the British Navy .
 President Kennedy ordered the line moved further in, to give Khrushchev more time to decide to comply . The line was moved further into the Soviet Union's territory . President Kennedy then ordered the move further in .
 Many scholars have described the confrontation between Secretary of Defense McNamara and Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Anderson in the naval operations room . McNamara ordered Anderson to move the line back .
 The Navy did not draw back, but kept its line well out of sea . Roger Hilsman says the U.S. Navy was not drawn back .
 U.S.-sponsored agents infiltrated into Cuba committed acts of sabotage . The Cuban government has been accused of attacking Cuba . The government says it is investigating the deaths of Cuban citizens .
 Had they killed Soviet military officers, the Soviets might have begun shooting down U.S. low-flying aircraft . The Soviets may have started shooting down the United States .
 By 27 October, all of the medium-range ballistic missiles were launch-ready . Within a day could have been mated to nuclear warheads that had been stockpiled for them .
 Any military incident in Cuba might quickly have escalated into a nuclear confrontation on the island . The island nation is home to a large number of Cuban refugees .
 U.S. intelligence at the time had no knowledge of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba . Photographs taken by the Navy over intermediate-range missile sites revealed the presence of Soviet ground forces .
 The photos also showed six launchers for FROG battlefield nuclear missiles, and subsequent flights showed a total of 14 missiles .
 They also claimed to have had several nuclear bombs for their Jluyshin bombers . The Russian government also claimed they had nuclear bombs .
 Khrushchev gave initial authority for their use to General Issa Pliyev, commander-in-chief of Soviet forces in Cuba . There is some evidence that he centralized the command decision when the crisis broke out .
 In a U.S. invasion, local Soviet commanders might have disregarded command and control procedures and initiated a nuclear exchange . Nevertheless, in a United States .
 They had already shot down a U-2 at the height of the crisis on their own authority, in spite of orders from Moscow that they were not to do so . The U.S. government had ordered them to shoot down the U.2 .
 On the 26th, Pliyev ordered nuclear warheads moved from storage areas closer to the MRBM missiles, as a prelude to possibly ""mating" them .
 The United States, for its part, also had plans for use of tactical nuclear weapons . The U.S. also planned to use tactical nukes .
 An invasion contingency plan, CINCLANT OPLAN 316, was developed by the military commanders readying for an invasion . It proposed among other things to have tactical nuclear weapons available to the invasion force .
 These would be used without further authorization only in retaliation if Soviets used FROG missiles with nuclear weapons against U.S. forces .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff approved a plan for nuclear capable mortars and howitzers and Honest John rockets . Nuclear shells and warheads being used only with the JCS approval .
 Top-level officials such as McGeorge Bundy were unaware at the time that the military had included such weapons in its planning . Bundy was unaware that such weapons were included in the planning .
 The civilian authority did not authorize the use of nuclear warheads on the Honest John rockets . It did not plan on using tactical nuclear weapons delivered by airplanes .
 Kennedy would not have authorized first use of such weapons, but would have sanctioned retaliatory strikes . Kennedy would have authorized strikes if Russia used their tactical nuclear weapons first .
 At every stage of the crisis, organizations acted on their own . NonstANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES: Organizations acted on themselves .
 "They were in a state of hair-trigger readiness, which distorted standard procedures," he said . "On the contrary, they were in the opposite state of readiness," he added . "They are in state of state-of-hairtrigger readiness," the official said .
 Presidium was ready to send orders to Pliyev permitting the use of two kiloton Luna missile tactical nuclear weapons in case of invasion, but decided on the basis of Malinovsky's arguments to wait .
 Kremlin put a hold on any use of nuclear weapons on the 22nd . Instead of using nuclear weapons, the Kremlin put it on hold until the end of the month .
 Castro ordered his anti-aircraft artillery units to protect the Soviet missile sites . Local Soviet commanders then ordered the shooting down of a U-2 as a show of fraternal solidarity with their Cuban compatriots .
 Thereafter the Cubans used their antiaircraft weapons against U.S. planes engaged in low-level reconnaissance . Thereafter, they used their weapons against United States planes .
 Cuban saboteurs blew up oil refineries in Venezuela, crippling one-quarter of oil production in the Caribbean . One-third of the Caribbean's oil production is thought to be in Venezuela .
 The crisis freed organizations from the ordinary constraints, rather than acting in an uncertain environment . Crisis by definition means that they were acting in uncertain environment. Crisis is a crisis by definition . Crisis freed these organizations from ordinary constraints .
 Each organization had to get information, test its own capabilities, and determine the capabilities and the intentions of the other side .
 Each organization acted autonomously, increasing the level of risk . In practice, each organization acted independently of each other .
 Each leader relied on his own decision-making prerogatives, which overturned or subverted the consensus position within their advisory systems . The U.S. President Barack Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 These decisions transcended the bureaucratic interests of the participants in the advisory groups and transcended chains of reasoning used by the advisers .
 The complex and chaotic real world environment in which the missile crisis was played out had more to do with the separate decisions made by Kennedy and Khrushchev to seek an end to the confrontation than any factor in the small-group advisory environment . Kennedy's decision to end the crisis had more
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a letter raising the issue of IRBM Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Kennedy raised the issue in the letter .
 In Washington, the FBI reported that the Soviet embassy was preparing to burn its papers . The move is often a signal that war is imminent . The FBI reported the embassy was burning its papers, a signal of war .
 Aerial reconnaissance showed the Soviet Beagle IL-28 bombers continued to be assembled at the San Julian airfield . Aerial reconnaissance continued to show the Beagle bombers were assembled there .
 A U-2 flight on a routine air sampling mission from Alaska strayed into Soviet territory over the Chukhotsk peninsula in Siberia . Soviet fighters chased back by U.S. planes that had scrambled to protect the U.2 . The incident nearly got into a dogfight with
 Cuban air defense troops, acting under Castro's orders, broke away from Soviet command and control . They began shooting at low-flying U.S. aircraft entering Cuban airspace . Castro's forces were acting under the orders of Castro .
 The U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a surface-to-air missile launched from a SAM site at Banes, near the eastern tip of the island . The missile was launched from the site of Banes .
 Years later, it was learned that the plane had been shot down by the Russians under command of Major Georgy Voronkov pursuant to an order issued by General Stepan Naumovich Grechko, the deputy commander of Soviet Forces in Cuba .
 There had been no orders from Moscow, and the shooting had been on initiative of the local commanders . But the American side couldn't know that at the time . The shooting took place in the Soviet Union in June 1968 .
 Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay directed his command to launch a massive reprisal strike against Cuba . The U.S. Air Force chief of Staff ordered the strike .
 The White House reached LeMay before the planes had been launched . LeMay had to wait for direct authorization from the president .
 Kennedy postpones retaliatory strike if a U-2 were shot down . Kennedy postponed strike for one or two days . Strike would have been possible if a plane was shot down by a U2 .
 Some believed that a limited retaliation, tit for tat, would convince the Soviets to back off . Some believed retaliation would convince them to back down .
 Others thought a ""surgical"" strike could take out the Soviet strategic missiles, thus ending the crisis . Some thought a strike could end the crisis with a 'surgical strike'
 Still others, including the Air Force commanders, did not believe a limited surgical strike could work . Still others believed a limited strike would work .
 Joint Chiefs planned for another six days of strikes, then advised invasion . Joint chiefs planned for more six days then advised an invasion .
 The danger, as all Kennedy's advisers were aware, was that the Soviets would respond somewhere else in the world . The danger was that they would respond to the threat posed by the U.S.
 Secretary McNamara developed the scenario for Kennedy and his advisers to demonstrate that under certain circumstances a general nuclear war might occur . McNamara's scenario was intended to be a test of the possibility of a nuclear war .
 The alert status of Soviet ICBMs and bombers was increased to intermediate level, then to combat readiness . Unknown to the U.S. at the time, the alert status was increased . It was unknown to the United States that the alert was raised .
 If it were shot down, the plans for some military action would then go forward . The plans would then be carried out if the plane was shot down .
 The Soviets had been under no illusion that the crisis could be managed as a war game . The crisis had been managed by the Soviets as a 'war game' The crisis was not a game, but a 'game of war'
 From the start, they were more interested in political negotiation, which they hoped would offset their weak military position . They hoped that they hoped that political negotiations would offset that weak military .
 By 26 October, from the Soviet perspective, it must have seemed as if the American ""hawks"" and the Cuban ""hotheads"" might take things into their own hands and escalate into all-out war .
 Castro communicated to Khrushchev on the 26th in a ""document"" dictated to a bilingual Soviet officer, who relayed Castro's words to Moscow . Castro's words were relayed to Moscow by a bilingual officer .
 He thought the Soviets had a thousand or so ICBMs and dozens of tactical nuclear weapons on the island . The island was invaded by the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 Khrushchev, under no illusions as to the real ""correlation of forces" between the superpowers, already knew that an American U-2 had been shot down . The U.2 was shot down by a U.S. missile strike .
 Soviet air command in Cuba authorized the shooting on its own initiative, without waiting for its request to clear in Moscow . He did not know that the shooting was authorized by the Cuban air command .
 Krushchev believed that Castro himself had ordered the shooting down of the plane . The plane was shot down by Soviet troops in the Soviet Union in 1961 . Castro was assassinated in September 1961 .
 Khrushchev understood that he no longer had full command of the military aspects of the confrontation . The Soviet leader understood he was no longer in charge of the Soviet Union .
 If any more planes are shot down, the U.S. would attack the missile sites . There is no guarantee that it might not launch a retaliatory attack in the next day .
 He settled for private deal, even though a public deal would have been much better for him, in order to avoid any further delay . "He settled for a private deal," he said. "I settled for public deal. It was a better deal to avoid further delay"
 The Soviets were convinced after Kennedy's evening meeting with Dobrynin that the United States was about to invade Cuba and would do so if the Soviets turned down Kennedy's offer . As his aide Oleg Troyanovsky saw it at the time, the Soviets believed the U.S.
 Khrushchev was convinced that the hawks in Washington were winning over the president . He said he was worried that the U.S. was losing control of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy was going to make another speech to the American people within the day . Then they heard from their diplomats in the U.S. that Kennedy was planning another speech . Kennedy's speech was the first to be made in the United States .
 Khrushchev made the deal because he was afraid the U.S. was about to go over the nuclear brink, says historian . The deal was made in response to fears that the United States was on the brink of war .
 He assumed forces within the Kennedy administration in favor of an invasion would get the upper hand . He assumed that forces within Kennedy administration would be able to win the battle .
 On the 27th he also believed that Kennedy did not want to invade Cuba (otherwise he already would have done so), and that he would be amenable to a trade . He believed Kennedy would be open to a deal with Cuba, but also believed he would want a trade deal
 Such an invasion would have eliminated Castro and installed a more sympathetic regime, the author says . It would have been under the supervision of the civil affairs units of the invasion force .
 In defending his decision, to deal before the Presidium, he called his removal of the missiles his ""Brest-Litovsk""-meaning a forced concession to the overwhelming military strength of the imperialists .
 Khrushchev had won two concessions from Kennedy- a trade of missiles and a no-invasion pledge . Even so, dealing from a weak hand, he had made a deal with Kennedy .
 He was ahead of the game compared to his strategic position before introducing missiles, but could lose everything if the game continued . He was able to take advantage of his position in the first half of the match .
 Absent more attacks on U.S. planes, Kennedy was not about to invade Cuba, McNamara says . McNamara: "We were not going to go to war"
 Had the Soviets stood firm on the 27th, the U.S. would have tightened the embargo and then repackaged the missile deal, presumably using the Cordier Channel, which allowed U Thant to go public with an offer to trade .
 The U.S. could have accepted the U Thant proposal unilaterally in an effort to end the crisis . Then the United States could accept the proposal unilaterally, the U. Thant said .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev misplayed their hands, but eventually they made a deal . By the final two days of the crisis they were frantically trying to keep the danger of nuclear confrontation contained .
 Khrushchev at this point ordered Pliyev not to use nuclear weapons . He also ordered him to send twenty-four warheads stored on board the Aleksandrovsk back to Moscow . The decision was made to send them back to Russia .
 Neither leader was worried any longer that the other would prevail in a strategic game of one-upmanship or nuclear brinkmanship . Neither was concerned that neither would gain a tactical advantage in the Western hemisphere, or a strategic advantage in cold war .
 Each looked down ""the gun barrel of nuclear war,"" and each was driven to end the crisis before events got out of hand . Each looked at the barrel of the gun barrel and ended the crisis .
 Khrushchev failed to improve his strategic position when he put missiles in Cuba . Kennedy didn't improve his position after he got the Soviets to remove them from Cuba .
 Soviet strategic rocket forces were inferior before the crisis, and thereafter thereafter . Soviet strategic missile forces have been inferior before and after the crisis . The rocket forces are inferior before, and after, the crisis.
 The Soviets did not intend their missiles in Cuba to change the military balance . Khrushchev clearly intended their placement to redress the imbalance favoring the Americans until his own ICBMs could be deployed .
 Khrushchev gave strict orders to the military commanders in Cuba not to prepare these strategic missiles for firing, nor to ""mate" them . 65 Fursenko and Naftali, ""One Hell of a Gamble,"" 276. Khrushche gave strict . orders to military commanders
 The operational orders indicate that these missiles were not intended to alter the balance of strategic power in such a way as to ensure their continued placement . They were intended to be placed in place by the U.S. military, officials say .
 They were at all times the object of the crisis, but not an independent factor helping to determine its resolution . They were not independent factors in deciding its resolution, says CNN's John Sutter .
 McNamara and Kennedy assumed that the Soviets had fifty to seventy-five strategic missiles, not the twenty or so they actually possessed . The Soviets had only about twenty missiles, according to the report .
 Without realizing it, the Soviets already had a deterrent against a U.S. first strike, without having to place missiles in Cuba or deploy missiles on their own territory . The Soviets didn't realize it, but they already had to deploy missiles in the country .
 Only they didn't know it, because they couldn't read their adversaries' minds . Only they knew they were going to do it, and they would be surprised .
 Khrushchev and Castro failed to win iron-clad security guarantees for Cuba . The two leaders were in the midst of the Cold War in the 1960s .
 The United States had not given the guarantees the Soviets had sought . The U.S. did not give the guarantees they had sought. But the U.N. had not .
 The U.S. had made efforts to destabilize the Castro regime . The Castro regime was overthrown by the United States in 1953 .
 The United States had already attempted to overthrow Castro in the Bay of Pigs operation . The U.S. had already tried to overthrow the Castro regime in the previous attempt .
 President Kennedy authorized Operation Mongoose, a covert operation to overthrow Castro . The operation was run by a Special Group which reported to Robert Kennedy and Maxwell Taylor .
 In early October 1961, McNamara had authorized new planning for an invasion by as early as 20 October 1962, but these were contingency plans, not likely to be approved . The invasion was planned by McNamara in October 1961 .
 Cubans were soon aware of Operation Mongoose and assumed the worst about U.S. intentions . Cubans believed the United States was carrying out the operation . Operation 'Mongoose' was the first of its kind .
 On 4 October 1962, Edwin Lansdale got approval to step up sabotage efforts against Cuban shipping . Lansdale's sabotage efforts were stepped up against Cuba .
 On 16 October a further step-up in Mongoose activities was authorized by Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy authorized the extra step-ups in October .
 Throughout the year, the United States had conducted military exercises simulating an invasion of Cuba, including Lantphibex 1-62, simulating the overthrow of a dictator named ""Ortsac" and Swift Strike II . Operation Quick Kick, involving landings of 40,000
 Another Marine amphibious exercise, Phibreglix, is planned for mid-October . The exercise will take place in October .
 Most of these activities (other than the plotting for assassinations) were known to the Cubans and Soviets, who could easily believe that U.S. intentions were to go well beyond intelligence collection and into a fullscale destabilization campaign . That was not what the United States intended at
 Three new Mongoose operations in Cuba continued into November, even after Robert Kennedy ordered the enterprise suspended on 30 October . This gives Castro even more reason to believe that the United States would continue efforts to overthrow him .
 Khrushchev failed to get full assurances about Cuba, because Kennedy was determined not to give them . Kennedy refused to give the assurances .
 At the ExComm meetings there had been some discussion about how to avoid such a pledge . President took the lead in revising draft language to make sure no such guarantee was given .
 The United States could define a large number of actions by Castro as aggressive . Castro's actions could be defined as aggressive, the U.S. says .
 Kennedy still hoped to retain some freedom of action with regard to Cuba . Clearly Kennedy still wanted to retain freedom of speech .
 In early 1963 Mongoose was terminated, that summer new destabilization attempts, including efforts to assassinate Castro, resumed . Although in early 1963, that year's destabilization attempt was terminated . That summer, efforts were resumed to destabilize Castro .
 The resolution of the crisis caused a breech between Khrushchev and Castro . The resolution was a key moment in the history of the Cold War .
 Castro wrote of Cubans experiencing ""unspeakable bitterness and sadness" at the Soviet lack of resolve . Castro wrote in his response to Khrushchev's letters that Cubans were experiencing "an unspeakable sadness"
 He was bitter about his ""betrayal"" by Russians, who had not told him of the missile gap favoring the Americans, had not consulted him fully during the crisis, and had not informed him of offer to permit UN inspection .
 As a diplomatic negotiator, he might have gotten a more advantageous deal had he actually tried the Trollope ploy . But as a diplomat, he may have gotten an advantageous deal .
 If he was willing to take any way out, a speedy reply to the offer of the 26th could have ended the crisis without a trade of missiles .
 It would have required a pledge not to invade Cuba, probably without any qualifications . But it would have been a pledge to not invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev mischaracterized the ""no invasion"" pledge to the Politburo and to Castro . That Kennedy was unwilling to give, though clearly . Kennedy was not willing to give the pledge .
 Kennedy made the trade after the shooting down of the U-2 had demonstrated to both leaders that the crisis might soon get out of hand . It is hard to fault Kennedy for making the trade the following day .
 Kennedy sought a speedy resolution on terms he had felt comfortable with from the beginning . Kennedy had been comfortable with the terms of his settlement with the White House . Kennedy's settlement with President Barack Obama is expected to be announced this week .
 By seeking to portray the resolution of the crisis as an American victory, Kennedy left himself vulnerable in the future to Soviet blackmail . Kennedy's actions left him vulnerable to blackmail by the Soviet Union .
 At any time after the withdrawal of missiles from Turkey, Khrushchev could have revealed the trade, which would have seemed plausible to much of the world, even if Kennedy later denied it . At any point after the pullout of missiles would have appeared plausible to many, even though Kennedy
 The Kennedys' insistence on no documents changing hands was designed to prevent that possibility . Of course, no documents were changing hands . The Kennedy family is famous for refusing to hand over documents .
 Khrushchev did not do so even after Kennedy's death . It was hoped the U.S. would honor what the Soviets still insisted was a noninvasion pledge .
 Each side had more to lose than to gain by revealing the terms it had accepted . Each side has more than a chance to win than to reveal the terms they have accepted .
 The crisis did not usher in an era of detente, contrary to the claims of national security managers on both sides . National security managers say the crisis was not the end of the Cold War .
 It also continued its escalation of commitments in Southeast Asia, another arena in which attempts at gamesmanship and compellence superseded efforts at diplomatic resolution of issues in the region .
 By 1964, Khrushchev was out of power, in part due to simmering resentment in the Presidium over his Brest-Litovsk .
 The lessons the Soviets also had learned was that military superiority-or at least perceived parity-would be needed to avoid a new defeat . The lessons were that military . superiority- or perceived parity would be needed .
 There were some efforts at detente, including the test-ban treaty and the hot-line set up between Washington and Moscow .
 Cold war was marked by rivalries and localized military conflicts far more than by detente . Cold war ended in 1980s, but was marked more by local military conflicts than by peace .
 Never again would either superpower play fast and loose with strategic missiles or threaten nuclear exchanges . What one can say, however, is that never again would both countries play fast-loose .
 His own discussion in the ExComm and those of his colleagues indicate his belief in the rationality of a diplomatic solution .
 From our post-cold war vantage point, the possibility that the world might have had to suffer a superpower nuclear exchange for want of a trade of missiles seems to be the ultimate folly . Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson both made the point with some exasperation during the ExComm deliberations .
 Perhaps our own expectations about national power and the presidency are the explanation . Perhaps our expectations about power and power are the reason for this .
 We simply expected that the U.S. president, as leader of the free world, could prevail in superpower confrontations . President Barack Obama was expected to prevail in the face of a superpower confrontation .
 The political dangers of seeming willing to compromise with the enemy had to be managed through the fiction that no compromise had occurred . The dangers of appearing willing to . compromise with . the enemy must be managed by the fact that no compromises had occurred, he says .
 Kennedy was vulnerable politically, and he was prepared to preserve an illusion rather than pay political costs at home . Kennedy was willing to preserve the illusion, and preserve it at home, rather than paying political costs .
 Kennedy was aware of the issue that the fictionalized version would open . Yet Kennedy himself was aware that the issue would open up .
 He told Arthur Schlesinger the day after the crisis ended that people might draw the wrong conclusions . He said people would assume that the Russians would cave in if you pressured them .
 Kennedy was willing to seek a political solution to a political crisis, and when his 82-year-old son died, he was willing . Arthur Schelsinger, Jr. was able to find a solution to the political crisis .
 Kennedy's unwillingness to admit how the crisis had been resolved left an unfortunate legacy for his successors . Kennedy's refusal to admit that the crisis was resolved left him a legacy for successors .
 What should have been learned was the need to negotiate in such a crisis and the meaninglessness of the nuclear balance of power, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The lesson should have been that crisis management often does not work, that the experts are often wrong, and that the military forces on both sides cannot be managed to prevent incidents . The lessons should be learned, especially from the experts themselves .
 The lesson should have been that political horsetrading is often a more effective way to resolve a crisis than situation room attempts at micromanagement . The lesson is that horsetrades are often more effective than micromanaging .
 He was not willing to make the terms public for fear that negotiation would be taken for appeasement . He feared that reasonableness would have been taken for weakness .
 The folly of such an assumption was laid to rest many years later by Robert McNamara himself, McNamara . McNamara: "The folly of that assumption was ... laid to end many years after."
 If we can learn anything useful from Kennedy's performance, it is that the art and science of politics and diplomacy, not gamesmanship and crisis management, are the keys to successful resolution of nuclear crises .