 San Diego de los Banos is where these missles are located, CNN.com correspondent says .
 Missile Analysist Sidney Graybeal briefed President on Soviet missiles in Cuba using maps, photos and briefing boards . National Photo Interpation Center prepared two sets of briefing boards using Zapruder film photos of the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Homer McMahon and his assistant Ben Hunter were color photo technicians at the NPIC at the time of the assassination . McMahon and Hunter prepared one set of briefing boards .
 Sidney Graybeal was responsible for directing the flight path of the U2s that flew over Russia, including Gary Power's ill fated fight . He also directed the path of U2's flights over Russia .
 The mission flew on the fifteenth of October and provided the photographs . They came into the National Photo Interpretation Center at around four, five o'clock in the afternoon. Well, when the mission flew .
 The photo interpreters started looking at these pictures and one of my branch chiefs was there and when he looked at 'em, he called me on the phone and said, we have something very hot, you'd better come down here immediately .
 When I got there, photo interpreters laid out the photographs of these canvas-covered objects . When I arrived at the museum, the photos were laid out by a photo interpreter .
 There was no question in my mind that we had offensive missiles in Cuba, says President Obama . "There were no questions in our minds," says Obama .
 The question was, what type of offensive missile is this and they could give very precise measurements of the length of this canvas-covered object . The question is, "What type of an offensive missile?"
 If this were a missile without its nose cone you see nose cones are normally mated later then it would be one type of missile, but if the nose cone was on, it would have been a different one .
 If this is a complete missile with the nose cone, it would be an SS-3, a relatively short-range missile . So essentially, that measurement said if this is . a complete . missile with a nose cone .
 If the nose cone is not on, it would be an SS-4, which is an eleven hundred-mile range missile . The nose cone would be on, which would be a missile with a nose cone on it . The missile is a missile capable of traveling over 100,000
 An SS-4 with a thousand, eleven hundred mile range can reach Washington, CNN's John Sutter says . The nose cone is normally not mated, it was my judgment that this was an SS4 . Sutter: If the Soviets were going to deploy offensive missiles into Cuba
 CNN's John Sutter says it's "like putting together a jigsaw puzzle" for a ballistic missile . Sutter: "You're doing an evaluation of the ballistic missile's capabilities, specifically the missiles that we saw on photography in Cuba"
 Penkovsky was clearly a critical aspect on the manuals and how these missiles operate . You have a piece of information here that comes from human sources that tells you about it, he says .
 Moscow had photographic information of missiles in the parade in Moscow, Russia . It also had information of the test range where these missiles had been tested . The parade included photos of the missiles in Moscow .
 As soon as we saw these were ballistic missiles, I knew we had something that was critically important process . "You don't panic in these type of situations, because you have to deal with facts and as an intelligence officer you recognize sometimes you will be wrong"
 These were provided to the DDI, which at the time Deputy Director for Intelligence was Ray Cline and he knew it was extremely important . The DDI was at the top of the CIA's list of top secret agents .
 The next day Art Lundahl went to the White House to brief McGeorge Bundy . "McGeorge Bundy knew exactly that this was extremely serious," Lundahl says . Lundahl: Bundy knew the next day that the situation was serious .
 "There was no laugh, there was no joking about anything to do with this situation. There was no joke, there were no jokes about anything that had to be joked about," he said . "There were no laughs, there wasn't any joking," he added .
 We know the type of missile this is, what we don't know is the operational status of these missiles right now . Yes, we know the kind of missile that this missile is, but what we need to know is operational status .
 Bobby Kennedy had been the person dealing with Dobrynin and others who were assuring the President there will be no offensive missiles in Cuba . Bobby Kennedy clearly knew that this was a major . The President had been assured that no offensive missile missiles would be deployed in Cuba.
 We prepared a three paragraph introduction to the subject which General Carter, who was acting Director of CIA because McCone was on the West Coast, for him to give at the Ex-Comm committee that morning .
 Art Lundahl, the Director of the Photographic Interpretation Center, and Sidney Graybeal, myself, were sent to the White House with our briefing boards of missiles in Cuba to brief McGeorge Bundy, the head of the National Security staff .
 Bobby Kennedy came in, we gave the same briefing to Bobby Kennedy and he took off to go upstairs to the personal quarters of President Kennedy to tell him . President Kennedy went upstairs to President Kennedy's personal quarters to get a briefing .
 We stayed in the White House all morning until the first Ex-Comm committee meeting took place at around eleven o'clock . Then we all went into the Cabinet Room and we waited for the President .
 The President came in, good morning gentlemen, sat down and sat down . The door that the President had come through all of a sudden burst open and Caroline Kennedy came in . Caroline Kennedy essentially said, Daddy, Daddy,. Daddy, they won't let my friend in .
 The President got up, went over, put his arm around her, took her out of the room, came back within a minute and said, gentlemen, I think we should proceed . He then said, 'gentlemen, I'm sorry'
 Carter read the three paragraphs, essentially what was the status of the status, suggested the President should look at the evidence . What transpired at the meeting is General Carter read .
 Art Lundahl, head of the NPA, laid on the table in front of President Kennedy, McNamara on the right, Rusk on the other side, so the three of 'em could see them . Lundahl said this is Cuba, this is San Forego , so
 President Obama pointed out that the missiles are offensive ballistic missiles . He specifically pointed to them on the chart . Then he mentioned, these are offensive missiles .
 He stood up behind McNamara, McNamara and Rusk and fired one question after the other . "He turned to me, I stood up . I stood . up behind the President, McNama and . Rusk," he said .
 The Ex-Comm committee meeting we had that morning was all business after the little... well there were all business in the sense that the President was extremely serious, he wanted to get the facts . His first question clearly was how long before they can fire those missiles, 'cos he knew
 There are a whole litany of debates within Ex-Comm which very, very well reported in various other publications . How do we get them out of there and there's a lot of debates in Ex-comm? We asked .
 President wanted to know how much time he had, McNamara asked McNamara where were the nuclear warheads . McNamara also wanted to find out if he had time to find the warheads .
 Rusk was worried about the political implications, what exactly had taken place here, what had they said to us, Mr President. Rusk said . He said: "What did you say in your last speech Mr President?"
 Lundahl and I were excused from that first meeting after we had presented the facts, Lundahl says . Lundahl: We had answered all the questions about the operational characteristics of the missiles .
 Curtis LeMay was the Chief of Staff of the Air Force in October 1962 . He was transferred from the European theater to take over the 20th Air Force, based on Guam .
 The mission of LeMay’s command was strategic bombing of the Japanese home islands . The mission was to bomb Japan's home islands and destroy Japan's nuclear bases .
 LeMay ordered a complete change in tactics after analyzing the command’s operations . After analyzing operations, LeMay decided to change tactics . LeMay: "Change in tactics is essential to success"
 The B-29s had been flying at high altitude in order to be safe from antiaircraft fire . The planes were flying at a high altitude to avoid being hit by fire . They were later found to have been destroyed in the crash .
 LeMay calculated that at much lower altitudes there might be a somewhat greater loss of aircraft, but that this disadvantage would be more than offset by increases in bomb loads and in bombing accuracy . LeMay said that at . much lower . altitudes . there might have been a somewhat .
 Colonel Robert S McNamara, who would later be Kennedy’s Secretary of Defense, was LeMay's civilian boss . Colonel McNamara was later the President of the U.S. Army .
 He, too, came from Irish immigrants, but his forebears had taken the Panama route to California . He and LeMay didn’t see eye to eye during the missile crisis .
 LeMay was gratified not only the cost-effectiveness of his operations but by their consequences . LeMay may not have seen eye to eye in 1945, when he was clearly gratified .
 LeMay also had command responsibility for the special bomber group that attacked Hiroshima and Nagasaki . LeMay's attitude toward the first atomic bombs was dismissive .
 He rejected notion that they were somehow special, morally or otherwise . He rejected the notion that . They were somehow . special, moral or otherwise.
 Cuba's credibility is "sacred" if it doesn't respond, Cuban president says . Cuban president: "If we don't respond in here in Cuba, we think the credibility is sacrificed"
 If we do this blockade that's proposed, a political action, the first thing that’s going to happen is your missiles are going to disappear into the woods, particularly your mobile ones . The first thing will happen is that your missiles will disappear into your woods, especially your mobile
 "Now, we can’t find them, regardless of what we do, and then we’re going to take some damage if we try to do anything later on," he said . "We’ve got to find them," he added .
 I don't think they're going to make any reply if we tell them that the Berlin situation is just like it’s always been. I don’t think they’re going to respond to that,’S. I’m not sure if we
 I don't think it changes the Berlin situation at all, except you’ve got to make one more statement on it. I don’t think it . It’s not going to change the situation, but you have to make a statement, he says .
 If this whole blockade comes along, MiGs are going to fly, he says . "We’re just going to gradually slip into a war under conditions that are at great disadvantage to us," he adds .
 Mr President, I feel that the course of action recommended to you by the Chiefs from the military point of view is the right one. Mr President. Well, Mr President , I feel . Mr President . I feel it is right to take the matter seriously seriously .
 A blockade, and political talk, would be considered by a lot of our friends and neutrals as being a pretty weak response to this . There's one other factor that I didn’t mention that’s not quite our field, which is the political factor .
 President George W Bush invited some of the Kennedy family to watch the film with him at the White House . It’s frightening to even ponder how the President today would be able to disregard the advice and desire of practically all of his generals .
 Leaving the theater however, thoughts and conversations weren't about how things would play out today, as most people didn't even talk about the movie or the Missile Crisis . Instead, the focus of interest was on the assassination of President Kennedy .
 “13 Days” is kind of a prequel to Oliver Stone’s “JFK,” as it lays out the groundwork and sets the stage for what was to come . The primary producer, Kevin Costner and actor, probably wouldn’t have
 Most of the viewers of both films weren’t even alive when the events portrayed actually happened . “13 Days” gives good insight into the character and personalities of some major players in the JFK assassination drama .
 The movie opens at Kenny O’Donnell’s home breakfast table where Costner quizzes his kids on the names and titles of Kennedy's cabinet . Costner is a part of the Kennedy cabinet .
 The assassination of JFK became a watershed event from which democracy has yet to recover . Withholding that option and continuing a reasoned diplomacy was probably one of the most pivotal decisions that has shaped our society, says Julian Zelizer .
 A bar owner once told me that he hired bouncers, not to fight or eject unruly patrons, but to keep things cool and not have any fights . A bouncer is not a bouncer, but a bar owner says he hires bouncers to not fight unruly customers .
 Sometimes bouncers don't think they’re earning their money if they don’t punch somebody out every once in awhile . But sometimes bouncers see it that way .
 It's sort of like a “Jack Ruby-Sparky Syndrome,” except in a more institutionalized form . It’s sort of a ‘Jack Ruby’ syndrome,’ except in more institutionalised form .
 General LeMay was used to giving orders, not following the demands of a couple of punk rich kids . LeMay: “Bomb’m back to the stone age,” Air Force commander .
 Robert McNamara had to sleep in his office at the Pentagon because he was afraid if he left the military would make a move without him . McGeorge Bundy, the national security aid who served as a ‘buffer’ between the military and the administration, was a “buffer
 At Dealey Plaza, the palace guard was down and most vulnerable . So they had to do it during a lull in the action, when the palace guards were down and vulnerable .
 JFK permitted producers of Fletcher Nebel’s ‘Seven Days In May’ to film scenes in the White House . Kennedy said it could happen if there was such an event such as the Bay of Pigs, then a military takeover of the government could happen .
 This military take-over included McNamara and Bundy, who got the message, helped devise the necessary strategy . It ensured the redirection of national security policy away from detente and diplomacy .
 The acceptance of this general outline and framing of the assassination of President Kennedy is one generally accepted by most people, but vehemently denounced by mainstream historians, politicians and the media . It is one that will be born out by the evidence when all the facts are in and the total truth is known
 The association of the Missile Crisis and the assassination is not made as clearly in the otherwise excellent made-for-tv movie “The Missiles of October” The film stars Marty Sheen and clearly delineates the back room dealings that went on during the crisis .
 O'Donnell was there, in the room, when most of the significant events occurred, and I intend to explore his role further . While the extent of O’Donnell’s role can be questioned, if not measured, you can’t get around the fact that
 According to The Kennedy Tapes, “On Monday morning, October 22, Kennedy convened his advisors…in the Cabinet Room. “Kennedy convened his . advisors’s advisors” in the . Cabinet Room . According to the Kennedy .
 Kenneth O’Donnell spoke for the first time at the meeting . Kenneth O'Donnell was one of those who had probably attended earlier meetings but who spoke first .
 O'Donnell was Special Assistant to the President, charged especially with managing the President’s time . O’Donnell was a Harvard classmate of Robert Kennedy and an aide to John Kenney since the senatorial campaign of 1952 . As described in A Common Good – The Friendship of
 As special assistant and appointments secretary, he was the gatekeeper to the president . He was also the president's special assistant secretary . He has been in charge of the White House since 1993 .
 He was relentless and tough in his new job as had ever been on the campaign . He said: 'He was relentless, tough in new job. He had to be tough'
 As seen through the eyes of O’Donnell, “13 Days” takes you into the White House, the Pentagon war room and the cockpits of the Surveillance planes . The film leaves the reactions of the Cubans and Russians, other than backchannel KGB contact,
 White House and Kremlin put in the Hot-Line red phones in times of crisis, so both leaders can talk one-on-one . Official bureaucratic channels were so cumbersome that the best and quickest way to communicate to Khrushchev in Moscow was to use the press .
 In the movie, the KGB officer’s bonafides as a close associate of Khrushchev are checked by comparing career chronologies of both men . JFK is afraid that he can no longer keep the military leaders at bay and if he doesn’t take a more aggressive
 Khrushchev knew the feeling well, as he too was under the same pressures from his military commanders, who eventually contributed to the removal of him within a year of JFK’s murder .
 Rather than the Soviets, it is the U.S. Military commanders who come off as the Bad Guys they apparently were . The United States Military commanders are the real Bad Guys .
 One fourth of the advisors, mostly military men, advocated an immediate surgical, tactical air strike and full scale invasion of Cuba . About one fourth of those advisors said an immediate air strike was needed .
 The Russians already had tactical nuclear weapons in place in Cuba under the command of field Colonels who would have used them if attacked . As we know today, that would have resulted in a total thermonuclear war .
 JFK mentioning tactical nukes in the movie is one of the few historical gaffs in the film . JFK mentioning the tactical nuke in the book is a historical gaffe . JFK mentioned the nukes as a tactical nuclear device .
 Pierre Salinger shown giving a press conference – “The President has a cold,” without a cigar in his hand, while General LeMay is never shown without one . Another technical inaccuracy is shown without cigar in hand .
 LeMay is reported to have been at JFK’s autopsy at Bethesda by attending technician, Paul O’Conner, who told me that one of the physicians performing the autopsy ordered him to tell whoever was smoking a cigar in the room to leave . O'Conner told
 JFK, RFK and O’Donnell make personal phone calls to the pilots of reconnaissance planes to order them not to even get shot at so as not to instigate a forced retaliatory strike . LeMay wants the Air Force to be given the ball so they can throw their bombs
 Pilot returns with photos of bullet holes in the wing of his plane . Pilot says the holes were made by a flock of sparrows .
 President Kennedy made personal contact with the players on the front lines, making sure they knew the game plan and what their role was . It was a good way of emphasizing the desire and determination of the military brass to get into a scrum, while also showing how President Kennedy operated .
 The Kennedys, as they did in their personal as well as their professional lives, look towards challenges as they do the game of football . The Kenneseses look at challenges in their lives as they look towards the game .
 In the movie, as in their lives, events overtook them, but they still made time to joke a little, throw the ball around the meeting room or backyard and confront crisis as a team effort .
 Kenny O’Donnell was the quarterback on RFK’s Harvard team . RFK was a close associate of the President, but was given a position in the White House .
 O'Donnell was the greater at the door, the Sgt-at-arms who you had to get past in order to get to the President . O’Donnell was a greater at-arms, the sergeant at arms who you must get past to meet the president .
 Bobby, as the Attorney General, was the nation's Top Cop, but also served as JFK’s right-hand-man and chief crisis coordinator . Bobby served as the President of the U.S. and Attorney General of the late 1960s .
 Kennedy steps in for a block to keep LeMay from putting his chest into Kennedy’s face . Then back at the office he has to run physical interference and step in for an interference .
 The football analogy is brought into play again when JFK tells Bobby to get ready to take Adlai Stevenson out of the UN and put in someone more force full . When nuclear push comes to shove Stevenson comes through in the clutch .
 Stevenson stayed in the game, then got roughed up by a gang of thugs in Dallas on UN Day and urged JFK not to go to there . Kennedy however, did take General Walker out of the game .
 RFK had ordered a halt to all such operations after RFK learned that William Harvey had sent in a commando team to Cuba . Also pulled from his position was “America’s James Bond,” William Harvey, who experienced the wrath of RFK .
 Oswald was in the Great Game too, only a less significant player, but a player nonetheless . Oswald was also a player in that Great Game, but not a significant player .
 He had previously been associated with the U2 program as a USMC radar operator in Japan . He defected to the Soviet Union, where his knowledge of U2 would have been of interest .
 Gary Powers said he believed Oswald gave them the information they needed to shoot him down . Powers said it averted the Eisenhower-Khrushchev detente meeting and postponing the end of the Cold War for decades .
 Company did classified work for U.S. Army Intelligence . Company reportedly placed marks, arrows and captions on photos taken from U2 .
 The possibility that the Russians would place long range offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba had been suggested years earlier by Gen. Gen. Michael Hayden . The possibility of the move had been raised by a retired general .
 The prelude for crisis was enunciated clearly by Clair Booth Luce in Life Magazine a week before the actual crisis . Walker claimed that such a scenario was played out in war games as long as seven years earlier, before Castro even came to power .
 U2 photos showed undeniable, irrefutable and certifiable evidence of the presence of the missiles in Cuba . Administration shouldn't have had to think on it’s feet and devise their own plays once the crisis got underway .
 If we do nothing then they’ll have these missiles, says President Obama . And clearly, if we do . Nothing, he says, will be able to say any time we ever try to . do something about Cuba, they'll fire these missiles .
 If we go in and take them out on a quick air strike, we neutralize the chance of danger to the United States, he says . On the other hand, we increase the chance greatly, as I think – there’s bound to be reprisal from the Soviet Union
 "If we do nothing, we’re going to have the problem with Berlin anyway," he says . "So that’s why we've got to respond. Because if we do . We’ve got to . respond," he adds .
 LeMay brings up ‘Munich,” after which there is a long, discernable pause in the conversation, since that is where the British under Lord Chamberlain, and the United States under Joseph Kennedy, Sr. were behind . LeMay: The British and the U
 James St. James attempted to avoid World War II by adopting a policy of appeasement towards the militaristic Nazi German government . James, a British Prime Minister of the 1930s, tried to avoid war with Germany by avoiding it .
 Both George Ball and Bobby bring up Pearl Harbor, and how the U.S. had not nor should pull off such a sneak attack . Others, like LBJ, didn’t want to ‘telegraph” the fact that we’re coming .
 LBJ congratulates the President on his handling of the crisis with some offhand remark about “passing the mid-terms,” which I think he means by the positive effect the episode will have on the next election, which of course, he will win . LBJ
 The script by David Self is really well done, and such writers seldom get the credit when their work is so good . It must have been difficult to cram in so much in just a few hours, but the script is well done .
 The president seemed thrilled and fascinated by the crowd’s noisy excitement . He seemed fascinated and fascinated .
 Ahead of us in the back seat of the Lincoln, the president was sitting on the right side of the car with his arm outstretched, waving to the crowd in front of the Depository . The president was in the middle of the crowd when he waved to them .
 "I had just finished speaking when we heard shots, two close together and then a third one. I was just finishing speaking when I heard shots," he says . "We heard shots. Two close together, then three close together," he adds .
 We saw pieces of bone and brain tissue and bits of reddish hair flying through the air . We saw bits of bone, brain tissue flying through air .
 The impact of the impact lifted him and shook him limply, as if he were a rag doll . Then he dropped out of our sight, sprawled across the backseat of the car .
 He became trapped by the deaths of John and Bobby Kennedy in a realm of lost possibilities, he says . He says he became trapped in the realm of a lost possibilities .
 After those two tragedies, he never cared about politics again, and he never gave his heart over to another politician again . The fight in the man was gone. He never gave up on politics again and never gave in to another .