 You will not be tested on these tenns, but should wish to review them, feel free to use the extensive glossary at the end of the book .
 XIV 10 -43 seconds after the Big Bang . In which our universe began, long ago and far away, there was a universe very much like ours .
 It had dogs, and cats, and people, and Trigoencephalopodic Gnoccis, and other things of which you've never heard because we haven't encountered them yet . Some of whom preferred the dogs and some of whom prefer the cats .
 The Universe is expanding, but for some reason it never gets any easier to find a parking place . In which the Universe Continues to Expand, though not Quite as Quickly .
 Antiparticles are very much like particles, except that when particles and antiparticles meet they destroy each other and emit a burst of energetic radiation . The Spirit of God was hovering b over the Universe .
 God called the photons “bosons” and the particles and antiparticles He called “fermions” c And there was pair production and there was photon creation-the first 10‘ 43 seconds .
 And there was vacuum energy density and there was inflation-the first 10"" seconds . And there were vacuum energy densities and inflation- the first 10."" seconds .
 L. He called some of the particles and antiparticles bosons as well, but that’s another story . L. A. L. called some particle and antiparticle bosons . He called them bosons, bosons and particles .
 The radiation became less energetic and the electrons combined with atomic nuclei . God blessed the particles and said, “Be fruitful and produce neutral atoms,” God .
 There was background radiation and there were neutral atoms- the first 380,000 years . And there were background radiation . There was neutral atoms in the universe for the first time .
 God made the clusters of galaxies according to their kinds, and the galaxies . The clusters of galaxy clusters are different kinds of galaxies, God says . God also made the stars according to the kinds of stars .
 White photons are hot. With photons cototot. etectrows come. White photon is hot. White photons come hot.
 The Galaxy TURBULENT FRAGMENTATION . In which a Giant Cloud of Gas Fragments into Smaller Clouds, Which Become Protostars a stellar nursery .
 Of course, knowing you, you'd probably have hung OUT WITH SOME LOOSE STAR, GOTTEN TO TOO MUCH MASS FROM THEM, AND BEEN COMPLETELY DISRUPED IN A SUPERNOVA explosion . Of course .
 There's dust EVERYWHERE AND YOUR MOTHERS AREN'T HERE to CLEAN it up for you. There's a lot of dust and dust everywhere, and your mother isn't here to help clean it up .
 The Galaxy SUPERNOVA EXPLOSION In Which a Massive Star Ends Its Life by Exploding “Hum Parsec to Star Command, come in, Star Command.” The Galaxy Supernova EXPLONATION .
 After the formation process is mostly complete, I'm expecting an atmosphere to form from the emission of volatile gases 34 from volcanoes, as well as comet impacts . After the process is complete, an atmosphere is expected to form .
 Your GenCod genetic code has been specially designed to be as error-free as possible . If a mutation changed a GCA codon into a GCG codon, then no change in the protein would occur since they both code for alanine .
 The Earth FERMENTATION In Which Bacteria Obtain Energy from Their Surroundings . Polymers in the ocean get made When organic compounds are sauteed, Ora UV-lighttreat .
 Eermentation reduced The glucose, and produced Ethanol, C0 2 , and some heat . The glucose was reduced to Ethanol . The Ethanol was produced from the glucose .
 If we made otir own food, It would really be shrewd, says author . Photosynthesis would be sublime .
 If you can turn carbohydrates into energy, then you’ve got what I need, baby, baby. If you're turning carbohydrates into an energy source, you've got what you need .
 Endosymbionts Seeking Hosts . Purple aerobic heterotroph wants to become a mitochondrion for a caring proteobacterium .
 A geologic era shall never go by, 30 From this day to the ending of the world, But we in it shall be remembered . We few, we happy few, are band of protists, we band of protebrates .
 If I develop a more efficient method of locomotion, I want my sweetheart to be able to move in the same way . For example, if I develop more efficient way of moving, I would like to move with my partner . I'm not sure if I want to develop a
 Examples include the prairie-dog-like Lambdopsalis and the squirrel-like Ptilodus .
 Pronouns grunt grunt grunt, do grunt, / grunt, eat grunt, you . Conjunctions grunt, quickly grunt, and grunt, slowly grunt, but grunt is a 68 3 .
 The Earth is one of the world's most famous religions . The Earth was created from the ashes of the planet .
 She said, It's really not my habit to intrude, Furthermore I hope my meaning won't be lost or misconstrued, So I repeat myself, at the risk of being crude, There must be fifty ways to loot your neighbor, Fifty Ways to Loot your neighbor .
 Just put on your belt, Celt; make off with the loot, Jute . Set fire to the cot, Scot, then bring back the gold, Scot . Jute: 'Set fire to your cot then bring the gold back, Scot'
 Go kill and maim, Dane, stop being humane . Hurt, wound, and stun, Hun, take all you can hold. Go kill, maim and kill, Dane .
 She said, "If that's your final word, I'll acquiesce" And then she killed me, took my land, and became marquise. She said: "I confess. Furthermore there is a plan that I like better, I confess"
 There must be fifty ways to loot your neighbor, Fifty ways to Loot your neighbor . There must also be fifty .
 After spending 12 years in field research, Frank and I get together to compare notes . Frank and Frank spent 12 years together in the field of field research . Frank is now retired from field work .
 The reactor-grade device will have a less predictable yield of between ^Band HI kilotons . The weapons-grade weapon will be more reliable than the reactor .
 Construct a spherical shell around this sphere with .Bwedgeshaped grooves on the inside of the shelving . Th e grooves should be covered bya .B mm thick layer of gold and of polonium .
 MakeJd identical plutonium wedges and assemble them into a soccer ball shape around the spherical shell . Then makeJd duplicate the soccer ball and create a spherical soccer ball .
 Put conventional explosives around the plutonium shell and a.Bcm thick shell of Uranium-238 around the explosives . Use conventional explosives and a shell of uranium-238 in place .
 The chain reaction continues until between^% and ^|% of the plutonium atoms have been split, at which point so much energy has been released that the bomb (and much of the surrounding countryside) is vaporized .
 I don't believe that the Rumanians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. I don’t believe that . The Rumanian Republic is not a republic of Romania, it is a republic .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski: "Today, Eastern Europe is again Central Europe-which it has always been historically, culturally and philosophically" “I see in Marxist ideology and the Communist pattern of rule is an extreme and cautionary instance of the arrogance of modern man,
 On his computer he wrote a Web browser. An' then one day, after drinking lots of beer, he wrote it . The Web browser was created by a man who had a lot of beer .
 Bill and Microsoft never take it lightly if their market share is lost . Well, now it's time to say hello to Microsoft and Microsoft, who never take a lightly .
 Internet Explorer may not be a pretty swap, but you'll need a lot of help getting it off your desktop . Internet Explorer will be available in the U.S. on Tuesday .
 After a few hours of work you realize that you're bored by the details of what you're doing . You've got to do something different, even if only for an hour or so, or else you'll take "hit any key to continue" far too literally .
 You are free to copy, distribute, display, and perform this work as long as you give me credit . Do not use this work for commercial purposes, and do not alter, transfonnn, or build upon this work .
 Founded in 1914, it is the largest of the Christian Pentecostal traditions . Founded by 1914, is the world's largest Pentecossal tradition .
 Born in Massachusetts and raised in Connecticut, he went on to become President of the United States of America in 1989 .
 Protestant Christianity teaches that human beings have no free will and that who will go to Heaven is predetermined . Founded in the 16th century A.D. by John Calvin, this sect of Protestant Christianity taught that who went to Heaven was predetermined .
 Scottish writer lived on a farm at Craigenputtock for six years . He hated and feared democracy .
 Founded in 1844, Christadelphians believe that baptism by immersion after receiving knowledge of the Bible is crucial to salvation . Founded by 1844 in Christadelphians .
 Winston Churchill should not be confused with Winston Churchill the American novelist and member of the New Flampshire legislature between 1903 and 1905 . Winston Churchill was the Prime Minister of England between 1940 and 1945 .
 French Premier of France in 1906-1909 and 1917-1919 . He was also a doctor, a teacher, a journalist, and a novelist .
 The statements in computer languages are usually composed of a series of incomprehensible words and symbols that require a . compiler to translate them into a series . of incomprehensible strings of l's and 0's . The statements are often composed of . incomprehensible words .
 He was named Commander in Chief of all French forces in June of 1939 and generalissimo of Allied forces at the start of World War II in September, 1939 . Appointed Chief of the French General Staff in 1931 .
 The war didn't go too well for France, and he was replaced on May 19, 1940 . He was replaced by the French president of France .
 Followers of Gurdjieff believe that all individuals need purification and that they must work on relationships by opening themselves to others . Founded in 1913, followers believe they must open themselves to other people to purify themselves .
 Macumba teaches that humans have both a physical and a spiritual body . Based on the spirit worship of Africans shipped to Brazil in the 1550s as slaves, the spiritual world is always being contacted by spirits .
 Martinism teaches that one should not work for personal interest and that the sexes are equal in the ability to develop divine gifts . Founded by Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, Martinism is a form of Martinism .
 Mennonite churches exist as associations of people who are mature enough to make freewill decisions to join the church . Founded in 1526 as a sect of the Anabaptist faith, Mennite churches exist in associations .
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints teaches that people live as spirit beings with God before being born . Life on Earth serves as a test to determine whether people are worthy to return to God, the church says .
 These prizes honor people whose achievements have conferred great benefit on humanity in the fields of physics, chemistry, physiology or medicine, literature, peace, and economics . They include people who have achieved great benefit to humanity .
 Founded in 1901, this is the fastest growing segment of Christianity in the world . Founded by 1901, it is the largest segment of the world's Christian community .
 Not to be confused with his son, Ron Reagan, who played Frank in Soul Man . Ron Reagan also appeared in the 1993 TV show The Positively True Adventures of the Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom .
 Franklin Roosevelt was President of the United States from 1901 until 1909 . He should not be confused with Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who was president of the U.S. from 1933 .
 The Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Cmcis was founded in 1915 by H Spencer Lewis . The Ancient Mystery Order was founded by Lewis in 1915 .
 Count Alfred von Schlieffen was chief of the German General Staff from 1891 until 1906 . He borrowed ideas from Hannibal to create a plan for defeating France within six weeks . He discovered oxygen in 1774 and chlorine in 1778 .
 Spiritists believe mediums can communicate with spirits that will answer philosophical and scientific questions . Founded in the 1850's by Allan Kardec (the nom de plume of H Leon Denizard Rivail), spiritists .
 Founded by Emanuel Swedenborg in 1744, this movement believes that the spirit world overlaps with the material world . It believes that spirits of the dead can communicate with the living .
 One of the four fundamental forces of nature, this force holds the nucleus of atoms together . The force is very important for the stability of hair-care products .
 The process by which oceanic crust is pushed under either oceanic or continental crust, usually resulting in volcanic activity as the newly melted rock makes its way towards the surface .
 Developed in the late 10 th century A.D. within Islam, this mystical movement emphasizes a personal union of the soul with God . Developed within Islam in late 10th century, this movement emphasizes personal union with God, often through ascetic practices .
 Founded in 1982 by Hue Dang Trinh (now known as Suma Ching Hai), this movement combines Christianity and Buddhism . Founded by Hue Trinh in 1982, this movement is now called Suma Cing Hai .
 A group of dozens of clusters of galaxies that are held together by gravitational attraction . A galaxy cluster of galaxies is held together in a galaxy cluster . The galaxy clusters are known as galaxies that hold galaxies together .
 Mutual cooperation between different organisms such that each benefit from the relationship . Mutual cooperation means cooperation between organisms such as organisms that benefit from each other .
 Founded by Lao-tze in the 6 th century B.C., this philosophical religion teaches that the ideal state of being is freedom from desire, which can only be reached through mystical contemplation . Founded in 6th century BC .
 Founded in 1838 by Miki Nakayama, this movement believes that God created human beings in order that they would live joyous lives by helping and respecting others .
 Plato's belief system teaches that divinity permeates all objects and that although absolute goodness exists, it is only knowable through intuition rather than through human experience or reason . First espoused by Plato in the 4th century B.C.
 Founded in 1956 by Mehesh Prasad Varma (now known as Maharishi Mahesh Yogi) This Flindu movement teaches that people can reach an enlightened state through meditation . Meditation leads to increased intelligence, resistance to disease, and better job performance .
 It teaches that Urantia is an ancient name for the planet Earth, that Jesus is the sovereign of Earth's local universe . God the Universal Father is present in all universes, which are each guided by a different Son of God, says Jesus .
 From one point of view, these particles and antiparticles don't really exist because they are created from nothing and go back to nothing in a very short period of time . From one view of the theory, they are not really exist. They are created by creating from nothing .
 In nuclear fusion protons are changed into neutrons via the weak nuclear force . For example, in nuclear fusion protones are changed to neutrons by weak nuclear forces .
 The fnst-and so far only-President of the United States to have earned a Ph.D., Dr. Barack Obama is the only person in the U.S. to earn a PhD. Dr. Obama was the only President to earn his Ph.
 The exchange of the Work for other copyrighted works by means of digital fde-sharing or otherwise shall not be considered to be intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or private monetary compensation . There is no payment of any monetary compensation in connection with the exchange of copyrighted works .
 Licensor has secured all rights in the Work necessary to grant the license rights hereunder and to permit the lawful exercise of the rights granted hereunder without You having any obligation to pay any royalties, compulsory license fees, residuals or any other payments; ii. You have no obligation to
 Sections 1,2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 will survive any termination of this license . Sections 1-2,5, 6 and 7,7 will survive if termination of the license is terminated . The license will not be terminated .
 License will continue in full force and effect unless terminated as stated above . Licensor reserves the right to release the Work under different license terms or to stop distributing the Work .