 Americans were worried about Soviet communism, and people worried about Joseph Stalin . But they also had some disagreements because Americans were also worried about Stalin .
 After World War II, Russia was not allowed to be part of the international community . Russia is now a member of the Russian Federation .
 During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union were enemies . The U.S. and Russia were enemies of each other . The United States won't be able to rely on Russia for the future .
 "They fought a lot and had many accidents that could have resulted in a nuclear disaster," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I'm not sure what's going to happen, but I'm sure it will happen again"
 At the end of 1958, some people against Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista began to fight him . Read more about World War II The Cuban Revolution .
 By New Year’s Day 1959, these rebels had taken over and become the leaders of Cuba . By 1959, they had taken control of the country .
 They also did guerrilla warfare until finally, they won on New Year's Day 1959 . The U.S. Army won over the world for the first time .
 Castro entered Havana slowly, visiting towns, cities, and villages along the way where he gave speeches to the cheering crowds . Castro entered the Cuban capital slowly, touring the streets of Havana .
 Raul Castro and Ché Guevara were in charge of organizing people to find “war criminals” who tortured and killed people under the old regime . They would bring them to trial or execution so they could be found .
 When Fidel Castro took over in Cuba, he became friends with the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro was friends with Soviet Union when he took over Cuba .
 The U.S. imposed an embargo that hurt Cuba’s people for many years . The embargo was imposed by the United States . Cuba has been hit hard by the embargo for years .
 During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union had a terrible political rivalry . The U.S. and Soviet Union were engaged in a fierce political rivalry.
 They had debates on many issues, but they were mostly about politics and economics . They were generally about politics, economics and politics .
 Missile Major Richard Heyser, the American U-2 spy plane pilot, flew over Cuba on October 14th, 1962, and photographed a Soviet SS-4 missile being assembled .
 Photographer traveled to the island and shot hundreds of images of new projects in the Cuban countryside . He traveled to Cuba to take part in the project .
 Heyser was afraid he would be looked at as the man who started a war . As he recalled, he was afraid of looking like he started the war himself .
 CIA analysts saw many things that show the Soviets were making sites to launch missiles that could hit targets across the U.S. CIA analysts say the Soviets made sites for missile launches . CIA analysts: The Soviets were working on missile bases in the United States .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev did not like the number of nuclear weapons that were pointed at him . The Soviet leader did not want the nuclear weapons pointed at his Soviet Union .
 The United States and Cuba were not friends in the 1960s . Another factor was that the U.S. was not friends with Cuba in the 60s .
 President Kennedy had already attacked the island once, so Khrushchev and Castro built missiles to stop any more attacks from happening . President Kennedy also built missiles in order to prevent further attacks .
 President John F Kennedy met with a team of advisers known as Ex-Comm to decide how to respond to the missile threat . Kennedy's decision was made in response to the threat of a nuclear missile attack .
 Robert McNamara, the secretary of defense, brought three choices to President Kennedy . McNamara brought three candidates to the White House for president .
 The president could talk to Cuban Leader Fidel Castro and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . The United States might impose a naval quarantine on Cuba . The third choice was to use soldiers on the ground to destroy missile sites .
 Kennedy did not like the idea of an attack on the Soviet Union . This might kill Soviet people and cause a counterattack, Kennedy said .
 He thought quarantine was better because it would give time to negotiate with the Soviet Union about missiles . Quarantine would give the Soviets time to talk about missiles, he said .
 Because a blockade was considered an act of war, JFK avoided using the term . JFK and his advisors avoided using it because of the blockade .
 JFK said he had “unmistakable evidence” of a missile threat . JFK said in a speech transmitted by American television, JFK said that he had "unmistakenakable evidence" of a threat .
 The president said that the U.S. would not allow ships to take weapons to Cuba . The president also said he would not let ships take weapons into Cuba .
 A letter was delivered via the U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union, who also brought a message from John F Kennedy to Nikita Khrushchev . A letter of support was also delivered by the United States ambassador .
 Kennedy wrote back, telling Khrushchev that he started this crisis by sending missiles to Cuba . Kennedy said he started the crisis when he sent missiles to the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy got a letter from Khrushchev saying that Kennedy was mean to the Soviet Union . Kennedy got the letter saying he was a bad guy to the Soviets . Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 These ships were carrying supplies to Cuba, but they stopped because of what was happening . These ships stopped because they were trying to protect Cuba .
 The oil tanker Bucharest came into the United States quarantine zone . Nevertheless, the oil tanker called Bucharest is still in the U.S. quarantine zone.
 Two American warships, the USS Essex and the USS Gearing prepared to intercept it . The USS Essex was the first American ship to sail under attack in the past year .
 President Kennedy let it through because it was not carrying anything bad inside . But instead of stopping it like they should have done, he should have stopped it, he said . President Kennedy did not stop it .
 Khrushchev, however, did not want this and replied that he wanted to work with President Kennedy to make sure we didn’t end up in a thermonuclear war . President Kennedy said he wanted the war to avoid a nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 Rudolf Anderson was shot down and killed over Cuba on October 27, 1962 . Anderson was the first U-2 pilot to be shot down over Cuba in 1962 .
 The Soviet military wondered if it was taking pictures of weapons near America’s Guantanamo Bay Naval Base .
 The U-2 flew down to an island because it was hurt by shrapnel from the first missile that hit it . The U.2 flew to the island after it was hit by a missile fragment . The plane was hurt in the first strike but survived .
 The end of the Cuban Missle Crisis was a secret deal . The president sent his brother to meet with the Soviet ambassador and offer a deal . That night, the Cuban president's brother met with the ambassador and offered the deal .
 The Soviets promised to take their missiles out of Cuba, and in return, America would remove its missiles from Turkey and not invade Cuba . In exchange, America removed its missiles and not invaded Cuba, the Soviets agreed to take them out of Turkey .
 He wrote a letter to Kennedy saying that he would take his missiles away from Cuba . Kennedy said he would remove the missiles from Cuba, but it was too soon .
 One year later, the superpowers signed two treaties about nuclear weapons to make it less likely that something like this would happen again . One year after the attack, the world's nuclear powers signed a treaty to make nuclear weapons less likely to occur again .
 A hotline was created to talk between the Kremlin and the White House and the signing of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty was signed in 1998 . It was the first time a nuclear test was allowed to take place in the world .
 The crisis convinced the Soviets to increase their investment into an arsenal of missiles that could reach America from Soviet territory . The crisis was the result of an increase in investment into a missile arsenal .
 It made President Kennedy look good, and it also helped to get people's opinions of him better . It also helped get people’s opinions of President Kennedy better, he says .