 Two days earlier, a United States encounter in the Cold War had begun . U.S. military surveillance aircraft had taken hundreds of After President Kennedy photos .
 CIA analysts deciphered conclusive evidence plane findings . National defense officials briefed on the U-2 spy around the clock . CIA analysts, working national defense officials were briefed on U.2 spy .
 To avoid arousing public concern and tipping off the Soviets, the president maintained his official schedule, meeting periodically with advisors to discuss the status of events in Cuba .
 Kennedy decided to place a limited naval blockade around Cuba . Following many long and difficult meetings, Kennedy decided on a limited blockade .
 The aim of this “quarantine, as he called it, was to prevent the Soviets from bringing in more military supplies . The aim was to stop the Soviets bringing in DEPARTMENT of Defense more military .
 President Kennedy demanded the removal of the missiles already there and the destruction of the missile bases . He demanded that they be removed from the sites and destroyed .
 No one was sure how Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev would respond to the naval blockade and U.S. demands . "To the Brink" is made possible with generous generous donations to the film .
 The United States agreed to remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey . The agreement was secret for more than twenty-five years . The arms race was not over, and the arms race continued .
 Kennedy Library will mark the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy Library . H T T he Kennedy Library celebrates 50 years of service . Registration is required to register for Kennedy Library events .
 Ments, artifacts and photographs will also be featured will take place on October 14, from 12:30m. to in the display .
 Archives in Washington, DC from October 12, 2012 www.jfklibrary.org/Events-and-Awards/Forums . For more information and to register, visit Archives in D.C. for more information .
 The display current events while addressing national of this artwork reflects the deep standards of social studies and language arts . Conviction of both President and Students can win up to $10,000 .
 Profile in Courage is a unique way to speak to the human spirit in a and a link to a video . For complete guidelines, curriculum materials, visit the profile in Courage.com .
 The Pablo Picasso, Spanish Rape of the Sabine Women, 1963 Museum of Fine Arts, on display from October 4, 2012 . Deadline for submissions is January 5, 2013. The Picasso exhibit is on display at the Museum of Art in New York .
 Boston Juliana Cheney Edwards Collection, Tompkins through January 6, 2013, is on sale at Tompkin . The exhibit will be on display in New York City .
 Students consider some of the options discussed, what groups and which individuals supported each option, and the respective pros and cons of the alternatives . In this lesson plan, students consider what groups, which individuals support each option .
 Have students listen to Defense Secretary Robert McNamara’s 10/16/62 discussion of possible responses to USII.19 . Analyze the sources and, with a map of the the installation of missiles in Cuba, use a map to help students understand the situation .
 This National Security Archives site includes a number of primary sources, including audio clips of ExComm meetings . Have students listen to JFK’s and photographs of October 18, 1962 .
 The Miller Center of UVA, Kremlin Decision Making Project, has minutes from Soviet meetings from 1954-1964 . The project is based on minutes from meetings between 1954 and 1964 .
 An Activity on Presidential Campaigns and Elections Y our students can get a sense of the spirit and energy 2. Y . An activity on presidential campaigns and elections Y .
 Introduce students to The President’s Desk exhibit, and specifically the JFK campaign office in the Campaign . Students explore these and Button module activities .
 Show them JFK’s speech announcing his primary sources in order to gather information about candidacy . Identify the key people in the 1960 election and identify the steps .
 Distribute a Game Board to each student and explain White House Game Board . They make the “trip” with JFK that, as they explore the Campaign Button module, they will be making the trip to the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles . They explore the campaign button module .
 A group of students posed as a whole group of questions about the November 8th election . Assign either as homework or explore as a group posed on each square with information gleaned from the activity .
 The final question may be answered with students’ previous knowledge or by clicking on January 20, 1961 . For the complete lesson plan, visit www.jfklibrary.org/Education/
 For more historical background, visit the each square of the Game Board . The Game Board was created from scratch in 1973 .
 Ask them to write a summary of the Procedure ‘trip’ and comment on what portion of it was most memorable .
 The President’s Desk is an online exhibit on The President's Desk . The campaign button is a key component of the exhibit . Use the campaign button module to help you understand why you need it .
 The specific for grades 3 – 12, visit www.jfklibrary.org/Education/ sources . Students will need to complete the Game Board Teachers/Civic-Education-Programs-and-Materials .
 The John F Kennedy Presidential curriculum packets featuring biobreak the record Library and Museum will once graphical information about the for votes cast by again coordinate the National candidates . H are listed in the Sample Game Board Answers .
 This voter education Mock Election Day students will cast their vote for the candidate who best the Mock Election this in grades K-12 in state and national represents them . Students will cast participating in the program .
 Massachusetts teachers and campaigns, and emphasizes the their class’s results, and report them educators may register by emailing importance of voting and the to the Kennedy Library, which will their school's information .
 Teachers and Mock Election Day is Thursday, Thursday, November 1st . Over 90,000 Massachusetts students educators educators educators outside Massachusetts will be in attendance .
 Kennedy Library will distribute Election Election Election — an all-time record . The library will distribute a record number of copies of the mock-up .
 Shepard received the Distinguished RICK FRIEDMAN Service Medal from President Kennedy . Shepard was flown to Washington in a helicopter to receive the medal . Shepard is credited with saving his life in space .
 The Freedom 7 Mercury space capsule that carried the first American into space capsule is archived at the Kennedy Library . Shepard said “I was even space has landed at the JFK Library.” Shepard said in an oral history interview that he was “even even space”
 Watch live-streaming webcasts of Kennedy Library Forums at www.jfklibrary.org/webcast . Kennedy Library forums will be held at Kennedy Library in October .
 If you are an educator and want to attend, email jfkforums@nara.gov to reserve a place for you and/or your students .
 Martha Raddatz will analyze Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist leading up to the Cuban Missile the 2012 presidential Tom Oliphant will moderate . James Fallows, Ryan Ellen Fitzpatrick on a new book highlighting the most significant Historians, journalists and policy makers of the Kennedy presidency .
 Crossley, host of applied to the nuclear challenges WGBH’s daytime show, facing us today . Crossley: How it was resolved, and race with Callie how lessons learned can be applied .
 Moakley Public Speaking Institute students write controversial speeches on controversial issues and current events .
 The two-week intensive summer program serves students from Upward Bound and other enrichment programs in the Boston area . The program is offered to students in Boston area schools .
 Publication of the New Frontiers newsletter for educators is generously supported by Comcast .
 The Kennedy Library Department of Education and Public Programs offers free museum passes to teachers considering a field trip to the Library . Closed Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s Day .