 The pagination of the online version of this article is different from that of the print book . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport.com .
 Most serious incident of the Cold War regarded as the most serious . East and the democratic West came closer than ever to a mutual nuclear destruction .
 The U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement consisting of concessions on both parts . The crisis emerged on October 14, 1962, when a United States Air Force–operated U-2 aircraft produced detailed aerial photographs of Soviet missile installations in Cuba .
 The U-2 aircraft surveillance missions provided critical information to the U.S. administration in assessing the escalating situation . The U.2 aircraft were used to provide critical information on the situation .
 In June 1962, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro reached an agreement concerning the deployment of Soviet mediumand intermediate-range missiles armed with nuclear warheads to deter the U.S. government .
 Uneasy with the vicinity of a communist-ruled Cuba that developed friendly relations with the USSR, the U.S. administration repeatedly and unsuccessfully tried to remove Castro from power .
 Cuba tried assassination, counterrevolution, economic blockade, and military invasion, but all of these attempts failed . Cuba became the subject of intensive air reconnaissance, and Cuba was subject of air reconnaissance .
 Between October 1960 and September 1962, the U.S. government regularly sent U-2 surveillance flights over the island . The U.N. government sent U.2 U.K. surveillance flights to the island over the years .
 In August 1962, the U.S. government was already suspecting the deployment of Soviet weapons in Cuba, but several air reconnaissance missions in August and September failed to confirm such suspicions .
 In September, United States officials thought to redirect the satellites programmed to fly over the Soviet Union in order to cover Cuba’s territory, but the idea was rapidly abandoned as reprogramming the satellites would have caused important delays in gathering intelligence . The idea was quickly abandoned because reprogram
 The U.S. government continued to rely on the intelligence gathered by its Lockheed U-2 aircrafts . Single-engine planes are capable of flying at very high altitudes .
 The Soviet missiles arrived in Cuba in September 1962 in the utmost secrecy . They arrived in the country in the midst of the Cold War .
 Having a range of 2,000 to 4,500 kilometers, they could destroy the United States within minutes from launching . The U.S. could be within minutes of launching .
 President John F Kennedy and the Department of State were notified, and on October 16, an Executive Committee of the National Security Council was created .
 Among the members of the ExComm were Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell D Taylor, CIA Director John McCone, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, and National Security Advisor McGeorge
 The U.S. administration feared that a full-scale attack against Cuba could enable Khrushchev to respond with a nuclear strike or with a blockade against West Berlin .
 This term suggested that the U.S. government wanted to “quarantine” offensive weapons only, without intending to block all materials from entering Cuba, which might have been seen as an act of war . This term suggests that the United States wanted to "quarantine" offensive
 On October 22, President Kennedy declared that the construction of Soviet military bases in Cuba was an act of aggression that could not be tolerated, and announced the quarantine . President Kennedy appeared on television, declaring that the bases were being built .
 The next day, he signed the proclamation regarding the interdiction of the delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba . The proclamation was signed by President Obama .
 Khrushchev designated the U.S. blockade as “an act of aggression” and instructed the Soviet ships to ignore it . The Soviet ships were ordered to ignore the United States .
 During the entire crisis, the United States continued to gather intelligence via air surveillance . The U.S. continued to collect intelligence during the crisis .
 President Kennedy argued in an ExComm meeting that only an invasion could remove the Soviet missiles from Cuba . Kennedy argued that an invasion was necessary to remove the missiles . Kennedy: "Only an invasion of Cuba could remove Soviet missiles"
 The crisis continued to build up, aggravated by an incident that occurred on October 27, when a U.S. spy flight was shot down in Cuba and its pilot killed . The crisis was aggravated by the shooting down of a United States spy flight .
 Following this incident, the United States Department of Defense proposed a military attack against Cuba . Kennedy rejected the proposal, hoping for a diplomatic solution .
 The U.S. was ready to employ its plans of invading Cuba if negotiations failed . However, had the negotiations failed, the United States was ready .
 By October 26, more than 100,000 troops stood ready in Florida . 2 aircraft carriers were heading toward Cuba . 3,000 nuclear weapons were put on alert with a total of 7,000 megatons .
 In the meantime, the Soviets transmitted through various official and nonofficial channels their willingness to negotiate an agreement . The Soviets were able to reach an agreement with the U.S. government .
 Khrushchev declared that the Soviet Union was disposed to remove its weapons from Cuba under the supervision of the United Nations . The United States would remove its missiles from Turkey and Italy and would declare that it would not invade Cuba . The U.S. would remove the missiles, provided that
 The U.S. administration responded that it was ready to lift the blockade and to give assurances that it would not invade Cuba . But it said nothing about the removal of its missiles from Europe .
 Kennedy agreed to remove missiles from Europe in exchange for the USSR removing its weapons from Cuba . There is no consensus on whether the missiles were removed from Europe or Cuba .
 The United States aerial surveillance missions confirmed that the Soviets were removing missiles systems from Cuba . The U.S. aerial surveillance mission confirmed the Soviets had removed the missiles systems .
 On November 20, the United States administration announced the end of the blockade . The U.S. administration announced that the blockade had been lifted .
 The general perception was that Khrushchev had been defeated and embarrassed in this confrontation that he himself had initiated . The West and the East were shocked by the events in which they were confronted .
 China severely criticized Khrushchev for his Cuban ‘adventure’ and for giving in to U.S. demands . China severely criticizes Khruschev's Cuban "adventure" and for his giving in in-out Cuba .
 The crisis weakened the personal power of the Soviet leader, who, by the end of 1964, was removed from office . The crisis also weakened his personal power, and he was removed .
 The crisis consolidated the regime of Castro, which now had guaranties against a U.S. invasion . However, the crisis consolidated Castro's regime, which had guarantees against an invasion .
 The crisis proved that rapid, direct, and reliable communication between Moscow and Washington was necessary and of the utmost importance . In 1963, a Moscow-Washington hotline was established to ease tensions during international crises .
 Surveillance Satellites in War and Peace. Berlin, Germany, Springer, 2008. Berlin .