 U.S. government plotted assassination against my life by the United States government, says President Obama . Cuban exiles are plotting to form a revolt against my regime, he says .
 The U.S. that it would be easy to overthrow me from the power I gained 2 years ago and have held on greatly. The United States that it . would be easily overthrown, he says .
 Exiles were not able to get far into Cuba and create unrest as it was know that they would be coming . These exiles did not get far enough to create unrest in Cuba .
 From the intelligence that we have secured from . communications from . these exiles I was able to create . the defenses necessary to defend my rule, he says . He says .
 Tensions have been building with the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba . Cuba can join the super power against United States rule . With this failure now our relationships between us and the . Soviet Union can be secured .
 The United States has created images on nuclear warheads being placed on Cuba an have begun retaliation . The U.S. created images of the nuclear warheads to be placed on the island .
 If this is going to turn out to be the same as the assassination attempts then there is nothing to worry about . The assassination attempt is not the first attempt to assassinate a politician .
 The people have become uneasy with both the shipments of nuclear missiles and the actions of the U.S. Yet the people have been uneasy with the shipments, they say .
 I fear that my rule may be interrupted yet I must remember that i have the Soviet Union standing with me. I must also remember that I have the . Soviet Union stood with me, writes President Obama .
 Cuba has done well but the retaliation of the United States forces may cause even more damage.- October 28, 1962 . So far Cuba has . done well .
 President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev have discussed ways to defuse this entire situation with a nuclear crisis . Kennedy: "President Kennedy and Prime Minister Khruschev discussed ways of defusing the situation with the nuclear crisis"
 "The worst part about this is that I have not been involved in any way with the negotiations considering Cuba was in the middle of this the entire time," says President Obama . The worst part of the situation is that Cuba was involved in the negotiations .
 The Soviet Union better correct this with us with forms of reparations or this entire process has been an entire waste, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Cuba has not gone horribly wrong, but I hope that connections can still be made between us and Cuba can continue to become a competing power . So far things between us have not gone terribly wrong but we hope that we can still work together, he says .
 CDATA[ // Decorate any fastUI buttons on the page with a class of 'goog-button' if { JOT_decorateButtons; } // Fires delayed events. CDATA .