 From that point on, Americans and Soviets would express their hostilities through interference with other nations . The Soviets and Americans would use interference to express their grievances .
 Cuba, once a secure place to hold American goods, had become one that was not to be trusted for its adoption of communism . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the rise of communism in Cuba .
 The country would eventually let the Soviets keep nuclear weapons on their land, posing a threat to American security . The U.S. would eventually allow the Soviets to keep the weapons .
 Lack of communication between the two world powers was a key factor in what catalyzed the near end of the world . The lack of communication led to the near-collapse of the second world power .
 The close call made Americans realize how dangerous nuclear weapons were . The brush with death only increased the fear and misunderstanding between the two countries .
 Fidel Castro started his communist regime overthrowing the US-backed government and increasing Cuba’s involvement with Soviet Russia in 1959 . At the end of the Cuban revolution, in 1959, Fidel Castro overthrew the US government and increased Cuba's involvement with Russia .
 The shift from a laissez-faire to a communist economy tried the trust that the U.S. had with Cuba in terms of government . Cuba's communist economy was a key part of the United States' relationship with Cuba .
 The media did nothing to quell matters on both sides and used propaganda as a firebrand, encouraging relations to become increasingly more flagrant .
 Fidel Castro started to penalize U.S. trade while simultaneously favoring imports made by the Soviets . Castro also started to punish the United States trade while favoring imports from the Soviets.
 The U.S. responded to the unfavorable trade with the Soviets by putting an isolation order on Cuba . The United States responded by putting a quarantine or isolation order, on Cuba, in response to the trade .
 In 1961, the United States tried to overthrow Fidel Castro with disguised U.S. planes . This incident was known as the Bay of Pigs Incident .
 Attempts to repair relations between the two superpowers were promising at first . Chicago Sun Times: Relations between the U.S. and Russia have been rocky .
 On June 4th, 1962, Kennedy and Khrushchev met for the first time at the Vienna Summit to discuss major issues concerning the two countries . The summit was held at the end of June 4, 1962 .
 On August 10th Kennedy received intelligence that the Soviets planned to place mid-range missiles in nearby Cuba . However, on August 10, Kennedy was forced to accept the threat .
 The U-2, a surveillance plane, was able to fly over Cuba and find Soviet missile sites . Obtaining proper evidence by the end of the month, the U.S. used the plane to find the sites . The U.N. says the missile sites were found by
 A series of meetings were immediately held by Kennedy to make sure that the Soviets are not just using Cuba to put the U.S. in danger . Kennedy held meetings to ensure that the Soviet Union was not using Cuba as a weapon .
 The first was with Soviet Foreign Defense Minister Andrei Gromyko discussing the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba . The first time the two had met in Cuba was in 1959 .
 Ex-COMM, government advisors to President Kennedy, discusses the content of his future speeches . Ex-comm also discussed the U.S. should blockade Cuba . ExCOMM also discussed whether or not The United States should block Cuba .
 On October 21st, Kennedy declared a blockade on Cuba . Both parties seemed constantly on edge when it came to Cuba . The blockade was declared by Kennedy in 1962 .
 To protect from any possible attacks from the US, Russia wanted to dock its weapons in Cuba . Russia eventually wanted to protect from attacks from US .
 President Kennedy announced on TV that Cuba would be blockaded due to the potential threat to the balance of power caused by the placement of Russian weapons so close to the U.S. border .
 Doing such a thing could potentially ruin the trust of other Latin American countries . It could also ruin the reputation of Latin America .
 Walter Lippmann uttered the same concerns as Kennedy in a Paris conference . The writer was asked about the near nuclear disaster on November 29th .
 The clash was caused by cultural differences and misunderstandings between the global superpowers .
 Castro had wanted the weapons to fend off a “Yankee’s invasion, but he had to settle for an American pledge not to invade the island . The weapons were part of the agreement ending the missile crisis in Cuba .
 The experience of the world coming to the brink of destruction caused both the U.S. and the USSR to reconsider the use of nuclear weapons and increase communication between each other . Cuba remained a key player in the Cold War conflict .
 These changes would be the first steps toward diplomacy during the remainder of the Cold War years . The changes were made in the 1950s .
 The USA kept their part of the deal and dismantled their missiles in Turkey in November 1962, something kept secret by President Kennedy . President Kennedy kept it secret .
 Khrushchev backed down in the face of U.S. determination to go to war if necessary to prevent Cuba from targeting the mainland with nuclear warheads by removing the planes they planted on Cuban soil .
 The United States lifted the quarantine it had on Cuba . Not too long after, the U.S. lifted it on Cuba, Cuba . Cuba was the first nation to lift the quarantine .
 A telephone hotline was set up in 1963 to give the leaders of the U.S. and USSR instant contact if there was a crisis again . The hotline was established to give leaders of both countries instant contact .
 The Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed in 1963 and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968 . The nuclear test ban treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1963 . The N.N.A. nuclear tests have been banned since 1968 .
 In it the superpowers promised not to supply nuclear technology to other countries . In it they also promised to stop supplying nuclear technology .
 Even after Kennedy’s presidency, in 1972, President Nixon and Soviet President Brezhnev signed the SALT I treaty . The treaty was an agreement to stop the manufacturing of nuclear weapons .
 Reagan continued to contain the communist Central American nations . Reagan continued that mission of containing the communist nations .
 Fidel Castro was furious after learning of the deal made between the U.S. and the Soviets . However, the United States and USSR attempting to mend the policies did not sway Cuba .
 Castro remained in power even as the United States continued to boycott Cuba economically and culturally . Though cut off by the Soviets, Castro remained firmly in power in Cuba . Castro's Cuban government was largely dominated by the Soviet Union .
 Cuba remained an important area for Communists throughout the Cold War . Cuba was an important part of the Cuban state during the 1950s and 1960s .
 Americans would still face tensions with Cuba in the decades that followed . Despite slightly improving relations with the Soviet Union and being more tactful with foreign relations, Americans still faced tensions with the country .
 Cuban-American relations did not improve during the Cold War with an embargo still placed on the island by the US .
 This article has been made free for everyone, thanks to Medium Members . For more info about the coronavirus, see cdc.gov .
 For more information on the novel coronavirus and Covid-19, visit cdc.gov.gov."","",""markups"":},""unbound"
 "Medium Membership with setup fee" is billed monthly . "Unlimited access to the best and brightest stories on Medium"
 The gift includes unlimited access to the best of the best stories on Medium . Membership billed annually .
 Gift codes can be redeemed at medium.com\u002Fredeem .
 "Medium Membership" is a membership membership membership . The membership costs $1.99 per month .
 Membership billed annually . Membership includes unlimited access to the best of the best and brightest stories .
 Membership billed monthly . Membership includes unlimited access to the best and brightest stories on Medium .
 "Medium Membership" is billed annually . The membership includes unlimited access to the best stories on Medium .
 "Medium Membership" is a membership membership membership . The membership is billed monthly and costs $1,500 a year .
 Chicago Sun Times: "Trying to repair relations between the two superpowers were promising at first"
 On October 21st, Kennedy declared a blockade on Cuba . "With the increase in destructive militarization for both Russia and the United States, both parties seemed constantly on edge when it came to Cuba."
 "The experience of the world coming to the brink of destruction caused both the United States and the USSR to reconsider the use of nuclear weapons . Cuba remained a key player in the Cold War conflict and it remained communist."
 The U.S. and USSR attempting to mend the policies and relations did not sway Cuba . Fidel Castro was furious when he learned of the deal .
 "Encyclopaedia Britannica Online,v.v. 2020. Accessed March 27, 2020. http://www.jenn.org/encyclopaia Britannica .