 Eisenhower’s heir changes for the U.S. saw big changes in the years after World War II . He campaigned for President Eisenhower . Eisenhower campaigned for the country .
 A generation apparent2, criticizing of Americans came home and after some his opponent’s lack of initial problems, the economy steadily grew . experience. experience .
 Our status as a superpower came with the Kennedy, a young responsibility of stopping the spread of senator from Richard Nixon communism around the globe .
 As a result, Massachusetts. we went to war in Korea and by the end of Kennedy’s charm and the 1950s we were edging closer to another enthusiastic demeanor won over many war in Vietnam. We went to Korea .
 Kennedy’s religious background did not really come into play as would continue in the turbulent 1960s . As a Catholic, Kennedy was not considered a viable candidate for president .
 Nixon insisted that his campaign not focus on Kennedy’s The New Frontier religion . Nixon Lesson 1 – insisted that he would not run for president in the 1960s . Lesson 2: ‘Don’t run for the president’
 A new change in Washington ushered in a spirit of new the first televised debate possibilities a ""Camelot1 Era” that between presidential sadly ended in tragedy . What is unique about this election is that it marked Washington ushered .
 The role of television in electing a Election of 1960 president took on great importance . The 22nd amendment limited continues to this day .
 Both candidates were well prepared and did meant that a new president would certainly good jobs. This both candidates are well prepared. This means that they will certainly be able to do good jobs .
 Kennedy turned out to be another close one and the appeared calm and assuring . Kennedy appeared calm, assuring. Kennedy was a close friend of the president .
 Nixon's appearance signaled that the country was ready to haggard and his makeup was not good . Nixon looked result signaled that country was . ready to . move toward a new, youthful direction .
 The Turbulent Sixties 2 time and place, to friend and foe alike alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans – born in this century, tempered by war, disciplined by peace, proud of our ancient heritage – .
 At age 43, he became the youngest man elected president known as the “New Frontier” at age 43 . He was the first Catholic to hold that office .
 JFK appointed his brother, Robert Kennedy to the President Kennedy position of Attorney Kennedy . Kennedy came from a wealthy General in his Massachusetts family . Kennedy was appointed Attorney Kennedy by his brother Robert Kennedy .
 Robert Kennedy built his wealth in the stock played an important market before the 1929 crash . Robert Kennedy's wealth came from the stock market . He built his fortune in the 1920s and 1930s .
 JFK had been role in JFK’s decision appointed the Chairman of the Securities making throughout Attorney General and Exchange his presidency . He had been . appointed the chairman of the securities making throughout his presidency.
 The that a new object of this generation of . organization was to bring Americans aid to the neediest was looking underdeveloped toward a new America . The that new object . of this . generation of organizations was to . bring Americans help to the . neediest .
 Ask what you can do to help the people of interested can do for your country . Ask your country's citizens what you want to do for you .
 To help promote a better 1961 at a location called The Bay of Pigs . Let countries and areas in meeting the word go forth with this their needs for trained workers; Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 3 .
 Cuban exiles was trained to lead a counter-revolution against Castro . They were trained to help promote a better revolution against the Castro regime . A group of the part of the . part of . the . peoples served .
 The understanding of other peoples on information gathered by the CIA and the the the part of Americans. plan it ultimately put forth was flawed. Unfortunately, the understanding of others on the CIA. plan was flawed .
 When it came to foreign affairs, large amount of popular resistance among Kennedy had some hard lessons to learn . The agency had miscalculated that there was a huge public opposition to foreign policy .
 Eisenhower's commitment to South Vietnam embarrassed by the incident . Kennedy by sending more Americans to serve as advisors accepted full responsibility for the failure .
 President Obama's first test in foreign affairs came in Cuba and it was one in which he would admit failure . But his first test was in Cuba, which he admitted failure .
 By January 1961 the new Cuban leader, Fidel Castro had embraced communism . The Bay of Pigs was the first Cuban invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba before leaving office . Before leaving office, President Eisenhower broke ties with Cuba .
 Eisenhower had been planning an Khrushchev. invasion of Cuba by a force of anti-Castro Cubans . The Central Cuban dictator Fidel Castro receives a Intelligence Agency .
 The two had Castro’s new ties met in Vienna, Austria in June 1961 and to the Soviet Khrushchev came away from the meeting Union, the CIA felt believing that Kennedy was overmatched in that the plan had to the area of diplomacy .
 Khrushchev would learn that this was not quickly, before the case by the fall of 1962 . The world and go into effect would go to effect Khrushchevitch .
 We need to go back to the concept of Soviet weapons the Cold War and the growing nuclear threat Cuban poster warning of to understand what happens next . Castro could be supplied with nuclear weapons .
 President Soviet Union felt threatened by the growing Kennedy was United States nuclear arsenal placed in Western Europe . President Kennedy was informed of the plan and ultimately gave his Europe Europe an invasion .
 The invasion took place in April any future war would undoubtedly involve nuclear weapons and missile technology . Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 4 exposed Soviet cities .
 The Soviets concentrated on improving their nuclear arsenal and balancing the tables by exposing American cities to the same nuclear annihilation . In response to this, the Soviets concentrated .
 The Bay of Pigs incident drove a larger wedge between Cuba and the U.S. The incident was a major incident in Cuba's relationship with the United States . The incident is believed to have happened in 1961 .
 Castro leaned more upon the Soviets for aid, it was clear that the island could be used as a strategic base to benefit the Soviet Union . The island could also be used by the Soviets to benefit them .
 Khrushchev’s belief that Kennedy was President Kennedy goes on television to inform diplomatically weak, led the Soviets to begin Americans of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . setting up bases for intermediate range nuclear missiles . The Soviets believed Kennedy was the President Kennedy .
 On October 14, 1962, a U2 took nearing the United States quarantine zone near photographs of the Soviet bases being Cuba . On October 27, the Soviet ships were were were on Cuban soil .
 Kennedy was faced with U.S. would not invade Cuba or support any a huge crisis and had to do something about future anti-Castro invasion . Kennedy faced with . United States would not . invade Cuba .
 Kennedy met with members of the National Security Council to weigh his options . He met with his brother Robert Kennedy to inform the Security Council . Kennedy is weighing his options and met with the council members .
 The the Soviets that he would pull the U.S. from Turkey were reduced to either a full-scale missiles out of Turkey . The choice was between the Soviets and the United States . The U.N. had to pull the missiles from Turkey .
 On October 28, the invasion of Cuba or a naval blockade Soviet ships turned around . The crisis combined with the threat of attacking Soviet ships trying to deliver the missiles to Cuba . The invasion or naval blockade of Cuba turned around and the crisis continued .
 The possibility that this could develop into a major nuclear conflict, the beginning of World War III, was very real, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The possibility of a nuclear war was "very real," he says .
 Kennedy went on television to address the American public on October 22 . Kennedy spoke to the U.S. public for the first time since his death .
 Kennedy condemned the Soviets for their actions . The U.S. ambassador to the United Nations called upon the Soviets to admit they had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy claiming that the Soviets were only interested in peace and preventing any U.S. invasion of their Cuban ally . Kennedy: "I'm sure they're not going to invade Cuba, but they're going to stop it"
 Khrushchev wanted the U.S. to pull their intermediate-range nuclear missiles out of Turkey . He wanted to pull them out of the country, but they had already pulled them out .
 Kennedy gained the reputation of standing up to Khrushchev but both sides initially considered the compromise a failure . The compromise was considered a failure by both sides .
 A phone line was set up between the White House and the Kremlin to improve communications . To improve communications in the future, a phone line is set up .
 Hopefully with this form of instant communication, a potential nuclear misunderstanding could be avoided . The world's first nuclear communication system is being used to communicate with the world .
 President Kennedy’s limousine moments before his assassination in Dallas . President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Assassination in Dallas first shot believed to have struck the first shot . By the end of 1963, President president as well as Governor Connally as well .
 The second shot struck the president in the the the following year . Kennedy was preparing to run for reelection when he was struck .
 First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy was position in world affairs during the Cuban Missile Crisis . Cuban missile fragments were fragments of skull and brain fragments .
 The motorcade sped off to Parkland made speech at the Berlin Wall condemning hospital where the president’s death was the Communist government of East officially announced at 1:38m. The motorcadcade sped away to Parklands made speech .
 A massive manhunt began escaping to West Berlin and the freedom immediately . The wall was built in 1961 to essentially keep East Berliners from escaping from the city .
 Officer Tippit had stopped Oswald walking down the street for questioning . Texas had a state that he had questioning narrowly won in the 1960 election .
 Kennedy shot the officer came to Dallas on November 22, 1963 with several times, wife, Jacqueline . Kennedy's wife Jacqueline was in Dallas with him at the time of the shooting .
 He rode in a convertible killing him limousine with the top down alongside instantly . The driver was killed instantly in the accident .
 Texas governor John Connally and his wife, was later arrested . Nellie. Oswald was later found to have been shot dead in Texas .
 The presidential motorcade traveled in a movie theater through downtown Dallas on its way to the and was charged Dallas Trade Mart where Kennedy was to deliver a speech . At about 12:30m.
 At least two shots rang out at the scene of the assassination . It was involvement in the assassination then that at least two gunshots rang out. It was involved in the shooting, the police said . The suspect was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 Oswald was transferred to a nearby jail on November 24, 1963 . Two days later, Oswald was being transferred to nearby jail . Oswald was the last person to be transferred to jail .
 Oswald was being moved from Dallas police headquarters . Reporters gathered in the basement garage of Dallas Police headquarters as Oswald was moved . Oswald had been in Dallas for two decades .
 Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby walked up to Oswald and shot him point-blank in the stomach . Ruby was captured on live television shooting Oswald in Dallas nightclub .
 Oswald was taken to Parkland Hospital where he was declared dead . Oswald was later declared dead in a nearby hospital . Oswald had been in a coma for more than 24 hours .
 Ruby had ties to organized crime but had friends in the Dallas Police Department . Ruby had friends with the Dallas police department . Ruby was arrested in connection with organized crime in Dallas .
 Ruby entered of the Lincoln Memorial on August 28, 1963 . Martin Luther King, Jr. greets marchers on the steps of the steps while awaiting his new trial, Ruby .
 Parkland Hospital for pneumonia, later died at the famous hospital in January 1967 .
 Civil Rights continues to be a focal point for conspiracy theories . The Kennedy assassination continues to have a negative impact on the civil rights movement .
 President Johnson ordered the formation of the Warren Commission to investigate the that would grow in the 1960s . The Warren Commission was formed in the 1950s to look into the civil rights movement .
 The Civil Rights Movement that had acted alone in the assassination of began in the mid-1950s gained momentum President Kennedy in the 1960s . The commission, named after Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren, concluded in September 1964 that Oswald acted alone .
 During the Kennedy administration, civil rights reformers pushed the government to right the wrongs of decades past . The Kennedy administration pushed for civil rights reforms during the Kennedy era .
 The American South became a battleground for change as the Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 7 conservative registering for classes . Chapter 24: The American Sixties was the first chapter of the American South to be published .
 National bigotry of old used Guardsmen, under orders from President every means . possible to keep African Americans possible . That same month in Mississippi, civil from gaining social, rights leader Medgar Evers was shot to death in his driveway of political equality .
 Martin of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Luther King, Jr., the Birmingham, killing four black Sunday leader of the school children . Martin killed four black children in the shooting . Martin was the leader of a church in Birmingham, Alabama .
 The bodies of three Alabama bus civil rights workers were discovered a year ago . Nearly a year later in Montgomery, Philadelphia, Mississippi, the bodies were discovered .
 Dr. Martin had believed that law enforcement officials may have played a role in the killing of Dr. Luther King in the Birmingham Jail . Martin was a leader of the Civil Rights movement in the 1950s and '60s .
 He advocated civil disobedience national stage in his march on Washington, and nonviolent protest, in his March on Washington march .
 Americans around the country were horrified will be able to sit down to watch on television as Birmingham police together at a table of officers turned powerful fire hoses and brotherhood . I over its injustice, is in reality have a dream that one day expressing the highest on the red hills of Georgia
 I have a dream police dogs on peaceful demonstrators. that one day even the state of Mississippi will be transformed into an oasis of Conservative white backlash freedom and justice . Such images alerted people around the Mississippi, a state sweltering world to the plight of blacks struggling .
 The march on Washington was designed to pressure Congress into action on civil rights 1. 1963 was a bad year for civil rights legislation .
 President Barack Obama was assassinated in June 2012 . Obama was the first president to be assassinated in the country since leaving office in 2009 .
 Martin Luther King said that someone who breaks a law “that conscience tells him is unjust” is . Two key civil rights landmarks really “expressing the highest respect for followed in 1964,” followed .
 Southern states had used poll taxes to keep blacks from voting since the end of Lesson 3 – Reconstruction in the 1870s . Poll taxes were used to keep black voters from voting .
 The other Conflict in Vietnam landmark was the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The other major act of civil rights in Vietnam came from the US government in 1964 .
 President Johnson signed it into law on July 3, 1964 . President Johnson was focused on containing Soviet Union . The law was signed in 1964 .
 The U.S. racial discrimination in public facilities, employment, voting registration and within any federally funded program. strategy turned to Southeast Asia. Strategy turned to Asia. The strategy is based on Southeast Asia .
 President Kennedy’s administration increased the amount of advisors and aid . President Kennedy's administration also increased the number of advisors to the country .
 President Kennedy was frustrated by the South Vietnamese leader Ngo Dinh Diem . President Kennedy had been frustrated by Diem's refusal to negotiate a deal with the South Vietnam leader .
 Diem had become a dictator and was taking advantage of U.S. support, he says . Diem was a dictator, he said. Diem took advantage of United States support.
 He instituted a violent crackdown on Buddhist monks who had protested his policies . The monk's death was one of a series of violent clashes with the government .
 To demonstrate this to the rest of the world, several monks practiced self-immolation . President Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. & members of world, embarrassing the U.S. for its support Congress look on of such a dictator. Congress look as on. Congress looks on .
 The resolution before Kennedy’s gave President assassination . just a few weeks The resolution . before Kennedy's . assassination gave President Kennedy assassination .
 Johnson felt that in defending the the the U.S. freedom of South had to support Vietnam . President Kennedy had the power “to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force,” Johnson said .
 A Buddhist monk sets himself on fire to protest the in South Vietnam given LBJ the policies of South in order to stop authority to send Vietnamese dictator Ngo Dinh Diem the spread of U.S. troops to fight the communists in communism in Vietnam .
 Increasing military personnel in Southeast Asia would personnel was seen as the logical way to do . this. this. would personnel . increase . increase in Southeast Asian military personnel seen as a way to increase military personnel .
 By the end of July 1964, President Johnson had increased the number of American military advisors to 21,000 .
 Two U.S. Navy destroyers were in the waters off the coast of North Vietnam on August 2, 1964 . The Gulf of Tonkin Incident was the first time the two destroyers had been involved in the incident .
 Two days later a B-52 bomber drops bombs over North Vietnam . Unprovoked attack was completely unprovoked . The bomber was designed to carry nuclear bombs .
 The year 1965 saw the U.S. President Johnson go on television Vietnam . President Johnson was seeking to take a far more active role in the war in reelection in November .
 The goal of U.S. foreign policy and informed Americans of the attacks was to prevent the attacks, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The goal of United States foreign policy is to prevent terrorism," he says .
 His regarding Vietnam was originally to support Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara a pro-democratic government . His Vietnam mission was originally intended to support the government .
 North Vietnam wanted a united North Vietnam in the early 1960s . The country was free from foreign advisors and supplies influence or control .
 By 1965, concept that appealed to the Vietnamese than the U.S. became the primary force in the prospect of a so-called actual fighting of the war . The United States became the main force in prospect of actual fighting .
 At the beginning of the year, there were south. less than 25,000 troops in Vietnam .
 The United States strategy was to stop the flow of communist guerillas known as Let’s remember the the the Viet Cong, from moving into . The goal was to defeat the communists Ho Chi Minh – leader of South Vietnam from the . north . in Vietnam .
 Operation Rolling Thunder was a series of bombing raids on targets in North Vietnam . The U.S. population was unable to produce its own own weaponry . The bombing raids were relatively easy to defeat a Rolling Thunder campaign .
 The U.S. intended to stop re-supply of the Viet Cong, but that was not the case . The United States did not adequately and force the North Vietnamese to the understand the situation and as a result negotiating table .
 B-52 bombers began bombing the port of American military in June 1966 . This bombing was found itself in a war that it could not win stepped up in 1966 .
 French had ruled Vietnam as a colony for use guerilla tactics . Instead of a colony, they were forced to rely on guerillas tactics .
 China had ruled there for August of 1966, and Johnson had authorized it for hundreds of years . By even further, China had been allowed to rule there for decades .
 The saw no great difference in the United States. The cost of the war was going up considerably. The U.S. saw no difference .
 You must also remember that the government in South Vietnam was more interested in remaining in power than in the rights of the people they were supposed to be protecting . Remember that the South Vietnam government was more .
 A South Vietnamese police chief executes a Viet Cong suspect in the street . Police chief executed the suspect in a Vietnamese street .
 Images like these caused Americans back home to protest the U.S. military action in Vietnam . Images like this caused Americans to protest United States military action .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson personnel going to Vietnam increased . Protests against the had to follow in the footsteps of an war .
 He wanted to Vietnamese people should decide their own make significant changes to help fate and that U.S. soldiers should not be Americans, but the Vietnam War risking their lives half-way around the world would continue to frustrate him .
 The draft process was also unfair, since one could be exempt from the draft by going to college . One could go to college instead of going to the draft, and one could not be drafted .
 Critics of the war argued Johnson had come to Washington in 1937 as a New Deal Democrat from Texas . Critics said he was supporting the government we were supporting as a Democrat .
 By 1954 he was the Democratic Majority government caused the number of war leaders in the Senate . He was the President of the United States during Vietnam War .
 By the end of the . decade the anti-war movement became a huge political force in the U.S. The anti . war movement was a major political force during the 1960s .
 The role of this group in determining the assassination was crucial to the assassination . It was a difficult time after .
 LBJ sworn in as outcome of the war still debated today . LBJ was sworn in on Air Force One next to a shaken Jacqueline Kennedy . JFK was the president of the United States during the war .
 He tried to honor JFK’s legacy but had difficulty getting support for his own ideas . ‘I’m not sure how much of his legacy will be remembered,’ he said .
 He clashed with Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 12 outlined his plan, which was to be an extension of FDR’s New Deal and Truman’�s Fair Deal . The plan was intended to be a continuation of the New Deal .
 He wanted to focus on helping those Americans who could not help themselves . He said he wanted to help those who were not able to help themselves.
 The Great Society was supposed to provide assistance to the neediest of American Society . It was meant to help those in need of assistance, but it has never happened .
 LBJ’s Great Society plan was made up of a number of different government programs . LBJ's Great Society was made of a variety of government programs, including the Great Depression .
 Government welfare programs were designed to lower the number of Americans living below the poverty line . This meant the creation of a number of government welfare programs . The welfare programs are designed to help reduce the poverty rate .
 Lyndon B Johnson takes the oath of office on • Job Corps – a vocational training board Air Force One after the assassination of President Kennedy . Job Corps was a program aimed at disadvantaged President Kennedy youth .
 In 1964 he ran on his own for a full term as • VISTA (Volunteers in Service to president) But in 1964 income preschool children he ran for the first time as president .
 Domestic version of JFK’s Peace Corps, provided educational & vocational training for poor people . America – domestic version of the Peace Corps – provided educational and vocational training .
 LBJ won 61% of the popular up a large vote and carried a huge mandate into his percentage of first full term as president . LBJ was elected president of the United States in 1964 .
 LBJ’s presidency program that was added to the Social was to be what he called the Great Society . Medicare – medical insurance – was the centerpiece of the Social Security program .
 One who demonstrates an actively aggressive or combative attitude, as in an argument, is actively aggressive . One of the most aggressive people in the world is a person with an aggressive attitude .
 13 are receiving social security benefits. injured, 4000 people arrested and over $100 . Today it covers approximately 41 million in property damage. Today it covered approximately 41. million Americans.
 Militant African-Americans attack police cars helping poor Americans without health care and other vehicles after the shooting of a coverage: black man during a police chase .
 Medicaid – program funded by Stokely Carmichael, leader of the Student governments to provide health Non-Violent Coordinating Committee insurance for people with low incomes . Rioters chant “Black Power” a phrase coined by Carmichael . Medicaid is funded by managed by the federal and
 Carmichael is blamed by Atlanta’s mayor for inciting the riot . Today, approximately 43 million people are estimated to have been involved in the riot in Atlanta .
 Critics of Johnson’s Great Society Police officers arrest 82 people drinking have complained that the program did not illegally at a bar on 12th Street on Detroit's West Side .
 Statistics show that the percentage of breaking windows in a nearby department Americans living below the poverty line store are breaking windows . However, some arrested were black people, but some were not black .
 Rioting lasts over five days despite dropped nearly 10% as a result of this the presence of National Guard troops. program. program . Rioting lasted five days, despite drop of 10% in five days .
 The 1960s is also a decade to form the National Advisory Commission . The rioting caused President Johnson to become president . The commission was formed in the wake of the riots .
 Commission reported that the United States destruction of property in a number of U.S. cities was “moving toward two societies, one cities.” In February 1968 this took place, resulting in loss of life and loss of property, commission reported . Commission reported .
 Most of these riots were sparked by black, one white, separate and unequal . The amount of racial tension in certain areas was found to be the highest in the history of riots .
 1968 would and is allegedly beaten by turn out to be another year of police officers in the Watts major rioting . As we’ll learn arrested for drunken driving further along, 1968 would also be a year of alleged beatings .
 The allegations of police brutality touch off six days of rioting in predominantly African areas . Police officers arrest a black protestor .
 In 1967 this amendment was ratified, making clear the order of case . The first is the 1966 Miranda Arizona ratified . In 1967, Arizona ratified the amendment .
 The Supreme Court ruled succession to the office of 5-4 that a suspect must be president . The case was overturned by the Supreme Court .
 The office of including the right to have a vice president remained vacant lawyer present, prior to if that person moved up to the questioning by the police . Prior to passage of the amendment, this amendment, the office of . including the . right to . the right of a . vice president
 This presidency due to the death of the president was a result of an appeal by a the president . This presidency is due to be a follow-up to an appeal from the president of the country .
 Ernesto Miranda has been convicted of rape in Arizona . President would be nominated for him . Miranda is a former vice-presidential nominee for President Obama .
 Lawyers by the president and win argued that he was denied his confirmation with a majority 5th Amendment right when confessing to his vote of both houses of Congress crime .
 President Wilson’s term served as the inspiration for this part . The last years of President Woodrow was the inspiration .
 If the president is unable to serve, • You have the right to remain the vice president . Vice president will assume the duties of silent and refuse to answer the president until he is able to resume questions . The vice president will be silent .
 If the vice president and a majority of the cabinet believe that the used against you in a court of president is unable to serve, then the vice law . Anything you do say may be a majority  of the Cabinet believe that . that . may be used . against you if a majority
 You have the right to consult an way the office of president will be occupied if attorney before speaking to the a president undergoes surgery or should police and to have an attorney have some sort of illness that could cause present during questioning now him or her to be incapacitated . This • You
 Name a Great Society program, explain attorney present you will still what it does and why it was so important. 2. have the right to stop answering 2. Have the right not to answer questions about Great Society programs. Name a program that is part of the Great Society. name a
 President Johnson’s National at any time until you talk to an Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders attorney . What did President Johnson's National National? What did he say? "I don't believe it"
 15 Lesson 5 – so that all Vietnamese could celebrate but 1968 was different . Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 15 Lessons: Vietnam's '60s was a period of turmoil .
 The Viet Cong launched attacks in Main Idea: So many bad things almost every South Vietnamese city . A Very Bad Year. A very Bad Year .
 Most of these attacks were defeated quickly by happened in 1968 that it deserves U.S. and South Vietnamese forces study all by itself . Most of the attacks were so quickly defeated quickly that they deserve a lot of study .
 Death and mayhem are two words showed communist forces attacking the U.S. that could describe 1968 . 1968 was a year of chaos in the United States .
 The ancient represented a turning point for the United capital city of Hue . Hue was taken over by States. The ancient city was taken to Hue by States .
 The reality of the war in Vietnam hit communist forces home in the United States . Americans back home were shocked by the clear that the war wasn't as close to over as boldness of the attack and protests against the government had been predicting .
 Many Americans who had backed the war were horrified that a grief and violence was caused by assassinations of key political figures led to war .
 The campaign for nearly defeated enemy could still wage a president showed how our country was massive attack like this . The campaign showed how the country was still at risk of being attacked .
 Commanding American general in Vietnam had claimed he “could see the light at the and the opposite resulted . They launched the attack in Vietnam, hoping to spark support from within .
 The United States forces end of the tunnel” regarding the eventual killed or captured many of the communists . When the fighting was over nearly 50,000 forces in the war. Nearly 50,00 U.S. forces in total were involved in the conflict .
 The claim that the war communists were dead with another 6,000 was nearly over was shattered in January captured . The claim was shattered by the capture of captured communists in January .
 Their ability to continue their 1968 as the Viet Cong and North guerilla efforts was damaged severely . The North and Viet Cong guerillas were severely damaged by the loss of their ability to fight for their cause .
 Vietnamese launched a massive attack the impact of their attacks swayed American during the Vietnamese New Year public opinion and resulted in the celebration of Tet . The impact of the attack swayed American public opinion .
 The United States would begin lowering the number of troops in Vietnam as protests at home increased . Ultimately, the U.S. would begin lower the numbers of troops as protests increased .
 The popularity of President Johnson had hit a low point after the Tet Offensive . Johnson will not run for president in the U.S.
 In March, Minnesota Senator Eugene McCarthy came in a close second to the American soldiers pinned down by Viet Cong and president in the New Hampshire Democratic North Vietnamese forces .
 He will win the forever be Democratic remembered nomination nomination . By the end of the month, human Johnson rights will be human rights . 16 expected to win the Democratic nomination .
 Dr. King’s shocked the nation when to the civil he went on rights President Johnson announced television and movement he will not run for president in 1968 . Dr. Johnson said he would will be Dr. Martin Luther King's successor in the White House .
 King supporters point in not seeking or remembered the direction of the where the accept his forever and shot that killed Martin Luther party’s nomination for another term as he is president of the United States. King was fired .
 Johnson felt unable to pursue his goals for Americans. the Great Society at the expense of the country’s deepening conflict in Vietnam. The Vietnam War is still raging .
 A number of Democratic candidates After President Johnson pulled out of surfaced upon Johnson’s withdrawal . Robert F Kennedy was a candidate for President Kennedy .
 Hubert H Humphrey of Kennedy became the front-runner in the 1960s . Humphrey was the vice president of the Kennedy administration . His the presidential campaign, Robert F. Kennedy was the candidate for the nomination .
 1968 would not be a very good year for him the war in Vietnam, aiding the urban poor and bringing an end to racial violence and discrimination . Unfortunately and ran a campaign that focused on ending 1968 would be a bad year for the president .
 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was in Memphis, Tennessee to support a in South Dakota and sanitation workers strike . King had just won two big Democratic primaries in the state of South Dakota . King was in support of the South Dakota sanitation workers' strike .
 King stepped out early morning hours on to the balcony of his hotel and was shot of June 5, he gave a in the neck . King was shot in the head in the early hours of that morning .
 An escaped convict by the name Ambassador Hotel in of James Earl Ray was convicted of King’s Los Angeles, assassination . The Ambassador Hotel was named Ambassador Hotel by the convicted convict .
 After the rest of his life to withdraw his plea and deliver the get a new trial, he was sentenced to life in prison . He was found guilty of sexual assault and sexual assault in 2008 .
 King’s assassination led to a wave of to greet some riots in more than 60 cities across the country . It never happened. King walked through the kitchen to greet his supporters .
 Sirhan Sirhan fired two shots that demonstrators from around the country had killed Robert Kennedy . King’s fundamental belief in nonviolence is shown by the Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 17 .
 Daley refused to allow permits for the King, shocked the country . The decision shocked Daley and other protestors .
 The mayor sent in riot police to subdue the crowds . Riot police were called in after the protests continued regardless of the mayor's intervention .
 The chaos and violence surrounding the convention left many Americans disillusioned with the Democrats . Many Americans were left disillusioned by the chaos surrounding the Democratic convention .
 In August the Democrats held their George Wallace was Independent nominating convention in Chicago, Illinois . The party was divided after the dropping out governor of Alabama . The Democratic candidate was George Wallace, the Democratic Candidate George Wallace .
 Wallace was upset with the of Robert Kennedy . Wallace of President Johnson and the assassination . Wallace said he was upset that Robert Kennedy was assassinated .
 McCarthy decided to run as a third-party candidate . McCarthy campaigned on ending the candidate for president . McCarthy ran as a candidate for the Democratic Party in 1964 .
 The bigger news government on seemed to be desegregation. happening outside . happening outside Democratic Candidate Republican Candidate of the convention .
 The Richard Nixon Hubert Humphrey Anti-war Republicans, Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties, Chapter 18, ran former California Senator and former Vice President Richard Nixon . Chapter 24: The Nixon and Humphrey antiwar Republicans .
 Nixon ran a “law-and-order” campaigned to appeal to Americans who were piece of loose-leaf paper. shocked and outraged by the violence .
 Even though the Tet Offensive was a was close but Nixon won and the disaster for the communists, how did this Republicans took control of the White House fundamentally change the view of the Vietnam War?
 Wallace winning 4 key southern states, Nixon easily had enough electoral votes to win the election . Wallace won 4 key Southern states . Wallace's victory was enough to secure the election in 1968 .
 The Eagle Has Landed: Man Walks On the Moon . President Kennedy had challenged During the election of 1968, Nixon the country in his inauguration speech in had promised “peace with honor” regarding 1961to put a man on the moon .
 Humphrey alleged he planned to kill President Nixon in 1969 . That challenge was met on July 21, 1969, when he said he wanted to kill the president .
 The National Aeronautics and that Nixon must have a “secret plan” to end Space Administration had spent the the war. The National A&E had spent most of the war on the war .
 Nixon years following Kennedy’s challenge by presented the “Nixon Doctrine” – a policy of building rockets and spacecraft with the turning over the main fighting of the Vietnam ultimate goal of landing on the moon .
 The Apollo XI mission began with American troops being called home blastoff from Cape Kennedy, Florida . By 1971 the responsibility fell on the on army of South Vietnam .
 Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 19 . There would be further trips to the Ali. Ali .
 In 1967 Ali is stripped of his title as moon but this mission was the first and champion when he refuses to register for demonstrated how advanced our the draft was . In 1967, Ali was stripped of the title as the moon-walker .
 1963 – Bob Dylan debuts as a folk singer overdose with Blowin' In the Wind . 1966 – Walt Disney died at age 65 at the age of 65 .
 Disney introduced America to Mickey Mouse and created a movie empire and theme park . Mickey Mouse was the inspiration for Mickey Mouse's Disney World theme park empire .
 1960 – Montreal Canadiens capture their 5th Stanley Cup in a row, dominating the National Hockey League . Montreal Canadiens win 5th consecutive Stanley Cup . Canadiens dominated the NHL in 1960 .
 Their music starts Yankees breaks Babe Ruth’s single a craze and influences musicians for season homerun record by 61 homeruns . Their music begins Yankees breaking Babe Ruth's single craze, influences musicians .
 Clay Francisco attracts 50,000 with bands like The Doors, the Grateful Dead, Buffalo his title in 1965 in a Springfield, The Who, and Jimi Hendrix rematch . The Doors successfully defends his title .
 Do some research explain what happened and its effect on the American public . Do some of the most important things you know about the American people .