 The Cold War has many features and these features have been determined by the results of the World War II World War . Cold War is the result of the outcome of that war .
 Most of the countries were divided into two al groups of war-torn countries . The war was the most destructive of the war, especially in Europe, and to improve economies .
 Capitalist Western world led by the U.S. and Communist eastern under the leadership of Soviet Union . The two groups are defined by their rough lines as the Capitalist . Western world .
 There has been fierce competition in the political, economic and military fields between the two groups . The two sides are engaged in fierce political and military competition .
 Turkey and Iran heavily felt the effects of the new situation and their chances of staying neutral were very low . As the two important states of Middle East, Turkey . Iran and Turkey felt the effect of the situation and its chances of remaining neutral was very low.
 Turkey became a NATO member and made a formal alliance with the western bloc . Turkey is now a member of the NATO alliance . Turkey has a long history of anti-Turkish sentiment .
 There was a close bond between Iran and the U.S. until the 1979 revolution in Iran . Although fluctuations were observed in the bilateral relations of Iran and America, there was a very close bond .
 Cold War, Iran, Second World War, Soviet Union, Turkey, United States of America 1. 2.5 million killed in Iran, 2.7 million killed by U.S. troops .
 World War II paved the way for a new world political order in recent history . The results of the war paved the . way for the world's political . order .
 U.S. and Soviet Union emerged as super powers and became the leaders of the global political arena . Two victorious nations, the United States of America and the Soviet Union, emerged as the super powers .
 The new status was characterized by its bipolar nature where the Western Bloc represented capitalism, democracy, human rights, freedom of expression . The West Bloc was characterized as a bipolar nature .
 NATO was established on April 4,1949, with twelve founding members . The major organization of the Western Bloc was NATO, established in 1949 . NATO was NATO's first major organization .
 The organization was military in nature and expanded with addition of new members in the 1950's . The organization expanded in the '50's and '60's .
 Eastern Bloc stemmed from socialist ideology, claimed solidarity of socialist governments and state controlled economy . On the other hand , the Eastern . Bloc claimed solidarity with socialist governments, state controlled . economy .
 The main area of conflict between the two sides was Europe which was a natural consequence since the most devastating effects of WW II were lived in the old continent .
 Europe was practically divided into two parts and only a few countries were able to keep their neutrality like Switzerland . Switzerland was one of the last few countries to be able to remain neutral .
 The hostility surrendered the whole world and the leaders of the blocks searched for their interests everywhere . The hostility surrenders the whole of the world, the leader of the block searched for interests everywhere, the author says .
 Bernard Baruch, adviser to president Harry S Truman, was the first political figure to pronounce the words of ""Cold War"" on April 16, 1947 to describe the nature of relations between United States and Soviets .
 The breakdown of Soviet Union and associated disintegration of the Eastern Bloc marks the end of Cold War . The collapse of the Soviet Union was the beginning of the Cold War, according to historians .
 The war profit expectations of the victorious states began to shape the new era in human history . The war profits of the victorships began to help shape the future of the world .
 The first step was to fill the power gap resulting from the defeat of Nazi Germany, says President Obama . President Obama's first task was filling the gap created by Nazi Germany's defeat .
 George Kennan was completely aware of the real nature of Russian intentions and reported that the target was maximum expansion . Kennan said the target of the Russian expansion was maximum .
 This policy was a combination of present Soviet ideology and Tsarist ambitions of the past . The policy was combined with present Soviet Ideology and past ambitions of past . This policy is a mixture of present ideology and past aspirations .
 He commented about Soviet leader Stalin, noting that he regards Western Capitalism as an enemy . He also said that Western Capitalism is his enemy .
 Cold War was characterized by enormous nuclear proliferation, exaggerated budgets for conventional armament, space competition and efforts to suppress the capacities of the opponent in every possible way . Cold War also characterized by huge nuclear proliferation and exaggerated budgets .
 Both sides carefully refrained from direct military action against each other, since balance of horror made it clear that a war between U.S. and Soviet Russia would definitely end with a Pirus victory .
 Leader states tried to access and control natural resources and geostrategic areas on global scale . They gained allies and expanded their zone of influence .
 Propaganda and proxy wars were other instruments that played an important role during the Cold War . Propaganda also played a key role in Cold War.
 The tension between blocks was intensified in north-east Asia in fifties, in sixties, in Middle East in seventies and seventies . Central America in eighties and Central Asia in 80s .
 This era was featured by local confrontations but, the world faced some events which inevitably threatened the relative peace and the delicate equilibrium . This era featured some confrontations, but, it was also a period of peace .
 World War I facilitated the fall of the Ottoman Empire, which was declining in every aspect since the last two centuries . The end of WWI facilitated the end of the empire, which had been declining in all aspects .
 The invasion of Anatolia by foreign forces stimulated Mustafa Kemal, afterwards named Ataturk, to initiate a War of Liberation which successfully ended on September 9,1922 . The invasion prompted Mustafa Kemal to initiate the war of liberation .
 The establishment of a new nation state, Turkish Republic, was officially announced the next year . Turkish Republic was officially established the following year .
 Territorial integrity, international political recognition and necessary reforms for transition from a six-century old cosmopolitan empire to a modern state were the main concerns .
 Ismet Inonu succeeded Ataturk as the second president of the republic after his death on November 10,1938 . He was an Ottoman general, commander in chief of the West Front during the War of Liberation .
 These times were double edged sword for Turkey and she did her best to preserve the equilibrium between axis and allies . She did not want her country to be seen as an ally in the Middle East .
 President Inonu's main problem was to maintain neutrality and refrain from being actively involved in the war . President Inanu was trying to avoid involvement in the conflict .
 Neutrality can be defined as active neutrality since Turkey maintained good relations with both sides for a long time . Neutrality is defined by Turkey maintaining good relations between Turkey and the West .
 Adolf Hitler sent a letter to Inonu on March 1, 1941 assuring him that German troops in Bulgaria had no intention of threatening Turkish territory and country's political structure . Hitler sent the letter assuring that German forces in Bulgaria would not threaten Turkish territory .
 A friendship and non-aggression treaty was signed between two countries on June 18, 1941 . Inonu responded positively and ultimately a friendship treaty was reached .
 Turkey's export of 90,000 tons of chromium to Germany was a reflection of its friendship with Germany . Turkey exported the most of its chromium exports to Germany in the 1980s .
 Turkish Republic and Soviets signed an agreement of ""neutrality and non-aggression"" on December 17, 1925 . Turkish Republic signed agreement of 'neutrality' and 'non-aggressive' agreement with Soviets .
 As renewal date of the treaty was approaching, Soviets notified Turkish government that they shall not extend the old treaty and instead discuss the situation in the light of current military and political changes . Soviets notified Turkey that they will not extend old treaty .
 Soviet demands included construction of land and naval bases in Bosporus, common control of Turkish straits and changes in the Turkish-Soviet border in favor of the latter .
 Meeting between Inonu and Churchill took place in presidential train at Yenice station in southern Turkey . Churchill was the British Prime Minister of Turkey in the 1940s .
 Churchill told the Turkish side that they have come to meet the needs of the Turkish army and they asked for no engagement . Churchill pointed the crucial importance of Turkish land and bases for military operations against Germany .
 The decision to enter the war was completely a matter of the Turkish government, he said . According to him, the decision was made by the government of Turkey . The Turkish government is responsible for the decision to join the war .
 Potsdam conference was held in 1944 lasting from mid-July until early August . Conference was held between July 1944 and August 1944 .
 Russians proposed free passage of their ship through Turkish straits, a naval base and an international status for Bosporus and Dardanelles . Russians propose free passage, free passage and international status of the straits . Russian ship's passage to Turkey was also proposed .
 Turkish demands meant serious changes of Montreux treaty which authorized Turkey over the control of the straits . These demands required serious changes to the treaty which allowed Turkey to take over the strait .
 The conference did not arrive to a concrete conclusion about the issue . The conference was held in New York City .
 President Inonu realized that Turkey would face isolation in the postwar era if Turkey does not act together with alliance and not take responsibility . Mehmet Nur Altınörsörs 9 President In onu realized Turkey would be isolated if Turkey did not act .
 Turkey has not received economic and military aid from the UK and U.S. This meant not receiving British and United States economic and . military aid which eventually make Turkey more vulnerable to Russian threat . Turkey is now vulnerable to Russia's growing influence in the region .
 Turkey formally declared war to Germany and to Japan on February 23, 1945 without actually being in the war . Turkey declared war on Germany and Japan in 1945 . Turkey was officially declared war in 1945, but was not actually involved in the conflict .
 Turkey's previous application was rejected, particularly with strong opposition of England . The country has been in talks with the UK over a decade ago .
 Prime Minister Adnan Menderes' government sent an initial military force of 4,500 without the approval of the Turkish General Assembly . The Turkish government sent the initial force without approval from the General Assembly.
 The contribution of Turkish troops and their bravery during Korean war paved the way for NATO membership . NATO membership was finalized in 1952 .
 In fifties, Turkish foreign policy was totally pro-American, practically reaching to maximum military, economic and political dependence . In 1950s, Turkey reached maximum dependence on the U.S. in terms of military and economic dependence .
 The U2 plane took off from Incirlik Air Base in Southern Turkey . It was the first of these planes to take off from the base in Turkey .
 Pilot Gary Powers survived but he was captured and sentenced to ten years of imprisonment . Pilot was captured by police and jailed for ten years in prison .
 President John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev arrived at an agreement after ten days of intense diplomatic communication . President Kennedy and his Soviet Union came to an agreement in Moscow .
 The sides agreed for reciprocal removal of missiles which meant removal of Jupiter missiles launched in Turkey . The sides also agreed to remove missiles from Turkey .
 Two leaders avoided a possible third World War and marked the start of détente . The reasonable approach of two leaders avoided the possibility of war .
 The early beneficial results of the agreement were the establishment of a direct telephone line between the White House and Kremlin Palace . The agreement was also the signing of an antinuclear treaty limiting nuclear testing only to underground .
 Turkish decision makers saw that if Cuban crisis had not been solved peacefully then Turkey would have been the initial target for Russia . Turkey's decision makers see that if the Cuban crisis wasn't solved peacefully, Turkey would be the target of Russia . Russia has not been seen as a threat to Turkey
 Lyndon Johnson's letter to Turkish Prime Minister Ismet Inonu stated not to use American weapons in Cyprus conflict became one of the milestones for Turkish foreign policy because of the letter .
 American missionary activities that increased in the second half of 19th century in Ottoman Empire and in Middle East created an atmosphere of sympathy for Armenians . American missionary activity increased in second half .
 Events of 1915 was defined as genocide by Armenians and allegations against Turkey intensified over the years . Armenians defined 1915 as genocide .
 Parliaments of many countries passed laws recognizing 1915 events as genocide . American Congress kept the issue as a pendulous sword each year .
 Turkey and some other opium producing countries were held responsible for illegal trade by the US government . Turkey and other opium-growing countries have been blamed for the illegal trade of the drug .
 Nixon administration requested banning of opium cultivation and in 1969 they requested buying of all the year's product which was refused by Turkish government . Nixon administration asked Turkish government to ban opium cultivation in 1969 .
 Turkey's first step was to limit plantation area and finally total prohibition of opium agriculture on June 1971 was declared . During the course of negotiations to solve the problem, Turkey was able to limit the area of plantation area .
 The coalition government led by Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit passed a law on July, 1974 permitting cultivation of opium in seven provinces under state control and only for medical purposes . The law was passed by the government in 1974 .
 A month later Turkey intervened in Cyprus because, the constitutional order was broken by Greek Cypriots . Turkey intervened because, a month later, it broke the constitution of Cyprus .
 The United States administration initiated arms embargo on February 5,1975 lasting more than three years . The embargo was initiated by the U.S. administration .
 Turkey, influenced by the above summarized incidents, began to review her options in mid-sixties . Turkey began reviewing its options in the mid-60s and mid-70s .
 Many important industrial projects were realized with Russian technology and financial support during that decade . Middle East countries including Palestinians were approached with a more wide perspective .
 Reza Khan, afterwards Reza Shah Pahlavi, in command of Persian Cossack Brigade, realized a military coup on February 21, 1921 in Tehran . Khan was succeeded by Shah Shah Shah Khan, the Shah Shah of Iran .
 He strongly believed in powerful central authority, independent foreign policy and strong army . The former British Prime Minister believed in a 'strong central authority'
 He was a nationalist, anticommunist and tried hard for achievement of national identity . He was an anti-communist who tried hard to achieve national identity, he said .
 In the early days of Mohammed Shah's rule a relatively free atmosphere was created . But simultaneously the central authority weakened and problems began to emerge . Mohammed Shah ruled Iran in the early 1980s .
 Soviets occupied northern Iran on August 25, 1941 . British invaded the south . Soviets occupied the northern Iran .
 Iranian government resigned and U.S. forces were launched in September 1941 . United States forces launched on September 1941 in Iran . Iran was overthrown by the United States .
 Treaty signed by Anglo-Soviet-Iran considered Iran as an ally, recognized and protected territorial integrity and political independence of the country . It also promised compensation for war losses due to occupation . Treaty was signed in 1950s and 1960s .
 Foreign military forces were to leave Iran latest six months after the war was over . Foreign forces were expected to leave the country following the end of the war .
 Soviets reinforced their existence in northern Iran and in Azerbaijan . United States and British withdrew in timely manner . Soviets refrained from doing so and instead reinforced their presence in Iran and Azerbaijan .
 He was appointed as Prime Minister on August 30, 1951 and only two days after the parliament passed the law nationalizing the Anglo Iranian Oil Company .
 British reaction was to take back all English technicians in oil industry, blockade of Abadan bay, signing an agreement with Aramco oil company and importing oil from Saudi Arabia . British reaction to the incident was taken back all .
 All these measures naturally resulted in marked decrease of Iran's oil export, inflation and unemployment . Iran has seen a marked decrease in its oil export and inflation, unemployment and unemployment.
 Americans worried about England's tough approach fearing that Iran would incline towards Soviets . Americans were worried that England's approach would lead to Soviet-backed regime .
 British explicitly proposed U.S. to remove Moseddaq and substitute him with a pro-western figure . British explicitly requested United States to remove him and replace him with an American .
 A joint mission organized by CIA and British called ""Ajax operation"" removed Moseddaq from power . Operation was a joint mission to oust the former leader of the country .
 As the Shah's dependence to U.S. climbed, ironically enough, the public opinion about America gradually began to worsen and it reached its climax at 1979 revolution . The Shah became dependent on the United States .
 Shah Pahlavi made the Iranian army among the first five in the world in the seventies . He also made plans for possessing nuclear energy . The tremendous oil income especially in seventies prompted him to make the army .
 He signed agreements with European countries and U.S. for nuclear energy plantation projects . The deal includes nuclear energy plantations .
 American politicians and particularly Kennedy administration were anxious about Shah's expenditure on arms which was far beyond the real needs of the country . U.S. politicians and especially Kennedy administration was anxious about . Shah's expenditures on arms were far beyond .
 The border between Turkey and Iran has been determined by the peace treaty signed on May 17, 1639 after the Ottoman-Iranian war . The treaty was signed after the war between the Ottoman and Iranian armies .
 Turkey and Iran have been important actors in Middle East for many centuries . Turkey, Iran and other countries have been key actors in region for centuries . Iran and Turkey have been involved in Mideast region for decades .
 Both have searched for regional power and this has inevitably created an implicit competition . Both countries have looked at each other in search of regional power . This has created a tension between them and each other .
 Turkish Republic established as secular state while Iran seemed to be core of Shia Moslems . Turkish Republic was established as a secular state . Iranian Republic was formed as a state of secular state in 1950s .
 The 1979 revolution drastically converted the authoritarian monarchy into a religious state . The monarchy was overthrown by the 1979 revolution . The revolution turned the country into an authoritarian state .
 The ideology brought by the leaders of the revolution was in clear contradiction with Turkey's fundamental principle of a secular state . Turkish government immediately recognized the new regime but the ideology was not accepted by the Turkish government .
 Despite this troublesome situation no serious decline in bilateral relations was observed . Despite this serious decline of bilateral relations, there were no serious declines observed .
 An important population of Turkish descent lives in Iran, concentrated in Azerbaijan region . The population is mainly concentrated in the Azerbaijian region .
 Iran has been skeptical of Turks and viewed them as potential danger . Iran has seen Turks as a potential danger in recent years .
 In a similar manner the close bonds of the Iranian government with the Shia Muslims of Turkey annoyed Turkish governments . The close ties of Iran's government with Turkey's Shia Muslims annoyed the Turkish governments.
 Religious and ethnic differences have not caused serious social unrest in either country . Religious differences not causing serious social problems in both countries .
 Additional conflict was separatist Kurdish movement which began as terrorist attacks in Southeast Turkey in 1984 . Separatist Kurdish movement began in 1984 as a result of terrorist attacks on Turkey .
 In many instances terrorists were able to safely cross the Iranian border . Terrorists are able to cross the border safely from Iran .
 During the Iraq-Iranian war,1980-1988, Iraq was backed by Western Powers and Iran was isolated . During the 1980-1988 war, Iran was back and isolated from Iraq . Iraq and Iran fought each other during the war .
 Trade with Iran reached its climax which naturally contributed to good neighborhood relations . Trade between Iran and the U.S. was a major factor in the region's relations with Iran .
 The destructive economic effects of the war and basic daily needs of the people was partially compensated with Turkish imports . Turkish imports were partially compensated for the war's destructive effects .
 Iran changed dramatically in the aftermath of the 1979 revolution and a new page started in the history of this country . Mehmet Nur Altınörs says Iran's history has changed dramatically since the revolution .
 Turkey complied firmly with her valid principle by recognizing the new regime immediately and by maintaining friendly relations with Syria . The new regime was overthrown by the West .
 Some fluctuations naturally occurred from time to time, although no serious confrontation was encountered . No serious confrontations were encountered, but no serious incidents occurred .
 The dilemma continued after the war because of the new bipolar world political order . The world's bipolar political order was created in the aftermath of the war .
 Turkey and Iran tried their best to stay neutral during WW II but they were in a way obliged to make a preference . Iran and Turkey tried to remain neutral during World War II .
 Iran formally declared her neutrality but she could not stop British and Soviet occupation in 1941 . Iran eventually put Iran on the side of allies in the war .
 The motivation of Turkey and Iran to join the West stemmed mainly from Soviet threat . The motivation for joining the West was mainly from the threat of the Soviet Union .
 Russia's ambition of reaching the warm South seas dates to Tsarist rule . Russia has ambitions of reaching warm seas dating back to the Tsarist era .
 Control of Turkish straits or accessing Persian gulf were the ways to reach this goal, says CNN.com's John Defterios . Control of Turkey straits was the key to reaching this goal .
 Historical prejudices and actual threat of the communist regime was the primary reason for Turkey and Iran to join Western bloc . Historical prejudices were the main reason for the two countries to join West bloc .
 Establishment of Warsaw Pact enabled Russians to control nearly all East Europe . Established in 1961, Warsaw Pact allowed Russia to control most of the continent . Warsaw Pact was formed in 1961 to allow Russia to take control of most of Europe .
 Soviet expansion aimed propagation of communist ideology and practice wherever possible globally . Soviet expansion was aimed at propagating communist ideology .
 The social, cultural and religious backgrounds of Turkey and Iran were absolutely in great contradiction with communism . This brought fear and the need to step aside on the anticommunist front, says Ali Babli .
 Security concerns played an important role in decision making, determining the priorities . Security concerns also played a key role in the decision-making process .
 United States of America did not bear the prejudices and misconceptions of the European history and had no serious conflict of interests with Turkey and Iran . United States had no real conflict of interest with Turkey or Iran, writes CNN.com .
 The United States was most probably the only country capable of supplying security measures and financial support . The U.S. was most likely to supply security measures, financial support, the author says .
 Economic aid of U.S. to Iran and Turkey was vital and it marked another factor which facilitated annexing them to West . Economic aid was vital for the two countries to join the West .
 During the years of WW II and in early post war era Turkish leaders realized that infrastructure investments, sustainable economic growth and modernization of the army desperately needed foreign financial aid . Turkey's infrastructure investments needed foreign aid .
 Truman doctrine and Marshall program intended economic reconstruction of Europe including Turkey and many other countries . Turkey was part of the Marshall program to rebuild Europe . Turkey is one of the most important economies in Europe .
 Turkey's Washington Ambassador Munir Ertegun died on November 11, 1944 while on duty . Turkey's U.S. ambassador died on duty in November 1944 .
 His body was not sent to Turkey due to war and conditions and was preserved at the national cemetery in Arlington . The body was preserved in Arlington, Virginia .
 This gesture has become an important milestone in integration of Turkey to the Western bloc . This gesture is an important step towards integration with the West, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Turkey's goal to integrate with the West Bloc coincided with her motive to be a democratic state . Turkey's aim was to become part of the West bloc . Turkey is now a member of the EU and NATO, but not a member state .
 Turkey worked hard to be a part of Western Community on institutional basis . Turkey has been a member of the Western Community for over a decade . Turkey is a major ally of the European Union and NATO .
 Her efforts for NATO membership and various European organizations is a proof of this fact . Her efforts are proof of her support for the U.S. and NATO membership .
 Iran maintained relations on personal grounds as a natural feature of an authoritarian regime . Iran on the other hand maintained relations with the West as a result of its authoritarian state .
 Reza Pahlavi's efforts aimed to accept Western values, technology, institutions and way of life . The top-down reforms were performed by Reza and his successor Mohammed Reza Shah Pahavi .
 Pro-American and pro-Israel policies of Turkey and Iran began to induce some disadvantages . In the following years of Cold War, pro-U.S. and anti-Iranian policies began to induce advisibility .
 Both countries were criticized as being extremely loyal to the United States . They were viewed as agents of American imperialism . The U.S. was viewed as an agent of imperialism .
 The nationalist-socialist winds blowing under the leadership of Egypt initiated a popular movement in Arab world . Egypt's revolution was inspired by Egypt's success in Egypt, the country's first Arab Spring .
 Turkey, conceiving her isolation, began establishing closer ties with the countries of the region including Palestine . Turkey began establishing relations with the region after the Arab Spring .
 This new block accepted following neutral and independent policies toward existing two blocks . Block accepted following following neutral policy toward existing blocks .
 Turkey and Iran neglected this group and became offensive . This attitude increased isolation of both countries . The two countries are now isolated in the world .
 The costs and risks of alliance with West seemed to outweigh the benefits as the years of Cold War passed . Costs and risks were outweighs the benefits of the West as the Cold War ended .
 The wide spectrum of information supplied by space technology began to change the conventional military concepts and lessened the strategic importance of front line countries . Space technology has changed the way conventional military thinking has been developed .
 "This progress created the feeling of abandonment in Turkey and Iran," says Iran's president . "It created the feel of abandonment" in Turkey, Iran, says President Obama .
 The deteriorating relations with the U.S. and political isolation also contributed to the idea of reviewing foreign affairs .
 Both countries developed better relations with Russia but did not go so far as to leave the alliance . The balance of power was so delicate that both the alliance itself and excluded members would suffer from the consequences .
 The last eleven years of Cold War is entirely a different chapter for Iran, says Iran's president . Iran has been in the grip of the Cold War for 11 years, says President Obama . The country has been involved in a nuclear arms deal with the United States .
 The domestic social religious and cultural life along with international positions were drastically reversed . The domestic and international life was drastically reversed in the 1930s .
 The analysis of this period is an interesting subject for further studies since the regime is still existing in Iran . The analysis is an important subject of further studies, says Dr. Ghitis .