 CNN.com host a series of high-profile events in the U.S. State of the Art of the Year 2015 . Visit the gallery for photos and videos of the events you saw on CNN iReport .
 In 1949, the Soviets detonated their first atomic bomb, and throughout the 1950s the two nations raced to build ever-growing stockpiles of nuclear weapons . The Soviets had been working frantically to catch up with the Americans' nuclear technologies .
 By the 1960s, both sides began to question whether continuing to build their nuclear arsenals was really beneficial . By the 1950s, the U.S. and the Soviet Union had begun building their nuclear weapons arsenals .
 Each country had enough weapons to destroy the other multiple times over . The United States possessed around 30,000 nuclear warheads while the Soviets had about 5,000 . The U.S. possessed around .
 Under President Dwight Eisenhower, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles had developed the policy of ""massive retaliation,"" whereby nuclear weapons' real power was to deter attacks . Under President Eisenhower, the policy was developed under the name of 'massive retaliation'
 Dulles reasoned that no nation would want to risk 'massive retaliation' with nuclear weapons by attacking American interests abroad . Dulles: No nation would risk "massive retaliation" by attacking U.S. interests .
 If both Americans and Soviets adopted a policy of massive retaliation, the consequences of nuclear war would be so high that neither would ever launch a nuclear attack . If both maintained a large enough nuclear arsenal to ensure each other's complete annihilation in the event of a nuclear war, then the consequences would
 Mutual Assured Destruction inherent in nuclear war would forever deter either side from ever starting one . So, either side of the war would be deterred from starting one.
 Critics seized upon Mutual Assured Destruction's unfortunate acronym—MAD—to decry the policy a form of institutionalized madness . Huge arsenals of nuclear weapons, paradoxically, were the only thing that could be depended upon to save the world from destruction by huge arsenals .
 On several occasions since 1945 nuclear weapons have come terrifyingly close to being used, either by accident or miscalculation . Anti-nuclear activists have never been able to develop a credible strategy for stuffing the nuclear genie back into the bottle .
 Once both sides possessed enough warheads to destroy each other completely, there was no need to continue racing to build ever-larger nuclear arsenals .
 The American nuclear stockpile actually shrank slowly from a peak of 31,323 warheads in 1966 to 23,387 by 1980 . After growing quickly throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, the U.S. nuclear stockpile grew slowly .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro pushed hard to launch a nuclear strike against the United States . American President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev were able to stave off disaster through negotiation .
 If the weapons had been under Castro's operational control, rather than Khrushchev's, we might all be dead . The weapons were under the operational control of Castro's rather than the control of the government .
 Leaders of the United States, Soviet Union, and Great Britain signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . They hoped it would slow new development of nuclear weapons technology by banning test explosions in the atmosphere .
 France obtained the bomb in 1960, and China followed quickly after . All three nations were allied with nuclear powers, including the U.S. and the USSR .
 Chairman Mao had once dismissed the atom bomb as nothing more than a ""paper tiger" China desperately hoped to join the ranks of the nuclear powers by the 1960s . The atom bomb was seen as a 'paper tiger'
 The proliferation of nuclear technology to France and China only intensified American, British, and Soviet efforts to prevent even more countries from obtaining the bomb . In 1964, Chinese scientists successfully detonated their first bomb .
 In 1968, the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . The treaty agreed not to distribute nuclear weapons to other nations and to limit the development of nuclear delivery systems .
 The treaty opened each country's nuclear facilities to inspections by the U.N. International Atomic Energy Agency . The treaty was signed by the United Nations in 2007 .
 The Nixon administration met with the Soviets in Helsinki, Finland, in 1969 to begin discussing limits on nuclear weapons . Nixon administration had met with Soviets to discuss limits on nukes .
 These talks led to the 1972 Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty . The treaty froze the number of nuclear missiles on both sides at current levels for five years .
 These agreements limiting nuclear weapons contributed greatly to détente, the relaxation of Cold War tensions, during this period . These agreements contributed greatly .
 Nixon's successor as president, Gerald Ford, met with Khrushchev's successor, Leonid Brezhnev, in Siberia at Vladivostok to discuss more arms control . Next up, Ford's successor will meet with Breznev's successor to discuss arms control in
 Ford laid the groundwork for SALT II, a second treaty which would be signed by Brezhnev and President Jimmy Carter in Vienna a few years later . The U.S. helped Cuba gain its independence in the Spanish-American War of 1898 .
 American businesses began to invest heavily in Cuba and well, expected a government friendly to their interests . U.S. businesses began investing heavily in the country and expected a friendly government .
 During the 1930s, the Cuban government took a nationalistic turn and promoted greater Cuban control of the economy . The Cuban government was nationalistic during that period . The economy was heavily controlled by the government .
 Officials in Washington helped to establish the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista . Batista took a permissive attitude toward continued American dominance of the Cuban economy .
 With Batista in power, wealthy Americans and even mobsters came to see Cuba as their personal playground . Wealthy Americans came to Cuba as a playground .
 Guerrillas began attacking government buildings and the army as early as 1953 . Batista's harsh policies and uncompromising dictatorship turned many of the Cuban people against him .
 Guerrillas eventually succeeded in leading a revolution that toppled Batista's government in 1959 . Led by the charismatic young Fidel Castro, these guerrillas led to the overthrow of Batista .
 Castro became, for most Cubans, a national hero, cementing his role as the new leader of Cuba . Castro was the Cuban president of the late 1960s and early 1960s .
 He began to institute land reform, nationalizing millions of acres owned by U.S. companies . He seized control of the country's businesses and natural resources from foreign investors . The land reform began with land reform .
 The United States severed diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1961, leading Cuba to ally itself with the Soviet Union . Castro was both a leftist and an ardent Cuban nationalist, and it would've been very difficult for the United States to maintain good relations with his regime .
 He didn't fully embrace communism until he'd been ruling Cuba for more than two years . His alliance with the Soviet Empire came about only in the wake of American sanctions against his regime .
 Critics of U.S. foreign policy say support for Cuban companies drove Castro into alliance with Soviets . While Cuba was economically important to a handful of powerful American companies, the Middle East provided a vital resource that was critical to the American economy .
 U.S. policy in the Middle East had the difficult task of balancing interest in oil with support for Israel . The Middle East usually had hostile relations with the neighboring nations that controlled the oil .
 Iraq, Iran, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia sought to use the organization to coordinate petroleum production and pricing . Venezuela, Venezuela, Iraq and Iran watched closely during the Six Day War of 1967 and Yom Kippur War of 1973 .
 In the 1967 conflict, Israel launched a preemptive strike against its Arab neighbors, storming to victory and seizing expansive new territories in the West Bank, Golan Heights, and Sinai Peninsula .
 Six years later, Egypt and Syria struck back with a surprise attack launched on the Jewish holiday of Yom Kippur . Egypt, Syria and Egypt struck back six years later with an attack on Israel .
 Arab armies pushed into Israel in 1967, recapturing much of the ground lost in 1967 . Arab armies recaptured much of Israel's territory lost in that year .
 The U.S. responded to Israel's pleas for aid with a massive airlift of supplies that helped turn the tide of the war . OPEC responded by placing an embargo on oil sales to the United States and raising oil prices around the world .
 The embargo would continue through 1974, quadrupling the price of oil in the U.S. The embargo continued through 1974 .
 For the first time since World War II, Americans endured gasoline rationing . Americans endured rationing for first time in decades since WWII .
 In some areas, people whose cars carried license plates ending in odd numbers purchased gas on odd days of the month . Those with license plates with even numbers bought gas on even days of month .
 The oil crisis made clear to U.S. policymakers the costs of supporting Israel in a hostile Middle East . The crisis brought attention of the American public away from the Nixon administration's successes with the Soviet Union and China .
 The thorny interrelationship of America's strategic and economic interests in the Middle East would continue to bedevil U.S. policymakers into the 21st century .
 Castro's overthrow of the unpopular Batista appalled some Cubans, but enthralled many more . Some Cubans had prospered under the Batista regime . Castro overthrown the unpopular regime, but many Cubans have remained loyal to him .
 Despite his many flaws, Castro became a beloved hero to the island nation's impoverished masses . Castro's relationship with the U.S. was always going to be difficult .
 American corporations had dominated the Cuban economy since the Spanish-American War at the turn of the 20th century . U.S. companies had dominated Cuba's economy .
 Castro's insistence upon land reform led to the U.S. imposing economic sanctions against Cuba . Castro seized millions of acres owned by American companies and redistributed them to Cuban peasants in 1960 .
 Castro retaliated by nationalizing Cuba's oil refineries and other American-owned businesses . Castro, always eager to pick a fight with his neighbors to the north, retaliated . Castro: "I'm not afraid to fight"
 The Kennedy administration severed diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1961 . Castro sought to seek a formal alliance with the Soviet Union . Castro's alliance with Russia was unacceptable to American leaders .
 Previously, the Soviets had been able to expand the scope of their communist sphere of influence in places in Eastern Europe and Asia . But never in ""America's own backyard,"" the Western Hemisphere .
 Castro's rise to power represented a major Cold War setback for the U.S. The Americans' solution was to attempt to overthrow the Castro regime .
 The CIA began training a band of anti-Castro Cuban exiles to lead an invasion against the island . The CIA trained the exiles in Cuba to prepare for an invasion .
 The plan was for the exiles to land secretly at the Bay of Pigs, then advance inland to rally a popular uprising to oust Castro's government . The invasion's planners, Americans and Cuban exiles alike, wrongly assumed that the Cuban populace would back their efforts .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion, launched in April 1961, proved to be a fiasco . It was the first time the U.S. troops had invaded the region since 1961 .
 The American-backed invaders, overpowered by Castro's army, never got off the beach . The U.S. backed invasion of Cuba was defeated by the Castro-led army .
 President Kennedy refused to commit American forces to a direct attack against Cuba . The Bay of Pigs debacle made him appear weak and impotent . Kennedy accepted full responsibility for the debacle .
 The humiliation of the Bay of Pigs loomed large two months later, when the young president met Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev at the Vienna Summit . The young president encountered Soviet Premier Kim Jong-ho at the first time .
 Khrushchev once accentuated a speech at the United Nations by banging his shoe on a tabletop, and once said, ""We will bury you!" Kennedy was a lightweight and sought to bully him into acceding to Soviet demands, he says .
 Kennedy was unsettled by how weak the Bay of Pigs had made him look, and he became obsessed with plotting Castro's overthrow . The CIA began scheming to assassinate the Cuban leader .
 The most memorable of the CIA's many failed attempts to take Castro's life involved an exploding cigar . The Pentagon conducted several military exercises in the Caribbean, practicing for the overthrow of a hypothetical foreign leader .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev began covertly placing nuclear missiles on Cuba to defend the government of his new ally . These maneuvers led the Soviet Premier to begin covertly placed nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles were used to protect the Cuban government .
 As the Americans had recently deployed their own missiles in Turkey, they assumed that the missiles would not be seen as a threatening provocation in the United States . The U.S. had also recently deployed its own missiles to Turkey, which is as close to Russia as Cuba is to the United
 The placement of the weapons in Cuba didn't fundamentally alter the strategic balance . President Kennedy didn't see things that way . He says the Soviets already possessed plenty of missiles that could hit the American mainland .
 On October 14th, 1962, an American U-2 spy plane snapped aerial reconnaissance photos that revealed Soviet workers building missile bases on Cuba .
 In Washington, the top echelon of the U.S. government goes into crisis mode . The top echelons of the American government are in crisis mode.
 President Kennedy canceled all scheduled public appearances, falsely claiming to have caught a bad cold . President Kennedy claimed he had caught a cold . Kennedy was president of the White House in 1961 .
 President Obama convened a special committee of top advisers and called the ExComm . The ExComm spent long hours debating how the U.S. should respond to the situation .
 Military leaders urged Kennedy to launch air strikes immediately to destroy missile installations before they became operational, or to order a fell-fledged American invasion .
 Kennedy feared that such an escalation would lead to full-blown nuclear war . Kennedy feared such a war could lead to a nuclear war in the U.S. But Kennedy feared it would be a nuclear escalation .
 Later peeks at post-Cold War Soviet archives show that Kennedy was probably on the money . Kennedy was right on the point: "I'm sure it's a good thing to be in the Soviet Union"
 Kennedy determined to negotiate with the Soviets to ensure the missiles' removal . So, instead of attacking Cuba, Kennedy decided to talk to the Soviets . Kennedy: "Instead of attacking, we should negotiate"
 In 1962, Kennedy announced the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba and demanded their immediate removal . Kennedy intended to negotiate from a position of strength, and to do that, he needed to raise the stakes .
 The Cuban government has imposed a 'quarantine' around Cuba to block further shipments of nuclear-related cargoes to the island .
 The ""quarantine"" was actually a total American naval blockade, but since a blockade is officially an act of war under international law, Kennedy chose to call it a "quarantine" instead . The blockade was a total U.S. naval blockade of Cuba .
 The threat of full-fledged nuclear war had never been more imminent . Soviet ships carrying more missiles to add to those already installed in Cuba continued to steam toward the island .
 They approached the blockade line, showing no signs that they planned to stop . No signs of stopping, they showed no sign of stopping .
 The United States Navy discovered they were accompanied by armed submarine escort . With no idea of intentions, all of those explosives were way too close for comfort . The crew of the USS Essex began preparing to intercept the Soviet freighters .
 Kennedy insisted that the missiles already on the island had to go . The blockade may have prevented more missiles from reaching Cuba, but Kennedy still insisted that it had to stop .
 Khrushchev could not simply capitulate without undermining his own reputation and the prestige of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union would have been humiliated by the West .
 Leaders in Washington and Moscow engaged in frantic, confused negotiations to try to resolve the standoff . Russia and the U.S. have been locked in a bitter dispute over Syria .
 Khrushchev sent an incoherent, rambling message to Kennedy, at one point writing: "Mr President, Mr Kennedy, you and I are like two men pulling on a rope with a knot in the middle; the harder we pull, the tighter the knot until it would have
 Khrushchev offered to withdraw his missiles if Kennedy would vow publicly not to invade Cuba . Kennedy would have withdrawn his missiles in exchange for a pledge not to attack Cuba . Khrushche offered to pull missiles out of Cuba if Kennedy pledged not to do so .
 The Soviet Union would remove their missiles from Cuba only if the U.S. removed its own Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The offers spooked the ExComm, making Kennedy's advisers wonder whether Khrushchev was even still in charge in Moscow .
 Ameican policy in the case of a downed U-2 called for immediate destruction of the anti-aircraft site, but Kennedy pushed his generals to accept restraint .
 Castro, fearing imminent American attack, urged Khrushchev to strike against the U.S. Kennedy's team was befuddled by the two different offers and was uncertain how to respond .
 Robert F Kennedy suggested that the Americans write back, accepting the terms of Khrushchev's first offer while not mentioning the second letter . The president's brother and Attorney General suggested that Americans accept the first offer .
 Robert Kennedy met secretly with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . U.S. would remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey if the Soviets took their missiles out of Cuba, but only on condition that the Soviets never made the quid pro quo public .
 Kennedy didn't want to appear to have given in to Soviet pressure or to have sold out his European allies . Kennedy was trying to avoid appearing to give in to the Soviet pressure .
 The fact that disaster had actually been averted through negotiation and compromise wouldn't become clear until much later . The fact of the averted disaster would only become clear later that it was through negotiation .
 In the meantime, many Americans took their misconceptions of what had happened in the Missile Crisis as proof that they could prevail in Cold War confrontations .
 Kennedy became convinced of the need to pursue a more nuanced policy toward the Soviet Union . They set up the famous hotline between their offices to allow for direct contact in times of crisis .
 Khrushchev suffered politically at home and among his allies for the humiliation of his apparent capitulation in Cuba . However, he suffered politically from the humiliation at home .
 In 1964, Khrushchev was forced into retirement, replaced as Soviet leader by hardliner Leonid Brezhnev . Other Soviet leaders and Soviet allies were embarrassed .
 By the late 1960s, cracks began to appear in the Soviet Union's Iron Curtain . Oh, and Fall, Too, is a documentary about the fall of the Cold War .
 Eastern European communists sought to bring greater freedoms to their communist societies . They'd been forced into the Soviet orbit following World War II . Eastern European communist societies sought greater freedoms .
 Crowds gathered in Prague to discuss crimes of the past regimes and learn about the new reforms . Crowds of Czechs gathered to discuss the crimes of past regimes . Czechs also gathered to learn about new reforms in the country .
 Josip Tito of Yugoslavia and Nicolae Ceausescu of Romania visited Dubcek to show their support . Two other relatively liberal and independent communist leaders, Josip . Tito, Ceausecu and Tito were also visited to show support for Dubceks .
 Students in Poland and Yugoslavia demonstrated in sympathy with the reformers' cause . Students in Yugoslavia and Poland demonstrated in support of reformers .
 The Czech people soon began to push for even greater reforms . Dubcek urged caution and moderation while other leaders pushed for even more drastic change . Soviet leaders began to worry that the spirit of reform would spiral out of control .
 Prague Spring unleashed by Prague Spring may spread throughout Eastern Europe, threatening the Soviet strong . Soviet leaders feared that the enthusiasm for freedom unleashed by the Prague Spring might spread .
 Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev sent in the Red Army to crush the Czechs' growing spirit of independence . In the end, the Czech Republic was forced to surrender to the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 Czech leaders flown to Moscow and forced to renounce their own reforms . Czech leaders were flown to Russia and forced into renounce reforms . Prague was one of the most successful countries in the Soviet Union .
 The Prague Spring of 1968 represented a brief moment of hope for Czechoslovakia and other communist regimes . Censorship returned to the communist regime after the Prague Spring .
 The American public was stunned by the invasion, which provided shocking images for display on the front pages of their newspapers and on their television screens .
 Nightly news broadcasts sympathized with Czech reformers and vividly portrayed the brutality of the Soviet response with film smuggled out of Czechoslovakia . News broadcasts sympathize with the reformers .
 Mao Zedong sought to make China, not Russia, the world's foremost communist power . By 1972, Richard Nixon and his National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger saw an opportunity to divide China .
 Chairman Mao was irked by what he perceived as the Soviets' attitude of condescension toward his country . Communist China was eager to take its rightful place in world affairs, he said .
 Mao predicted the ""East Wind rising over West Wind,"" so China, the East Wind, would surpass the Soviet Union, the West Wind, as the world's leading communist nation . Mao had predicted the 'East Wind' rising over Soviet Union . Mao predicted China would surpass Soviet Union
 U.S. sought to appear strong in foreign policy, giving impression that Vietnam debacle did not mean a broader disaster for the Cold War . Meanwhile, the United States was reeling from defeat in Vietnam and sought to be strong .
 Nixon's approach to China marked a dramatic reversal of American policy toward the world's most populous nation . If all went well, Nixon and Kissinger could exploit the Sino-Soviet split by playing China off the Soviet Union .
 Since 1949, the official American position regarding Red China had been that it just didn't exist . The official U.S. position regarding the existence of Red China was that it was just not exist .
 In 1949, the Chinese Civil War ended with Mao's communists taking control of the entire mainland . Chiang Kai-Shek's nationalists fled to the island province of Taiwan . Mao's communist government took over the mainland in 1949 .
 Both the communists in Beijing and the nationalists in Taipei claimed to be the legitimate government of all of China . Then, both the communists and nationalists in Taiwan claimed to have been the Chinese government .
 The United States continued to recognize Chiang's Taiwan as the legitimate government of all of China . The U.S. continued to hold China's powerful permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council .
 In a strange twist, China invited the American ping-pong team to visit the country in the spring of 1971 . The team was then playing in Japan .
 The team's nine players, along with some of their spouses and a few officials and journalists, were the first Americans given official sanction to enter China since the communists gained control of the mainland more than 20 years ago . The team was the first to enter the mainland since the communist government gained
 Henry Kissinger sent Kissinger to China in July 1971 to lay the groundwork for Nixon to travel there later . Kissinger was the first person to visit China since Nixon's visit in 1971 .
 Kissinger kept his own mission a secret so that Nixon could surprise the world by announcing the first-ever presidential visit to communist China . Nixon kept his mission secret so he could announce the first presidential visit .
 Nixon's journey in February 1972 drew attention away from the war in Vietnam and toward a positive relationship with China . Nixon's visit to China drew attention from Vietnam War in Vietnam .
 The United States recognized communist China's existence and reversed its longstanding resistance to admitting the country to the United Nations . The U.S. reversed its long-resistance to admitting communist China to the U.N.
 Nixon built his political career on targeting suspected communists in the government . Nixon's anticommunist credentials were unassailable and certainly beyond those of any preceding president .
 The most hardline American president of the Cold War era was the only one who could open the U.S. to friendship with communist China . It's ironic, then, that the most hard-line U.K. president was the most open-minded president .
 At a 1960 speech in Florida, Kennedy stoked fears of Cold War inferiority . At the 1960 speech, Kennedy said the U.S. had a better relationship with Russia .
 CIA surveillance revealed that there was indeed a missile gap . By the time Kennedy took office in 1961, there was a gap in missile technology .
 The Soviets had only 10 intercontinental ballistic missiles to the Americans' 57 . The Americans had 57 intercontinental missiles, the Soviets had 10 .