 Marxisme Online, March 2000, is published by Jørn Andersen for Marxisme online .
 China now participates in joint foreign policy initiatives with the USA in Afghanistan, and encourages the entry of western capital and a more sharply differentiated society at home . These questions have been posed even more sharply by recent events in China .
 Many have had no doubts about the socialist nature of Cuba’s revolution . Many indeed have no doubts at all about the socialism of the Cuban revolution .
 Cuba was the last remnant of Spain’s Latin American Empire mid when, in 1898, it finally freed itself from Spanish rule . The USA was to step in when Cuba was to be overthrown .
 The USA entered Cuba to protect its citizens’ and the new government of independent Cuba was appointed by them,’s new government was appointed . The new government is appointed by the USA .
 The 1901 Constitution was actually written in the office of the United States Governor of the island . The 1901 constitution was written by the Governor of Puerto Rico .
 Cuba was one of the biggest prizes in the drive of U.S. imperialism into the Caribbean and Central America . Cuba was a prize prize for the United States in the Caribbean .
 During the 19th Century more and more sugar-growing and fell into American hands . The process continued rapidly under the new regime .
 By 1926, American capital owned 63% of Cuban sugar production . The wild fluctuations of sugar prices on the world market aided the process of concentration .
 The Cuban economy was completely subordinated to the U.S. sugar barons . Cuba's economy was dominated by the United States sugar-barons .
 The entire economy was structured around sugar and, as early as 1912, 70% of all imports were consumer goods . The sugar-based economy was built up around sugar .
 In the 1940s the Batista regime had begun a process of ‘cubanisation’ in the sugar industry . Direct U.S. control of the industry receded, but their control of world sugar market meant that they could continue to control the overall direction of the
 By the 1950s, 80% of all Cuban imports came from the USA . $1 billion of U.S. capital was invested there. $1billion of United States capital invested there .
 The USA had a virtual monopoly of foreign trade via the 1934 Reciprocal Trade Agreement . The 1934 agreement allowed the USA to have a monopoly on foreign trade .
 By 1959, Cuba was a model of an underdeveloped economy . Its real centre was not Havana but Washington, Washington . Cuba was an economic model for the US .
 Between 1924 and 1933 an ex-director of General Electric in Cuba, Gerardo Machado, ran things with repression and tenor . Machado was a dictator of Cuba between 1924- 1933 . He ran things in Cuba with repression, tenor. Machado ruled things out .
 In 1933 he was overthrown by a workers’ rising and replaced for a few months by ‘progressive’ nationalist Grau San Martin . In 1933, he was replaced by a 'progressive' nationalist .
 Fulgencio Batista was to dominate Cuban politics from 1934 to 1959 . He was toppled by an ex-sergeant-clerk who was then toppled by the Batista regime .
 What began as a strike of bus drivers in Havana escalated rapidly into a general rising of workers and students against the government . Workers and students have taken to the streets of Havana to protest the government's crackdown .
 By 1934, after massive recruitment of members, they were the effective leadership of the working class . By 1934 they had become effective leaders of the workers' movement .
 Mass support was used as a bargaining counter with the Grau San Martin government . But their aim was not the overthrow of the Cuban state . Instead they used their mass support as a negotiating counter .
 When he was toppled by Batista and the army, the movement was greatly weakened . The movement was weakened by the collapse of the movement .
 By 1938, in pursuance with the Comintern line of unity with ‘progressive’ forces, the CCP was ready to do a deal with Batista . The CCP was in pursuit of a unity with 'progressive' forces, and was ready for a deal .
 Batista sought to enlarge the slate machine and to incorporate the trade unions into it . Batista wanted to give the local capitalists a larger share of the sugar industry .
 Cuban Workers’ Federation, founded in 1940, was part of that strategy . The Cuban Workers' Federation was formed in 1940 . Cuban workers' Federation is part of the Cuban government .
 CCP abandoned independent working class politics for a nationalist populism . The CCP had abandoned independent . working class . politics for nationalist populism which focussed on national interest .
 The unions limited membership was relatively privileged economically but any political opposition was violently crushed . The unions were relatively privileged economic but were violently crushed by political opposition .
 The rural workers, on the other hand, remained poor and badly organised . Rural workers are still poor and poorly organised, says the government .
 Majority of plantation workers were unemployed for 5 or 6 months every year . 29.4% had three years or less, 3.5% had been to high school, and only 1% to university .
 So long as the whole economy remained dependent on the USA, the less powerful sectors of the urban middle class could not develop . The U.S. economy will continue to rely heavily on the U.K.
 They together with middle farmers, small peasants and university students, formed the backbone of the nationalist opposition . They formed part of the opposition .
 After the semi-incorporation of the organised working class, they formed the only political opposition to Batista . They formed the first political opposition against Batista.
 Castro and other leaders of the 1959 revolution came out of this, fundamentally non-working class, tradition, he says . Castro and the other leaders came from this tradition . Castro: "It was out of a fundamentally non working class tradition, that Castro came"
 Their background was in an ideology of independent national development which had been betrayed time and again by corrupt politicians who had failed to reform Cuban society . Their background is in a ideology of independence, which was betrayed time .
 socialism was discredited and the potential mass base for a revolutionary organisation – the working class – was effectively insulated from political action . But, at the same time, socialism was entirely discredited . The working class was insulated from the political action, says the historian .
 Castro’s most complete political manifesto was delivered at his trial after the failure of the attack on the Moncada barracks on 26 July 1953 . Castro was the leader of the Spanish government in the early 1950s .
 This speech, History will absolve me is a fine fighting speech, but its politics are radical reformism . This speech is a fight, but it is a radical reformist, and its politics will be radical .
 Castro was to have been an Ortodoxo candidate in the 1952 elections which had been forestalled by a military coup led by Batista . The speech is cast in that mould, and it was cast in the mould .
 It calls for agrarian reform, for proper social services and lower rents, and for controls on U.S. capital . It also calls for better social services, lower rents and controls on United States capital .
 Castro was released in a 1954 amnesty and went to Mexico, where he organised a guerrilla group . He landed in Cuba from the motor-boat Granma in late 1956 . Castro was freed in 1954 and went on to organise a guerrilla movement in Mexico .
 The nature of the 1959 Revolution illustrates the divergence between these two currents . The 1959 Revolution was the birth of the Soviet Union . The revolution was the first of its kind .
 The 12 members of the 26 July Movement who survived the Granma landing established a guerrilla front in the Sierra Maestra mountains . By late 1957, a second guerrilla front was established in Escambray .
 The working class had no place in the guerrilla’s central strategy . Both of these were distant from the working-class centres, such as the working class centres .
 Workers in the 1958/9 revolution played no central role at all . General Machado's dictatorship was overthrown in 1933, but the workers played no part in it .
 Castro's 26th July Movement attempted to build the struggle in the cities by organising another on the same lines . The former was spontaneous and successful, and as a result of this Castro’s 26th . July Movement was organised in the same way as the previous .
 Outside Havana working class support for it was almost complete, but the overall effect was disastrous all the same . Outside Havana, support for the Cuban government was almost completely complete . The overall effect of the Cuban revolution was disastrous .
 From then on Castro ignored the working class, concentrating exclusively on the guerrilla struggle . Castro ignored working class and focused on guerrilla struggle.
 Workers hated Batista and his boot boys . Like almost every other section of Cuban society, the workers hated the dictator .
 Workers did not connect this with any specific social goals beyond toppling the dictator . But they did not do so as workers, and so in general they didn't connect this to any social goals . "They did not link this with social goals," she says .
 Batista emasculated the trade unions by declaring strikes illegal . Workers failed to create organs of their own to fight back – either clandestine or legal . Batista declared strikes illegal, but the workers didn't create organs to fight against .
 It might be thought that this was contradicted by the fact that general strikes took place . General strikes were held in the 1930s and 1940s, but the general strikes were not .
 The general strikes were not organised in and through the workplace . For the general strikes, they were not organised in and around the workplace. For the first time, the general strike was not organised through workplace rather than workplace .
 In the first case the spontaneous walk-outs were generalised through the bourgeois and petit-bourgeois organisations of the Instituciones Civicas, the students’ organisations, even religious and professional organisations . In the second case the walk-out was generalised by the
 In the second case the same groupings, but this time under the hegemony of the 26th July Movement, organised the strike from the beginning, coordinated through clandestine radios and so on. In the other case the groupings coordinated the strike .
 In other words in both general strikes workers were helping to build institutions of collaboration between all classes, and ones which were under the hegemony of bourgeois and petit-bourgeois elements . Workers helped build institutions which are under the hemorality of bourgeois and petit-
 The reverse happened to the Cuban working class in 1957-59 . Instead of building their own organisations and their own independent strength, they collaborated with other social strata to bring down Batista . The same thing happened to Cuba's working class .
 By 1958, it was clear that Batista enjoyed no support outside of the state machine itself . By 1958 he had no support from any outside of state machine . Batista died at the age of 60 .
 The fall of Batista was the result of the work of the guerrillas, but there was no class who wanted him to continue in power . No class wanted Batista to remain in power, but no class wanted him out of power .
 When Castro entered Havana in January 1959, the 26 July movement – a group of radical students, professionals and some peasants – walked into a vacuum of power . Thus, when Castro entered Cuba in 1959, he entered Havana, he faced a vacuum .
 Some claimed they had a ‘working arrangement’ with the Batista regime . Some claimed that they had worked out a 'working arrangement' with the regime . Others claimed to have worked out an arrangement with the government .
 The victory of the revolution faced Castro with the task of building a new order . Castro faced with task of rebuilding a new world of power .
 In the first few months bourgeois politicians held government posts while Communists moved into local administration . Communists moved to local administration in the early years of the Soviet Union .
 The command structure of the revolutionary army would be reproduced in government . Power lay with the barbudos, the bearded guerrillas who had fought the war .
 The new, honest, administrators would be revolutionaries and that would be sufficient guarantee – that, at least, was how Castro saw it . The new administration would be honest, honest and revolutionaries .
 For the people, however, despite their enthusiastic support for the barbudos, the task was to be limited to that of spectators and recipients of the revolutionary process . The people were not allowed to be part of the revolution, but they were part of it .
 The process itself was to be carried through by the real, proven revolutionaries in the olive-green uniforms . The real revolutionaries were to carry out the revolution in the style of the uniforms .
 The deformation of our economy through imperialist influence has made us very dependent on imports, even for the most basic of foodstuffs of the people . The deformed economy through imperialism has made our economy very dependent, says the PM .
 Capitalism sacrifices the human being, communism with its totalitarian conceptions sacrifices human rights . Communism with totalitarian conceptions sacrifice human rights, the author says . Capitalism sacrifices human being .
 The 1959 revolution was supported by virtually every section of Cuban society, and was incredibly popular . Very few people deny that the 1959 revolution supported by the Cuban government .
 It is generally admitted that it was the collapse of the Batista regime – and above all the army – that led to the victory of the rebels, rather than a bitter struggle between social classes . The collapse of Batista's regime is generally thought to have been the downfall of the social
 The rebels found themselves inheritors of an economy with a great deal of slack in it, but with no ready-made state apparatus to run or administer it . The rebels are inheriting a stateless economy with little state apparatus, but no ready to run it .
 For a period of a few months they tried to rebuild a liberal constitutional state, though on foundations that were not much stronger than the fragile ones of 1933-34 . For a time, the British government was trying to rebuild its liberal constitution .
 Castro had continued to put forward the radical programme from 1953 onwards . All this was consistent with the radical – but petit-bourgeois – programme that Castro had put forward .
 Castro was pushed from below by the workers or peasants, says Castro's critics . He says he was pushed to the top level by workers and peasants . Castro was not pushed from within by the peasants, he says .
 After the January 1959 coup there was a widespread strike wave, but the demands were purely economic . The demands were for reivindicaciones – more goods – not for any changes in the structure .
 The strike wave was a complete dying away of the strike wave by the summer of 1959 . After they had been met, with large wage increases and a rapid decline of 36% in unemployment, they led not to further demands .
 Unlike in 1933, there was hardly any looting or any other more obvious signs of class struggle in the cities . It was necessary to sentence only a few hundred of Batista’s murderers to death, and apart from that there was almost complete social peace .
 In the countryside too, the 1959 land reform was not at all the result of spontaneous squatting by peasants that the government was only later forced to legitimate . The government was forced to legitimate land reform in 1959 .
 There is virtual universal recognition that this again was instituted from above . On the contrary, there are virtual universal recognisals that this is not the same thing .
 In Chile this led to subsequent pressure by both peasants and workers on the government . But in Chile, the government has been accused of corruption in the past . This led to the government being forced to crack down on corruption .
 They occupied the land and many factories demanding land reform and nationalisation . They went far beyond the moderate proposals put forward by the Allende government . They were also demanding nationalisation, nationalisation and land reform .
 Instead of leading to renewed pressure from below, it left “the overwhelming majority of Cuba’s workers and peasants very satisfied with the new regime,” one commentator said . Instead of renewed pressure, it was left ‘very satisfied’ with the regime .
 The major reason must be found in his long standing commitment to diversify the economy, to end its dependency on the U.S. and the vagaries of the world sugar market .
 The rapid increase in wages, the fall in unemployment, the drastic reduction in rents and the cheapening of electricity, telephone and medicine charges; all put much more money into the workers’ pockets .
 This automatically increased the demand for consumption goods – all of which had to be imported – and food and food . This led to a rise in consumption goods and demand for food and consumption goods .
 Cuba had more than 80% of the exports from which the imports had to be paid . This situation could not be allowed to persist indefinitely . The latter automatically put pressure on the land available for sugar, putting pressure on sugar .
 Cuba’s almost total dependency on it as a source of foreign earnings . The level of demand in the domestic economy was much too unpredictable for most capitalists to want to take the risk of relying on it .
 Without that, there is no advantage attached to investing productive capital in Cuba . And, without that, no advantage, it would be better to invest in the country .
 With a very small and highly unpredictable home market, there is not the least chance of the situation changing if the bourgeoisie was simply left to its own devices . With just about the highest wage levels in Latin America, there was not the most chance of changing the situation .
 It was in no way a socialist measure, nor one which led to collectivisation in any other form . The measure was no way of leading to collectingivisation, nor a form of collectivising . It was a measure which was not linked to a socialist movement .
 It abolished only the very largest estates, and it did not solve the problem of the indebtedness of the small peasant . It did not abolish only the large estates .
 One agronomist sharply contrasted the 1959 reform with those in East Europe in the early 1950s . Instead, he suggested strong parallels with the 1950s in Italy in 1949-50 instead .
 Something like 25% of the cultivable land was covered by the Act, and was distributed to the poorer peasants . Yet for all that, something like 25 per cent of the cultivated land was .
 The effect was to increase the proportion of land that was devoted to immediate consumption rather than providing the country with an exportable surplus . This added considerably to Cuba’s problems .
 To increase productivity significantly would have required levels of investment and skilled personnel that were just not available at the time . Much of land previously owned by the latifundistas was poorly tended .
 The initial reforms were in no way reminiscent of the state-capitalist ‘collectivisations’ of Eastern Europe in the 1950s, nor Cuba’s own 1963 reform . But what they did do was to create a situation that only a state-capital programme could solve .
 It is important to stress the ideological or subjective factors at work too, as well as the fact that the debate is being debated .
 It is impossible to underestimate the significance of the popularity of the new regime, or the widespread trust it engendered in the Cuban masses . The new regime's popularity has engendered widespread trust in the masses, says the writer .
 First of all there was the ascetic revolutionary purity of the rebels which continued while they were in power . First of them there was a revolutionary purity, which continued to be in power, even after they were overthrown .
 Cuba enacted draconian measures such as the death penalty for the misappropriation of public funds against bureaucrats, while at the same time making the biggest efforts to eradicate illiteracy, Cuba had ever known . Cuba had made efforts to eradicating illiteracy and to massively extend preventive health measures .
 The enormous confidence in the regime that these measures created made sure that a large reserve of loyalty – above all on the part of the workers and peasants – was built up for when the state itself began to take on a more active role in the direction .
 Before that America and its multinationals coexisted peaceably enough with the new regime . Before that U.S. and multinationals were co-existing peaceably with the regime . The new regime has been in power since 2009 .
 A substantial amount of US-owned land was involved . Washington demanded full and immediate compensation for lands seized in the 1959 Act . It refused financial support to the Cuban regime, supported the most reactionary of the Batista followers .
 Castro was forced to use the state in a much more activist way in the economy . Faced with the refusal of the USA to grant aid, and an economy that could not survive in its old laissez-faire form without such aid, Castro used the state more activist in
 In September 1959 he announced that henceforth economic development would have to take place under the auspices of the state . He announced in September 1959 that economic development had to be taken into account .
 The property gained by Batista’s followers during his regime was confiscated at the end of the year . Batista's followers gained the land they gained during the regime .
 Castro at this point still hung back from nationalisation measures . Castro at the time was reluctant to nationalise the government .
 Cuba’s attempt to break from the stranglehold of dependence was connected with oil . The next phase in Cuba's attempt to free itself from dependence is connected to oil . Cuba's next phase is to try and break from dependence on oil .
 The USSR agreed to supply a limited amount of crude to Cuba in the summer of 1960 in exchange for sugar . Cuba agreed to receive crude in return for sugar from the USSR in the 1960s . The Soviet Union agreed to provide a limited supply of crude in exchange with sugar .
 Texaco, Shell and Esso refused to refine it in their Cuban refineries . But the multinationals – Texaco and Shell – refused to ref refine it .
 Cuban government seized the installations at the end of June 1960 . The Cuban government reacted swiftly, seizing the installations .
 This was followed by the confiscation of about $800m of U.S. corporation property – in oil, sugar, electricity and mines . The confiscation was followed immediately after . This was . followed immediately . by confiscation .
 The USA responded with a total trade embargo to and from Cuba – a devastating economic blow given Cuba’s total dependence on the United States connection . Cuba responded to the US embargo, and Cuba was left dependent on the U.S.
 The Cuban regime completed its hold on industry in October 1960 with the nationalisation of banks, hotels, cinemas and most of the factories and shops . Finally the Cuban regime was able to nationalise the banks and hotels .
 Kennedy promised his voters that the United States would send its troops in to “protect American interests” Not surprisingly therefore, the Cubans reacted by defending their territorial integrity as best they could .
 Committees for the Defence of the Revolution were set up in September 1960 . First of all, they set up the Committees for Defence of The Revolution . In September 1960, the Committees set up .
 Small squads of vigilantes formed to observe and report on possible fifth columnists . Organised on block-by-block basis, their purpose was to form small squads to monitor and report .
 In October 1960 the popular militias were introduced; mainly for guard and watch duties on strategic installations, so that the army could be freed for major military operations .
 The initiative was again taken by the USA, which decided to oust Castro militarily . Castro was ousted by the U.S. in 1953 .
 It supported incursions and raids by extreme right-wing ex-Batista supporters and mercenaries . 1,400 of them were backed, armed, and ferried there by U.S. authorities .
 The landing, in the Bay of Pigs, was to be coordinated with uprisings throughout Cuba of the extreme-right underground, and the USA was to provide the necessary air cover and fire-power . The landing was planned to coincide with an uprising of Cuba's extreme-
 Militarily the invaders were wiped out by the local militias, without them even having to call on the support of Havana . The local militias wiped out the invaders, without the help of Havana, without .
 Support for the Castro regime was so complete that everywhere else in Cuba the tiny insurgent forces were immediately isolated and defeated . Everywhere else, Cuba's support for the regime was complete, the rebels were defeated .
 The effect of the abortive invasion was to strengthen the support for Castro among the vast majority of the Cuban workers and peasants faced with the threat from the colossus a mere 80 miles away .
 The militia and CDRs were never seriously put to the test after the Bay of Pigs fiasco . As it happened the militia and the CDRs never seriously tested .
 The social basis of support for the old order within Cuba itself was being rapidly eliminated by the fundamental changes that the nationalisation and land reform measures were producing . The U.S. did not have to invade and the social basis for support was being eliminated .
 More than 1/2 million refugees left Cuba in the first 3 years of the Castro regime, unable to make a living from the exploitation of others any more .
 The Batista ex-officers, the pampered state officials, the elite professions, the landowners and so on. Then followed . Then followed the business men, the . Batista . Ex-officer: The . business men and the . elite professions .
 By 1961 the layers of Cuban society that would have enabled them to ‘Cubanise’ had more or less disappeared . However much the U.S. might have wanted to put the clock back, by 1961 it had already disappeared .
 Castro regime had quite effectively removed opposition to its continued rule . Castro regime was effectively removed from opposition to continue rule .
 Then came the 1965-69 Chinese period; with the emphasis on sugar remaining, but presided over by a small and highly militarised CP . The emphasis on 'moral' incentives to workers was largely ‘moral’ to workers .
 This has involved the militarisation of the economy, renewed emphasis on industrialisation and centralised planning on the basis of joint Cuban/Russian control . This has led to the introduction of joint control of the Cuban economy .
 These are all points to which we shall return in the following sections . We shall return to the previous sections of this article .
 In particular we shall leave the question of the nature of the ruling class that emerged till towards the end of the article . We shall leave it to the end, but we will leave it until the end .
 Castro and Che Guevara’s commitment to industrialisation was unyielding . Yet they had no experience of bureaucratic organisation nor any clear conception of how to change from expanding consumption to accumulating capital .
 The way out of dependency, according to Castro and Che, was the development of heavy industry . Heavy industry is the key to lifting the Soviet Union from dependency, Che said .
 The inexperience of the barbudos led them into the arms of the Cuban Communists . This led to a new interest in the Russian experience .
 The period 1962-63, then, was a period of planning, Che’s statements on planning returned repeatedly to the Soviet experience as a precedent for Cuba . as well as the direct involvement of ‘friendly socialist countries” in the actual preparation of the plan, he says
 The consequences of this shift in policy were profound at both economic and political levels, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The consequences were profound"
 The creativity and enthusiasm unleashed by the Revolution of 1959 were now mobilised in support of a central plan evolved by a rapidly expanding state bureaucracy .
 An increasing emphasis was laid on labour discipline, on ‘socialist competition’ and workers’ direct management of the implementation of central plans . Workers were encouraged to be more involved in the development of plans to implement them .
 The role of the trade unions was sharply curtailed, and replaced by technical commissions in the workplace . Trade unions were replaced with technical commissions, replacing them with trade unions .
 Identity cards were introduced in 1962 and made obligatory for workers . In 1962, identity cards were made mandatory for workers in the UK .
 Cuba’s integration as an unequal partner in a new circle of dependency . The outcome was not economic independence but Cuba's integration as a partner in the new circle .
 More than a quarter of the total national income was devoted to accumulation . The country's economy is estimated to be worth more than $1 billion .
 Living standards increased slightly, though they were based on longer hours at work and an attempt to speed up . Living standards also increased slightly .
 The industrialisation attempt itself sucked in a vast number of imports of the machinery, stocks, technology etc. needed to get industry moving . But the industrialisation attempts sucked in many of the goods needed for the industry .
 These were almost entirely provided by the Eastern Bloc countries, and of course they needed to be paid for . They were almost all of the money that was needed to pay for .
 Cuba had only sugar as a viable export – at least until some of the newer industries had matured sufficiently . It was precisely sugar that had been de-emphasised in the attempt to industrialise in 1961 .
 Cuba’s ability to find foreign sources of foreign earnings sharply decreased . So just when increased . earnings were needed to . pay for capital imports, Cuba's ability to . find them sharply decreased. So just . when increased sources of . foreign earnings are needed to pay for . capital
 Agricultural produce available for export was declining even faster than the figures suggest . And this meant that agricultural produce was declining faster than it should have been exported .
 Unless the catastrophic decline in sugar production could be halted, there could be no industrialisation because there would be no money to pay for it . Unless there is a halt, there would not be any industrialisation .
 They were forced to re-emphasise sugar again, and to put off industrialisation until they had the foreign exchange to finance it . The sugar industry was forced to stop industrialisation because of the lack of foreign exchange .
 Instead collectivisation needed to be extended very considerably so that the state would have much more control over what was going on . Collectivisation must be extended considerably to give the state more control of what is going on, says the author .
 There had to be a set of devices to increase labour productivity, he says . Second thing was to be to increase productivity, and third was to increase the use of devices .
 In both the policies of the Cuban regime failed in the years 1963-65 . In both of these respects, the policies failed in both of the three decades . The Cuban regime did not succeed in the Cuban revolution .
 The yield of rice has declined from 17 to 14 quintals per hectare on collective farms . But tubers of rice are three times greater on private than on state farms .
 State Investments in four sectors of the Cuban economy 1962-65 1962 1963 1964 1965 . Agriculture 29.4 24.3 30.5 40.5 Industry 23.1 21.5 29.1 Housing, Community Services &c 13.5 11.4 9.4 Education,
 Despite an increasing labour force, industrial production remained stagnant . Industrial production has remained stagnant in spite of an increasing workforce .
 Helped by better weather conditions, the sugar harvest improved considerably .
 It increased from the abysmal 1963 level of 3.88 million tons to 4.47 million tons in 1964 and 6.15 million in 1965 . In 1965, it increased from 3.87 million tons of tons to 5.15million tons .
 Most of this was destined for the USSR, which, in the years after 1961, was increasingly called in to bale out the Cuban economy . Most of the money was destined to the USSR .
 Russian policy towards Cuba has been conditioned by the progress of detente with the U.S. and economic interests . Russian economic interests are at stake in Cuba .
 It is the first that explains the cool reception in Moscow of the news of the Revolution in 1959 . It was not until February 1960 that a delegation led by Mikoyan reached Cuba and declared its support for the new revolution .
 For Russia, Cuba was a useful bargaining counter through the ups and downs of detente . Russia was a market for its goods and a producer of the sugar whose consumption in Russia was rising constantly . Cuba was also a good bargaining counter .
 The Cubans looked to Russia for aid, for machinery, for military assistance and for credits . Cubans sought Russia for help, for equipment, for credits and for credit .
 Cuba’s $1 million per day aid from the USSR meant that it was receiving a per-capita aid equivalent to the total income of people living in poorer parts of Africa during this period . Soviet technicians became increasingly evident after 1961 and Cuba's $1.million per day
 By 1963, with the turn back to sugar, the Russians contribution did not fall but grew due to the need for the industrialisation of sugar production . Russia's contribution to sugar production in 1963 was due to demand for industrialisation .
 The agreement signed between Cuba and Russia in 1963 established a quota of 5 million tons per year of sugar exports to the USSR . The five year plan of 1965-70 reinforced that decision by projecting a gradual increase in sugar production .
 The payment for Cuban sugar exports to Russia was to be in the main in non-convertible currency . It is worth underlining that the payment for Cuba's sugar exports was not to be paid in cash . The payment was in the form of non-Convertible currencies .
 Cuba could not use non-convertible currencies to purchase goods outside the Russian-bloc countries . This meant that while the USSR guaranteed Cuba a market for its sugar, it ensured at the same time that Cuban imports would come from the USSR .
 Russian sugar beet was for more expensive to produce than Cuban sugar . A considerable amount of agricultural land in Russia could be released to other more productive crops .
 Russia has found in Cuba a market for its goods and a field of investment; its aid has served not so much as a support for Cuba as to reinforce and deepen the domination of sugar over the economy . Thus in a strictly economic sense, Russia has . found . in Cuba, Russia
 The bulk of their investment enters sugar and related industries . The Russians themselves are aware of this–that may be why they prefer to conceal it .
 Cuba's main export – to the exclusion of almost any other – continues to be sugar . Cuba’s limited development of its other natural resources has done nothing to alter the fundamental structure of the economy .
 The real benefit to Russia was geo-political, rather than economic, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia's influence in the Middle East is seen as an important part of the world, says Putin .
 USA was in the 1950s quite willing to sink millions of dollars into Yugoslavia to have a friend on Russia’s doorstep, so too with Russia over Cuba . In much the same way that the USA was . in the . 1950s, the USA . was willing to . sink
 Russia installed a number of intermediate range ballistic missiles on Cuban soil in the Autumn of 1962, making many American cities as vulnerable to nuclear attack . At a later stage, Cuba would be an important spokesperson for the global Russian interest within a non-aligned movement many of its members were hostile to
 Khrushchev turned back his ships and reached agreement with Kennedy without bothering to consult Castro over the missile bases . The Missile Crisis brought a large scale disillusionment with Russia .
 Cuba continued to be drawn into the Soviet camp, but a cautious debate was reopened on the question of the available strategies for economic development . This would not lead to any open criticism of Russia until 1965 .
 Cuba gained its reputation as a libertarian revolution between 1965 and 1970 . Che Guevara was a representative of a revolutionary purity symbolised in the figure of Che . The Cuban revolution was a symbol of a libertarian purity symbolising in the image of Che Guesgar .
 It was in these years that European intellectuals in search of the revolution made their way to Havana . The working class in the industrialised world seemed reluctant to make the revolution as it should be made .
 It was now that Cuba’s flamboyant support for guerrilla movements persuaded the revolutionaries of the Third World that Cuba was the home and the haven of Revolution. Cuba was now a haven of revolution, says historian John Avlon .
 There is a reality behind the appearances which points to the fact that the break may have been less radical than it first appeared . Yet, as elsewhere in the world, there is also a reality .
 It was a question of political mobilisation – convincing the Cuban working class to work harder, without an increase in their buying power . It was an issue that concerned the rational use of resources; but it was also a question . The issue was a matter of politics and mobilisation .
 Cuba deprived of a wide range of consumer goods because of a lack of foreign exchange coupled with the American blockade . And that was a political issue, particularly underlined in a country deprived of foreign goods . The U.S. has imposed a blockade on the island .
 The trouble with the ‘material incentives’ was simply that the scarcity of consumer goods made the material incentives available to very few workers, only 1.7% at first . ‘Material incentives” was simply because of the scarcity .
 The logical corollary, at the level of the whole economy , was that funding should be determined on the basis of the profitability of each plant . Funding should be based on the profitability each plant, the government said .
 Che Guevara, on the other hand, argued a different solution based fundamentally on Chinese experience . Che had argued that the solution should be based on the experience of the Chinese, rather than a solution .
 His arguments were set out in an essay written in 1965 called 'Man and socialism in Cuba'
 Underdevelopment, he argued, imposed upon any society seeking to break the circle a general and collective sacrifice . Underdevelopment is imposed upon by society, he said .
 It was necessary to replace self-reliance and self-interest, with a collective, social interest . Therefore it was necessary for the country to replace itself with a social interest, he said . He said .
 In this respect, he clearly identified with the Great Leap Forward, in which Mao had stressed the importance of the element of consciousness, of the replacement of individual with social consciousness . Mao's 'social consciousness' was a key part of the revolution, he said .
 Like Mao, Che recognised potential for popular mobilisation that still existed in Cuba, particularly behind the charismatic figure of Castro . Che sought to harness that to the development of the productive forces in Cuba .
 The objective conditions of scarcity did exist, but that the productive forces were not developed . The problem, however, was that the objective conditions did exist . The productive forces did not develop .
 Accumulation was the pressing need, for without it, the material base of the revolution could not exist . Without it, it would not exist, the revolution would not have existed .
 Che’s idealism ostensibly recognises the problem; yet in real terms the moral incentives formula, with its emphasis on the subjective conditions, on consciousness and the will of the people, represents a means of mobilising the workers and peasants against the state .
 Moral incentives in Cuba were designed to prepare the ground for a swing of investment away from consumption and social expenditure .
 Socialism is not what socialism is about, it is about freeing human beings from the slavery of want . Equal poverty is not equal poverty is about equal poverty, it's about freedom of want, says David Cameron .
 Che makes no mention of the state, which is assumed to be representative of the working masses, to be its voice and incarnation . The state is unquestioningly assumed to represent the working class .
 In this respect, Che’s vision of the relationship between state and people can be reintegrated into his political theory of revolution . Che's vision of state-to-people relationship can be reconciled with that of Che, writes David Frum .
 Che insists that it is the revolutionaries who make the revolution . In his “Guerrilla Warfare’s ‘Guerrilla warfare’, Che insists . Che insisted that it was the revolution that made revolution .
 The experience of the barbudos is generalised. and the assumption is drawn that willpower, the subjective conditions, can overcome the absence of the objective conditions for revolution. For example, the experience of a barbudos can be generalised .
 In the same way, the protagonist of the Cuban Revolution is the state, and not the Cuban working class . The state, not the working class, is the main character of the revolution, in Cuba, the state .
 Politics, in that sense, becomes the state’s activity among the masses . Politics is politics in the sense of the state, in which it becomes its activity among masses . Politicians in the U.S. become the state of the people .
 This explains why it is these same years of moral incentives that witness also tightening of labour discipline . It is also seen as a result of the tightening of discipline in the workplace .
 The Law of 1964-65 enforced sanctions for breaches of Labour Discipline . Grievance Commissions established in 1961 were abolished at the same time because they were regarded as too lenient . Labour Discipline was abolished in 1964 and 1965 .
 By 1969, the then Labour Minister Jorge Risquet, acknowledged that absenteeism was a permanent and growing problem . Yet in 1970 new and even harsher forms of persuasion were introduced, including entry of merit and demerit points on a worker’s identity card .
 Moral incentives are combined with coercive measures of state control . Thus at all stages, moral incentives were combined with state control, says the author .
 The key to explaining Cuba’s change in foreign policy is to be found here, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba's foreign policy has changed dramatically in recent years, he says .
 1966 also marked an important change in Cuban foreign policy . It was a shift away from the Russian orbit and towards Latin America .
 From then until 1970, Cuba again took on before the world the image of the pure guerrilla so dear to Regis Debray and other ‘Third worldists” in Europe . Cuba again became a model of guerrilla in the 1970s .
 Too poor to provide material incentives that would work, and requiring a powerful shift away from consumption if the foreign reserves necessary for industrialisation were to be generated, the moral incentives formula seemed at the time to be the only viable alternative .
 It is difficult to assess the significance this ‘revolutionary’ line had on labour discipline and productivity, but there is no doubt that it must have helped . It is impossible to assess how much this 'revolutionary' line helped .
 For the years 1965-70 were ones of stagnating or declining living standards . The years 1965/70 were those of stagnant or declining standards . For the past few years, living standards have been stagnating .
 The true extent of the decline is hidden by the figures because the Central Office of Statistics in Havana measured output in constant prices until 1966, but from 1967 it was measured in current prices . The decline would be sharper still if it were corrected for inflation .
 An exact estimate for the effect of this on the Cuban working class is a little difficult to measure, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Cuba’s output of consumption goods during this period can be obtained by Cuba's output of consuming goods . But some idea can be gleaned by the country's consumption of goods during that period .
 Only the production of eggs, rice and fish actually went up . Two of the twenty remained more or less constant . The production of rice, eggs and fish increased .
 When one takes into account the fact that the population grew by 10% in this period, the extent of the deprivations that the working class suffered become even more manifest . The working-class suffered even more deprivation .
 After 1964 its strategic interest in Latin America – well served till then by Cuba – led to a series of new approaches to bourgeois regimes in the region . After 1964, the US had a new approach to Latin America .
 Frei had come to power in Chile in 1964 with a programme of industrialisation and capitalist development . In Venezuela the COPEI government promised a new version of social democracy . In Brazil the military government, while brutally repressive, had expanded trade. In Brazil, the military had a programme
 With all these regimes, the Soviet government sought economic contacts. The Soviet government wanted to make contacts with the world's most powerful regimes .
 Cuban state set out to establish an area of political independence from the Soviet Union . Organisation of Latin American Solidarity, the Tricontinental organisation, the Cultural Congress of 1967, and the Revolutionary Offensive in 1968, were launched .
 The identification of exploited peoples and colonised nations, however, had only an ideological significance . The identification had only been ideological significance, however .
 Castro still saw the central question as development, Castro said . Castro was unbroken continuity from 1961 onwards . Castro saw development as a central question in Cuba .
 The attempts by the Cuban state to gain political legitimacy in the world were in the first place a response to political developments within Cuba . The Cuban state's attempts to gain the world's political legitimacy were in response to developments in Cuba .
 They were designed as a massive exercise of ideological mobilisation . Secondly, they were designed to be an exercise in ideological mobilising . They are designed as an exercise of ideology, not politics .
 Cuba has a consistent fall in production, a gathering disillusionment among Cuban Workers, and an increasingly draconian body of laws controlling everyday life . Yet they were coupled within Cuba with a falling production and a growing disillusionment .
 In defending the invasion he was, as always, responding first of all to the domestic situation within Cuba . It was a conciliatory speech; in defending it, he was responding first to domestic situation .
 The bad sugar harvest, it was clear, underlined the failure of the period which had culminated in the Revolutionary Offensive of 1968 – the end of the search for an alternative strategy . Bad sugar harvest underlined failure of period which culminated in 1968 .
 The only aid that Cuba did receive came from Rumania – and that was only of symbolic value . Cuba did not receive much of the money it received from the Soviet Union .
 The Czechoslovakia speech was an act of public reconciliation with Russia, says David Cameron . It was a recognition that the austerity measures of the previous years had failed, he says .
 Russia's full scale intervention in all levels of Cuban life put the seal on Cuba’s future . Russia’�s full-scale intervention in Cuba put the . seal on the future of the Cuban people .
 Cuba would once again be confirmed as the world’s main sugar producer, strongly dependent on Russia . From then on, Cuba would become the world's main sugar-producer .
 Cuba devoted itself to ‘La Gran Zafra’ – the search for the 10 million ton sugar harvest . In between times, Cuba dedicated itself to La Gran Zafa, Cuba's search for 10 million tons .
 The sugar industry is dependent on selling additional sugar on the open market . Only then would be able to earn enough to begin to industrialise independently of Russian aid .
 Cuba’s dependence on sugar confirmed . Cuba's dependency on sugar confirms its dependence on the country's dependence .
 The Zafra, then, was above all a political event, a great mass mobilisation around sugar, and around the nation . It was a great mobilisation of sugar and the nation, and was a political moment .
 In a real sense, though tens of thousands of people did move to the cane fields in response to Castro’s call, their contribution was more ideological than physical . Their neglect of their own areas of work had a disastrous effect on the economy .
 While the zafra was big , it was nowhere near the 10 million ton target . The index of production had fallen considerably in the rest of the agricultural sector and in industry .
 Castro’s speech on Czechoslovakia was the first of a number of moves which were to culminate in 1970, in a series of agreements which confirmed Cuba's dependency on the Soviet Union . Castro's speech was first of several moves to cement Cuba's dependence on Russia .
 On January 2nd, 1969 Castro’s speech on the 10th anniversary of the Revolution contained no mention of Guevara . On the other hand, it made a point of referring repeatedly to Soviet aid . On January 1st, 1969, Castro made a reference to Soviet
 In the following year absenteeism and low productivity became a serious problem . Castro was only able to make real inroads into the problem with the re-introduction of material incentives and wage differentiations .
 The connections between this and growing Soviet involvement may not be immediately obvious . Yet they were intimately interwoven . The connections were not immediately obvious; yet they were very important .
 New Russian aid in mid-1970 carried quite reasonable terms of interest . But there were other, less visible strings attached whose effects would he profound . New Russian assistance in mid-'70s carried quite modest terms of . interest .
 Soviet economic planning methods included devolution of responsibility for the profitability of individual plants to their managers, and establishment of material incentives as an instrument in achieving that profitability . Furthermore, it was effectively conditional on Cuban acceptance of a new role in the world .
 The new involvement of the USSR in the Cuban economy carried a heavy price tag . For the new involvement in the Soviet Union in Cuba, it was a heavy cost tag .
 From now on, all government functions would be organised through, and determined by, the Cuban-Soviet Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation . All government functions will be decided by the Commission .
 The period of ‘revolutionary idealism’ had attempted to deepen the exploitation of Cuban workers by the state . It had done it in their name, while undermining the autonomy of all the mass organisations which might have given those workers some autonomous political expression .
 In a crisis or a revolutionary confrontation the rhetoric of sacrifice and political frenzy can be sustained for a time – but only for so long . The rhetoric of dramatic sacrifice is sustained for the sake of a crisis, but can only be sustained . In a revolution or a crisis the rhetoric can be
 The claims for the ‘new Cuban man’ had been underpinned with an increasing concentration of power, a proliferation of coercive regulations and controls . Mass organisations which were no more than conduits for the channelling down of state policies .
 By 1970, Castro had formally announced the abandonment of the armed road, and the shelving of the dream of rapid industrialisation propounded in the early sixties by himself and Guevara . By 1970 he had formally abandoned the abandonment .
 The groundwork had been firmly laid for what came to be called the ‘institutionalisation” of the Cuban Revolution . The groundwork was firmly laid .
 The second decade of the Cuban Revolution brought Cuba fully within the Soviet ambit . Top Cuba in the 70s was a Soviet state .
 Cuba’s economic relations with the USSR in the mid-seventies were very similar to its place in the American system before 1959 . The shape of Cuban politics increasingly took on the central features of Soviet political life in the 60s and 70s .
 While the level of consumption may be rising in absolute terms, it is unequally shared . The price of that privilege is loyalty and adherence to a party line that is never open to public discussion or amendment .
 In the realm of foreign policy, Cuba’s internationalism of the seventies is a poor parody of the idealistic concept of revolutionary solidarity which had been claimed for it in the late 1960s . In the 1970s, Cuba's internationalist internationalism was an idealistic idea
 The contradictions between the rhetoric and the reality have promoted a bureaucracy whose control over the ‘general affairs of society’ has required an increasingly repressive response to pressure from below, writes CNN.com.com's John Defterios .
 The Zafra of 1970 had dislocated the Cuban economy and brought the Cuban state face to face with its incapacity to industrialise rapidly, as the optimistic predictions of Guevara had been made .
 The economic projections for the coming decade placed sugar firmly back at the centre of the Cuban economy in the long term .
 This was the definitive renunciation of the idealism of Man and Socialism in Cuba . Poor Guevara must have turned in his grave, for this was the defeat of his ideals .
 If this required the intensified exploitation of the Cuban working class, then that was an unfortunate but “objective” necessity, it would have been unfortunate, but ‘objective, necessity,’ says the Cuban president .
 The full integration of Cuba into the Russian economy would be completed . And in the meantime, the full integration would be complete, the Russian president said .
 By 1973, 67.5% of all Cuban trade was with the USSR . Its chief export, sugar, was exchanged for Soviet manufactures and equipment, whose prices were up to 50% higher .
 Even Cuba’s trade with the West, although much smaller, only continued with Russian support and guarantee . Even Cuba's trade with West, which was smaller, continued with Russia's guarantee and guarantee.
 Castro’s animated defence of Russian foreign policy at the Conference of Non-Aligned Nations at Algiers in 1973 was its political expression . Joining Comecon in 1972 was the logical confirmation of this new relationship with Russia .
 And there are other consequences too, particularly over economic policies and methods of planning . And there were other consequences, including over economic policy and planning .
 In 1973 a number of prices were decontrolled, and three years later prices on all other non-essential items were too . In 1973 prices on items such as toiletries and toiletries were also cut .
 In 1976 a form of profit-sharing with the managers of state enterprises was introduced, together with the concept of the autonomy of individual enterprises . In 1976, the government introduced the idea of profit sharing with state enterprises .
 The implications were enormous; far from the gradual abolition of money, social relations in Cuba were increasingly expressed through the 1970s in money terms . The implications of the Cuban economy were enormous .
 A managerial class, economically and politically privileged and acting in terms of profit and loss, was fast being created, says David Cameron . "A managerial class is fast becoming a managerial class," he says .
 In 1980, it is hard to distinguish between the dependency of the Cuban economy before 1959, and its renewed dependency in the third decade of the Revolution . Cuba's economy was dependent on the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Cuba continues to be the world’s major sugar supplier, the bulk of it going to the USSR which in turn provides Cuba with the industrial goods, and the oil, it does not and cannot produce itself . Cuba is a major source of sugar and industrial goods .
 In 1980, Cuba is re-affirmed as a fundamentally single-product economy, incapable of diversification, but now controlled from Moscow . Cuba is now controlled by Moscow, Cuba's economy is now dominated by Moscow .
 Cuba’s economic ‘takeoff’ is postponed indefinitely indefinitely . And the prospective is for a deepening dependence, as trade deficits grow . Cuba's economic "takeoff" has been postponed indefinitely .
 During the revolution itself the working class played, as we have seen, no active role in the revolution .
 Increasing living standards – albeit often accompanied by various shortages – retained the support of the regime by largely non-coercive means until the middle-1960s . The regime did not significantly change this role .
 These are all questions that have to be answered before a definitive answer can be given to the class nature of Cuban society . These are questions that must be answered, says the Cuban president .
 The only organisation of or for workers vis-a-vis production has been the trade union; though there has also been a loose movement – the Advanced Workers movement .
 First proposed by Castro in 1968, it was formed as a pro-regime cadre of foremen, charge hands etc. who were entrusted with the task of speeding up production . First proposed in 1968 by Castro .
 Those aspiring to such status needed to be proposed by the workforce, though they were actually selected at the level of government . The workforce was required to be selected by the government .
 At this stage the movement was no more than an arm of the ‘revolutionary offensive’ of the late 1960s . At this time the movement had been no more important than the 'revolutionary' movement .
 With the end of rationing and the freeing of price controls and the reintroduction of material incentives after 1970, the situation changed rapidly . But with the ending of . rationing, the . situation . changed rapidly.
 Material incentives and widening differentials proceeded throughout the 1970s . Material incentives continued to grow throughout the period of the decade .
 ‘moral incentives’, so popular in the late 1960s, were more or less abolished in the 1970s in favour of material incentives . So "moral incentives" were replaced with material incentives in the 1980s .
 In this context of widening material differentials, it is easy to see why the Advanced Worker movement began to confer such material privileges . The Advanced Worker Movement is based on the idea that workers should have material rights .
 The minimum wage ceased to play any real role of preserving equality, and soon the bonus system ensured that an Advanced Worker could earn easily twice as much as ordinary workers .
 By the mid-1970s the ‘social wage’ was also being increasingly treated as a privilege . The social wage was also increasingly being treated as an increasingly valuable privilege .
 It is no coincidence that day nurseries began to charge fees in 1977, nor that access to housing became dependent on Advanced Worker status . Access to housing is dependent on advanced worker status .
 In no way therefore can the Advanced Workers movement be seen as even remotely connected with bringing socialism into the workplace . The Advanced Workers Movement is not connected with socialism .
 There was no question of defending workers against the employers, because the employer was now the state . Employers were assumed to have the same interest as that of the workers, the state said .
 The leaders were not elected by the workers, but directly appointed by the regime . The leaders of the workers are not elected, but instead chosen by the government .
 All this cut away the basis for the existence of trade unions – even as collaborative bodies . Trade unions are no longer a collaborative body, even though they are collaborative bodies.
 The unions were given managerial functions but no managerial power . Instead of managerial functions, they were instead given managerial powers . The unions are given managerial function but no management power .
 For a time the regime attempted to use ‘Advanced Workers’ who were encouraged and given facilities to coordinate worker-management cooperation on the shop floor . The regime tried to use the 'Advanced Workers' to coordinate workers' cooperation .
 The worker may have a right established by the Revolution ... and there is no one to defend him . The worker is not protected by the law, he says .
 About 40% of the places were uncontested . Turn-out was only about one half of that expected by the government . No canvassing was allowed apart from that put out by electoral commission .
 Nothing has been done to implement any of the proposals that came out of the CTC Congress in 1973 for greater trade union participation in the protection of workers’ rights .
 In these crucial respects there has been no significant change from the conditions that led to the virtual disappearance of trade unions in the late 1960s . In these circumstances, trade unions have been virtually eliminated in the past .
 They help organise holidays, recreation and training, and organise holidays and training . Tighter labour discipline of the 1970s has made them important role, but also role as arm of management .
 In the last 10 years there has been an increased emphasis in engineering on ‘scientific’ management, using works study engineers to optimise the output of each worker . So too has there in Cuba and it has been performed by the unions themselves .
 Since 1970 there has been a much tighter system of identity cards and labour records . Work quotas have been adjusted and increased, absenteeism has been cracked down on by an 'anti-loafing' law .
 The organisation of production in Russia now resembles that in Russia quite closely . It is now a model of production for the first time .
 Trade unions are the only organisation which embraced the mass of the working class . But they must be set in their turn in the context of what is claimed by many to be a significant move in the direction of popular democracy .
 In 1976, the experiment was extended to the whole country, and elections were held for delegates to the Municipal Assemblies . The experiment was expanded to the entire country, with elections in 1976 .
 What poder popular did represent was a further step in devolution to the local level of the devolution of the detailed implementation of government plans and strategies . It is the first step in the process of devolution .
 Labour government attempted to devolve control over house repairs to council tenants in 1976 . But all socialists protested because it did not involve devolution of power, but only of responsibility for implementation .
 While local government was evolving in Cuba, control over organisations in the workplace, at the point of production, in the living areas and on the land was ever more restricted . And exactly the same is true for Cuba; for .
 Poder popular has to be matched against the constricted role of trade unions . Trade unions have a role to play in the UK's most successful political system .
 Dominguez notes the almost complete unanimity on all issues at the meeting of the National Assembly . Most major decisions were taken by acclamation, including the election of the Council of Ministers .
 In general, the same conclusions can be drawn for the other mass organisations, despite their superficial resemblance to organs of power .
 The Committees for the Defence of the Revolution were set up to watch for ‘counter-revolutionary activity’ after the Bay of Pigs . The Committees are a case in point. They have been a point in point .
 By the late 1960s their role had developed into being one of the main organisations for tapping manpower reserves in the economy as well as promoting public health, education and general propaganda functions .
 At their height in 1970 they included fully 3. million people – a remarkable figure for a country of only 8 million . At the height of the 1970s, they included 3.million people .
 Since this whole method is now universally recognised as actually counterproductive, the regime’s need for the CDRs has diminished accordingly . The regime's need for CDRs is diminished accordingly, says the author .
 They were never permitted to formulate policy, only to implement the policy given to them from above . They were not allowed to form policy, but to implement it from above, they said .
 The other mass organisation set up in the period around the Bay of Pigs invasion – the people’s militia – had a shorter history . The people's militia had a short history .
 By 1964, with the United States military threat fading, they were disarmed . The remaining personnel were incorporated into the army reserve . In 1973 they were abolished .
 The Federation of Cuban Women, a parallel body to the CDRs, has shared its fate . It has been in the hands of the CDR since it was founded in 1959 .
 A mass organisation of 1.1 million at its height, also charged with a principal role over public health and volunteer labour, it has had all too little effect on changing the male domination of production and society .
 A massive campaign to get women into the workforce in the 1969-70 period failed to retain the majority of them . A massive number of women did not retain their place in the workforce .
 The Family Code of 1976 reaffirmed the equality of men and women in the home . But it did nothing to socialise the functions of women, nor to acknowledge the continuing exclusion of women from political life .
 Cuba has at various times created a variety of mass organisations . Since the revolution therefore, Cuba has created a number of mass groups . Cuba has also created various mass organisations since the revolution .
 But none of them at any time has been able or willing to do anything but implement the already fixed policy of the regime .
 Castro did not simply lay hold of the existing state apparatus . But it is equally true that Castro laid hold on the existing apparatus . Castro was not simply a dictator, but a dictator .
 There is no way he could have done so – Batista’s corrupt state machine was definitively smashed in 1959 . Batista's corrupt state machines were definitively smashed by 1959 .
 The army, the courts, the state bureaucracy etc. etc. collapsed like a pack of cards . The army and the courts failed to cope with the collapse of the country's political system .
 The July 26th Movement took over from the rebel army and the petit-bourgeois intelligentsia of the July 27th Movement .
 U.S. blockade changed Cuba's social situation very rapidly, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba has been hit hard by the blockade, he says . Cuba is now in the throes of a social transformation, says Sutter.
 The regime found itself in need of a stratum of reliable people who could run the nationalised industries and the collective farms . The regime was found to need reliable people to run the industries and collective farms.
 The blockade and attack on the wealthier urban population also ate into the support for Castro in the milieu that the movement had recruited from . What is more is more the blockade and the attack on wealthier urban residents ate into Castro's support for him .
 The capitalists, the pimps and the croupiers included not just the capitalists, but also, for instance, two thirds of Cuba’s doctors . Two thirds of Cuban doctors were Cuban doctors, according to the Communist Party .
 Had Castro continued to rely solely on the 26th July Movement, he could not have survived the transformation of the society over which he was presiding . Castro could not survive without the movement, he says .
 He made sure that it was easy for the old ruling class to leave the country, he says . He says. First of all whenever he moved decisively against any sections of the old . ruling class such as the landowners or the businessmen, he said .
 In the late 1960s, he greatly strengthened the army and used this strength to militarise both the party and the civil administration, thus extending his control throughout Cuban society . Finally, in the late . 1960s he used this . strength to . militarise . both the . party and
 It has held only one congress in its entire history, and that was in 1975 – ten years after it was set up . Only one congress was held in 1975, and it took place in ten years .
 It was kept fairly small to begin with, and was allowed to expand only at the rate that ‘trusty’ members could be found for it . It was allowed only to expand at a rate that 'trusty' members could find it .
 Even from its inception it was dominated by the military, its first Central Committee was more than two thirds composed of top army brass . Even from the inception it has been dominated by military .
 Fidel and Raul Castro were the first and second in command of the army . As such these members were of course under the direct military discipline of the Castro brothers .
 The military influence continued in the party and was extended considerably in the area of civil administration . By the mid-1960s, the army had already taken over many non-military functions such as organisation of production, cutting the cane, criticising dissidents etc.
 Fidel Castro was already first secretary of the party, commander in chief of the army and also prime minister . The constitution hardly added anything new to the Castro family . Fidel Castro had already been the party's first secretary, the army's commander and prime minister.
 Without congresses there are in fact no means at all for this to be done . Central Committee is supposed to be elected from below, and is in turn supposed to elect the higher party bodies .
 In practice the Secretariat is, as in Russia, a self-perpetuating clique . In practice, it's as much as Russia, it is a self perpetuating, self-defending clique.
 The army achieved this hegemony in Cuba in the late 1960s not only because it was Fidel’s pliant tool, but because of its efficiency, it was also efficient . Fidel Castro's army was a 'pliant tool' for the Cuban government in the 1960s .
 The years from 1966 to 1970 showed a decline of more than 1% in per-capita GDP even according to the regime’s own figures . Industrial and agricultural development in Cuba in the late 1960s was quite disastrous .
 During these years all forms of cost accounting were eliminated, in the attempt to substitute ‘moral incentives’ for material incentives . ‘Morality’ was replaced with ‘material incentives,’ according to the Government .
 Only 81/2 million tons of sugar were produced by this method . The virtual collapse of the rest of the economy forced Castro to make a sharp reversal of policy .
 This left the army as the only instrument that worked at all efficiently in Cuba . The army was left as the last instrument to work efficiently in the country . The Cuban army was only instrument of efficiency in Cuba's war of power .
 It was the only organ untouched by Cuba’s disastrous ‘Chinese’ experiment . Its cadre of officers had been trained in Russia from the early 1960s .
 Its technicians and other skilled personnel were not ignored or put on other work – as occurred elsewhere in the economy . It was not the same thing that happened elsewhere, but it was not ignored by the government .
 The militarisation of the economy and the administration seemed the obvious – indeed the only – solution to the crisis of the late 1960s . For these reasons the militarisation . of the . economy seemed to be the obvious . solution .
 The command structure, size and efficiency of the latter – coupled with the militarisation of the economy after its collapse in the late 1960s – ensured that it played the crucial role in cementing together and structuring the relatively stable Cuban ruling class of the past 10 years .
 The relationship between the Cuban state and the mass of the people remains unchanged . The internal struggle within the bureauracy continues, but the relationship between state and mass remains unchanged.
 Power resides in the 18 overlapping members of the Politburo and its Secretariat . The Council of Ministers and the Council of State elected by the National Assembly are also in power .
 Only 3 people are members of all three bodies – Fidel, his brother Raul Castro and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez . Only 3 members of the three bodies are included in all bodies .
 In effect, all leading posts in Cuban organisations are determined in the last analysis within a tiny circle of power, whose domination is and will for the foreseeable future be unchallenged .
 The increasing differentiation within the Cuban working class is not, then, the fruit of a differential development of political consciousness among sections of workers, but the creation of new layers of privileged individuals who are dependent upon the Cuban bureacuracy for their continuing prosperity .
 Since 1970 sugar has not been allowed to disrupt the rest of the economy as it did before . Cuba's state capitalism has been subordinated to the USSR .
 There has been a distribution of resources throughout the economy that is much more rationally tied in with the regime’s goals of development and accumulation . Skilled personnel have been re-introduced and there has been an increase in skilled personnel .
 First five years of the 1970s saw a healthier growth rate in the Cuban economy . The first five years saw a much healthier growth growth rate .
 The militarisation of the economy has not, however, been a magic wand eliminating Cuba’s problems of underdevelopment . Cuba's problems have not been solved by militarisation, but they are still there .
 Cuba's diversification away from sugar required substantial imports of capital goods that would make it possible . The downturn of the world economy in 1975 affected Cuba deeply . Cuba’s diversification of the capital goods needed to make this possible .
 80% of Cuba’s foreign earnings came from sugar, and the price of sugar dropped rapidly in the 1975 crisis . That in turn required foreign exchange, and a severe balance of payments crisis was the inevitable result .
 The effect of this has been for Cuba to become more dependent on the Russian economy to bail it out – at least for the foreseeable future . Cuba is dependent on Russia's economic support for the Cuban economy .
 It also threw planning into a sharp crisis, markedly lowering growth aims and involving a massive cut of 25% in 1977 state expenditure . 1977 state spending was cut by 25% . It also cut planning aims and markedly lowered growth aims .
 It produced the delegation of executive responsibility and financial accountability to the individual enterprises themselves . The demand that they pay stricter attention to profitability in future .
 The crisis would have been much worse if the Cuban regime had not already made major attacks on the working class, writes David Frum . The Cuban regime is bound to repeat its attacks as the present world crisis deepens, he says .
 But this transformation has come about not as a result of the intentions of the revolutionaries of 1959, it has been said . It has been a long way since the revolution began in 1959 .
 The result has been the transformation of the Cuban economy into a state capitalist one . The result is the transference of dependence from the USA to the USSR, as the huge levels of Russian aid indicate .
 Since the onset of the 1975 crisis these levels have increased even further . Since the start of this crisis, the levels have been even higher .
 Cuban state capitalism is at the present time a completely dependent formation . But unlike Russia or China, Cuba's capitalism is not dependent on state capitalism . Cuba's economy is now a dependent formation, unlike Russia and China .
 Russia and the East accounted for two thirds of Cuba’s trade even before the 1975 crisis forced a still heavier concentration on these sources . The Cuban government relied heavily on Russian aid .
 As industrialisation proceeds, more and more based on Russian technology, this dependence is bound to grow further . The dependence of Russian technology will grow further in the future .
 Russia’s allies in Eastern Europe have been developing greater economic – and therefore also political – independence from Russia . The reverse is happening in Cuba, writes Andrew Hammond .
 For all intents and purposes therefore, Cuba has become an international tentacle of Russian state capital . Cuba has also become a symbol of Russia's influence in Cuba .
 In the long term, things could develop differently – as they have in Russia’s Eastern European allies in the past 15 years . In the past, things have developed differently, as well as in the long-term .
 It was with respect to Latin America that Cuban foreign policy has been most clearly defined, says Cuban President Obama .
 Castro’s clarion call to revolution on the continent established his revolutionary credentials during the high point of the ‘revolutionary’ period in the late 1960s . Castro's clarionism was established during the 'revolutionary' period .
 Relations with other Latin American countries could only be restored if not only were OAS sanctions rejected, but also if these countries had a revolution and if they condemned U.S. crimes against Cuba as well .
 "Within a very short time – less than a year – this whole position was revealed as empty rhetoric. Yet within a short time, this whole . short time - less than . a year - this . short . time, it was revealed to be empty rhetoric .
 Peru’s new dictator, General Velasco, and Castro became close associates . Diplomatic relations were restored and he was proposing in the OAS that sanctions should be dropped .
 Those with illusions in Castro were shocked and disarmed by this volte-face, but all too few learnt any lessons from it . Castro's decision to step down was a mistake, but it was not a mistake .
 In the early 1970s similar relations developed with the Panamanian military regime of General Torrijos and the Ecuadorian autocrat Velasco Ibarra . Neither had introduced any nationalisation or other ‘socialist” measures at all .
 The situation has developed further since then, and now even one of the most right wing and repressive regimes in the continent, Argentina has diplomatic and commercial relations with Cuba .
 The OAS policy of isolating Cuba was quietly dropped in 1975, and since then there have been tentative measures to reopen some direct US/Cuba links .
 He has now reduced that to support of any regime that opposes U.S. interests, however reactionary it is . He himself has explicitly admitted to a position that he himself has publicly admitted to .
 Cuba’s ‘revolutionary’ phase as far as foreign policy is concerned, was mainly rhetorical, conditioned by Cuba's isolation from the rest of Latin America, and short-lived . Castro supported right-wing military dictatorships on the continent, leading to Castro supporting right
 Cuba’s following the interests of Russia that explains the 1969 turn to the ‘nationalistic’ dictators . It was also, of course and crucially, that explains why Cuba followed Russia's interests in the country .
 The Russian connection explains the role of the Cuban armed forces in Africa . And of course, it is the Russian connection .
 In Angola the USSR provided the military hardware and the Cubans the troops to holster the efforts of the MPLA – the legitimate national liberation movement . In Angola, the Soviet Union provided the . hardware . in Angola the . military hardware . and the . Cubans .
 The Cubans were much more acceptable than Russian troops would have been . The Cuban government is a third world country .
 To attribute the Cuban action to the “progressive” nature of the regime would be to fly in the face of all the evidence to the contrary provided by Castro’s friendly relations with Latin American military dictators . From what we have said already, it is clear that to
 The reality is that Castro was acting as Brezhnev’s agent, and that the action was designed as a means of strengthening the hand of the Russians in their inter-imperialist rivalry with the Americans . The action was meant to strengthen the Russian-American rivalry .
 This analysis was strikingly confirmed shortly afterwards in the horn of Africa . The analysis was also confirmed shortly after .
 The Russians and Cubans initially extended aid to the Eritrean liberation movement . Eritreans were legitimately fighting against the Ethiopian occupying forces .
 The U.S. switched allegiance from the United States to the USSR for this policy to be sharply reversed, leading to a flow of military aid from the Cubans and the Russians to the Ethiopian army of occupation .
 Nothing about the nature of the struggle in Eritrea itself had changed, but for all that the Eritreans were cynically sacrificed without the least hesitation by Cuba and Russia . The Eritrea has been ruled out of the country since 1998 .
 Russian foreign policy, the inter-imperialist rivalry between it and the USA, was the sole criterion according to which the Cubans operated . Russia's relations with the U.S. was the only criterion for Cubans to operate in Cuba .
 These consequences of the development of state capitalism in Cuba, both at home and abroad, are important . For the self-emancipation of the working class, the Cuban working class will be able to make it their own .
 We do not debate Cuba in the abstract; it is not a matter of the “correct line”, any more than it is when we discuss Russia . We are not debating Cuba in an abstract, we are discussing Russia in the same way . We will continue to debate Cuba
 To accept Cuba as a socialist country would have a series of implications for our understanding of what is meant by socialism, says Simon Tisdall .
 It should be clear that the Cuban masses did not make the Cuban revolution, says CNN.com . The Cuban masses were not the cause of the revolution, it says .
 The political question remains – how can the working people create through their own intervention the institutions and organisations that will defend their gains and create a workers’ state?
 There can be no workers’ state without the working classes, says Lenin . socialism is the conscious repossession of their world by the workers, he says .
 There is no guarantee whatsoever in the sincerity or commitment of a leadership which proclaims itself as the representative and substitute for the working class . That is the sole guarantee that it will be the interests of the majority that are expressed through the state .
 The history of post-revolutionary Cuba is that of a separation between state and masses through a network of organisations which mobilise the masses but do not provide forms of direct and permanent involvement in the whole process of political life .
 The interests of the state have been in conflict with the needs of the workers more than once . The response has been a series of increasingly draconian measures designed to maintain the continuing exploitation of the working class despite their discontent .
 The emphasis throughout has been on discipline, obedience. loyalty – not on the creative transformation of a society from one based on exploitation to one organised around the fulfilment of need .
 Growth has been presented as equivalent to socialism . Accumulation has taken precedence, growth has been compared to socialism. Accumulations have taken precedence; growth has taken priority . Growth has also taken precedence .
 If the task of accumulation is urgent, that is essentially the function of a bourgeoisie in capitalism . If the working class is to carry out that function because a dependent capitalism has failed to develop those resources, then it must do so in the context of a form of power that is proletarian .
 The state is exercising to its full extent a capitalist function in a capitalist way . If it fails to reconcile those two things, then the state is a capitalist . The state must be a capitalist in the capitalist way, he says .
 It has been the desire of every capitalist class to encourage the working class to submit voluntarily to their own exploitation . After all, it has been a desire of the capitalist class for the workers to submit to their exploitation .
 Cuba has succeeded in this – and there is no doubt that it has done so more successfully than any other state capitalist regime – is no evidence that it is socialist . Cuba is no longer a socialist state, but it is a state capitalist state, writes David Frum .
 The origins of the distortion of the Cuban economy coincide with the moment of its ‘discovery’ by Europe in 1492 . Cuba was forced to sacrifice the development of its own productive forces .
 The iron circle of dependency closed through the centuries, and the central problem in 1959 was still how to accumulate, industrialise, and thus escape from the circle . In 1959, the government was trying to find a way to escape the iron circle .
 It became clear that rapid accumulation, with all its attendant sacrifices, could only offer a ‘socialism” that involved the equitable division of scarcity and poverty . But it became clear, rapid accumulation had to be replaced with social justice .
 Without the full development of the productive forces, there could be no emancipation of the working classes, says Marx . Marxists say that without the development of productive forces there could not be an emancipation .
 For a time, the ‘optimism of the will’ – the belief that ideas were enough – sustained a politics of sacrifice . The “optimism’s of the . will” – the . belief that . ideas were . enough – and a time of
 Cuba has reconciled itself to an accommodation with the existing world order . Yet in the end, Cuba entered a new dependency, and reconciled it with the world . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. has been described as a dependency .
 Cuba is once again a victim of the unequal international distribution of the productive forces . Cuba is in a period of world crisis, Cuba is a victim again, says President Obama . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by an economic crisis in recent years .
 It is, ultimately, only at that – international – level that Cuba’s problem can be solved, says CNN.com . And ultimately, it is only at international level that the problem is to be solved .
 It remains as true now as it was for Lenin in 1917, that only the international revolution can effect the redistribution of the world’s resources that will release Cuba, says Lenin . The international revolution is needed to redistribute the world's resources .
 There is in Cuba today a class which dominates that society, and which has benefited in power terms from the present course of events . Yet the truth of the matter is that within its narrow confines, there is in . Cuba today has a class that has benefited greatly from the current course of
 For the moment at least, the survival of its national state has been and remains its only priority . For that, the modus vivendi it has reached with the Russian metropolis and its arrival at the negotiating tables of the international order have ensured its survival .
 If the interests of the Cuban working class lie in the international socialist revolution, then they too will have to overthrow a national state and its bureaucracy . The state has, in its turn, become an obstacle to the transformation of the world .
 Castro brothers secured complete control over the party in 1963 . Castro brothers expelled some of the old guard of the party . The Castro brothers took control of the Cuban Communist Party in 1964 .
 See the introduction of T Draper, op.cit., for the U.S. State Department’s position in 1961-62 .
 Since 1959 the world market price has fluctuated, sometimes wildly, between 5 and 65 cents per pound . World market price fluctuates, sometimes quite wildly, from 5 to 65 cents a pound .
 The 1959 reform did however resemble quite closely the initial reforms in Eastern Europe – in the late 1940s – but not the ‘collectivisations’ of the early 1950s .
 Even such strongly pro-US sources such as B Goldenberg, The Cuban Revolution and Latin America,347, admit as much .
 M Löwy’s very idealistic portrayal of Che in The Marxism of Che Guevara, London, 1973 . Quoted on71 of M. Löw’�s . The Marxist of Che .
 C. Mesa-Lago , Revolutionary Change in Cuba, Pittsburgh, 1971, was quoted in C MesaLago's 1971 book .
 The expansion in rice production did not however imply an increased consumption, merely a substitution of home grown rice for Chinese imported rice .
 Douglas Bravo denounced by leader of the Venezuelan guerrillas for doing so . And was bitterly denounced by Douglas Bravo, leader of Venezuela's rebel movement .
 Haernecker in Cuba dictatura o democrazia? Mexico? Mexico, 1975 .
 Castroism and Communism 1959-66, Cambridge, 1967, for a discussion of the origins of this phenomenon . Read this article for a look at the history of Castroism .
 Fidel’s candid self-criticism of the 1966-70 period can be found in Granma, 4.76.76 .
 Much of the growth reflected the boom in world commodity prices of the early 1970s . Sugar was one of the most extreme examples of sugar production .
 In addition to the above, this shows how Cuba’s convertible currency earnings declined by 50% from 1975-76, and to an even lower figure in 1977 . This shows how Cuban currency earnings fell 50% between 1975 and 1977 .
 The war for Angola played out as part of the broader inter-imperialist conflict that was the Cold War . What is true was that the Cubans were ultimately dependent on the USSR for military hardware .