 Never in history has any historical event assembled such great importance in all of its aspects, and been studied in such depth, says author .
 "Never before had humankind been so close to the brink of nuclear holocaust," says David Cameron . "I believe that is fully understandable, because never before had mankind been so near to . brink of . holocaust"
 Oleg Troyanovsky reveals that the Cuban missile crisis is indeed one of the most studied subjects in U.S. and Cold War history . The Russian-born KGB officer says that the missile crisis was one of America's most studied history .
 There has been a lively discussion about the origins and the management of the crisis . Ever since the thirteen days in October 1962 there has been plenty of discussion about how the crisis began .
 Most of the approaches were limited to studying the events from an American perspective . Despite an enormous range of opinions, most of the books and articles of the crisis are limited to the American perspective of the events .
 During the last decade the discussion has continued due to declassification of secret American documents .
 In fact it gained new speed after they became available for scholars to review . The book was published in 1998 and has been published since then .
 The opening of the Soviet Bloc under Mikhail Gorbachev’s glasnost efforts led to reconsiderations of the whole approach to the crisis . Another important development that led to a reconsideration of the approach was the opening of a Soviet bloc .
 The fall of the Soviet Union made it possible to reexamine the Cuban missile crisis by using Soviet information and questioning Soviet participants .
 Between 1987 and 1992 a series of five conferences helped to bring together former participants and scholars from the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba . The conferences were held in Cuba, the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 Soviet documents now become available as the Russian government admits historians into the long well protected archives in Moscow .
 As more and more pieces of information are revealed it is possible to provide a more complex picture of how the Soviet leaders perceived the developments before and during the 1962 crisis .
 After studying American and Soviet material, a more complete account of the crisis develops . After studying U.S. material, the story becomes more complex .
 The reason for the Soviet missile deployment to Cuba has been heavily disputed since 1962 . One issue has been hotly debated since 1962 is the reason for it being deployed .
 Even after more than 35 years, it is unclear why Khrushchev ordered nuclear missiles to be sent to Cuba . The missiles were sent to the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Even President John F Kennedy and his advisers in the Executive Committee could not agree on the reason for the missile deployment . The missile deployment was the first time the U.S. missile system was deployed in the Vietnam War .
 The official Soviet explanation states that the missiles were sent 4 to defend Fidel Castro’s revolution and to deter American aggression in Cuba . The official reason for the missiles is that they were sent to defend the revolution and deter American aggressors .
 The test-of-will theory states that the Soviets wanted to probe America’s resolve in Cold War politics . However, this theory has been vigorously dismissed as facesaving propaganda for the test of will theory .
 Khruschev did not send the missiles to Cuba because he wanted to directly challenge Kennedy, but rather two reasons were responsible for stationing strategic missiles 90 miles off the U.S. coast . I will show in this paper that .
 The Soviets and the Cubans believed that the deployment of troops and finally nuclear missiles was necessary to save Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s decision to send missiles to Cuba was directly linked with the idea of challenging the United States adverserial resolve in the Cold War . First of all, it was supposed that Khrushchchev wanted to challenge and to weaken the American prestige .
 The Soviets could also use the crisis to demonstrate their position as leaders of the communist world which was being challenged by the Chinese . Apart from inflicting a political blow on the United States, the crisis could also be used to show their position .
 It was also suggested that by reducing America’s credibility in the world, the Soviet Union could encourage other Third World countries to follow Castro's example .
 If we allow offensive capabilities in Cuba to remain in Cuba, "we will loose all Latin America to Communism," he says . "Credibility of our willingness to effectively resist Soviet military power will have been removed"
 President Kennedy’s decision to impose a blockade and to reject any proposal for a diplomatic response to the missiles was influenced by the threat of losing control in other Latin American nations . Therefore it has been argued that President Kennedy's decision .
 One thing disproves that the Soviet intentions in Cuba were solely driven by the desire to probe the U.S. determination is Berlin . Berlin .
 If the Soviets had wanted to test the U.S. resolve, it would have been easier to accomplish than sending missiles to the other side of the globe, where the United States was the dominant power .
 To maintain support for the bases would have been difficult 6 if not impossible . In addition, to maintain support would have to be difficult 6 or impossible .
 The American interest in the divided city had been obvious since the war, the last time during the Berlin wall crisis in 1961 . The last time the U.S. was in Berlin was in 1961, when the wall was built .
 If the Soviets had chosen Berlin instead of Cuba, much less effort would have achieved the same effect . The Soviets chose Berlin rather than Cuba for the same reason .
 A couple of MRBMs would have been enough to challenge America so that the deployment of IRBMs wouldn't have been necessary . The U.S. would not have been challenged by the Russian-led forces in Syria .
 The “supreme Soviet probe of American intentions“ as the sole motivation for the deployment is questionable . Therefore the ‘supreme . Soviet probe“ of American . intentions’ is questionable, says the author of the book . The book is published in the U.
 It was also argued that Khrushchev doubted America’s determination in general, and that he doubted President Kennedy's ability as an effective leader . It was argued that he not only doubted America's determination, but also doubted President .
 Khrushchev’s assumption that the missile bases on Cuba would not provoke a strong U.S. reaction was due to his picture of Kennedy as a young and inexperienced leader . Therefore the reason for the assumption was that the U.K. would not react strongly was to Kh
 Two events allegedly influenced Khrushchev's perception of Kennedy were the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961 and Kennedy's bad performance in the Vienna Summit later that year .
 With the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy’s reluctance to support the invasion with American troops and air support was used often by analysts to prove this explanation . Analysts often used this explanation to prove that this was true .
 According to the test-of-will theory, Kennedy felt deceived by Khruschev . Kennedy believed he had been deceived by the Soviet leader .
 In September, he had explicitly warned the Soviets twice not to install any offensive weapons on Cuba . The Soviet Union had not installed offensive weapons there .
 Before the crisis, he repeatedly received assurances that they did not intend to do so, he said . He said he had received assurances from the Soviet Union that they would not do so .
 Kennedy made every effort to get missiles out of Cuba . This feeling led Kennedy to take a firm stand and to take action . Kennedy took action to remove missiles from Cuba .
 President Obama warns of 'flagrant defiance' of his own warnings to the Soviet Union . Cuba's transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base constitutes an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas, he says .
 Kennedy and the members of the ExComm did not consider a diplomatic approach, but sought a clear and swift solution against the missiles . As a result Kennedy and his colleagues sought a swift solution, they said .
 Kennedy felt bound by his word after warning the Soviets . After having drawn a line by warning the Soviet Union, Kennedy now felt bound to his word .
 Kennedy’s firm handling of the Berlin issue should have taught him otherwise, he says . Even if he might have had doubts, Kennedy's firm handling should have shown otherwise, it would have taught otherwise .
 Khrushchev should have realized that Kennedy, who had authorized the invasion at the Bay of Pigs and other operations to remove Castro from power was committed to the protection of American interests in Cuba .
 Khruschev could have decided to place the missles because he respected Kennedy and because he knew Kennedy’s determination to impose pressure on Cuba . For example, he could have chosen to do so because of his respect for Kennedy .
 Another explanation for the Soviet decision to deploy missiles was proposed . During the ExComm deliberations and in later studies of the crisis, another explanation was proposed.
 The missiles might have been installed as a result of the situation in Berlin . The missiles were installed in response to the ongoing crisis in the city .
 Khrushchev tried a couple of times to pressure the Western allies out of Berlin and force the signing of a peace treaty . In the months and years prior to the October Crisis, Khruschev had tried to pressure Western allies .
 Kennedy had resisted Khrushchev’s efforts, but might have served to achieve a settlement for Berlin in a couple of ways . The missile deployment might have led to a settlement in Berlin, writes Peter Bergen .
 First, it has been supposed ever since the crisis that the missiles were intended to serve as a bargaining chip concerning the former German capital . The missiles are supposed to have been intended as a negotiating chip .
 A second assumption was that the Soviets considered the missiles to serve as a trap . The Soviets may have considered them to be a trap, according to a report .
 If the U.S. reacted with military action to this provocation that 8 was posed to them in their hemisphere, the Soviet Union then could justify military revenge, and therefore take Berlin . If the United States reacted, this could be a pretext for military action .
 Berlin may be thinking that they can either bargain Berlin and Cuba against each other, or that they could provoke us into a kind of action in Cuba which would give them an umbrella for them to take action with respect to Berlin .
 If they could provoke us into taking the first overt action, then the world would be confused and they would have what they would consider to be a justification for making a move somewhere else .
 If the Soviets had really intended to trade the missiles against a Berlin settlement, it would have been sufficient to deploy several MRBMs . The Soviets would have had to deploy more than a dozen of the missiles .
 It is not credible that they would have made all the efforts to install so many missiles and especially the more costly IRBMs if they meant to dismantle them later anyway . The North Korean government is unlikely to have intended to dismantle the missiles anyway anyway, says CNN.com .
 Kennedy had already shown his determination to preserve the status quo in Berlin . Another obvious contradiction is the fact that Kennedy would hardly have accepted any kind of deal .
 The hypothesis of a Soviet intention to trade the Cuban missiles against Berlin is doubtful . Therefore the hypothesis of an attempt to trade missiles is doubtful, says historian .
 The idea of Cuba as a diverting trap does not hold to closer examination either . Cuba is not a great trap, but the idea of it as a diversion trap is not true, it is true .
 It is questionable that the Soviets would have had to expend so much material to achieve their goal . The Soviets had to spend so much time to build the Soviet Union-made weapons .
 President Kennedy asked for possible reasons for the Soviet missile deployment during the first ExComm meeting . Kennedy's answers included a couple of assumptions .
 Kennedy advisers assumed Khrushchev's decision might have been a defensive one . But not one of Kennedy’s top level advisers assumed that the reason for the decision might be a defense one .
 Some analysts have vigorously rejected the official Soviet statements as pure propaganda . Some analysts say the official statements are propaganda .
 They maintain that after the missiles had been detected and after the Soviets had to withdraw them, their claim that they only tried to help Cuba to deter an American invasion was an effort to save face . The U.S. government maintains that after they had withdrawn the missiles, they tried to
 The Soviet leader could declare that the USSR achieved the goal to defend Cuba and in fact did not lose in the crisis because of Kennedy’s non-invasion pledge .
 Reviewing the documents and statements of participants from both sides that are available today it seems that there is more truth to Khrushchev’s reasoning than previously thought .
 Khruschev said the U.S. sent missiles to Cuba in 1962 was a threat to the island . The missile crisis began in spring 1962, when the Soviet Union sent missiles into Cuba . The crisis occurred in the months and years before the missile crisis .
 It is important to understand what information was known to the Cubans and Soviets . It is also important to know what information the Soviets and Cubans knew about .
 The Soviet claims that they had reason intervene because the U.S. intended to invade Cuba have been rejected by many scholars as false . Many scholars have rejected the claims that the Soviet claims are false .
 Even if the United States did not want to do so, it's important for the decisionmaking process that the opponent thought so . But even if the U.S. didn't want to, it was important that it thought so.
 If the Cubans felt threatened and the Soviets also believed in a threat, the U.S. intentions did not matter for the final outcome . If the Cuban government felt threatened by the Soviets, it would not have mattered .
 Cuba and the Soviet Union agreed to station nuclear missiles on the Carribean island in 1962 . The Cuban and Soviet Union were the only two countries to agree to station missiles on Cuba .
 Khrushchev saw an imminent threat to Cuba, which was one reason for his missile decision . This will help to make plausible that Khrushchevs indeed saw a imminent threat .
 To grasp how this understanding evolved it is necessary to examine the US-Cuban relations and to go back at least to the year 1959 .
 Cuba under the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista was virtually controlled by U.S. interests . Before Castro, Cuba was almost entirely controlled by the United States . Castro's Cuba is now controlled by Castro .
 Americans owned utilities, most of the sugar plantations and oil refineries on the island . Americans owned most of Cuba's utilities and most of its sugar plantations .
 Despite American investment and a higher standard of living when compared to other Latin American countries Cuba still faced severe problems like unemployment and poverty . Cuba is still facing severe unemployment, poverty, unemployment and unemployment .
 Batista's administration was characterized by corruption and inefficiency, not to forget its unscrupulous persecution of dissenters . Furthermore Batista’s administration was . characterized by . corruption and . inefficiency . Not to forget the unscrupulous persecution of dissenters.
 Castro and his movement promised to restore the former Cuban constitution . Castro promised to carry out agrarian reforms that would make owners out of tenants . Castro also promised to improve the situation of the poor .
 When they finally succeeded in overthrowing the US-backed dictator Batista in January 1959, Castro was acclaimed by a majority of the Cuban people . Castro was the leader of the revolution that overthrew the Batista regime .
 Most of the citizens also supported Castro’s view that the constant U.S. intervention in Cuban affairs since the 19th century was the reason for Cuba's bad situation . Most of Cuba's citizens supported Castro's view that U. States intervention in Cuba's affairs is the reason
 Initially, America was optimistic concerning the future relations with the new Cuban government . Initially, the U.S. was optimistic about the future of relations with Cuba .
 Castro declared himself Premier and suspended elections, persecuting Batista supporters and legalizing the Communist party . The US hopes for good relations with Cuba soon evaporated .
 This became obvious when he started to put his vows for reforms into action . This was evident when he put his promises for reforms in action . He said: "This is not the first time I've seen a change in the way I've been in charge of the government. This is
 Castro administration expropriated land owners and prohibited future foreign ownership . The Agrarian Reform Law was introduced by the Castro administration .
 Castro began to remove liberal members of the administration, replacing them with Socialist and Communist members . Castro then began to replace them with Communist and Socialist members of his administration .
 He did not forget what had happened in Guatemala during the first years of the 1950s . He said: "I am not going to forget what happened to Guatemala."
 In 1952, Guatemalan president Arbenez introduced an agrarian reform bill that enabled the state to expropriate uncultivated land and to distribute it . The bill was introduced by the president of Guatemala in 1952 .
 This state measure was also applied to the American owned United Fruit Company . The measure damaged American interests in the United Fruit company .
 The company started a massive publicity campaign that claimed the Guatemalan government and its actions were influenced by Communism . The company was not content with the compensation offered by the government .
 A number of United Fruit officials, who were involved in United Fruit affairs, supported the Boston based banana producer . United Fruit was founded by the Boston-based company .
 In 1953, the CIA with White House permission started to train a small rebel army that was under the leadership of Castillo Armas . The CIA began to train the rebel army in 1953, and the White House approved it .
 In June 1954, Armas and his small force penetrated from Honduras into Guatemala, gaining control after Arbenez fled the country . Armas gained control of Guatemala in June 1954 .
 After the setup of his government, Armas returned as one of his first actions the land was given to United Fruit . After the government was setup, he returned the land to the company .
 Castro was wary that the Americans would try their Guatemalan strategy on Cuba . Castro knew that he had to be careful .
 Castro turned to Western Europe, Poland, and Czechoslovakia to obtain military supplies . The Castro government turned to Poland, Poland and Czechsoslovakia for supplies .
 Despite heavy American pressure, France and Belgium complied with Cuban orders . Despite heavy U.S. pressure on the European allies, they complied with orders .
 Castro openly accused the United States of sabotage in 1960 . The ship that brought arms to Cuba exploded in the Havana harbor exploded in March 1960 .
 Castro's accusations would trigger U.S. action . Castro was clear to Castro that he would trigger American action . The Castro administration has been criticized for its treatment of Castro .
 Cuban leader tried to go farther by opening Cuba to the East . Cuban leader had already started to diminish American influence by expropriations . President Castro Castro tried to open Cuba to East .
 By the end of 1959, he had established close connections to the Soviet Union . He was rather cordial with Alekseev .
 In February 1960, Cuba hosted a Soviet trade exhibition when Castro welcomed Anastas Mikoyan to Havana . Cuba hosted an exhibition of Soviet trade in February 1960 .
 The outcome was a Cuban-Soviet aid and trade agreement that was perceived in the U.S. as proof of a communist Cuba . The outcome of the agreement was seen in the United States as proof that it was communist .
 News of the American program reached Cuba via the Cuban exile community in Florida . The program was sent to Cuba via Cuban exile communities in Cuba .
 In April, Khrushchev received intelligence reports that made him aware of the Cuban threat, such that he ordered to supply the Cuban government with weapons free of charge . The Cuban government was supplied with weapons by the Soviet Union .
 The next confrontation began when in July 1960 the American owned oil companies refused to refine oil the Cubans had bought from the Soviets . In July 1960, the U.S. owned oil company refined the oil Cubans bought from Soviets .
 Castro used this incident to nationalize the refineries after getting assurances of Soviet assistance . Castro later nationalized the refines after receiving assurances from the Soviet Union . The refineries were nationalized after the incident .
 The United States had guaranteed the export of Cuban sugar to the United States for prices that were higher than on the world market . The U.S. reaction to this was an almost 95 percent reduction of the sugar quota .
 As a next step, the United States administration stopped exports to Cuba . The U.S. administration has also stopped exports of Cuban goods .
 From the Cuban perspective, the economic sanctions were devastating and raised fears that more economic action and even military operations were to come . The economic sanctions have been devastating for the Cuban people . The Cuban government has been accused of using economic sanctions against Cuba .
 This development and the Soviets’ assurances led the Americans to step up their anti-Castro program . The Americans stepped up their program against Castro Castro in the 1970s .
 They recruited more exiles for their guerilla training camps located in Guatemala, intensified planning for the assassination of Castro . Continued covert 13 operations in Cuba like bombings in Havana .
 This was done, for example, at a regional foreign ministers’ meeting in Costa Rica in August .
 The Cubans interpreted all the information they gathered about the American actions as preparations for US-backed military intervention . Cuba interpreted the information as preparing for military intervention, CNN reports .
 The rhetoric in the American presidental election campaign became more and more focused on demanding action against Cuba . Meanwhile, the rhetoric was more focused in the U.S. campaign .
 Castro feared that president Eisenhower would order U.S. military action in Cuba to give Nixon support in the close election to come . Castro feared the action would give Nixon backing in the election .
 By the end of October the Cuban military was put on the highest alert . This too added to the Cuban perception that an attack was close at hand, such as an attack .
 Castro demanded the reduction of the U.S. embassy staff in December 1960 . He feared that the American diplomats were involved in planning covert actions and the expected attack .
 The U.S. broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba in January; just before the inauguration of president Kennedy . Instead of complying with the Cuban demand, the United States broke off relations with the Caribbean island .
 When Kennedy came to office a major part of his foreign policy centered around Cuba . When Kennedy was in office, Cuba was a key part of the foreign policy . Kennedy's Cuba policy was centered on Cuba .
 In his election campaign, he had promised to take a firm stand against the Communist intrusion into the Western hemisphere .
 Kennedy inherited the anti-Castro program from Eisenhower and stuck to it . Kennedy inherited a program from the Eisenhower administration . He stuck to the program, and it was a success .
 In fact, he not only continued the actions begun by the Eisenhower administration but instead expanded the U.S. efforts . President Obama expanded the United States efforts .
 CIA-trained Cuban exiles and mercenaries landed on the Cuban shore after initial air strikes . The covert operations came to a climax in April 1961 when he ordered the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 President Kennedy refused the order to provide United States air cover for the invaders . In the face of international pressure on the United States in the UN, the U.S. refused to provide air cover .
 The operation did not succeed in accomplishing the destruction of the Cuban Air Force . Therefore, the operation failed to succeed in destroying the air force .
 This enabled the Cubans to sink some of the support ships and to prevent the invaders from establishing a secure beachhead . The Cubans were able to sink a number of support ships in the battle .
 The Cubans succeeded in holding the attack and in repulsing the whole invasion . The Cuban government succeeded in repressing the invasion .
 CIA continued to plan and implement assassination plots against Castro and other Cuban leaders . Especially in 1961, the CIA continued in 1961 to plan assassination plots .
 Cuban security forces detected several of the attempts to carry out the plots . Wheras many of the plots were never detected by the security forces, several were detected .
 The discovery of plans or materials and the arrests of some assassins caused Castro and Khrushchev to recognize the American determination to overthrow the Cuban government . Despite the clear defeat at the Bay of Pigs, the U.S. continued to try and overthrow the government .
 Kennedy administration intended to further intensify the actions against Cuba . Kennedy administration wanted to intensify the attacks against Cuba.
 President Kennedy ordered General Edward Landsdale to plan and initiate the CIA program ‘Operation Mongoose“ The program was to be controlled by a panel of top level politicians and high ranking Pentagon officers .
 The program’s covert actions included sabotage by attacking the Cuban coast, burning cane fields, and bombing factories and utilities .
 The CIA operated in Europe to make products that were going to be shipped to Cuba unusable . The CIA also operated in European countries to make certain products unusable in Cuba .
 The United States further expanded trade restrictions by banning Cuban imports to the United States . The U.S. also applied pressure on American allies to cut their trade relations with Cuba .
 The economic sanctions finally became a full embargo such that the Soviet Union now became Cuba’s sole trading partner . The Soviet Union was now Cuba's sole trade partner .
 Another major part of the operation was to isolate Cuba diplomatically . Cuba was isolated by the Cuban government in the 1980s .
 The most severe diplomatic blow for Cuba was the US-initiated OAS decision in January 1962, which excluded Cuba after Castro in December had publicly declared to be Marxist-Leninist .
 Castro and Khrushchev believed the U.S. was preparing a second invasion attempt . The U.K. had already invaded Cuba . Castro believed the United States was preparing to invade Cuba in the fall .
 The U.S., Cuban and Soviet intelligence knew that the Americans conducted and coordinated the covert and subversive operations . Apart from the obvious public measures by the United States, the Americans knew that they were behind the covert operations .
 At the same time, we were doing everything we could to diminish and curtail the impact of Cuba and its Soviet friend in the Latin American countries in their 15 efforts to increase the power of the communist parties .
 The question whether the U.S. intended to invade Cuba in 1962 has been discussed ever since . The question has been debated ever since since .
 Today it is impossible to say if the Americans would have invaded the island or not . The island was invaded by the U.S. in 1941 .
 Some scholars reject this possibility . Others claim that there is now enough evidence to support this assumption .
 The United States prepared contingency plans in coordination with Operation Mongoose, deployed troops to the Caribbean . The U.S. military exercises were perceived by the Soviets as proof of invasion plans .
 The U.S. military performed public maneuvers designed to train for an actual invasion of islands . During the spring and summer of 1962 the United States military was training for an invasion of the islands .
 During one exercise Marines even invaded a mythical island to overthrow its dictator Ortsac Castro spelled backwards .
 Facing all these developments and receiving information on American activities, it was understandable why the Cubans and Soviets perceived a threat . Cuba feared that Cuba would be attacked if the Soviets would not give further assistance, says historian .
 The Soviets had already sent conventional arms to Cuba and had given public pledges to defend Cuba . The U.S. continued its actions .
 Nuclear missiles were only the logical next step in trying to secure Cuba, says President Obama . Nuclear missiles are only the natural next step to try and secure the island nation .
 Even if scholars doubt that Kennedy intended to invade it is obvious that Khrushchev had reason to assume an attack . Even though scholars doubt it is clear that Kennedy planned to invade, Khrushche had reason for attack .
 American covert operations enabled Khrushchev to station his missiles on Cuba . The U.S. covert operations allowed the Soviet Union to station its missiles on the island .
 The U.S. reactionary forces have been doing everything to overthrow Cuba’s revolutionary government and to restore their domination there . The United States reactionary forces are trying to overthrow the Cuban government, the Cuban president says .
 They broke off diplomatic relations, were and were and are conducting subversive activity, established an economic blockade of Cuba . They broke . diplomatic relations .
 Cuba needed weapons as a means of containing the aggressors, not as means of attack, Cuban president says . Cuba's weapons must be used to contain aggressors rather than attack them, he says .
 Neither U.S. nor Cuban friends had mind that small number of IRBMs would be used for an attack on the United States or any other country .
 Many scholars doubt that the defense of Castro was the sole purpose for the Soviet decision . Many scholars have doubted that the decision was made in favor of Castro Castro .
 It is widely accepted that another reason for the deployment of missiles to Cuba was to counter the American nuclear superiority of the early 1960s .
 Khrushchev knew of U.S. nuclear superiority and saw the need to counter it . This statement shows he knew of American nuclear superiority, says historian John Avlon .
 This shows that the Soviets felt threatened by U.S. nuclear superiority and policy . Therefore, this shows that this . shows that . this . show that the Soviet Union felt threatened . by American nuclear superiority .
 To understand this reasoning it is necessary to have a look at the strategic situation, the nuclear policy of the two countries, and to examine why Khrushchev felt threatened .
 This will have to include a short discussion of how nuclear stability was defined in the early 1960s .
 Nuclear theory at the end of the 1950s and the beginning of the 1960s was shaped by the belief that stability could only be achieved by securing a nuclear second strike capability .
 Being able to absorb an enemy’s first strike while still having enough nuclear weapons to retaliate in a way that would impose unacceptable damage to the opponent consequently would prevent the enemy's first strike . The U.S. would then have enough nukes to retaliate .
 Building secure retaliatory forces is therefore the most important part of achieving deterrence . Building secure . forces was therefore the main part of . achieving deterrence, the author says .
 In order to accomplish a stable situation, it was necessary that both superpowers have secure retaliatory weapons at their disposal . The U.S. and Russia need each other's weapons to achieve a stable relationship .
 One side knowing that the other was able to destroy its nuclear arsenal without leaving enough warheads to retaliate would be tempted to order a first strike . The U.S. and South Korea would have to decide whether to go nuclear .
 Counterforce strategy was the only possibility to effectively defend against nuclear weapons . Therefore, the question of targeting the enemy’s weapons, the counterforce strategy, became crucial . Counterforce was crucial, because it was only the only way to prevent nuclear weapons being used .
 U.S. and Soviet Union could destroy each other’s retaliatory forces and society, given the opportunity to administer the opening blow . The United States and the Soviet Union have the power to destroy each others’ retaliation forces .
 It would be extraordinary risky for one side not to attempt to destroy the other, or to delay to do so . This is the sole way it can reasonably hope to emerge at all, it says .
 If it is clear that the aggressor too will suffer catasrophic damage in the event of his aggression, 18 he then has strong reason not to attack . On the other hand if it is . clear that he will . suffer cat asphyxrophic damage, then he has strong
 A protected retaliatory capacity has a stabilizing influence in deterring rational attack, says the U.S. State Department . The U.N. Security Council says it has a duty to protect itself from attacks .
 Preemption was also an option for one country if it possessed a decisive advantage in nuclear weapons over its enemy . Such a country could strike first and be sure to take out all the adversary’s weapons . Preemption also was also a possibility for another country .
 Such a first strike capability would add to the insecurity of the other side, he says . Such a situation, he adds, would lead to an immense effort to compensate this missile gap .
 The two theoretical approaches just mentioned were both implied in the events leading to the Cuban missile crisis . Both were implied in events leading up to the crisis .
 At first the United States feared that a missile gap would arise after the Soviets had achieved several successes in rocket and space technology . The U.S. feared that the gap would grow after the Soviet Union had achieved success in space and rocket technology .
 The launch of Sputnik and Yuri Gargarin’s space flight raised assumptions that the East was also far ahead in missile technology . It was assumed the East would be far ahead of the Soviet Union .
 Despite their successes, the Soviets had to restart their program for Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles after technical problems appeared and made the whole project useless .
 It would take years to get to the actual deployment of the second generation of ICBMs . The ICBM would be deployed in the U.S.
 Khrushchev faced an enormous missile gap as the U.S. capability of deliverable nuclear warheads constantly increased . The Soviet Union would face an enormous gap as a result .
 The Americans expanded their triad doctrine of strategic weapons based on bombers, ICBMs and Submarine Launched Ballistic Missiles . The Soviets had to rely on their obsolete bomber fleet and only a couple of ICBMMs .
 The numbers of nuclear weapons clearly favoured the United States . The U.S. had an overall advantage in warheads of 12:1 and a 4:1 numerical advantage in ICBMs . The United States had a numerical advantage of warheads and missiles .
 This would be a typical first strike possibility for the Americans should they get to know about the actual balance of power . The U.S. government is in the midst of a potential first strike .
 He constantly boasted that the Soviet Union was able to stand up to any nuclear challenge . He boasted that he had the ability to withstand any challenge .
 U-2 flights over 19 the Soviet Union had been halted following the Garry Powers incident in 1960 . The United States administration already supposed that Khrushchev’s claims were false, but until 1961 they lacked proof .
 In 1961, the United States successfully launched the first Samos satellites that delivered the long awaited pictures of the Soviet Union . The pictures showed that the perceived missile gap did not exist . The U.S. launched the Samos satellite in 1961 .
 Kennedy let Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric reveal the truth in October 1961 . Kennedy let his Deputy Secretary-Secretary of Defense reveal the secret .
 Gilpatric told in his speech of recently gained intelligence that the Soviet Union had much less nuclear weapons than the United States . He said it was known exactly where these few missiles were stationed and where they were stationed .
 President Obama made clear that America could absorb a Soviet first strike and retaliate with more warheads than the Soviets could use for their first strike . He also described the United States nuclear capability .
 It had already been devastating for them to know that they lacked nuclear power, but now the enemy knew of their inferiority as well . It was already devastating for . They had already known of their . inferiority .
 With Gilpatric’s speech, the Soviet strategic arsenal became useless as a deterrant . The Soviet strategic weapons were useless as deterrant, says historian .
 The Soviets now faced a real crisis because they were not able to redress the strategic balance with the deployment of ICBMs . The Soviets faced a 'real crisis' because of the lack of strategic balance, says historian .
 The Americans had just deprived the Soviets of their second strike capability while telling them that they still had one . The U.S. told the Soviets that they had one more strike capability . The Soviets had been deprived of a second strike .
 Khrushchev now had to think of other possibilities to counter this threatening situation . The Soviet Union’s ICBMs would not become operational for the next 10 years .
 The USSR had an enormous amount of MRBMs and IRBMs that they used for targeting Western Europe . As opposed to the ICBMs, the USSR had a huge amount of IRB missiles .
 Khrushchev thought of using these medium range weapons as kind of “ersatz ICBMs“ by stationing them as close as possible to the United States . Khrushchev had planned to station them close to the U.S. as well as possible .
 The Americans had used this method already against the Soviet Union by establishing military bases all around the Soviet Soviet Union . The U.S. had already established bases around the world .
 Khrushchev was especially annoyed about American Jupiter missiles in Turkey that became operational in April 1962 . The U.S. Jupiter missiles were launched in Turkey in 1962 .
 He felt it just to do the same to the Americans by sending his missiles to Cuba, he said . Therefore, he felt it was just to . do the . same to . the Americans . by sending missiles to . Cuba .
 The Gilpatric speech had also sent the message to the Soviets that the Americans knew they possessed a first strike capability .
 This confirmed to the Soviet leadership that there was a real threat of an American first strike that had to be countered in some way . The Soviet leadership had to deal with the threat of a first strike .
 The Jupiter missiles added to the Soviet fears that the U.S. planned a first strike on their country . Jupiter missiles previously mentioned added to Soviet fears .
 When the construction of the missile sites in Turkey started the Jupiter missile generation was already outdated and was even considered obsolete by the Americans . The Jupiter missiles were already considered obsolete .
 The missiles were very vulnerable to an attack and needed hours before getting ready for the launch . The missiles could only be used by the Americans for a first strike .
 Missiles placed near the enemy, even if they could not retaliate, would have a potent capability for striking first by surprise . The U.S. would be able to launch a missile at the enemy even if it could not be retaliated .
 When not coupled with the ability to strike in retaliation, such a capability might suggest an intention to strike first . Such a capability could suggest a willingness to strike before striking first .
 Khrushchev's strategic threat perception was not the only reason for setting up a Soviet nuclear base on Cuba, it is now clear . The base was set up in response to the threat posed by Castro .
 The nuclear situation and the Soviet need to counter their strategic inferiority at least influenced the decision . The decision was made as much as the need to deter U.S. aggression, the author says .
 The intention of my paper was to show how the Soviets perceived the situation in the spring of 1962 when Khrushchev made the decision to send nuclear missiles to Cuba . Conclusion of the paper is that the Soviets saw the situation differently .
 "I did not want to judge the Soviet action as justified or not. Because of this, I did not judge it as justified," he said .
 To understand the reasons for the installation of nuclear weapons it is necessary to distinguish between U.S. intentions and Soviet understanding . But to understand why nuclear weapons were installed in the Soviet Union, it is essential to understand .
 Soviet and Cuban leaders feared a possible American invasion in 1962, Cuban leader says . "I think that it became obvious that they had genuinely perceived a possible invasion," he says .
 The Soviets assisted Cuba so that they would not lose their new ally . The Soviets therefore assisted Cuba to avoid losing its new ally.
 Khrushchev secured a launchpad for the spreading of Communism in Latin America . By doing this Khrushche secured a . launchpad . The Soviet leader maintained the Soviet leadership of the Communist world .
 The defense of Cuba enabled the Soviets to counter their ballistic missile inferiority by increasing the amount of deliverable nuclear warheads to the U.S. The United States also increased its nuclear warheads .
 Khrushchev and the Soviet leaders felt threatened by the U.S. nuclear policy and even feared a first strike . The Soviet leaders feared a possible first strike against the United States .
 Cuba offered the possibility to at least try to redress the strategic balance of power and to answer to American missiles threatening the USSR from outside the U.S. territory . The Cuban government was forced to accept the Soviet Union's decision to pull back from Cuba .
 It is possible that the strategic reason for setting up the Soviet missile bases was more important to Khrushchev than the defense of the Carribean island . Despite the official Soviet explanations, the official explanations claim the defence of Cuba was the only motive .
 From today’s point of view it is impossible to judge which of the two reasons might have been the primary one . From today, it is difficult to judge whether the two were the primary ones .
 The Cuban missile crisis must be seen in the entire context of the Cold War, which dominated international politics . The Soviet deployment was certainly influenced by both motives, it is said .
 The missle crisis was a kind of croassroad where two major strings of Cold War policy came together . Examining the events in this context, the Missle crisis is an important part of the Cold War era .
 The pre-crisis events show how vigorously both superpowers fought to gain influence in the Third World . The events show that both the U.S. and Russia were involved in the Middle East .
 The United States was determined to counter the loss of Cuba and to prevent the spreading of revolution and communism in Latin America . The Soviet Union was eager to respond to the Cuban quest for help .
 The second major theme was the continuing arms race and the effort to overcome the other superpower . The other superpower is the U.S. and Russia .
 The Soviets in trying to achieve missile parity, and the U.S. in . trying to prevent even the appearance of it, were both willing to accept a confrontation . The Soviets and the United States were willing to take on each other .
 The importance of the Cuban missile crisis in Cold War history is obvious . CNN's John Sutter says the crisis was crucial for the U.S. in the Cold War .
 Its ramifications are still relevant today as can be seen in the controversial discussion the crisis triggered . Its ramifications can still be seen today as well as the controversy surrounding the crisis .
 The Cuban missile crisis appears to have been a more important turning-point than we had earlier believed it to be, he says . What has not changed is the central place the crisis occupies in Cold War history, he adds .