 Castro overthrown the proAmerican government in Cuba in 1961 following the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion by Cuban exiles . Castro announced he was a communist in 1961 after he overthrown a pro-American government . Castro had overthrown Cuba's pro-US government .
 Long-range missiles launched from Cuba could reach major U.S. cities . The missiles could be used to launch missiles from Cuba .
 At the same time, America prepared to invade Cuba if the Soviet ships did not turn back . The U.S. readied to attack Cuba if it did not return to Cuba .
 When Soviet ships continued to sail towards Cuba after Kennedy imposed a naval blockade, the world watched expecting war . The world was expecting war when Kennedy imposed the blockade .
 Kennedy considered a nuclear attack as an option when responding to photos of missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy had considered a nuke attack as a possible option when he was responding to the photos .
 During the crisis, there were moments when the possibility of war was high . Once when Cubans shot down a U2 plane and once when Americans stopped and boarded a Soviet ship containing nuclear bombs .
 The crisis actually resulted in an attempt by the USA and USSR to reduce tension . The crisis made the superpowers realise how close they had come to war with each other and they became determined to never let a crisis escalate again .
 Preparing for your assessment by learning the content on the next few pages . Prepare for your assessments by learning about the content of the next pages .
 The crisis actually resulted in an attempt to reduce tension & limit the arms race because they had got so close to war . However, the crisis actually led to a reduction in tension and an arms race .
 Dubcek became leader of Czechoslovakia in 1968 and tried to make communism more Democratic . Dubceka was a member of the Communist Party in the Czech Republic . He was the leader of the country's communist regime .
 Brezhnev responded by invading Czechoslovakia and removing Dubcek from power . The invasion was the result of a coup by the Soviet Union . Dubkek was removed from power by the Soviets .
 During WW2 the Nazis took over Czechoslovakia and later the Red Army liberated them from Nazi rule . During WWII, Czechs were liberated from Nazi-occupied territory . During the Second World War the Czech Republic was taken over by the Soviets .
 Czechoslovakia became a satellite state of the Soviet Union in 1948 . However in 1948 the communists forced their way into power . Czechsoslovakia was forced to become a communist state in 1948 and became a Soviet state .
 Living conditions in Czechoslovakia were poor and in the 1960s protests and demands for change grew . The Czech Republic was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 He wanted to increase the standard of living, trade with the West and have more freedom, including free elections and allowing opposition parties, he said . He said he wanted more freedom and more freedom .
 Dubcek promised Brezhnev that he would not leave the Warsaw Pact . However he promised to stay with the Soviet Union in the future . Dubcec promised to remain with the USSR .
 Brezhnev believed the reforms, known as the Prague Spring, still threatened the security of the Soviet Union because they would lead to demands for change in other satellite states and possible demands to leave the Warsaw Pact . The reforms were still threatened by the reforms .
 Brezhnev also felt that if Czechoslovakia increased trade with the West, it may be closer to the USA than the USSR . The USSR felt that this would create a gap in the Iron Curtain creating a gap .
 Czechoslovakian radio told people not to fight back and only protest peacefully to avoid a repeat of the violence that had occurred in Hungary in 1956 . Czechoslovakia told people to protest peacefully and not fight back .
 Dubcek was removed from power and replaced by Husak who withdrew the reforms of the Prague Spring . Husak was replaced as a result of Dubceka's failure to implement reforms .
 As a result of the Prague Spring, Brezhnev issued the Breznev Doctrine which stated the Soviet Union would not let any communist country abandon communism and would use force to keep them communist . The doctrine was the result of a Prague Spring in 1968 .
 The USA did not intervene to help because they did not want to interfere and risk war with the Soviet Union . The USA had welcomed Dubcek’s reforms but didn’t want to intervene .
 If Brezhnev allowed Dubcek to introduce democratic reforms in Czechoslovakia other satellite states may also want reforms . This would weaken the Soviet Union’s control over them .
 Soviet security was dependent on maintaining tight control over its satellite states . The Soviet Union had to maintain tight control of its satellites states in order to maintain security .
 In the 1970s a Soviet-backed communist group was in power in Afghanistan . The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan was the result of the Soviet invasion .
 Reforms were introduced against the Muslim culture of Afghanistan . They introduced reforms that went against Muslim culture, Afghan officials say . The reforms were introduced in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Ronald Reagan became President of the USA in 1981, determined to be tough on communism . Reagan’s policies were the result of his election as President .
 Success Criteria: WWW EBI  You have re-written content in a new format (e.g. A new format) Use this article to help us understand today's featured news stories .
 Détente was a period of lessening tension during the late 1960s and 1970s . The first one has been done for you. The first was a telephone call from the Cuban government .