 Six years later I was combat aircrew, flying recon patrols for the Navy squadron that was first on the scene, on the first day of the blockade . I was the first to fly recon patrols in the first year of blockade .
 15 users marked this as a favorite .push; Totally unnecessary event . Props for the Jed Bartlet prototype .
 JFK actually didn't know that prior to discovering the missiles in Cuba . JFK didn't actually know that before discovering missiles in the country .
 I believe ours were Thors which were unreliable turkeys who were placed there to make our allies feel good . The Thors were unreliable turkey turkeys that were placed in place to make us feel good, he says .
 The Russians won that one, because we secretly agreed to remove the Thors and not attack Cuba as we were planning before the incident . Russia won because we agreed not to attack Cuba, as we planned before .
 Thirteen Days is indeed a bit of a remake, although with some additional declassified details . It focuses much more on the events as seen through Ken O'Donnel's eyes .
 His base was one of the ones large enough to accommodate the U.S. missiles that were in Turkey . So he was needed to help plan the pullout of the missiles to his base if his base wound up being used .
 For a number of years Dad was one of the few who knew the truth about the deal we made to pull our missiles out of Turkey . They wound up not using his base .
 He said it was felt it was more important to get the deal worked out to get missiles out of Cuba, and to avert a potential catastrophic conflict . He said: "If I remember correctly, it had not been considered that big a deal to do that"
 He wondered why the truth of that story did not come out sooner or get more attention . He always wondered why it didn't come out earlier or why it wasn't more important .
 JFK standing "eye-to-eye" against Khruschev and the Soviet leader ""blinking"" in the face of steely and muscular American resolve . JFK standing ""eye- to-eye"" against the Soviets . JFK stood "eye to eye" and the Soviets "bl
 As scary as the fictional Kennedy account is, the truth was even worse . The truth is even worse. The Kennedy story is even more scary than the fictional .
 Kennedy had seen some combat in WW2 so he knew a little bit of what war was about . Kennedy had been involved in World War II . Kennedy was a veteran of combat in the war .
 Both of these men the Soviet leader in particular had an understanding of the fog of war and the terrible consequences that can come from miscalculation . This made them cautious and careful which is what really served everyone so well in the end .
 Kennedy was improvising as he went along, and frequently bended the rules to give his opponent more time . Caro demonstrates again and again that Kennedy was improvisating as he played .
 Dobbs also basis much of his argument on his own analysis of where the ships actually were . Dobbs says the ships were not actually found in the area .
 Most historians rely on peer review for this sort of research . Fascinating, but he's just one man, and when revising history, most historians use peer review .
 My mother was in the Navy and stationed here at NAS Jax during the missile crisis and has talked about it just in the last few years .
 She was a nurse and at dinner she and several friends made plans to go to the beach in the morning . When they woke up all the men were gone from the base except MP's guarding the gates and one doctor .
 They were all told that they were confined to base until further notice . They were told they had to stay at base 'until further notice'
 Nobody knew where they went for several hours until they were told in small groups privately that the nation was at war with Cuba and to prepare for the casualties, specifically radiation wounds .
 She said she just hoped it would be quick and painless everyone . She said her family 'all really expected to die' and she hoped it was quick .
 "It's amazing to me how fatalistic everyone was-but they were given reason to believe that Florida was going to be hit with an atomic bomb at any minute," says author .
 After the crisis, my mother received orders for Bethesda and was on duty when JFK was shot and was again confined to the hospital when they brought the body back from Dallas . Oddly enough, after the crisis she received orders and was confined to Bethesda again .
 The Jupiters in Turkey were obsolete, and their management a cause for concern . Turkey felt that having them and thus being a nuclear power by proxy was both a deterrent to Soviet aggression and national prestige .
 In terms of the ability to launch nuclear attacks on Russia, decommissioning them made very little difference . The U.S. had plenty of long-range missiles, as well as nuclear weapons, experts say .
 Nixon took stunning risks to impose American hegemony . The reality is he took stunning risk to impose U.S. hegemony .
 There were four Foxtrot class subs that left Russia bound for Cuba, with authority to fire nukes without Kremlin approval .
 A typical weblog is one person posting their thoughts on the unique things they find on the web . A typical blog is a one-off blog that focuses on unique things you find online . Weblog is a blog where people post their thoughts about the web's most interesting things .