 The image of the world standing still is the turn of phrase of Sheldon Stern, former historian at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, who published the authoritative version of the tapes of the ExComm meetings . Kennedy and a close circle of advisers debated how to respond to the crisis .
 Meetings were secretly recorded by the president, which might bear on the fact that his stand throughout the recorded sessions is relatively temperate compared to other participants .
 Stern has just published an accessible and accurate review of this critically important documentary record, finally declassified in the late 1990s . Stern's review of the documentary record has just been published by Stern . Stern has also published a guide to the film's declassification .
 A nuclear war was all too imminent, a war that might “destroy the Northern Hemisphere,” President Dwight Eisenhower had warned . President Eisenhower also warned that a nuclear war might ‘destroy the . Northern Hemisphere’
 Dino Brugioni saw no way out except “war and complete destruction” as the clock moved to “one minute to midnight,” the title of his book . Dobbs quotes a key member of the CIA team monitoring the Soviet missile buildup, who saw no
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara wondered aloud whether he “would live to see another Saturday night” Defense Secretary McNamara later recognized that “we lucked out” — barely . McNamara: “We lucky out — barely”
 October 27th, when U.S. destroyers enforcing a quarantine around Cuba were dropping depth charges on Soviet submarines . This is October 27, when United States destroyers enforce a quarantine .
 Second Captain Vasili Arkhipov may have saved the world from nuclear disaster . The decision to assemble a nuclear torpedo for battle readiness was aborted at the last minute .
 There is little doubt what the United States reaction would have been if the torpedo was fired, or how the Russians would have responded as their country was going up in smoke .
 On that day, Clawson himself was in a good position to set off a likely terminal cataclysm . Clawson: "On that day I was in good position ... in a position that could set off an apocalypse"
 The errors, confusions, near-accidents, and miscomprehension of the leadership that Clawson reports are startling enough, but nothing like the operative command-and-control rules — or lack of them . Clawson: "The errors and confusions" are startling
 Once the crew was airborne carrying thermonuclear weapons, “it would have been possible to arm and drop them all with no further input from the ground," he writes .
 About one-third of the total force was in the air, an Air Force official says . About a third of the force was flying, the official said .
 Strategic Air Command appears to have had little control of the Air Force . The Strategic Air Force is technically in charge .
 The civilian National Command Authority was kept in the dark by SAC, which means that the ExComm “deciders” pondering the fate of the world knew even less . And according to Clawson’s account, the civilian NCA was kept .
 General Burchinal’s oral history is no less hair-raising, and reveals even greater contempt for the civilian command . The oral history reveals the contempt for civilian command, as well as the general's contempt for civilians .
 The CD operations were designed to make it crystal clear to the Russians that they were hardly even competing in the military confrontation, and could quickly have been destroyed . Russia could have been easily destroyed by the CD operations, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 President Kennedy was “leaning towards military action to eliminate the missiles” in Cuba, to be followed by invasion, according to the Pentagon plans . Stern concludes that, on October 26th, Kennedy was leaning towards a military action .
 It was evident then that the act might have led to terminal war . Later revelations that tactical nuclear weapons had been deployed and that Russian forces were far greater than U.S. intelligence had reported .
 Nikita Khrushchev sent a letter to President Kennedy from the Soviet Union . The letter arrived at 6m. on the 26th at 6pm GMT .
 These were obsolete missiles, already slated for withdrawal, soon to be replaced by far more lethal and effectively invulnerable Polaris submarines . The missiles were already slated to be withdrawn from the U.S.
 The planners therefore faced a serious dilemma . Keeping United States Power Unrestrained would be a major problem .
 Khrushchev's proposals to end the threat of catastrophic war were rejected . Each would seem to any ‘rational man’ to be a fair trade . They had in hand two somewhat different proposals from Khrushchevs .
 One possibility would have been to breathe a sigh of relief that civilization could survive . The U.S. could have accepted both offers: to remove any threat to invade Cuba; to withdraw missiles from Turkey .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy said no such thought could be contemplated . Bundy was a Harvard dean and reputedly the brightest star in the Camelot firmament . Bundy: No such thought would be contemplated by Obama administration .
 The idea that the U.S. should be restrained by international law was too ridiculous to merit consideration . Of course, the idea that . the United States should . should .
 The U.S. should not obey international law or other conditions that we impose on the powerless, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says it's “amazingly naïve” to suggest that it should obey law or conditions .
 This was a frank and welcome exposition of operative assumptions, reflexively taken for granted by the ExComm assemblage . It was a welcome welcome .
 This “pragmatic” stance was about as far as moral considerations could reach . This ‘pragmatism’ was not the only moral consideration, it was a ‘policmatic’ stance . This is not the first time the U.S
 They prevail to the present, with only the rarest of exceptions, as easily documented . And they prevail, as well as the present . The only exception is that they do not .
 We might have been “in even a worse position” if the world had known more about what the U.S. was doing at the time, he says . The world might have known more of what the United States was doing, he adds .
 Six months earlier, the U.S. secretly deployed missiles in Okinawa virtually identical to those the Russians would send to Cuba . Only recently was it learned that, six months later, the United States had secretly deployed missile launchers .
 These were surely aimed at China at a moment of elevated regional tensions . China is seen as a key player in the region .
 Okinawa remains a major offensive U.S. military base over the bitter objections of its inhabitants . Okinawa residents are less than enthusiastic about the dispatch of accident-prone V-22 Osprey helicopters .
 An Indecent Disrespect for the Opinions of Humankind . The deliberations that followed were revealing, but I will put them aside here .
 Dobbs: If it appeared that the U.S. was dismantling the missile bases unilaterally, under pressure from the Soviet Union, the alliance might crack . He says if the United States replaced useless missiles with a far more lethal threat, as already planned, in a trade with Russia that
 When Cuba is no longer an ‘armed camp,’ then “we probably wouldn’t invade,” in the president’s words . President Obama: “We probably wouldn't invade.”
 Cuba must end its "political subversion" in Latin America, President Obama says . He added that if it hoped to be free from the threat of U.S. invasion, Cuba must stop its political subversion . Cuba must also end its “political subverting” in
 Ronald Reagan’s vicious terror wars in Central America in the 1980s remained alive and well right through . Ronald Reagan's vicious terror war in Latin America was the result of the Reagan administration's brutal tactics .
 Cuba’s “political subversion” consisted of support for those resisting the murderous assaults of the U.S. and its client regimes . Cuba also provided arms to the victims, perhaps even perhaps — horror of horrors — providing arms .
 The first was armed attack across a border, that is, aggression as defined in international law, the first was an attack on a border . The second was an armed attack on an international border .
 The second was “overt armed attack from within the area of each of the sovereign states,” as when guerrilla forces undertake armed resistance against a regime backed or imposed by Washington, though not when “freedom fighters” resist an official enemy .
 The primary example at the time was South Vietnam, where the U.S. was defending a free people from “internal aggression,” as Kennedy’s U.N. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson explained .
 Though these assumptions are so deeply embedded in prevailing doctrine as to be virtually invisible, they are occasionally articulated in the internal record . They are sometimes articulated in an internal record.
 Cuba represents a successful defiance of the US, a negation of our whole hemispheric policy of almost a century and a half,” since the Monroe Doctrine announced Washington’s intention, then unrealizable, to dominate the Western hemisphere .
 Iran scholar Ervand Abrahamian’s important upcoming book of the U.S.-U.K. coup that overthrew the parliamentary regime of Iran in 1953 is revealed . Abrahamian: The coup was the result of a joint effort to overthrow Iran's parliamentary regime .
 With scrupulous examination of internal records, he shows convincingly that standard accounts cannot be sustained, he says . He says .
 The primary causes were not Cold War concerns, nor Iranian irrationality that undermined Washington’s “benign intentions,” nor even access to oil or profits, but rather the way the U.S. demand for “overall controls” was threatened by independent
 " fanaticism in that particular case might merit examination. That is what we discover over and over by investigating particular cases, including Cuba," he says .
 United States policy towards Cuba is harshly condemned throughout Latin America and indeed most of the world . “A decent respect for the opinions of mankind” is understood to be meaningless rhetoric intoned mindlessly on July 4th .
 Polls show a majority of the U.S. population has favored normalization of relations with Cuba . But that too is insignificant, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is a powerful state interest involved in punishing Cubans, says CNN's John Sutter . That suggests that, in addition to cultural factors revealed in the hysteria of the Camelot intellectuals, there is a strong state interest, Sutter says .
 The missile crisis officially ended on October 28th . Saving the World from the Threat of Nuclear Destruction .
 On November 8th, the Pentagon announced that all known Soviet missile bases were dismantled .
 Kennedy’s terror campaign, Operation Mongoose, had been formally curtailed at the peak of the crisis . On the same day, “a sabotage team carried out an attack on a Cuban factory”
 The November 8th terror attack lends support to Bundy’s observation that the threat to peace was Cuba, not Turkey, where the Russians were not continuing a lethal assault . Bundy: "I'm not sure what I was doing here, but I'm sure it's not what I
 Raymond Garthoff wrote a careful account of the missile crisis in 1987 . More details were added by the highly respected scholar Raymond GarThoff .
 Garthoff also reviews the murderous and destructive operations of Kennedy’s terrorist campaign . We would certainly regard as more than ample justification for war, if the U.S. or its allies or clients were victims, not perpetrators .
 Terrorist attacks intensified in August, including speedboat strafing attacks on a Cuban seaside hotel where Soviet military technicians were known to congregate, killing a score of Russians and Cubans . Attacks on British and Cuban cargo ships, the contamination of sugar shipments; and other atrocities and sabotage
 Shortly after came “the most dangerous moment in human history,” not exactly out of the blue, says President Obama . Shortly after, he said, “The most dangerous moments in history” were “most dangerous moments” of his life .
 Kennedy officially renewed the terrorist operations after the crisis ebbed . Kennedy was president of the United States during the 1980s .
 A plot to assassinate Castro was apparently initiated on the day of the Kennedy assassination . The plot was apparently started on the same day of Kennedy's assassination .
 We can, at last, hear the voices of the victims in Keith Bolender’s Voices From the Other Side, the first oral history of the terror campaign . Bolender is one of many books unlikely to receive more than casual notice in the West because the contents are too revealing
 Kern is right that it is ‘universally perceived’ that way, apart from those who have escaped sufficiently from the ideological shackles to pay some attention to the facts . Kern is correct that it's ‘not universally perceived” that way .
 Sheldon Stern is the latest celebrity to reveal that he is a pedophile . Sheldon Stern is one of the world's most famous deviants . Stern says he is proud of his work in the field of gay men .
 The Mongoose operations were run by Edward Lansdale, who had ample experience in “counterinsurgency” — a standard term for terrorism that we direct . Lansdale’s experience in counterinsurgentency was run by Lansdale .
 He provided a timetable leading to “open revolt and overthrow of the Communist regime” in October 1962 . In 1962, he provided a timeline leading to an uprising against the government .
 “Final success will require decisive U.S. military intervention,” says Obama . The “final definition” of the program recognized that terrorism and subversion had laid the basis . The program’s final success would require “decisive United States military intervention
 The implication is that U.S. military intervention would take place in October 1962 — when the missile crisis erupted . The implication would be that the United States would intervene in the event .
 The events just reviewed help explain why Cuba and Russia had good reason to take such threats seriously . Russia and Cuba had good reasons to take threats seriously, the author says .
 Years later, Robert McNamara recognized that Cuba was justified in fearing an attack . McNamara: "The Cuban government was right to fear an attack"
 Stern: Kennedy’s very narrow victory in the 1960 election relied heavily on a fabricated “missile gap” concocted to terrify the country and condemn the Eisenhower administration as soft on national security . Stern: Remember that Kennedy's very narrow win in 1960s relied heavily
 The Russians are well aware of their relative weakness and vulnerability, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The Russians of course were well aware that they are vulnerable, he says .
 They were also aware of Kennedy’s reaction when Khrushchev offered to sharply reduce offensive military capacity and proceeded to do so unilaterally . Kennedy was aware of the reaction he would have faced in the wake of the threat posed .
 The president failed to respond, undertaking instead a huge armaments program . The president instead of responding to the threat, he ordered a huge arms program .
 It began with Kennedy’s terrorist attack against Cuba, with a threat of invasion in October 1962 . The threat to invade Cuba in 1962 began with the threat of a Cuban invasion .
 President Obama rejected Russian offers that would seem fair to a rational person, but were unthinkable . They would have undermined principle that the U.S. has unilateral right to deploy nuclear missiles anywhere, aimed at China or Russia or anyone else, and right on their borders .
 To establish these principles firmly it was entirely proper to face a high risk of war of unimaginable destruction, and to reject simple and admittedly fair ways to end the threat, writes David Cameron .
 Kennedy rejected the militant advice of his advisers and associates who called for military force and the dismissal of peaceful options . Stern partially agrees with Stern, noting that Kennedy repeatedly rejected the advice .
 The ExComm tapes reveal that the president stood apart from others, sometimes almost all others, in rejecting premature violence . The president stood aside from others in rejecting early violence, the tapes reveal .
 The question does not arise in a disciplined intellectual and moral culture, which accepts without question the basic principle that the United States effectively owns the world by right . It is an outrage for others to think of deterring the threatened use of violence by the benign global hegemon .
 In internal discussion, the Kennedy brothers expressed their fears that Cuban missiles might deter a U.S. invasion of Venezuela, then under consideration . The Kennedy brothers feared a Cuban missile could deter a United States invasion .
 Henry Kissinger called a high-level nuclear alert to warn the Russians to keep their hands off during the 1973 Israel-Arab war . Kissinger was secretly authorizing Israel to violate the cease-fire imposed by the U.S. and Russia .
 When Reagan came into office, the U.S. launched operations probing Russian defenses and simulating air and naval attacks . Pershing missiles in Germany provided a “super-sudden first strike” capability .
 Russia has repeatedly been invaded and virtually destroyed by the U.S. in recent years . The U.K. has repeatedly invaded Russia and has virtually destroyed it .
 There have been hundreds of cases when human intervention aborted a first strike minutes before launch . Automated systems gave false alarms when they were given false alarms .
 We don’t have Russian records, but there’s no doubt that their systems are far more accident-prone than ours .
 India and Pakistan have come close to nuclear war several times, and the sources of the conflict remain . The two countries have been at odds for decades .
 Both countries have refused to sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty, along with Israel, and have received United States support for development of their nuclear weapons programs . India, now a United States ally, is now a major ally of the United States .
 War threats in the Middle East, which might become reality very soon, once again escalate the dangers . The Middle East is a source of instability in the region .
 Khrushchev's willingness to accept Kennedy’s hegemonic demands avoided war in 1962 . In 1962, war was avoided by the willingness of Kennedy to accept his demands . Kennedy's demands were met with the support of the Soviet Union in 1962, but they were never met .