 John McCone pushed President Kennedy for more reconnaissance of the island to aid this effort . On this subject, he will examine McCone's efforts from May to September 1962 to understand the Soviet buildup .
 McCone was one of the main officials responsible for briefing the Kennedy administration on the Soviet efforts in Cuba in October 1962 . He sided with the members of the cabinet pushing for an air strike and invasion to remove the missiles .
 Following the crisis, McCone continued to watch the Soviet withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba, all the time maintaining his anti-communist views .
 John McCone maintained throughout the summer and fall of 1962 that the Soviet Union might place nuclear weapons into Cuba . McCone: The Soviet Union may have placed nuclear weapons in Cuba in 1962 .
 McCone pushed to remove Castro and his communist government from power . McCone also pushed for the removal of Castro's government .
 McCone joined several prominent members of the Executive Committee proposing a surgical strike against missile sites followed by an invasion . McCone: "Surgical strike" followed by invasion .
 McCone had the job of briefing the administration on daily intelligence reports . He kept Kennedy and his cabinet informed on construction efforts in Cuba .
 Despite his emotional calls for attacks on Cuba, McCone's efforts to combine intelligence reports, analysis, and photo interpretation branches during the Crisis allowed the President to have a detailed picture on the withdrawal of the missiles .
 McCone's efforts were in November 1962, during the Soviet withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba . McCone: "I'm glad to have been able to do so much for the United States"
 Kennedy relied on the CIA Director and the rest of the EXCOMM for intelligence analysis on whether the missiles had indeed left Cuba . Kennedy, under intense pressure from Congress and public, relied on intelligence analysis .
 Analysts concluded weapons were being shipped back to the Soviet Union . McCone gave the administration the conclusions of the analysts studying the withdrawal .
 McCone had the important role of giving Kennedy the evidence he needed that the missiles were in fact leaving Cuba, bringing an end to the crisis .