 Both the USA and USSR viewed each other’s expanding nuclear arsenals with suspicion . Both the U.S. and USSR saw each other's expanding nuclear arsenal with suspicion.
 Each development one superpower made would be followed by the development of new weaponry by their opponent . The development of each superpower's weapons would follow the development by their opponents .
 Nuclear capabilities became a symbol for national prestige . Nuclear capabilities were a symbol of national pride .
 Superiority was needed to impress emerging third world countries of the relative successes of capitalism and communism . The success of capitalism was needed for the success of communism and capitalism .
 Eisenhower was pushed towards nuclear stockpiling, as he thought it would increase his domestic support . Eisenhower thought stockpiling would increase domestic support in the United States .
 The emergence of nuclear weapons provided wealth and influence for those involved in their construction . Those involved in the construction of the weapons were rich and influential .
 In Russia, nuclear technology allowed the military to extend its influence over the USSR’s defence policy . Russia's nuclear technology was used to extend the influence of the military .
 In America, manufacturers, development teams and the military also became increasingly influential as a result of nuclear development . Manufacturers and development teams became more influential in the nuclear industry .
 This made it hard for any President to cut down nuclear technology development, as it risked creating unemployment . This made the President's decision to keep developing nuclear technology hard to do .
 The complex created fear and paranoia around the Soviets’ nuclear capabilities . The complex also created fears and paranoia about the Soviet Union’s capabilities .
 This was reciprocated by the Soviet military, perpetuating the escalation of tensions and nuclear development . July 1945 – the Manhattan Project – was the focus of the project .
 The Soviets explode their first atomic bomb in Kazakhstan in August 1949 . August 1949 – The Soviets exploded their first nuclear bomb in the country .
 It was developed with such speed thanks to the activities of Soviet moles, and kidnapped German scientists, it was developed . The Soviet Union was behind the development of the weapon .
 November 1952 – American insecurity following the Berlin Blockade and Chinese Revolution lead to the development of the first H-bomb – vastly more powerful than the Atomic bomb dropped on Japan . August 1953 – The USSR test the first Lithium bomb in August 1953 . November 1952 - American insecurity .
 October 1957 – Sputnik is launched . It is first launched in Kazakhstan . October 1957 .
 It creates fear in the United States over the possible military applications for space technology . The U.S. fears it could be used for military purposes in space .
 A malfunction leads to the dog’s death, but the United States is even less successful . The dog's death is not the first dog to die in the U.S. history .
 The early 1960s – By July 1960, Kennedy launches the first submarine launched ballistic missile . The missile was the first to be launched by a submarine .
 Kennedy also commits to putting a man on the moon by the end of the decade . Kennedy also committed to putting the moon on the ground by the year 2000 .
 A range of delivery systems have been developed: planes, submarines and missiles . The delivery systems include planes and submarines, missiles .
 Both sides are capable of launching attacks and, from 1962 onwards, counter-attacks on each other . Both sides launched attacks and counter-attacked attacks on each another in 1962 onwards .
 Since Cuba's independence from Spain in 1898 it had essentially been a puppet state of the United States . Cuba had been essentially an American puppet state since 1898 . The U.S. has been a major ally of Cuba since the end of World War II .
 He oversaw a pro-American dictatorship, where much of the population lived in extreme poverty . Much of the land was owned by U.S. corporations .
 Batista was overthrown by the 26th of July Movement, lead by Fidel Castro, in 1959 . The 26th July Movement was led by Castro, who led the Batista government .
 Cuba created one of the best health cares in the world, Cuba's health care system . Fidel Castro's regime instituted major reforms; illiteracy was almost eradicated . His regime instituted reforms, and Cuba created a health system .
 The Mafia was also driven from Cuba, when it had once dominated the country . The Mafia also left Cuba in the 1980s .
 In 1961, the U.S. government ordered that all American property be seized . The seizure was ordered by President Nixon in 1961 .
 The USSR gave Cuba a lot of cheap oil, but the refineries in Cuba were all American owned . The USSR also gave support for Castro's fledgling Government .
 The United States cut the amount of sugar it imported from Cuba . In response, the U.S. cut sugar imports from Cuba, cutting sugar imports .
 Cuba's sugar exports were a major source of income for the country . This could have had disastrous consequences for Cuba . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the loss of sugar exports .
 Castro nationalised even more American-owned companies and tied Cuba's economy to that of the USSR's even more . Castro also nationalised more than a third of Cuba's US-owned businesses .
 The CIA also developed a plan to arm Cuban exiles who would stage an invasion of Cuba . The plan was also developed by the CIA to arm exiles .
 Kennedy was assured the plan would succeed, and that the exiles could quickly defeat Cuba's army . Kennedy was also assured that the Cuban government would succeed .
 Kennedy gave the plan his blessing and the Bay of Pigs Invasion began in April 1961 . Kennedy gave his blessing to the invasion .
 Ships that were designed to supply the rebels were sank by the Cuban army, and the invasion was quickly invaded . Ships were sunk by Cuban army .
 Castro was politically strengthened, and the CIA resorted to launching several hundred assassination attempts on him . Castro's political power was strengthened by the assassination attempts .
 Khrushchev wanted to help Castro, who feared another U.S. invasion attempt, for a number of reasons . Castro feared another invasion attempt .
 Castro was trying to expand Communism into Latin American countries . For one, Castro was expanding Communism in Latin America countries .
 Khrushchev also wanted to portray himself as a defender of the rights of small countries against American imperialism . The Soviet Union wanted to show itself as an anti-U.S. imperialism .
 Kennedy establishes a committee of the National Security Council to advise him on the crisis . Kennedy establishes the committee of a committee to help him deal with the crisis.
 Soviet military presence in Cuba is designed to protect Cuba from U.S. aggression, says Soviet leader . He explained that the military presence is solely designed to prevent U.K. aggression .
 The United States offers to withdraw its missiles in Turkey in return for the Soviets withdrawing their missiles from Cuba . The U.S. offered to pull missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet missile withdrawal from Cuba.
 He offers to dismantle the sites in return for the blockade being lifted and Kennedy agreeing not to invade Cuba . Kennedy agrees to dismantle sites in exchange for lifting the blockade and agreeing to not invade .
 Khrushchev sends another telegram, demanding Kennedy dismantle U.S. missile bases in Turkey . Kennedy also demanded Kennedy dismantle United States missile bases . Kennedy was responding to the telegram .
 This explains why he was so vehement about the USSR withdrawing its missiles from Turkey . He was also vehement about withdrawing his missiles from the country .
 Kennedy said he would lift the blockade and not invade Cuba in return for Khrushchev dismantling Soviet bases in Cuba . Kennedy made a statement in which he said he wouldn't invade Cuba . In exchange for the removal of Soviet bases, Kennedy agreed to lift blockade and lift embargo .
 Key turning points of the Crisis: Kennedy lifts naval blockade . Kennedy lifts the naval blockade of Cuba . Kennedy lifted the blockade of Cuban territory .
 Khrushchev begins to place medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . U2 planes detect the building sites . U.2 planes also detect the build sites .
 The Hot Line telephone link was established between the White House and the Kremlin . It was established in 1993 between the two countries .
 It is designed to provide direct communication between the President and Premier in times of crisis . It was designed to . provide . direct communication . between the . President and the . Premier in the country .
 The Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed in 1963, banning all nuclear testing except those conducted underground . The treaty was signed by the U.S. government .
 Khrushchev does not over-react when a U2 enters Soviet airspace . Kennedy doesn't when a plane is shot down over Cuba . Kennedy didn't over-rereact when the U2 entered Soviet airspace and didn't when it did .
 Khrushchev could claim he had secured U.S. promise to not invade Cuba . He could claim to have secured American promise not to attack Cuba .
 This increased his standing, and meant he could present himself as a defender of the rights of small countries . He said: "This increased his . standing, . meant he . presented himself as the . defender of . small countries, he said .
 The success of a nation became much more concerned with their military might. The success was the success of the nation . The success became more important to the success .
 Khrushchev's compromise was attacked by the military; he was dismissed as Soviet leader in 1964 . He was dismissed in 1964 as leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The crisis led to an increased awareness about the dangers of nuclear war . The Arms Race intensified, albeit under the limits established by US-Soviet treaties .
 Both administrations would henceforth be more considerate about not violating these spheres of influence . Both administrations should be careful not to violate these spheres .
 The hotline telephone link was established between the Kremlin and the White House . The hotline was set up between Russia and the Kremlin .
 Such legislation was indicative of improved relations between superpowers, such as Russia and Japan . Such legislation is indicative of better relations between the superpowers .
 Kennedy was torn between improving US-Soviet relations and working with the Civil Rights movement . However, Kennedy chose between improving relations with the Soviet Union and helping the civil rights movement .
 This meant that in the event of a nuclear strike, both sides would be destroyed . Both sides were likely to be destroyed by a nuclear attack .
 Following the failure of flexible response, mutually assured destruction became central to Kennedy's foreign policy . The failure to find a flexible response was followed by the failure to implement flexible response to the crisis .
 Although the Soviets never used the term, it also underpinned their tactics . It also underpined their tactics, including that of the Soviet Union .
 Both sides tried to limit conflicts so that they did not escalate into a nuclear war . Both sides try to limit conflict so that it does not escalate .
 Stalin never committed his own troops, Truman fired McArthur for wanting to deploy nuclear weapons . The United States kept the combat zone to Korea . The U.S. never committed its own troops .
 The United States withdrew its missiles from Turkey, the Soviets did the same in Cuba and the United States made no intervention in the Hungarian crisis . The U.S. withdrew its missile bases from Turkey and withdrew its own missiles from Cuba .
 The Sovier acquistion of a nuclear bomb in 1949 lead to the Americans developing the Hydrogen Bomb, in turn leading to the Soviets developing the Lithium bomb . The Soviets also developed the lithium bomb in turn .
 Culture of secrecy led to fears that each side had superior capabilities . The culture of secrecy meant there were fears of superior capabilities.
 Gaither Report created fears in the U.S. about a non-existent bomber gap . The Gaither report created fears about the gap in the United States .
 The cost of nuclear weapons put massive strains on both countries' economies . Cost of nuclear arms put strain on economies of both countries .
 Khrushchev made up for this weakness with an increasingly aggressive foreign policy towards the West . His decision to place weapons Cuba can be seen as an economic choice .
 Nuclear weapons did not stop the Soviets and U.S. competing for influence in other regions . Nuclear weapons didn't stop the Soviet Union and the United States .
 The Soviet Union commits no troops, but Mao is inferior to Stalin in terms of decision-making . Mao was superior to Stalin, but Stalin was inferior to Mao in decision making . Mao died in 1968 in a house fire explosion .
 He does not consult Mao on this beforehand, and Mao persists, pursuing Stalinist policies . Mao persists in pursuing Stalinists policies, despite having consulted him beforehand .
 Khrushchev criticises the Great Leap Forwards, especially the backyard production of steel . The Soviet Union is now the world's most powerful state of the world .
 China has promoted itself as an anti-imperialist force hostile to the U.S. This is heavily criticised in China, which has been criticised in the past for being anti-US .
 The dispute over the Sino-Soviet border leads to two clashes at Damansky Island in the Ussuri River . September 1969: Zhou Enlai, China's Foreign Minister, and Kosygin, the USSR's Prime Minister, have a difficult meeting in Beijing .
 The USA withdraws diplomatic support from Taiwan, and gives it to China . Mao had a great deal of respect for the USSR, the world's first Marxist-Lenninist state .
 He was especially reverent to Stalin, whom he saw as the leader of the revolutionary movement . He was reverently reverential to Stalin .
 Mao believed that such an alliance was key to preventing American aggression, and to stopping the development of anti-communist forces within China . Mao believed such a deal would prevent the U.S. from attacking China .
 Mao also wanted the help of Soviet experts in developing Socialism in China . Mao wanted Soviet experts to help develop socialism in China. Mao wanted to use them as a tool to develop socialism .
 Negotiations began in the summer of 1949 in Moscow, before the civil war had even been fully won . He only came out in public support for Mao once the War had finally been won in 1949 .
 The Chinese communists were willing to put themselves in a position of deference from the start of the Chinese Communist Party rule .
 Mao and Stalin met face to face in late 1949, and the treaty was signed in 1950 . Mao met Stalin and Stalin in 1949 and signed the treaty .
 The Soviet Union agreed to provide China with economic support worth $300 million . It agreed that the Soviet Union would provide China an economic support of $300million .
 Soviet experts were also sent to China to provide technical assistance . Soviet experts also provided technical assistance to the country .
 The Soviets helped the Chinese build new aluminium plants, a cable factory and modernise industry . Soviets helped build aluminium plants and cable factories in China .
 Only non-natives allowed into the area were Soviet citizens . Soviet citizens were allowed in the area .
 Stalin forced Mao to drop his support for Ho Chi Minh and the Vietnamese communists . Stalin also forced Stalin to drop support for the Vietnamese communist party .
 In the early years of Communist China, a process of rapid industrialisation took place . It was overseen by Soviet specialists during the Communist era .
 By 1956, the number of people living in Cities had more than doubled . Hundreds of thousands of people moved to the cities .
 Conditions were generally very poor, and there was widespread dissent over people's living conditions . There were also widespread dissent about living conditions in the country .
 Zhou Enlai, the Chinese foreign minister, proposed a programme of liberalisation, allowing Chinese citizens even anti-communist intellectuals to voice their opinions and views about the policies pursued by the Chinese Government .
 It was designed to create a more accountable, open Government with greater popular support . It is designed to be more accountable and more democratic .
 Mao, who was worried about the lack of peasant involvement in new developments, encouraged the idea . Mao was worried that the peasants would not be able to participate in any new developments .
 Mao became the figurehead for the campaign, making regular speeches about the campaign . Mao was Mao's main figurehead .
 By 1957 criticism of the Government became increasingly widespread and heated . Criticism was slow coming at first, but by 1957 it became more widespread .
 Millions of people were writing in to Government officials, criticising many aspects of Government policy . Soon, millions of people began writing to Government .
 The Hundred Flowers Campaign became the ‘anti-rightist campaign’ Hundreds of thousands of people who had criticised Mao during the period were purged . Mao's regime purged people who criticised Mao's policies .
 An alternative position has suggested that from its very inception, the campaign was designed to flush out dissidents and that it was never intended to liberalise Chinese society . The Great Leap Forwards is one of 81 of 81 The Great Leap Forwards .
 The Great Leap Forwards was a campaign instituted by Mao that aimed to rapidly transform China from an agrarian society to an industrialised, socialist state . Mao's campaign was meant to rapidly change China from a peasant society to a socialist society .
 It was not at all dissimilar to the programme of Five Year Plans instituted by Stalin in the 1930s . The programme is not all the same as the programme instituted by the Soviet Union in the same period .
 Perhaps the most fundamental change to the nature of Chinese society was the collectivisation of agriculture . The collectivising of agriculture was the most significant change to Chinese society .
 This increased production, but the materials were of very poor quality . The materials were increased production but the quality was poor .
 The production of these materials took people away from agricultural production, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 New experimental agricultural methods were pursued, which further destabilised the agricultural process . New experimental techniques were pursued by the government .
 Poor weather makes agricultural problems even worse for farmers . Successive years of poor weather made agricultural problems worse . Agricultural problems have worsened in recent years .
 The Cultural Revolution was initiated in 1966 as a way to re-impose Maoist values following the Great Leap Forward, which had significantly undermined Mao . It was a way of reinvigorate Mao's Maoist ideals after the 'Great Leap Forward'
 Mao encouraged the purging of all bourgeois and 'backwards' traditional Chinese elements from society . Mao encouraged all 'bourgegeous' elements to be purged from society in China . Mao wanted to purge all bourgeois elements of society from society, including bourgeois elements .
 Young people encouraged to form Red Guard to hunt down ‘revisionists’ a wide range of people from liberals to communists sympathetic with Khrushchev’s reforms . Young people were encouraged to become Red Guard .
 The zeal with which the Red Guards took to the persecutions was beyond what even Mao predicted . Even Mao predicted that even Mao would not have predicted the persecution .
 Millions of people were persecuted; people were publicly humiliated, “re-educated”, imprisoned and tortured . Millions were humiliated, humiliated and ‘re-educated’
 The upper echelons of the Communist party were also affected . Many were purged from positions of seniority . The Communist party was also affected by the purge .
 Mao hoped to further reinforce his cult of personality, and eliminate anyone who was not totally loyal to his personal rule . Mao wanted to further . eliminate . anyone who did not totally .
 Soviet-Chinese cooperation in the Korean War perhaps marks the high point of Sino-Soviet relations . The Korean War was one of the key events in the Cold War .
 Mao supported Kim Il-Sung's belief in Korean reunification, but thought that the North Korean Invasion in 1950 was premature . Mao supported the North Korea invasion in 1950, but believed that the invasion was premature.
 He feared that it would lead to the USA expanding its influence in south-east Asia . He also feared that the USA would expand its influence into the region .
 Stalin was key to Mao's decision to commit Chinese troops to the North Korean War . Stalin was also a key figure in the decision to send troops to North Korea .
 He convinced Mao that a South Korean victory would create a domino effect, leading to the collapse of other communist powers including China . The South Korean government was overthrown in 1968 .
 Mao ordered 500,000 Chinese troops into North Korea . UN forces were only miles away from the Chinese border when Mao ordered them .
 Mao hoped that Chinese support for the North Koreans would show China's commitment to the international revolutionary struggle . Mao also hoped that China's support for North Korea would show its commitment to international revolution .
 The Soviets were clearly the senior partners in terms of planning the war effort . Stalin left Mao alone, but he would occasionally intervene and overrule Mao .
 Chinese and Soviet commanders frequently clashed, but it was the Soviets who always prevailed . The Soviets always prevailed in the battle between China and Russia .
 China emerged as a world player as a result of the war . Despite being a junior partner in the Sino-Soviet alliance, Mao began to believe that China had a duty to assist other Communists .
 It was home to the Nationalists, who still claimed to be the legitimate Government of China . It was also home to China's Nationalist government .
 Mao had wanted to invade Taiwan for a long time, but Stalin's reticent attitude prevented him from taking action . Mao wanted to take advantage of the situation but Stalin refused to take action .
 The blockade had been established to prevent conflict between China and Taiwan . The blockade was set up to prevent a conflict between the two countries .
 The lifting of the blockade meant that Chiang Kai Sek could intensify Taiwanese pressure on China . The lifting has been a boon to the Taiwanese government .
 Mao saw this as an opportunity to ‘liberate Taiwan’ and galvanise the Chinese people . Mao saw it as a chance to “liberate’t Taiwan” Mao saw the opportunity to galvanise China .
 Khrushchev was willing to support Mao's venture . Although the Soviets had not been informed, Khrrushchev supported it .
 The crisis therefore had the danger of escalating into a full-blown China-USA war . The crisis could have the danger to escalate into a fully-fledged war .
 The Nationalists abandoned the Taschen Islands to the Communists, but kept control of Quemoy and Matsu . The Communist Party took control of the islands in 1945 .
 The crisis ended only when the Soviet began to take a more moderate stance, and engaged in peace talks with the Taiwanese . The Second Taiwanese Straits Crisis was the result of a series of Soviet-occupied Taiwan .
 Tensions re-emerged in 1958, when Mao ordered a new wave of shelling of Quemoy . Mao ordered the shelling in 1958 when he ordered the bombardment .
 He wanted to stir up revolutionary sentiments on the mainland, tie the USSR into military support for China and test the US' commitment to Taiwan . He also wanted to test the U.S. commitment to the Taiwan .
 The USSR seriously disagreed with China's tactics, but felt they had to present a united communist front . The USSR felt it was necessary to present the united front against China .
 Mao and Khrushchev decided that leaving Quemoy and Matsu in the hands of the nationalists gave them a tactical advantage . The second crisis came to an end when Mao decided to hand over the nuclear weapons .
 This angered Mao; he had not been consulted on the speech, and was pursuing Stalinist policies in China . Mao had not consulted on his decision to give the speech . Mao's decision angered Mao, who had not even been consulted by him .
 Mao was deeply angered by the speech, and began to see Khrushchev as a revisionist . Mao was also deeply angered . He saw the speech as an act of revisionistism .
 Mao considered this process of reconciliation as ideological revisionism . Mao considered the reconciliation process as ideological revisionsism .
 Khrushchev’s visits to the U.S. in 1959 were criticized for their lack of respect for the American people . This criticism was especially heightened during Khrushche's visit to the USA in 1959 .
 Mao believed Khrushchev was showing weakness against a capitalist power, and that he was abandoning millions of comrades resisting imperialism . Mao believed that Khrushchevitch showed weakness against capitalist power .
 Mao considered himself to leader of the anti-imperialist movement, and wanted to take a much aggressive, anti-American stance . Mao wanted to be aggressive and aggressive .
 Mao had willingly accepted Stalin as his superior, but he was highly critical of Khrushchev . Mao was critical of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . Mao had accepted Stalin's position as his boss, but was critical .
 He saw Khrushchev as his inferior, and wanted to position himself as leader of the worldwide revolutionary movement . He wanted to become a leader in the world of revolutionary movements .
 He felt that as leader of the USSR, he should be leader of a world revolutionary movement, he said . He said that as he felt that . as leader he should . be . leader of Russia, he felt . that as . leader he . should be a leader of world revolutionary
 Neither trusted each other, and both try to outdo each other when they met . Both try outdo themselves when they first met .
 Mao invited Khrushchev to go swimming during a meeting, according to a famous anecdote . The incident occurred at the height of the Cold War in the early 1960s .
 Mao was famous for being a skilled swimmer, and he deliberately humiliated Khrushchev, who could hardly swim . Mao was known for being famous for his skillful swimming skills .
 National interests were a key factor in the deterioration of Sino-Soviet relations . National interests are key to the deterioration in relations between China and the Soviet Union .
 The USSR prevented China from expanding its influence into North Korea . Spheres of influence were a particular matter of contention .
 Khrushchev also refused to reduce its ties to Mongolia, which Mao saw as a natural part of China's sphere of influence . Khruschev refused to cut ties with Mongolia, and Mao saw it as part of the Chinese sphere .
 The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 also deteriorated relations . Czech-Russian relations deteriorated after the Soviet invasion in 1968 .
 The border between China and Russia was the most important national issue in the Sino-Soviet split . China's border with Russia was one of the most significant issues in the split .
 China demanded territorial concessions from Russia, and this increased tensions over the border . China demands territorial concessions and this has led to increased tensions .
 He believed that this would help affirm China’s position as a World Power . He said this would also help affirm the country's position in the world .
 The USSR tried to persuade the Chinese that Chinese nuclear weapons were redundant, as China was under the Soviet Union’s nuclear umbrella . The USSR was hesitant about assisting China; they tried to convince the Chinese .
 Soviet reluctance to help China develop a nuclear bomb developed in 1960 . In 1960, they withdrew all support for China’s nuclear programme .
 This increased fear and paranoia in China over the USSR’s intentions towards them . This increased paranoia over Soviet intentions towards China .
 China refused to sign the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 and developed its own nuclear bomb in 1964 . In turn, China refused the nuclear test ban Treaty and tested its own bomb in 1963 .
 The possession of a nuclear weapon by the Chinese increased fear and tension with the Soviet Union, and further helped to deteriorate Sino-Soviet relations . 35 of 81 Damansky Island Dispute .
 Damansky Island dispute is a prime example of how tensions over the border led to the Sino-Soviet split . The Damansky island dispute is one of the key reasons for the split in China .
 The Ussuri River region in the Sino-Soviet border was particularly contentious, as it flooded often and so it was hard to establish a definitive border . It flooded often so it made it difficult to establish an official border .
 The Damansky Island was in the Ussuri River and Khrushchev offered to cede it to China . The island was in Russia's Ussurki River in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev withdrew his offer when Mao declared that it would be the first of many territorial concessions . Mao declared he would be willing to make territorial concessions, but then withdrew offer . The offer was rejected by the Soviet Union when it was threatened by the threat of Soviet invasion .
 Tensions were heightened by the appointment of the USSR's former deputy of Strategic Rocket Forces as a commander in the region . Tensions have also been heightened by appointment of a former commander of the Soviet Union .
 These tensions were further escalated in 1968, when the USSR invaded Czechoslovakia . These tensions escalated when the Soviet Union invaded the Czech Republic .
 China feared that the USSR might attempt an invasion of China, and that the Ussuri river would be a weak spot in such an eventuality . China feared it might be the weak spot of an invasion .
 The Chinese adopted a tactic of ‘active defence’, whereby China would pre-emptively strike the Soviet Union and prevent it from launching its own attack . The Chinese therefore adopted the tactic of 'active defence'
 36 of 81 Damansky Island Dispute #2. By this point, both countries possessed nuclear weapons, so there was a real threat of nuclear war .
 They appeared to the Soviet troops to be unarmed, but soon charged on them, engaging in hand-to-hand combat . The incident took place in the early 1950s .
 The Soviets withdrew their troops from the Island completely . Eventually, the Soviets withdrew from the island completely .
 The Chinese then began to mass their troops on their side of the border . The Chinese began massing their troops in China's border .
 The Soviets then attacked the Chinese troops, claiming a high number of casualties . The Soviets claimed a number of Chinese troops were killed .
 On the 13thAugust 1969, a violent clash led to the destruction of a whole Chinese Brigade . The Chinese Brigade was destroyed by a whole of a Chinese Brigade in a brutal clash .
 Kosygin, the Soviet Prime Minister, met Zhou Enlai in Beijing Airport, returning from the funeral of Ho Chi Minh . The Soviet PM was returning from a funeral of the Vietnamese leader .
 37 of 81 Reasons for Pro-American rapprochement with the USA. 37 reasons for pro-U.S. ties .
 To the east lay India, who had gone to war with China over a border dispute in 1962 . India and China went to war in 1962 over border dispute between them .
 To the west lay Taiwan, which claimed to be the legitimate Government of mainland China, and South Korea, which is a strong capitalist nation . To the east, South Korea was ruled out of Taiwan .
 Mao instinctively feared Japan was growing in terms of economic strength . Mao feared its resurgence; it had invaded China only thirty years before . Mao also feared Japan's growing economic strength and feared it would invade China .
 Mao feared it would lead to an increased American presence in the south-east . Mao feared that it would be an increase in the presence of the U.S. Mao also feared that the move could lead to increased American influence .
 To the North was Russia, border disputes and ideological conflict threatened war . And, of course, to the North, it was Russia's ideological conflict .
 He hoped to curtail Soviet influence by exploiting Sino-Soviet tensions . The Chinese hoped to use the power of the Soviet Union to curb influence .
 Mao feared a resurgent Japan it had invaded China only three decades before, and there was years of mutual hostility and tension between the two countries . Mao feared it would be a threat to Japan, which invaded China three decades earlier .
 The military situation in Vietnam was also an issue . America was deeply entangled in the conflict . China was providing vast amounts of support for the Vietcong .
 The US' diplomatic and military support for Taiwan was also a major source of tension in China . 39 of 81 Ping-pong diplomacy was conducted by the U.S. government .
 The United States Ping Pong team were invited to play the Chinese team in 1971 . In 1971, the U.S. team were asked to play in a friendly match .
 This was a monumental event; he was the first American President to visit Communist China . He was the President of the U.S. President of China .
 The visit was seen as a success by both parties . A communiqué was produced stressing the ideological differences of Maoism and American capitalism .
 Trade increased not just with America, but with other western countries as well . Trade increased with the United States, but also with other countries .
 It began criticising human rights abuses in South Korea and withdrew diplomatic support for Taiwan, expelling it from the UN security council . It began to criticise South Korea's human rights violations .
 Soviet leaders had not expected rapprochement; they were forced to see the world in multi-polar terms . The Soviet Union was forced to deal with the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Egypt and Syria, supported by surrounding states, invaded Israel in 1973 . In 1973, Israel was invaded by Egypt, Syria and other countries .
 OPEC decided to raise the price of oil to all countries supporting Israel, such as the U.S. and UK . OPEC also raised the price to support the United States and United Kingdom .
 This created the possibility of a recession and lost economic growth across much of the west . This created a potential for a recession across the west, says David Cameron .
 In response, the United States organised the Washington Energy Conference, which harmonised Western Energy policies . The conference was held in Washington, DC .
 The United States lifted controls on the banks, letting them exploit the surplus of dollars . The U.S. also lifted the banks' ability to exploit the excesses of the dollar .
 The threat of an economic crisis pushed the United States towards détente . The U.S. and Russia have been at odds for decades .
 It made people reconsider whether exorbitant defence spending was actually good for the economy . Defence spending has been a major problem for the U.S. economy since 2001 .
 The USSR was actually strengthened by the oil crisis . Its own oil exports became more valuable and its strategic position was strengthened . The US' weakness was also strengthened by its weakness .
 30% of Soviet workers were involved in armament production . The USSR was spending a vast amount of money on arms spending and armaments production was large part of the economy .
 Much of the Soviet economy was focused on heavy industry, and consumer goods were largely neglected . Consumer goods were neglected .
 Were the Soviets able to divest funds away from armaments, they would be able to invest in consumer goods more than armaments .
 The USSR was providing economic support to communist allies abroad . $1 billion a year was given to Vietnam and $4 billion to Angola and Ethiopia .
 Willy Brandt, Social Democratic Chancellor of Germany, was keen to develop links between East and West . Brandt was keen on developing links between the East and the West .
 Tensions were still high following the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia . The Czech Republic was invaded by the Czech Republic in 1968 . The invasion took place in 1968 and 1969 .
 He saw stabilization of relations as essential to maintaining European well-being, and to economic growth .
 Ostpolitik, meaning ‘East Politics’, was the policy designed by Brandt to open up channels between East and West . Brandt's policy was designed to open channels between the East and the West . The East-West policy was created in the 1930s .
 He encouraged Western European countries to open up relations with the Eastern Bloc . The former Soviet Union leader urged Western European nations to open relations .
 There was a real threat of war with China, and China's rapprochement with the USA forced the Soviet Union to improve relations with America . China's relationship with the U.S. forced the USSR to improve its relations with the United States .
 The USSR also wanted the west to recognize the legitimacy of the Eastern Bloc to secure Soviet hegemony in the region . The USSR wanted to secure its dominance in the Middle East . The Soviet Union also wanted recognition of the Bloc's legitimacy .
 Rapprochement, it was felt, would also help the Soviet Union limit the US' power . It was also felt, that it would help the US limit its power .
 In the early 1970s, the two superpowers had nuclear parity, but the Soviets knew they couldn't keep up in the arms race indefinitely . The Soviets were aware they weren't able to keep up with the nuclear arms race .
 The USSR sought to maintain parity through arms limitation treaties . It sought parity with other nations through arms control treaties .
 Kennedy's threats to create a nuclear war also caused considerable anxiety . Kennedy also threatened to create nuclear war with the U.S.
 The Treaty of Warsaw and Treaty of Moscow, 1970 lead to West Germany accepting the Oder-Neisse line as Poland's border . West Germany accepted the line as the border as Poland, but Poland refused to accept it .
 The Four Powers Agreement, 1971 confirmed France's, the US', the UK's and the USSR's administrative zones in Germany . The agreement was signed by France, the U.S. and the UK .
 These had originally only been temporary divisions, but they were made formal by this agreement .
 Basic Treaty, 1972 was an agreement between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany . The Basic Treaty was signed in 1972 . It was a treaty between the two countries .
 In the treaty, the FRG accepted the existence of the GDR and formally recognised it as a legitimate state . The FRG also formally recognised the state of GDR as an independent state .
 The crisis showed the dangers of nuclear war, and had already led to the Test Ban Treaty and the hotline . The crisis had led to a test ban treaty and hotline .
 There was significant obstacles for the superpowers to overcome in signing the treaty . The Czechoslovakian invasion of 1968 stopped negotiations in 1968 . The treaty was signed after the Czechoslovakia invaded the country .
 It was hard to compare the USA's and USSR's arsenals, which were incredibly different . Furthermore, it was impossible to compare Russia's and U.S. arsenals to that of the USSR's .
 The USSR was pushed towards signing the treaty by Nixon's visit to Beijing in 1972 . The treaty was finally signed by Nixon in 1972 after a visit to China .
 Both superpowers were committed to preventing nuclear war . It showed increased cooperation, and both superpowers agreed to prevent war .
 This was a significant change from the period when Massive Retaliation dominated foreign policies . This was the era when Massive Reactions dominated foreign policy .
 The USA was developing MIRVs, which were not legislated for, and which were capable of holding multiple warheads . The U.S. was not legislating for the MIRV .
 The Basic Principles Agreement established the terms of conduct in the event of nuclear war . It was established in the Basic principles Agreement .
 SALT II set equal limits for the number of missile bombers and strategic bombers, but not cruise missiles . The limits on missile bombers are equal to those on strategic bombers and missile bombers .
 It was only signed in 1979, after Ford had attempted to limit the number of Soviet Missiles . Ford had tried to limit number of Missiles in an attempt to stop Soviet missiles .
 It was rejected by the Senate, as America felt increasingly vulnerable and conflict in Angola, Afghanistan and Iran made it seem like the USSR was expanding its sphere of influence . However, the Senate rejected it, as it felt like it was expanding America's sphere of power .
 The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe comprised countries from NATO and the Warsaw Pact . NATO and Warsaw Pact countries attended the conference . The conference was attended by NATO and NATO members .
 The Accords encouraged improved and encouraged trade across the Iron Curtain .
 The Warsaw Pact promised to protect human rights and submitted to being observed by objective institutions . Warsaw Pact was formed in 1968 and signed a pact with the Soviet Union .
 West hoped this would undermine communist regimes by encouraging dissent . The West hoped it would undermine the communist regimes . But the West failed to realise this was a mistake .
 The Accords were criticised by the U.S. right-wing as it was seen as a complicity with Soviet tyranny .
 USSR was expanding its sphere of influence into the third world such as Angola, Afghanistan and Mozambique . The USSR was still expanding its influence into third world .
 Some interpret it as having prolonged the war, and having given the USSR time to recover . Carter was president of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . The Soviet Union was defeated in the Cold War .
 Carter became President in 1977, and didn't really have a clear line on foreign policy . Carter was President of the U.S. in 1977 .
 Previously to this point, his experience had been largely in domestic policy . Previously, he had been in charge of foreign policy .
 He was keen to focus on human rights in Eastern Europe, but was also influenced by other factors . He focused mainly on Eastern Europe but was influenced by factors such as human rights .
 Neo-conservatism was rising in popularity and particularly pressured Carter into resuming the arms race . The arms race was a major factor in Carter's decision to resume the war .
 58 of 81 Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan #1 . Brezinski wanted to take an increasingly hard line . His national security adviser, Brezinski, wanted to be tough .
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan can be seen as beginning the end of détente . The invasion of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan was seen to be beginning to end denteente . Denteente was a two-decade-era relationship between the two countries .
 Afghanistan was considered a place of strategic importance for the Soviets . It divided Pakistan and Iran, two major regional powers . Afghanistan was seen as one of the most important countries in the world .
 It was close to the Arabian sea and the strait of Hormutz, a key passageway in the transport of oil to the West . The strait is a key passageway in which oil can be transported to the west .
 A friendly Afghanistan would give the Soviets influence over this area of tactical importance, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Afghanistan is a key ally of the Soviet Union .
 They immediately alienated themselves from the religious elite, who are immensely influential in Afghan society . They were immediately alienated from religious leaders .
 Land was redistributed from wealthy landlords to the landless poor . Women's rights and education were heavily promoted . Headscarves were discouraged and women were enrolled in literacy classes .
 Protests spread to other Islamic countries, especially Iran, where it lead to the revolution of 1979 . Protests led to the overthrow of the Soviet Union .
 They feared the Soviets might exploit the crisis to gain influence in the area and seize oil supplies . They felt the crisis might also be an opportunity to seize influence and oil supplies in the region .
 The United States started giving aid to the Mujahadeen in 1979, when they were provided with communication equipment . The U.S. provided communication equipment in 1979 .
 President Obama sought to expunge political dissidents through drastic reforms . He sought to expel them through drastic and draconian reforms . His government sought to do so through drastic measures .
 The Afghan Prime Minister Mohammed Taraki wanted to oust Amin, and end the repression and radical reforms . Amin was overthrown by Taraki, who wanted to end repression and reform .
 The attempted coup made Taraki realise he had little support in the USSR . Taraki began to increase relations with the West after the attempt .
 Andropov, KGB chief, argued that if the USSR did not commit troops to help save the Communist regime, Amin would claim the USSR was abandoning its responsibilities and would look to the United States for support instead . Amin claimed the USSR would turn to the U.S. for support
 Members of the Politburo suggested that the USSR should invade and topple Amin, as had worked in Hungary in 1956 . Amin was the prime minister of Amin's regime in the Soviet Union .
 When NATO deployed even more nuclear weapons, it was felt that the Soviets had nothing to lose from invading Afghanistan . NATO deployed more than 100 nuclear weapons in the 1980s .
 Soviet expansionism into the third world, particularly Mozambique, Angola etc. was used by neo-conservatives as evidence of a need to take a more aggressive foreign policy .
 Carter expanded aid given to anti-communists in El Salvador and Nicaragua . Carter also expanded aid to El Salvador, Nicaragua and Honduras .
 Soviet violations of human rights, in contravention of the Helsinki accords, troubled many Americans . U.S. citizens were outraged by Soviet human rights violations .
 He could only function whilst heavily medicated having had a heart attack in the late 1970s . This led to Soviet diplomacy becoming more confused . He was only able to function with a heavy heart attack .
 In November 1979, American hostages were taken captive by Islamists in the United States embassy in Tehran . American hostages taken hostage in 1979 were taken hostage by Islamists .
 neo-conservatives claimed it showed American impotence in world affairs . They weren't released until 1981, leading neo-Conservatives to claim it showed U.S. impotency .
 It was seen by neo-conservatives as an act of Soviet expansionism that American impotence had been unable to stop . The U.S. was seen as impotent to stop the Soviet invasion of Europe .
 There was growing criticism of detente in the Politburo, who were angered by U.S. criticism of their human rights record . There was also growing criticism .
 The military pushed for a resurgence in the arms race, believing it would increase their influence and support Soviet hegemony in the Global South . The arms race was part of Reagan's Foreign Policy .
 Regan argued that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the deployment of **-20 nuclear missiles in Eastern Europe were signs of increased Soviet expansionism and that it necessitated a change in foreign policy . Regan argues that the invasion was a sign of increased Russian expansionism .
 The Militarised Counter-Revolution saw defense spending increase 13% in 1982 and by 8% in each of the following two years . Defense spending increased by eight percent each year in 1982 .
 New ways to deploy nuclear weapons became prevalent . Strategic planes and trident were developed . New ways of deploying nuclear weapons were also developed .
 Reagan knew that the U**R would never be able to match the USA in a new cold war, but that they would be forced to . Reagan knew the U.S. would never match the United States in a cold war but that it would be necessary .
 The most important development under the Reagan Administration was the Strategic Defense Initiative, or “Star wars” The system was a complicated and technologically advanced anti-ballistic missile system in space .
 The Star Wars system clearly contravened the Anti-ballistic Missile System Treaty . The Reagan Doctrine is the result of the Reagan Doctrine . The system contravenes the treaty, according to the Reagan doctrine .
 The Reagan Doctrine was a policy that armed and supported anti-communist Governments or rebels fighting left-wing Governments . Reagan's policy was to arm and support anti-Communist Governments . The Reagan doctrine was backed by the Reagan administration .
 Military support was sent to right-wing Contra rebels in Nicaragua fighting the Sandinista Government . Contra rebels were fighting the government of Nicaragua .
 An unpopular, right-wing Government in El Salvador facing a left-wing insurrection was also supported . An unpopular government in the country was also backed by the government .
 A notable exception was Grenada when the New Jewel Movement, lead by Bernard Coard, was overthrown by military troops . Grenada was the only country to have overthrown a major political movement .
 Stinger anti-aircrafts were also provided to the Mujahadeen in Afghanistan .
 The United States cut loans and bank credit to Poland when Solidarity was banned in 1981 . The U.S. also instituted tariffs on Polish exports when it banned Solidarity .
 It was seen as neo-imperialist and intervening in the affairs of small western countries . It was also seen as interventionist and interventionist .
 Many of the regimes in the Phillipines and El Salvador were anti-democratic and violated numerous human rights . The Phillipines, El Salvador and Phillipines were also anti-democracy . Thatcher and Reagan were in charge of 64 of 81 of the countries .
 She was fervently anti-communist and committed to the US-UK special relationship . She was dedicated to the U.S. and UK special relationship.
 The fact that the U.S. had missiles on European soil significantly increased the pressure on the USSR . The United States had missile bases in Europe . The Soviet Union did not want to invade Europe .
 In the early 1980s, the USSR was a gerontocracy, governed by old, ill and often incapable leaders . The USSR was governed by people who were ill, ill or incapable .
 Reform, especially of the economy, was badly needed, but the leaders in this period were unable to provide such change . Reform is badly needed in the country's history, especially in the economy .
 He made the SALT II agreement with Ford in 1979, but by this time, it's doubtful as to whether he fully understood what was happening .
 He began some reforms, starting domestic reforms and beginning half-hearted attempts to withdraw from Afghanistan . He also began some domestic reforms .
 The Foreign Minister refused to comment on the incident, only warning that if any other aircraft entered Soviet airspace without permission, it too would be shot down .
 Andropov was too old and weak to make a face-to-face meeting with Western leaders about it . He was too weak and too old to meet with them about it, he says .
 He was considerably younger than his predecessors; only just in his fifties . He was only the only Soviet leader to not have been born in Imperial Russia .
 Gorbachev argued of the need to reform communism, making Soviet Government more accountable and ending conflict with the USA, which he saw as destructive and destabilizing . He saw the need for reform of communism and ending the USA conflict .
 He felt this would let him reduce arms spending without making the USSR vulnerable to U.S. aggression, thus appeasing the fears of the Soviet military . He felt it would allow him to cut arms spending .
 Gorbachev's foreign minister launched a charm offensive with the west . Shevardnandze sought to improve relations with Western leaders in the 1980s .
 It dragged on indeterminably, highlighting the inefficiencies of supporting foreign communist Governments . It was the longest-ever battle between the Soviet Union and Russia in the world .
 Little actual change was effected by the Geneva summit, but it established amicable relations between Reagan and Gorbachev .
 Gorbachev offered to phase out all of the USSR's nuclear missiles in exchange for the United States abolishing the Star Wars programme . The deal was agreed in the 1980s .
 Reagan declined, but the offer shocked Washington and showed that Gorbachev was a radical alternative to his predecessors . Reagan declined .
 The Intermediate Nuclear Forces agreement lead to the immediate withdrawal of Nuclear Missiles . The agreement led to the withdrawal of nuclear missiles from the Soviet Union .
 It was also the first time Gorbachev met George Bush in a formal capacity, who would later succeed Reagan as President . The first time the two leaders met in formal capacity was the first meeting of George Bush .
 Gorbachev declared that they had “buried the cold war at the bottom of the Mediterranean’s Mediterranean . It established good relations between the two and they declared that . They declared . “Buried cold war . at bottom of Mediterranean”
 These policies encouraged more criticism of the USSR, and demands for greater liberalization . The policies encouraged criticism of Soviet policies .
 Demands range from greater liberalization to rejection of Communism . Demands ranged from greater openness to a full rejection of communism .
 This encouraged similar reformers within Soviet satellite states in Eastern Europe . This encouraged other reformers in the Soviet Union satellite states .
 Solidarity won all but one seat in the Polish legislature . Solidarity was the first non-communist Government elected in Poland . The Polish government was elected in 1978 .
 Throughout the 1980s, there were pressures produced by ineffective rule, economic problems and greater calls for freedom . The 1980s was a period of political turmoil in the United States .
 There was a lack of prosperity in these countries; they were unable to match the wealth and prosperity of the west . The west was unable to compete with the west, says the author .
 In the East, there was a continued focus on heavy industry which was inefficient, unprofitable and that often took the focus away from consumer goods and light industry . Unlike in the West, financial industries, in particular, were booming in the East .
 Pollution was becoming very severe as a result of such a focus on heavy industry; people's health suffered . Pollution became very severe . People's health was also suffering .
 Technology was increasingly outdated – there were few computers, videos or robotics in the East . Technology is increasingly outdated - there are few computers or robotics .
 People were becoming increasingly aware of the advantages of a materialist, consumerist society . People were also becoming increasingly conscious of the benefits of the society .
 Resistance to communism became increasingly prevalent following Pope John Paul II's visit to Poland in 1979 . Resistance to the communist regime became more prevalent following John Paul's visit .
 Throughout 1980 – 1981, an illegal Trade Union called Solidarity became increasingly important in Polish society . Solidarity was an illegal trade union which was illegal in 1980-81 . The union was illegal and illegal in Poland .
 Solidarity wielded significant influence over industrial workers, especially the shipyards in Gdansk, Poland . Lead by Lech Walesa, Solidarity was Poland's largest industrial enterprise .
 He hoped that by making concessions with Solidarity, he would be able to make them cooperate with the Communist Government .
 Polish General Jaruzelski was convinced by Soviet troop movements along the Polish border that a Soviet invasion was imminent . The invasion was based on the Brezhnev Doctrine, according to a Polish general's view .
 He declared Marshall Law, outlawing Solidarity and using the army to quell dissent . Hoping to appease Soviet fears about Solidarity, he declared Marshall law .
 Solidarity continued to operate illegally and was well supported due to popular discontent at continuing economic stagnation . Solidarity operated illegally and well supported by the majority of the population . The organization continued to work illegally .
 The Government was still unable to reform the economy and the price hike in July 1985 created deeper resentment . Price hikes in 1985 created deep resentment for the Government .
 In 1987, the Government held a referendum on instituting economic reform but it failed . The referendum on economic reform was held in 1987 but failed .
 In 1988, a 110% price increase was instituted, creating widespread anger . The price hike created widespread anger in 1988, when it was instituted .
 Following the repression of demonstrations in March 1988, steel-workers went on strike in April . Steel-workers' strike was the first strike since the April 1988 uprising .
 The troops intimidated many workers into returning to work . 72 of 81 Fall of Communism in Poland #2. The troops intimidate many workers to return to work.
 In August, mineworkers from mines across Upper Silesia went on strike, surprising the secret intelligence service . Mineworkers surprised the secret service by striking out against the government .
 10,000 workers went on strike and occupying Stalowa Wola Steelworks, demanding the legalisation of Solidarity . They were succeeded by 10,500 workers going on strike .
 Lech Walesa – fearing violent repression – called off the action off . This particularly concerned the authorities, and the authorities . The action was called off by Walesa, who feared violence .
 Jaruzelski also legalised Solidarity – although this was largely opposed by other members of the Government . Jaruzelki was also opposed by others to legalising Solidarity .
 In the agreement signed in April 1989, it was agreed that semi-free elections should be held in June .
 Solidarity won all but one seat in the senate and all the seats they were allowed to contest in the Sejm. Solidarity also won all seats they could contest in parliament . The election was held in Budapest, Poland, on Sunday .
 Despite Solidarity winning the elections, the Communists maintained control over the military . Solidarity won the elections despite Solidarity's victory in the elections .
 Solidarity compromised with the Communists, agreeing that Jaruzelski be allowed to continue as head of state . Solidarity agreed with the Communist Party to allow him to continue .
 Solidarity MP was elected PM the Eastern Bloc's first non-communist head of Government . The Communist Prime Minister resigned and the Solidarity Minister was elected Prime Minister .
 The election of a non-communist Government in an Eastern Bloc country had massive ramifications . It inspired people in other Soviet satellite states to begin to call for an end to communist rule, beginning the process that would end communist rule .
 Gorbachev said in July 1989 that the USSR would no longer involve itself in the affairs of Eastern Europe . In July 1989, he said that he would not involve himself in Eastern Europe affairs .
 This reinforced calls for an end to communism elsewhere in Eastern Europe . 74 of 81 Fall of Communism in Hungary in Hungary .
 Throughout the 1980s, as in many Eastern European states, there were widespread economic problems throughout Hungary . Hungary was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 The reformists who replaced Kadar instituted wide-reaching political reforms .
 For the first time since the rise of communism, multiparty elections were allowed to be held . The first time in the country's history since the fall of communism was allowed to take place .
 In September 1989, the borders with the East were opened, fatally undermining the German Democratic Republic . The borders were opened to the East in September 1989 . The West and the East became a major factor in the West .
 East Germans could now escape to the Federal Republic of Germany via Hungary . Thousands of East Germans escaped to the German Republic via Hungary via Hungary.
 0,000 employers were employed along with 300,000 employees . It was a surveillance state; the Stasi kept records on hundreds of thousands of East Germans .
 There were significant economic problems in Eastern Europe, and people were aware of the benefits of a materialist lifestyle as a result of receiving Western television . People were increasingly aware of benefits of Western television, and became aware of their materialism .
 East Germany was an artificially constructed country – it was a product of Cold War tensions . Attempts to create a sense of national identity lead to prominent athletes becoming rich and pampered .
 Police brutality against protestors was only ended when Krenz, of the East German Politburo, claimed that such repression would lead to a bloodbath . The East German politician claimed that repression would end up leading to a 'bloodbath'
 Honecker refused to deal with the mass emigrations from the GDR and was replaced by Krenz in October, 1989 . Honeck was replaced in October 1989 by the German government .
 Krenz's talk of democracy encouraged further demonstrations and protests . He encouraged demonstrators to take to the streets to demonstrate .
 Krenz encouraged the opening of the Berlin Wall; it fell in November 1989 . The Berlin Wall fell in December 1989 .
 Gorbachev agreed on the condition the USSR be given economic aid . Czechoslovakia was one of the most successful countries in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was forced to accept economic aid from the West .
 Protesters angry at declining living standards and called for economic reforms . Protesters were angry at decline in living standards . Protesters also called for reforms in the country's economic system .
 Protests quickly dispersed and organisers were purged by the ŠtB, State Security . State Security purged the organisers of the protests .
 Public expressions of anger and discontent were encouraged by the occupation of the West German Embassy in Prague by East Germans keen to escape the GDR . The fall of the Berlin Wall in November, and Czechoslovakia's neighbours overthrowing Communist Governments, encouraged the public's anger .
 On November seventeenth, 1989, students took the streets to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Jan Opletal, a Czech martyr murdered by the Nazis . Students took to the streets in memory of the Czech martyr .
 Trade unions, civic groups, actors and playwrights join together to form Civic Forum . Civic Forum was attacked by members of the public, trade unions and actors .
 The leader of the Forum was Vaclav Havel, an activist in the 1968 Prague Spring, and a playwright . The Forum was founded by Havel in 1968 . Havel was a member of the Prague Forum .
 The Forum employed non-violent tactics; plays and art were used to convey their message . Public assemblies were held, public assemblies held, protesters waved Czechoslovakian flags . The Forum was held in Prague, Czechoslovakia .
 Many of these non-violent protests were met with police violence . Protesters handing policemen flowers were attacked by police officers .
 On the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth, 750,000 people attended a demonstration in Prague . The demonstration was held in the Czech capital .
 75% of Czech workers took part in a General Strike on the twenty-seventh of November . Strikes were also used in the Czech Republic .
 On the tenth of December the Communist President, Gustav Husak, handed power to a non-communist administration and resigned . Husak was the leader of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union .
 Civic Forum won nearly 50% of the vote in Czechoslovakia's first democratic elections since 1946 in June 1990 . Civic Forum was founded by the Civic Forum, a Czechoslovak-based group of activists .
 Bulgaria had not experienced the same economic problems as other countries . The country had been a popular tourist destination for people in the Eastern Bloc .
 The leader of Bulgaria, Zhikov had never been as Stalinist as many other leaders, but his regime was quite autocratic . The death of his liberalizing daughter under controversial circumstances led to his autocratic regime .
 In 1989, Zhikov forcibly expelled Bulgarian Turks, causing a massive downturn in agricultural output in Southern Bulgaria . The expulsion of Bulgarian Turks caused a massive economic downturn in the country's agriculture .
 Outcry over the break up of an environmental protest lead to wider protests for change . Outcry led to the break-up of an eco protest in the UK .
 Zhikov replaced by Foreign Minister Maldenov, but this only stopped demonstrations for a while . Zhikkov was replaced by foreign minister Zhidov, who is now the prime minister of Russia .
 Maldenov promised reforms, perhaps even free elections, but this did little to stop rising discontent in the country . Maldenova promised reforms but his government has failed to meet expectations .
 The Romanian Revolution is distinct in that it is the only one of the 1989 where violence was organized and widespread . Violence was organized, widespread and widespread in the 1989 revolution .
 Of all Communist states, his was perhaps the most Stalinist and dictatorial . Of all Communism states, he was the most dictatorial, dictatorial leader .
 The state police, the Securitate, ruthlessly eradicated opposition to opposition . censorship was so complete that all typewriters in the country had to be registered . The state of Soviet Union was so powerful that all Typewriters had to register .
 He alienated Romanians even further by destroying whole villages to make way for agro-industrial complexes . He alienated them even further with his destruction of whole villages .
 Ceausescu intended to ride the revolutions out; he was re-elected for another term in 1989 . He felt secure enough enough to leave the country for Iran . He left the country in 1989 to join Iran .
 The fall of Communism was triggered by the arrest of a Priest called Tokes, who had broken the law by allowing poetry to be read during his service . Tokes was arrested by the Communist Party in 1968 .
 At a rally in Bucharest the next week Ceausescu was drowned out by the booing crowds . Rumors surrounding the event were rife and at a rally next week he was booed out .
 Ceausescu and his wife fled Bucharest in a helicopter but were arrested and shot by the army . The couple were shot in the head after fleeing Bucharest but were captured by the military .
 The Securitate continued in street battles until Ceausescu’s death on Christmas Day 1989 . Loyal to the end, they continued to fight in the streets .
 His economic reforms had failed to improve the Soviet economy, and living standards remained low . His reforms were not enough to improve living standards .
 Food queues, strikes, inflation and crime had become commonplace by 1988 . Food queues and strikes in strategic industries were commonplace in 1988 .
 This was coupled with increasing freedom of expression as a result of Glasnost, meaning vocal criticism of the CPSU was becoming more and more common . The CPSU has been accused of corruption in recent years .
 The policy of Glasnost led to greater transparency in the Soviet media, and the abuses of the Soviet Government became more apparent .
 The reforms instituted by Gorbachev ran out of control in 1991, when the monopoly of the CPSU ended . Reformists were legally able to establish the Democratic Reform Movement .
 Conservatives feared the break up of the Soviet Union, and Liberals demanding greater change . Liberals demanded greater change in Soviet Union .
 In August 1991, the Conservatives launched a coup against Gorbachev and held him under house arrest . The Conservatives launched the coup against the Soviet Union in August 1991 . The coup took place in the wake of the fall of the Cold War .
 The coup failed in the face of mass protests led by Boris Yeltsin, the Russian President . The coup took place in Moscow in 1992 .
 Rising nationalist sentiments in the Baltic states had led to their declaration of independence by the end of 1990 . Rising nationalist sentiment in Baltic states led the declaration of their independence .