 Scholars have produced an empirically rich and theoretically diverse literature on the Cuban missile crisis . Scholars say the crisis was a "humanitarian crisis"
 Historians trace the evolution of the crisis hour by hour,2 one can also read how participants and scholars reacted as key historical points were revealed .
 Little has been written about the intelligence aspects of the superpower nuclear standoff that blossomed in fall of 1962 .
 During the Cold War, the performance of intelligence organizations in the autumn of 1962 was shrouded in secrecy . During the 1960s, intelligence organizations were closely watched .
 The nuclear and diplomatic elements of the Soviet-American confrontation soon dominated popular and academic attention . Despite early interest in the role of intelligence during the crisis,"""The nuclear and . diplomatic elements" of the . crisis soon dominated . academic attention.
 The classic Cold War work on the crisis, Essence of Decision, even seemed to provide the final word on U.S. intelligence performance .
 This volume was also the standard introduction to organizational politics for students of international relations . Questions about intelligence performance and organization were resolved before they were clearly raised .
 Today, the vast literature on the Cuban crisis, including a largely declassified American documentary record, offers some intriguing insights into the role of intelligence .
 To draw these insights, this essay will be divided into three sections . This essay will focus on the themes of the book, "The Power of the World" and "The World"
 The first section describes how the different strategic positions of Americans, Russians and Cubans shaped the intelligence challenges they faced in October 1962 . The second section of this article includes the first section of the 1962 CIA memo .
 The second section applies this framework to identify how the actors involved met the intelligence challenges posed by the crisis . The framework is used to identify the challenges that led to the crisis in Syria .
 This section does not provide a complete overview of the Cuban missile crisis . It will highlight some important intelligence aspects of the confrontation .
 The concluding section will offer a few observations about how each of the states involved met the intelligence challenges posed by the crisis . These insights might help those interested in organizing for future crisis intelligence .
 Domingo Amuchastegui suggests that policymakers and citizens in different countries experienced rather different crises . The crisis in Cuba was particularly acute in the 1980s and 1990s .
 If one views the crisis from both a structural and domestic political perspective, this observation also applies to assessments of crisis intelligence . The U.S. has been in the throes of a major crisis in the world since 2001 .
 In a structural sense, an intelligence organization's contribution to policy formulation is shaped by a state's position in a given strategic interaction . Intelligence organizations' contributions to policy are shaped by their position in strategic interaction, writes CNN's Peter Bergen . Intelligence agencies' contribution to foreign policy is shaped
 Cuban, American, and Soviet policymakers needed different intelligence assessments in the autumn of 1962 because of the different part their respective states played in the crisis . Cuba, the U.S. and the Soviet Union needed different assessments of the crisis in the fall of 1962 .
 A state's domestic structure, the overall way it is organized to conduct diplomatic and military initiatives, and the spirit that animates intragovernmental relations, all affect the potential contribution intelligence organizations make in guiding crisis decision making .
 If few channels exist between intelligence analysts and policymakers, or if policymakers do not value intelligence, it is unlikely that intelligence estimates will have much influence over state policy . Intelligence estimates are unlikely to influence state policy, say experts .
 Each state's intelligence community faced key challenges during the crisis, including structural and domestic political constraints . When combined, these constraints identify the key challenges that faced each state's intel community .
 Challengers are states that have taken some initiative which is the proximate cause of an event intended to surprise an opponent . Challengers can be states that take initiative, but not states that do not take initiative .
 Allies prior to invasion of Normandy, Japan prior to Pearl Harbor, North Vietnam prior to Tet offensive, and Egypt prior to the 1973 war are examples of states that attempted to surprise their opponents .
 Intelligence assessments can help challengers achieve surprise by identifying opponents' beliefs about their military and political weaknesses and strengths . Intelligence assessment can help candidates achieve surprise, experts say .
 This information would be especially useful in devising deception operations to mask preparations for a surprise initiative . This information is especially useful for planning deception operations .
 Challengers would also benefit from intelligence estimates of the likelihood that targeted states might respond preemptively if their clandestine preparations were detected, catching the challenger in an extremely vulnerable position .
 In other words, since the side seeking surprise is taking the initiative, intelligence assessments of the opponent seem superfluous ex ante . In other . circumstances, intelligence assesses of the opponents seems superfluous, ex ante.
 The victim of a failure of intelligence will dance to the tune of the side that achieves surprise . Actor taking the initiative do not worry about estimates of future events because they plan on literally controlling the future . The victims of intelligence fail to anticipate future events .
 The rationale for attempting to achieve surprise often is based on the assumption that it will produce desirable future outcomes by eliminating an opponent's ability to oppose effectively one's political or military initiatives .
 Estimates of how an opponent will respond to some initiative are usually incorporated into the plan for surprise as justification for undertaking the operation .
 This sort of intermingling of estimates and planning often produces a variety of cognitive and bureaucratic barriers to effective policy-intelligence interaction . The problem is that this sort of planning and estimates are often intermingled .
 A net assessment is essential to intelligence participation in the planning of a surprise initiative . But the fundamental stumbling block to effective intelligence participation is that it requires the development of a net assessment .
 To predict an initiative's likelihood of success, analysts would have to estimate the outcome of a strategic interaction between intelligence challengers and defenders .
 Intelligence analysts are often unwilling to conduct this kind of analysis, however, because it deviates from their traditional focus on opponents' activities . It might result in a critical assessment of their own state's foreign and military policies, they say .
 Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali's description of the Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti and Glavnoe Rasvedyvatel'noe Upravelenie's approach to intelligence suggests that Soviet intelligence
 Soviet intelligence managers were more interested in reporting the results of clandestinely collected data (e.g., overheard remarks of gossiping U.S. officials) than rigorous analytical assessments .
 Individuals rarely discuss their responses to events they do not anticipate . If surprise is complete, or if the effort to achieve surprise fails disastrously, espionage agents will not detect indications of an opponent's response .
 Even highly informed speculation about a defender's response to some future scenario can be highly misleading . And even highly informed conjecture about a player's future can be very misleading .
 Political conditions often undergo a profound transformation following surprise initiatives . Military or diplomatic actions viewed ex- ante as politically unsupportable become politically unstoppable in the aftermath of surprise .
 In the months leading up to World War II, President Roosevelt adopted provocative policies toward Nazi Germany . President Roosevelt took provocative policies in the months before entering the war .
 He told disappointed British officials, however, that stronger American action would have to await an 'incident' that could be used to justify hostilities to Congress .
 Americans turned decidedly belligerent following Pearl Harbor . Roosevelt no longer needed the attack as a pretext for war against Germany .
 The German declaration of war against the United States settled the issue . The U.S. declared war against Germany in 1941 .
 German action allowed Roosevelt to capture the political high ground by demonstrating America's defensive stance to an already enraged public . But the action allowed the German action .
 Defenders states seek to avoid surprise by discovering opponents' intentions before some surprise or fait accompli . They face a variety of challenges beyond the fact that opponents will go to great lengths to mislead them about their initiatives .
 States seeking surprise often are the weaker side in a conflict, writes Peter Bergen . Without surprise as a military or diplomatic force multiplier, their initiatives are unlikely to succeed, he says .
 The defender must reach the conclusion that challengers will actually undertake initiatives that appear extraordinarily risky and ill-conceived ex ante . Thus, the defender must conclude that challengers are actually undertaking initiatives .
 Many Americans have a clear conception from film and books of the workings of Nazi concentration camps, but the reality of the camps was difficult for people to grasp quickly . Today, for instance, many Americans still have a . clear conception of the . workings of the concentration camps .
 Judge Felix Frankfurter was confronted with accurate evidence of the extent and nature of the Holocaust . He told Jan Karski, a Polish emissary who had escaped the camps, that he did not believe him .
 Bystanders states that are interested observers, allies, or opponents of challengers and defenders face the problem of estimating the actions of both . states . The problem is to estimate actions of the two sides .
 Bystanders often have an interest in supplying information to one or even all the parties involved to influence the course of events . Bystander information can be used to help one or all parties involved .
 Both U.S. and British leaders warned Joseph Stalin that an invasion was imminent . Operation 'Barbarossa' was the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 .
 Clients or weak states are especially interested in supplying information to their strong allies . Clients of weak states or clients are interested in providing information to them .
 Policymakers in weak states would be worried that in a pinch, stronger allies might consider abandoning them as some crisis makes the potential costs of an alliance highly salient to the patron . Weak states are worried that if they lose allies, the costs of alliance would be highly salient .
 A patron might even want to cultivate this fear because it would increase the leverage it can exert over a client . Indeed, a patron may even want this fear to cultivate .
 Bystanders will be sensitive to influencing a patron's perception of the crisis to shape the patron's response to fit the needs of the client . The client's response will be shaped by the client's reaction to the crisis .
 In a sense, the client or small power would like to be the tail that wags the great power dog in a crisis . Conversely, clients or bystanders must avoid becoming the battleground in a great power confrontation .
 Henry Kissinger linked leadership styles and associated government structures to 'the conjectural element of foreign policy the need to gear actions to an assessment that cannot be proved true when it is made' For Kissinger, leaders' behavior and perceptions are shaped by their experiences .
 These styles influence the formation and content of a state's foreign policies . The styles influence state policies, and influence the content of those policies .
 Kissinger's categories are not theoretically elegant or even exclusive . Kissinger is not an ideal category, but he says it's a good category .
 In fact, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that his typology really only applies to three countries .
 Kissinger identifies bureaucratic-pragmatic leadership style and associated government organizations . Kissinger clearly has the United States in mind, he says .
 Americans believe virtually any problem will yield a solution . Americans also believe that virtually any solution will yield to an answer .
 Kissinger: When some crisis does manage to make its way onto policymakers' agendas, they will divide it up into its constituent parts to solicit expertise . Kissinger: "When some crisis happens, it will be divided up into parts of the country's bureaucracy" Kissinger: It's a good idea
 Leadership, under these circumstances, involves coordinating well-defined organizational outputs to fabricate a policy consensus . Leadership is necessary in these situations, the author says . The author says, "Leadership is essential in order to achieve a successful outcome"
 Once a problem receives consideration, policymakers will use all available assets to find an appropriate solution . Moreover, once a problem is considered, policymakers can find a solution, experts say .
 Kissinger also notes that bureaucratic-pragmatic leaders often ignore the political history leading up to a crisis . Kissinger says they pay more attention to the technical aspects of international issues .
 Kissinger: Americans tend to depict international disputes in black and white terms . He says they lack an appreciation for political nuance . Kissinger: America's view of international disputes is too simplistic .
 Kissinger's description of an ideological style of leadership is meant to describe conditions inside the Soviet Union in the mid-1960s . Kissinger: "Ideology style" was meant to cover conditions inside Soviet Union during the 1960s .
 Ideologues are less likely to value or attend to the personal convictions or histories of individual statesmen, writes Andrew Hammond . In comparison with the bureaucratic-pragmatic leadership style, ideologues tend to be more focused on their own interests .
 In estimating an opponent's likely course of action, they will give more weight to 'objective factors' that make up the 'correlation of forces' The social and economic structure of opposing nations and the relative balance of military and political capabilities .
 Security cannot rest on the 'good will' of others, but only on a favorable correlation of forces . Security can't rest on good will on others' will, but it can only depend on a positive correlation of force . Security is not a matter of security, it's a matter
 In ideological states that are heavily bureaucratized like the Soviet Union, ideology also bounds the range of bureaucratic debate . Ideology also serves as the arbiter of organizational disputes, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Kissinger: Leaders rise to the top by eliminating sometimes physically, always bureaucratically all possible opponents . Kissinger: 'Leadership rises by eliminating all possible enemies' Kissinger: "Leadership rise by eliminating physical, sometimes bureaucratically, always possible opponents"
 Policymakers will view crises with the goal of aligning with the domestic political faction or leader that 'wins' the crisis politically . In other words, since succession is the concern of paramount importance, policymakers and bureaucrats view crises differently .
 Kissinger describes Fidel Castro as 'more interested in the future which they wish to construct than in the manipulation of the environment which dominates the thinking of the pragmatists' David Koresh or Shoko Asahara are typical charismaticrevolutionaries .
 charismatics often experience enormous hardships and suffering on their rise to power . They become resigned to the fact that human suffering is unavoidable part of political progress .
 Charismaticrevolutionaries often care little about traditional measures of power, but they are extraordinarily sensitive to internal challenges to their domestic political position . The United States is one of the world's most powerful states .
 As the challengers in the crisis, Soviet intelligence analysts and policymakers needed to develop accurate estimates of the opponent's likely response to surprise and to validate the decision to place missiles in Cuba .
 Intelligence organizations had to achieve these objectives, however, in a policymaking environment influenced by an ideological leadership style . Intelligence organizations have to achieve their objectives, but also have to be careful of ideological leadership styles .
 Efforts to avoid adopting a strategy based on wishful thinking (i.e. idea that the opponent will act in a way that facilitates one's plans) have domestic political implications under these circumstances .
 Access to leadership itself produces immediate implications for succession politics . Indeed, gaining access to the leadership itself has immediate implications .
 They had to recognize what amounted to an extraordinary Soviet initiative before it became a fait accompli . They also had to be able to recognize it before it was a faut accompli.
 Americans would do well with monitoring the technical aspects of the crisis, but would fail to grasp the political nuances of the Soviet decision to deploy missiles to Cuba . The U.S. government has been criticized for its bureaucratic-pragmatic leadership style .
 American analysts and policymakers needed to avoid their penchant for developing a consensus estimate on Soviet activities in Cuba . To avoid intelligence failure, U.S. analysts and . policymakers need to avoid developing consensus estimates .
 It is unlikely that all observers would agree that the Soviets had undertaken such an extraordinary and risky enterprise without perfect information about events in Cuba .
 Americans would have to act before Soviet intentions and actions became a fait accompli. To succeed, Americans would need to act, he says .
 Cubans bystanders in the conflict needed to develop accurate estimates of both Soviet and American actions in the crisis . Cubans bystanders needed to understand Soviet and U.S. actions in Cuba .
 Cuban estimates also had to support efforts to forestall Soviet abandonment when their alliance was tested by crisis .
 Cuban intelligence organizations faced a Herculean task of penetrating Castro's mindset . In terms of domestic impediments, Cuban intelligence agencies had to penetrate Castro's mind . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Castro rarely sought counsel outside of a small circle of trusted comrades . Castro was a revolutionary at the peak of his fame and political fortunes . He rarely sought advice from a close circle of friends .
 The framework highlights a series of 'non-events' that might otherwise be overlooked in discussions of the intelligence aspects of the crisis .
 Intelligence success might be linked to standard operating procedures that simply worked as intended . Intelligence success, for instance, is linked to the fact that intelligence success can be traced to standard procedures that worked well .
 Enormous pitfalls identified by the framework might, in practice, be avoided by rather mundane organizational procedures . The framework could be used to avoid many of the biggest pitfalls identified .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk called on Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to deliver a copy of the President's speech and a letter from the President to Nikita S Khrushchev . President Kennedy gave his televised address on 22 October 1962 announcing the presence of Soviet medium and intermediater
 Rusk noted that he was not instructed to add any comments, but he wanted to say informally that it was incomprehensible to him how leaders in Moscow could make such a gross error of judgment about what was acceptable to the U.S.
 Years later, Rusk noted that Dobrynin was so shaken by the news that he aged ten years right before his eyes . Rusk: "He looked like he was ten years younger than he had imagined"
 The Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. was unaware of his country's initiative in Cuba . He was the first Soviet to learn of the greatest intelligence failure to befall his country since the Nazi invasion of 1941 .
 The answer can be found largely in a policymaking process in which far too much power was in the hands of far too few people and an environment in which those responsible for devising a plan were also responsible for estimating its chances .
 There is little evidence that Soviet intelligence organizations had much to do with planning the missile deployments . Current Russian concerns about secrecy might be behind the absence of information about intelligence matters during the Caribbean crisis .
 Ideas vary about when Khrushchev first conceived of deploying Soviet nuclear-armed missiles to Cuba . The idea was first conceived in the 1950s and '60s .
 Khrushchev's idea began to take the form of a proposal by mid-May 1962 . The idea was first proposed by the Soviet Union leader in May 1962 .
 First Deputy Prime Minister argued that Americans would view the deployment as a provocation . Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko suggested that the deployment would cause a 'political explosion' in the United States .
 Mikoyan objected to the proposal on the grounds that Castro would not accept the missiles and that the Americans would detect them before they were completely deployed . The proposal was rejected by the Soviets .
 Khrushchev decided that the objections could be met if Castro's permission was secured in advance and if a clandestine military mission conducted a reconnaissance in Cuba to determine the prospects for secretly deploying the missiles . The decision was made to meet the objections of Castro Castro .
 Candidate Presidium member Sharaf Rashidov joined Khrushchev's ad hoc group . Aleksandr Alekseev, selected to become the new Soviet Ambassador to Cuba, will join the group in May .
 Khrushchev said it was important to find an effective way to deter an impending American invasion of Cuba . Alekseev had expressed doubts that Castro would accept the missiles .
 Khrushchev stated that faced with a fait accompli of secretly installed missiles, pragmatic Americans would not take any irrational risks . Americans would follow the Soviet lead and simply learn to live with the nuclear threat, he said .
 Soviet deliberations to present the Kennedy administration with a fait accompli in Cuba . Several observations can be made about these Soviet deliberations . The Kennedy administration was presented with a decision to strike Cuba .
 No references exist in the literature on the crisis, or in the remarks offered by the Soviets who participated in conferences on crisis . The KGB or GRU made contributions to deliberations about missile deployments, he says .
 Khrushchev asked Ernest May where he got his information and analysis about the U.S. The former Soviet Union leader was asked by Ernest May at the Cambridge conference .
 Fyodor Burlatsky noted that Khrushchev 'probably' would have consulted Ambassador Dobrynin and Oleg Troyanovsky, a noted American specialist . Mikoyan quickly added that he could not have been consulted because he was not informed about the deployments .
 The exact bureaucratic affiliation of these individuals, however, remains unclear .
 It is unlikely that this kind of sensitive analysis would be conducted in the United States, especially when the local ambassador was uninformed about the purpose of the analysis . The Cuban ambassador was asked about the possible American response to Soviet missile deployments in Cuba .
 Khrushchev's fear of an impending American invasion of Cuba probably was based on his own reading of recent events, for example, the American-backed Bay of Pigs invasion . By contrast, his fear of a U.S. invasion is based on a reading of events in recent events
 Fursenko and Naftali note that the KGB was tasked to discern the Kennedy administration's attitude toward Cuba in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs invasion . The KGB had some success in discerning American attitudes .
 KGB and diplomatic reporting suggested that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was unlikely in 1962, they say .
 The Kennedy administration never entertained the political decision to invade Cuba before the missile crisis, officials say . Despite military plans, exercises and clandestine activities, the administration never considered a military invasion .
 It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that if Soviet leaders believed in the spring or summer of 1962 that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was likely, then their beliefs were based on an impressionistic assessment of recent events, not on what the KGB was able to discover about American intentions
 Khrushchev was clearly primus inter pares at the time of the 1960s . The 'collegiaP' decisionmaking style was practiced in the Kremlin in the early 1960s. Second, while there is agreement that a sort of 'collemiaP decision making style
 'In '62, Khrushchev had the biggest authority during all his time in power. According to Burlatsky, 'Krushchev was the most powerful person in the world during his time at the top .
 Khrushchev was able to manipulate this decisionmaking process to enhance his short-run interests . The lack of any institutionalized constraints on his maneuvering proved counterproductive, says historian .
 Khrushchev apparently was able to ignore Mikoyan's and Gromyko's contradictory advice when it was privately delivered . For example, Khrushche was able, to ignore the advice .
 Neither Mikoyan nor Gromyko was apparently able to secure intelligence analysis or support to bolster their expert opinions .
 Khrushchev responded by mollifying his critics, not addressing the flaws in his plan . When reservations emerged about Castro's willingness to accept the missiles and the likelihood that they could be deployed clandestinely, he mollified critics .
 The Soviet delegation to Havana was more than just a fact-finding mission . It served to blur the distinction between political reservations and technical concerns about the military feasibility of the initiative .
 The clandestine mission to Havana resolved the political reservations about Castro . The mission also gave the task of assessing the feasibility of secretly deploying missiles to Marshal Biryuzov, a supporter of the deployment .
 The achievement of one necessary condition for success masked the fact that only a positive estimate of another necessary condition was available . When combined, the achievement of the achievement was achieved .
 Khrushchev outmaneuvered his opponents, but at the price of abandoning a realistic assessment of his initiative . The former Soviet Union leader is credited with the success of his own initiative .
 No mention is made by any primary or secondary source on the crisis of an independent Soviet intelligence assessment of the likely U.S. response to the missile deployment .
 Third, several logical inconsistencies emerge in the justifications Khrushchev and his colleagues provided for the missile deployment .
 These inconsistencies appear to be produced by a pervasive cognitive failure to perceive value tradeoffs, the opportunity costs that accompany all human activity . These inconsistencies are produced by the failure of people to perceive the value of all human activities .
 U.S. would respond in a way that fit the expectations of the Kremlin, Putin says . America would respond to Russia's actions in a similar way to the Kremlin's, he says .
 Khrushchev was both scared and angered by America's forward deployed missiles . He wanted to give the U.S. a taste of its own medicine .
 Khrushchev failed to realize that he was willing to undertake great risks in response to the perception that his adversary had undertaken a gratuitously provocative operation . The Soviet Union did not realize that it was taking great risks .
 He argued that Americans would respond in a risk-averse manner to what could be viewed by non-Soviet observers as a gratuitous provocation, even though the Soviets were responding vigorously to a similar insult . Ironically, he argued that U.S. would react in a more risk-
 Soviet policymakers failed to overcome the intelligence hurdles created by their role as challenger in the Caribbean crisis . In sum, Soviet policymakers fail to overcome intelligence hurdles .
 Honest intelligence assessments of the likely U.S. reaction to their missile deployments were never undertaken . Wishful thinking, the idea that opponents will somehow cooperate in their own demise, substituted for intelligence estimates, substituted .
 The Soviet decision making style exacerbated the structural challenges faced by the Soviet leaders . The Soviet leaders' decision-making style exacerbated some of the challenges they faced .
 Khrushchev delivered a virtuoso performance in political infighting, but bureaucratic success came at the price of a logical assessment of the Soviet initiative . The Soviet leader delivered a performance in infighting but also a political success .
 The Soviets forgot that the sauce that is good for the goose is also good for a gander . The Soviets simply forgot that . The sauce was good for both the goose and the gander.
 The CIA's Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 predicted that the Soviets would not place missiles in Cuba in fact just weeks before the crisis . The CIA succeeded in detecting and identifying the missiles in time to allow American leaders to take the initiative to obtain their removal .
 The intelligence community also provided timely reports on the technical capabilities of the weapons deployed to Cuba . The weapons were deployed in Cuba .
 The performance of American intelligence is explored from both its structural position as defender and its bureaucraticpragmatic orientation . Several unique observations emerge about the United States intelligence community during the crisis .
 Americans, in their role as intelligence challengers, failed to anticipate the likely outcome of their initiative . Attempting to surprise the Castro regime with a 'covert' CIA-backed emigre invasion, Americans, failed .
 There was no really detached body of experts giving a critical evaluation as to the chances of success and failure . No really detached bodies of experts gave a critical assessment of success or failure .
 It was essentially the same group of people processing the intelligence, planning the operation, 'selling' the project to the policy makers, and directing the final effort .
 Morale in the intelligence community apparently plummeted in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs disaster .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles' inability or unwillingness to bring coherent management to the CIA's three separate Directorates . Dulles's inability to direct and rationalize a sprawling U.S. intelligence community highlights his inability to manage the CIA .
 Inadequacies in community management became increasingly apparent in the early 1960s . Community managers and service representatives struggled to adjust to revolutionary developments in technical collection .
 McCone was a staunch anti-communist and former Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission . McCone had a reputation as a forceful, demanding, yet openminded administrator .
 McCone spent World War II not in the Office of Strategic Services, but in organizing and managing war industries . McCone was a CIA outsider and intelligence 'amateur', unlike his predecessor .
 Armed with a forceful letter of authorization from the president,46 he reasserted the DCI's position as the overall manager of the intelligence community .
 McCone instituted the McCone reforms to manage the CIA's competing Directorates at a level below the DCI . McCone also believed that covert operations had been given too much emphasis by his predecessors .
 On the one hand, he would have to make sure that the intelligence community did not become committed to an 'institutional' perspective on Cuba that would preclude debate . The problem that bedeviled the Bay of Pigs operation is the kind of problem that plagued the operation .
 If McCone waited until a consensus on developments in Cuba emerged, the USSR could present the U.S. with a fait accompli . On the other hand, if McCone didn't wait, the Soviets would present the United States with an easy solution .
 By July 1962, CIA analysts noted significant amounts of Soviet conventional military hardware were arriving in Cuba . CIA analysts relied on reports from intelligence agents in Cuba, Cuban refugees and U-2 aerial photography .
 DCI McCone began warning senior officials that the Soviets might be placing Medium Range Ballistic Missiles in Cuba . Almost immediately, the Soviets began placing missiles into Cuba .
 On 10 August 1962, McCone updated key members of the Kennedy administration about developments in Cuba . He raised the possibility that the Soviets might send MRBMs to the island .
 On 21 August, McCone's intelligence brief prompted virtually the same group of officials to begin discussing United States options (a blockade of Cuba, 'drastic action' against suspected missile sites) On 22 and 23 August, prior to departing for a one-month European honeymoon, McC
 With President Kennedy, McCone discussed the difficulty of distinguishing Soviet surface-to-air missile sites from MRBM sites . President Kennedy requested CIA analyses of the threat posed to the United States and Latin America by 'missile' deployments .
 McCone suggested that an extensive SAM network in Cuba could help conceal MRBM deployments . In meetings with senior Kennedy advisers and members of the Russell and Vinson congressional subcommittees .
 McCone had all along said that the Russians were not putting in antiaircraft missiles just for the fun of it . They were putting them in to defend something, he said . McCone said .
 'What was wrong was that it did not consider the nature of Soviet military production,' he says . 'It was wrong to think that the Soviet military could be used as a weapon'
 SA-2 deployments could reasonably be explained as a product of Soviet and Cuban expectations of an American invasion of Cuba . One might also add that in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, the deployments could be explained .
 SAM deployment was not related to the decision to deploy MRBMs to Cuba, authors say . SAM deployment, as Fursenko and Naftali note, was for the purpose of air defense . The SAM deployment is for the air defense, they say .
 McCone worries about the possibility of MRBM deployments in Cuba . McCone in cable exchanges with acting DCI Lt General Marshall S Carter .
 On 25 August and 7 September he urged Carter to obtain permission for low-level overflights of Cuba . He urged the president to get permission for such overflights .
 McCone's request for low-level reconnaissance, however, was sidetracked by two setbacks to the U-2 program . McCone: "I want to go back to the ground. I want to be able to get back on the ground"
 On 7 September 1962, the Soviet Union protested a U-2 overflight of Sakhalin Island, and on 8 September the People's Republic of China downed a 'Taiwanese' U.2 . These incidents led to modifications in aerial reconnaissance of Cuba, and prompted McCone
 SAM deployments may be for purposes of insuring secrecy of some offensive capability such as MRBMs to be installed by Soviets after present phase completed and country secured from overflights . Appears to be quite possible that measures now being taken [SAM deployments] are for purposes .
 I recognize Cuban policy decision most delicate and beyond Agency or my competence . Cuban policy is most delicate, beyond Agency's competence, says President Obama .
 We must give those making decisions our best estimate of possible developments and alternative situations which might evolve and unexpectedly confront us . However, believe we must . give those . making decisions their best estimate . possible developments .
 McCone was suggesting that the Soviets had created a situation in which it was now possible to surprise the U.S. by secretly deploying MRBMs in Cuba .
 As an intelligence amateur, McCone had not embraced analysts' empirical bias . McCone: "As an analyst, I'm not going to embrace empirical bias" McCone said .
 McCone was willing to speculate about what known 'facts' meant about Soviet objectives in Cuba . Unlike analysts, who were primarily interested in describing observed developments .
 McCone apparently reasoned that since the SAM network would have the effect of masking potential MRBM deployments, the Soviets were probably deploying MRBMs in Cuba . McCone: "Since the SAM system would have to mask ... it would be the same thing as the Soviets"
 McCone also appears to have engaged in mirror-imaging (using one's own values, procedures, goals etc. to account for the behavior of others) to explain what the Soviets were doing .
 On 19 September 1962, the CIA issued Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62, which predicted that because of the inherent risks involved, the Soviet Union would not place offensive weapons in Cuba .
 As Garthoff notes, this estimate remains the source of much irony to the present day .
 The prediction was intended to reflect the intelligence community's consensus about Cuba . But it did not preclude development of an accurate estimate of Soviet initiatives before they became a fait accompli .
 The intelligence community somehow avoided allowing debate over the Cuban estimate from deteriorating into open bureaucratic warfare . The 'consensus' on Soviet activity in Cuba was also allowed to continue to evolve .
 SNIE 85-3-62 contains conclusions that clearly contradicted his views . DCI McCone deserves credit for allowing SNIE to contain conclusions that contradicted him .
 One might argue that McCone could not really alter SNIE 85-3-62 on the basis of just a hunch . But it must have been difficult for him not to use his authority to stop the Agency from issuing an estimate which contradicted views that he already communicated to the N
 If McCone had interfered in the SNIE in a heavyhanded way, analysts would have objected . Analysts objected to what inevitably would have been viewed as politicization of their estimate .
 BNE analysts might have suspected that McCone was acting for Kennedy administration officials to deliberately shape intelligence products to fit political preferences .
 SNIE 85-3-62 also deserve credit for not defending what turned out to be a flawed estimate . For their part, analysts involved in drafting SNIE should also be credited with not defending the estimate .
 CIA analysts received credible eyewitness reports of military convoys delivering missiles to a large area in Pinar Del Rio Province . The area had been secured by Soviet troops .
 Witnesses say missiles described by these witnesses seemed to match the characteristics of SS-4 MRBMs . Witnesses say the missiles were likely to have been fired by the Russian-made missiles .
 By 3 October, analysts had developed what amounted to a priority request for photographic coverage that was used to direct the 14 October overflight of western Cuba which discovered an MRBM site near San Cristobal .
 The fact that analysts avoided the obvious urge to defend their recently published estimate by ignoring discrepancies in their analysis is no small accomplishment . It's no small feat for analysts to ignore discrepancies in the estimate .
 At a crucial juncture, McCone and Agency analysts worked together, albeit without any deliberate orchestration, to lift the veil of secrecy surrounding Soviet activities .
 This final push to get to the bottom of events in Cuba came without a moment to spare . Indeed, this final push for the truth in Cuba was met with no time to spare.
 By early September, McCone's worst fears about the SAM network in Cuba were coming true . The SAM network is a network of Cuban spies .
 Kennedy administration officials placed restrictions on U-2 overflights of Cuba, which temporarily eliminated photographic coverage of key portions of the island . The restrictions were placed during the Kennedy administration .
 The Kennedy administration was conducting quiet negotiations with the Castro regime to gain the release of Cuban emigres captured at the Bay of Pigs . overflights might have threatened those negotiations .
 The administration was also concerned about a public perception that overflying Cuba was gratuitously provocative .
 Kennedy officials believed that a public outcry against reconnaissance missions might erupt, especially if some flight culminated in a mishap reported in the world press . Officials believed that public outcry might erupt if some of the flights ended up in mishap .
 A 'Taiwanese' U-2 was lost over the People's Republic of China . Confidence in the survivability of the U.2 was low .
 McCone had to be armed with more than just a hunch about events on the island . To overcome political concerns about renewed reconnaissance of Cuba, McCone said .
 Intelligence collection requirements justified by analysis of reports that the Soviets might be deploying MRBMs in Cuba . McCone supplied McCone with ammunition needed to renew U-2 reconnaissance .
 Acting DCI Carter, Director of the National Photographic Interpretation Center Art Lundahl and Sidney Graybeal told the National Security Council that U-2 photography indicated that the USSR was deploying MRBMs .
 In a sense, analysts' ability to prevent a Soviet fait accompli is largely a story about non-events . Analysts say it's a story of mistakes that never happened in the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. intelligence community felt a special responsibility to improve their analysis and reporting of events in Cuba . In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, the United States intelligence community had to improve .
 Analysts produced conservative estimates following the Bay of Pigs . McCone's willingness to speculate about Soviet intentions in Cuba was counteracted by McCone .
 McCone confronted both policymakers and analysts with his concerns, which produced a productive exchange . McCone: "It was a highly productive exchange. It was a very productive exchange"
 McCone forced policymakers to confront the most unsettling implications of Soviet activity in Cuba . He encouraged analysts to justify their estimates and disconfirm his suspicions .
 McCone repeatedly confronted the Kennedy administration with evidence that its Cuban policies might backfire disastrously . Without the backing of his own intelligence community, he didn't get the backing from the CIA .
 He avoided the temptation to use his role as DCI to shape estimates to suit his hunches . Simultaneously, he avoided using his job as a DCI as a tool for shape estimates .
 In the summer and fall of 1962 there was just enough danger in the air to prevent secondary personal, bureaucratic, and political concerns from getting in the way of discerning what the Soviets were doing in Cuba .
 During the October crisis, the Cuban intelligence community faced three challenges . The October crisis was the Cuban government's first major crisis .
 Cuban intelligence was making the transition in 1962 from a counterintelligence service that guarded a revolutionary movement from internal enemies to a community capable of monitoring a superpower confrontation over Cuba .
 Under these circumstances, anticipating the potential for disaster in the fall of 1962 was a great accomplishment, says author of the book . The book was published in October 1962 .
 Soviet leaders failed to anticipate how their policies toward Cuba would precipitate a superpower confrontation . After all, Soviet intelligence and political leaders had both the initiative and the benefit of mature institutions .
 Cuban intelligence had to guard against becoming a pawn of their great power patron and even to attempt to manipulate Soviet policy to suit Cuban interests . Second, to protect Cuba's interests during the October crisis, Cuban intelligence must not become a pawn .
 Even though Christ never consulted the disciples, Cuban intelligence analysts now faced the task of offering advice to a successful revolutionary at the peak of his fame and fortune . In other words, even though Christ .
 On balance, the revolutionary atmosphere in Cuba"" not some flawed intelligence estimate would prevent the Cuban intelligence community from fully overcoming the challenges it faced during the crisis .
 Cuban intelligence community relied heavily on assistance from Soviet and Warsaw Pact intelligence organizations . Cuba was developing capability to conduct independent intelligence analysis by 1962, Amuchastegui says .
 This effort at independent analysis, however, was undermined in the Escalante affair of March 1962 . This effort was undermined by the aftermath of that affair .
 Castro was clearly sensitive to both internal and external threats . Castro was a charismatic revolutionary leader in the process of consolidating his hold on power .
 Castro responded to this challenge by literally embracing the Soviets . Castro dispatched a senior delegation of Cuban revolutionaries to Moscow to demonstrate loyalty to Castro .
 He still must have been wary of individuals and institutions that remained well connected to Moscow .
 PSP supporters say individuals who could be counted on to parrot the party line from Moscow were removed from the Cuban intelligence community . PSP supporters: "On the one hand, individuals who can't parrot Moscow's party line" were removed .
 Castro kept a watchful eye on his own intelligence analysts and officials lest they grow too friendly with the Soviets . On the other hand, since the Cuban intelligence community was heavily reliant on technical and analytical support from the Warsaw Pact .
 Castro maintained personal contacts with intelligence analysts and operatives in an apparent effort to retain an independent appreciation of the mood within his intelligence community . Castro even maintained personal contact with intelligence operatives .
 The fact that Castro was willing to embrace the Soviet Union to preclude internal challenges to his position explains some of his reaction to Cuban intelligence estimates during the October crisis . Castro's reaction to intelligence estimates may have been a reaction to his reaction .
 Castro rejected the Cuban estimates because they conflicted with his own estimate of the situation, Amuchastegui says . Castro rejected these Cuban estimates, he says, because of his own own estimate .
 Cuban intelligence officials warned not to discuss analytical differences with Soviet counterparts . But he also warned that they should not discuss their differences with their Soviet counterparts.
 The order prevented professional collaboration, which could threaten Castro's hold on power . It also prevented the emergence of a point of contention between Havana and Moscow . The order was also preventing professional collaboration .
 Castro's willingness to accept MRBM deployments as Cuba's contribution to socialism might also be interpreted as simply a manifestation of his eagerness to cooperate with Moscow for his own domestic political purposes .
 Castro's acceptance of the Kremlin's view of the American threat to his regime and his tendency to keep his own counsel were setting the stage for a major intelligence disaster . By September 1962, Castro had already accepted the views of Russia .
 Castro was no longer receiving assessments of the strategic situation from a Cuban perspective . Instead of positioning Cuba to manipulate its superpower patron, Castro was instead receiving assessments from the Cuban perspective, he says .
 Castro did not inform Cuban intelligence about the plan to deploy MRBMs . Cuban intelligence did not know about the plans to deploy the missiles, Castro said .
 In June 1962, Castro ordered Manuel Pineiro Losada, the Director of Cuban Intelligence, not to assess the impact of Soviet military deployments in Cuba . Castro even ordered that he did not assess the effect of Soviet troop deployments .
 In mid-September 1962, analysts produced a highly perceptive estimate that warned that Cuba could be dragged into a superpower war if the U.S. came to perceive Castro's regime as a Soviet proxy in the Cold War .
 Soviet deployments in Cuba would bring about the very turn of events they were intended to deter, a disastrous war with America . The Soviet policy was designed to deter a war with the U.S.
 Pineiro refused to present this assessment to the Cuban leadership because it would contradict Castro's thinking . Pineiro, however, refused to give the assessment to Castro's leadership because of his views .
 Just days before the October crisis erupted, Pineiro was not willing to admit to his intelligence analysts that the Soviets were deploying MRBMs .
 Pineiro understood that Castro did not seek intelligence community's advice when it came to receiving military aid from the Soviet Union . Pineiro would not bring the emperor bad news, he said .
 Between 16 and 18 October, Cuban intelligence delivered a final 'precrisis' estimate of the United States response to the Soviet buildup in Cuba .
 Report: U.S. would strike preemptively to eliminate Soviet threat developing in Cuba . Amuchastegui: Report said the United States would strike to eliminate the Soviet threat .
 Castro now seemed to recognize the enormous risk of accepting Soviet MRBM deployments on Cuban soil .
 Castro used this report to urge Soviet commanders to shoot down American reconnaissance aircraft overflying Cuba in an apparent effort to preserve the secrecy of Soviet MRBM deployments . Castro also urged Soviet commanders in Cuba to shoot out American reconnaissance planes .
 By 16 October, the ability of the Cuban intelligence community or Fidel Castro to influence events was diminishing rapidly . But, by that time, Fidel Castro's influence was fading rapidly . The ability of Cuba's intelligence community was diminishing .
 There was little Castro could now do to avoid the Soviet-American confrontation brewing over Cuba . Castro could not now do anything to avoid a confrontation .
 Cuban intelligence analysts failed to anticipate how quickly the Soviets would abandon their Cuban clients to their fate during the October crisis . But they did anticipate the enormous risks posed by Soviet MRBM deployments in Cuba .
 Cuban analysts faced an enormous challenge in attempting to warn Castro's regime about the impending threat to their country . Cuban analysts, however, faced a huge challenge in trying to warn the regime .
 Castro sought his own counsel and embraced a 'Soviet view' of the strategic situation . Not only did Castro seek his own advice, he also embraced the 'Soviet' view of the situation .
 Cuban analysts not only had to persuade Castro to listen to them, they had to convince him that he had made a major error by blindly accepting Soviet strategic assumptions . In other words, Cuban analysts must persuade Castro that he has made an error by accepting Soviet assumptions .
 Once Castro had given up Cuban independence, Cuban intelligence faced a hopeless battle in trying to preserve Cuba's room for maneuver and ability to manipulate its Soviet patron . Once Castro gave up Cuba's independence, Cuba's intelligence faced an uphill battle .
 Given the varied political situations faced by the Soviet Union, the United States, and Cuba in the autumn of 1962, it is difficult to generalize across the cases explored in this analysis .
 It's possible to venture three conclusions about the performance of intelligence organizations during the crisis . Still, it is possible to conclude that intelligence organizations did not perform well .
 The absence of any intelligence contribution to the Soviet and Cuban policymaking process leading up to the crisis is astounding . Nevertheless, the virtual absence of an intelligence contribution is astounding, the author says .
 Soviet and Cuban intelligence analysts never had the opportunity to share their insights with policymakers for the simple reason that policymakers never asked for their analytical input . But Soviet and Cuba intelligence analysts had the chance to speak with policymakers .
 In subtle ways, intelligence analysts and managers were clearly told that analyses that conflicted with the preferences of policymakers were not welcome .
 Cuban analysts, sensing that their nation was facing catastrophe, attempted to break through the barrier erected by Fidel Castro, but were stopped in their efforts by senior Cuban intelligence officials . Cuban analysts tried to break into the barrier, but failed .
 The relationship between the U.S. intelligence community and the Kennedy administration was highly constructive and successful . Second, on the issue of missiles in Cuba, the relationship was very constructive, he says .
 Americans never understood the political factors that led to the Soviet-American confrontation over Cuba . This did not prove to be a critical impediment to detecting Soviet missile deployments, Garthoff says .
 Policymakers and intelligence analysts conducted a serious and protracted debate about events in Cuba . The debate avoided political, bureaucratic and personal acrimony that often bedevils interaction between policymakers and intelligence community .
 Maybe the U.S. intelligence community was simply well suited to detecting Soviet military deployment in Cuba . After all, detecting the exact nature of Soviet activity on the island was primarily a technical intelligence problem addressed by technical collection methods .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco highlighted the need for U.S. officials and analysts to work together to avoid another disaster in Cuba .
 McCone's willingness to stand above the political and bureaucratic fray also contributed greatly to the American intelligence success during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Cuban and U.S. intelligence communities were key to success in Cuba . Sound analytical work, not some intelligence coup produced by espionage, was the key to their success .
 Only a sustained analytical effort produced timely warning of Soviet missile deployments . Americans benefited from myriad collection methods and data .
 Cuban analysts, probably using deductive reasoning, began sounding warnings that the Castro regime was headed for disaster . Similarly, Cuban analysts started sounding warnings about the regime's future .
 Maybe Khrushchev and his policymaking entourage understood the Soviet intelligence community's limitations in supporting an intelligence challenger . This might offer an explanation of Khrushche's decision to serve as chief intelligence analyst for the Soviet Union .
 The idea that a torrent of data can serve as a substitute for quality analysis is clearly misguided . At a time when excitement about the 'information revolution' is increasing, this is not the case .
 Only through analysis can one hope to recognize an unprecedented event before it becomes an historical fact . Only analysis can be made of events before they become history .
 An ever growing data flow also places an ever increasing premium on high quality analysis . More, not less, analytical effort will be needed to separate the wheat from the chaff . An increasing premium is needed for data analysis .
 Anything that places a barrier between the process of intelligence analysis and the pervasive bureaucratic ramifications that often accompany intelligence estimates is likely to improve the quality of intelligence support to policymakers . Additionally, anything that puts the process into the hands of policymakers can improve intelligence support for policymakers .
 John McCone turned in a virtuoso performance as the NCA's chief intelligence officer . McCone's foresight may be due to dumb luck, cognitive flaws or genius .
 The DCI should continue to serve in this dual capacity because ultimate responsibility and authority for intelligence needs to rest with one person . It also is unlikely that any individual could ever fully undertake both jobs .
 McCone apparently never delegated his managerial duties, he concentrated on his analytical duties . McCone was the only manager in charge of the Chicago Cubs .
 He served as a bridge between the policy concerns of the Kennedy administration and the intelligence output of the intelligence community . He was a key adviser to the CIA .
 Anything that might produce a surprise for the President is a cause for alarm, analysts say . President Obama is expected to make a surprise announcement this week .
 He told the President that it was extraordinarily dangerous to guard against the possibility of political embarrassment by placing restrictions on the analytical process .
 DCIs should always consider delegating one of their responsibilities to a subordinate better qualified to undertake one of these extraordinarily demanding tasks . Nevertheless, DCIs are always considering delegating responsibilities to their subordinates .
 The incident has generated a whole sub-field of studies on crisis management and inadvertent escalation . The incident was the subject of several studies .
 President Kennedy set in motion a plan to defuse the crisis using the United Nations as an intermediary . During the March 1987 Hawk's Cay conference attended by members of the Kennedy administration and scholars .
 Dean Rusk was the only person alive who knew about the incident when he chose to make this information available . This piece of evidence is crucial in estimating Kennedy's willingness to risk war to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 Participants and observers of the crisis do not agree about the proximate cause of the showdown . Needless to say, participants and observers don't agree about what happened .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion was the proximate cause of the Cuban missile crisis . It raised the salience of the defense of Cuba in the minds of Soviet leaders . Cubans and to a lesser extent Soviets maintain that the invasion was .
 James J Wirtz, 'Miscalculation, Surprise and American Intelligence After the Cold War', Int. James J. Wirttz . James J
 The Case of the Yom Kippur War (Jerusalem: The Leonard Davis Institute 1976) 16; and Michael Handel, 'Intelligence and the Problem of Strategic Surprise', Journal of Strategic Studies 7/3 230. 16 .
 Pragmatists often respond to this challenge with offers of financial aid . Pragmaticists often offer financial aid to those who want to take advantage of the situation .
 In 1965, President Lyndon Johnson offered Ho Chi Minh a project on the scale of the Tennessee Valley Authority if North Vietnam would only end military pressure against South Vietnam . The project would be a project of the same size as the project in Tennessee .
 Steven David's theory of omnibalancing explores the implications of this focus on preserving domestic political power . David argues that omnibalating is a form of preserving domestic power in the U.S.
 Dobrynin made this statement during the Jan.89 Moscow conference; see Allyn, Blight and Welch, Back to the Brink 145.89 .
 Raymond Garthoff also notes that Dobrynin informed him before the Moscow conference that he was unaware of the deployments . Raymond GarThoff says he was not told about the deployments before the conference .
 Khrushchev commented about the tranquility of the Bulgarian seaside resort of Vama in May 1962 . The story might be apocryphal, but it is said to have been true .
 Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, the Soviet Defense Minister, told Khrushchev that American missiles were being deployed against the Soviet Union just over the seemingly tranquil horizon . The Soviet defense minister then mentioned to him that the U.S. was deploying missiles .
 Khrushchev noted that the Americans had not asked permission to deploy these missiles in Cuba . He suggested that maybe the Soviet Union should replicate the action by placing missiles in the country .
 Blight and Welch, On the Brink 252; and Fursenko and Naftali, in this volume. Blight, Welch, on Brink, On The Brink .
 Sergo Mikoyan's father was Soviet First Deputy Premier at the time of the crisis . 'Khrushchev had some reason to think the United States would repeat the Bay of Pigs, but not make mistakes anymore,' he said .
 At Punta del Este, Cuba was excluded from the Organization of American States . In 1962, Cuban President Salvador Salvador Salvador Dcio was in exile from the United States .
 Biryuzov also appears to have been incompetent, and might have been incapable of conducting a useful assessment of Khrushchev's plan . The Soviet Union was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 It is unclear whether Khrushchev was aware of Biryuzov's abilities when he selected him for the mission . It is not known if he knew of his abilities when selected for mission .
 The source and motivations for Keating's warnings remain unclear and are not reflected in the documents used in this study . The source of the warnings remains unclear and not reflected on the documents .
 Khrushchev diverted to Cuba SAMs slated to be delivered to Egypt . According to Fursenko and Naftali, SA-2 production was, in fact, very tight .
 McCone's initial response to Soviet weapons shipments was to state the intelligence implications behind the Soviet initiative, further demonstrating how the principle of availability may have guided his thinking .
 This is not to suggest that McCone was especially sensitive to his personal or institutional position, i.e., he was not driven by careerism . This was not the case of McCone, but McCone's personal and institutional position .
 "By advocating unpopular and disturbing views, he placed his reputation on the line. Indeed, by advocating unpopular views, Mr. Obama placed himself at risk," he said .
 There is nothing theoretically inconsistent with the observation that McCone's reasoning might have been affected by the availability heuristic, even though he was sincerely concerned with protecting national security . McCone: "There is nothing theoretical inconsistent"
 SNIE 85-3-2 did carry consequences . SNIE: The mistaken estimate contained in SNIE was not accurate, but it was accurate .
 SNIE laid the groundwork for its eventual breakup . The Office of National Estimates lost credibility as a result of the SNIE . The SNIE was a predecessor of the National Estimates Office .
 photographic intelligence gained legitimacy during the crisis . By contrast, photographic intelligence became more mainstream .
 In the decades ahead, this legitimacy would translate into increasing budgets and greater reliance on imagery in intelligence analysis .
 McCone was not present to savor this moment of glory; he was in Seattle attending his stepson's funeral . McCone did not attend the funeral of his son .
 Amuchastegui notes that in the summer of 1962, 'Cuba was still in a virtual state of civil war' ibid., 101, notes that the Cuban government was in 'virtual state of war'
 This behavior is predicted by Steven David's theory of omnibalancing; Choosing Sides (note 23), passim .
 Intelligence analysts often face a point of diminishing returns when warning is available . Time no longer permits military or strategic countermeasures needed to avoid disaster, analysts say . Time is running out of time to prevent disaster .
 Ho Chi Minh and his followers in Hanoi win the award for turning their country into the Cold War's major battleground . The award was given to the Vietnamese government in 1968 .