 Winston Churchill and Nikita Khrushchev called it ""Operation Anadyr,"" after the River in Russia . It was designed to justify a first strike United States thermonuclear attack on Russia .
 The small island of CUBA is named after Cuba in Portugal–the birthplace of Portuguese Christopher Columbus . The island was named after the small island in Portugal .
 A thermonuclear attack on Russia would have ended all life on earth as the Soviets were ready to deploy their Doomsday Device . The Doomsday Device was the Soviet Union's Doomsday Device, which would have killed all life .
 In the novel, Armageddon is narrowly averted by an Eisenhower-like President in the White House . Armageddon was averted in the novel by a president in the 1960s and '60s .
 In the book, a hotline existed between Washington and Moscow, which did not exist in 1962 . In 1962, the hotline was used by the U.S. and Russia .
 President Barack Obama has been in office for more than 20 years . He has been at the helm of the White House since 2001 . Obama's administration has been accused of corruption in Washington .
 It is a quite simple idea, but if you look at it carefully you will see it really is the ultimate deterrent . The idea is a simple idea but it can be used to deter people from hunting .
 They don't need to be bombs, no airplane is going to be called on to carry them . No airplane will carry them, no plane will be called upon to carry such a weapon .
 You jacket those devices in cobalt, and you bury them in a convenient mountain range . It's a good way to get rid of the cobalt-colored devices .
 President Truman appointed an Edomite named Lewis Strauss to the 6-man commission in 1946 . The first ominous step to Armageddon was taken in July 1946 . Truman appointed Lewis Strauss as a member of the commission .
 Lewis Strauss was appointed to the Atomic Energy Commission in 1946 . Strauss was a member of the atomic energy commission . He was appointed in 1946 to work on atomic energy .
 A rabid Russia hater, he was the driving force behind the development of the hydrogen or thermonuclear bomb . He was also a rabid anti-Russia hater .
 Former shoe salesman Strauss didn't even have a college degree, a usual requirement for high positions in the government . Strauss is a former shoe salesman who sold shoes at a time when he was younger .
 From the time of his appointment, his only goal in life was to drop thermonuclear bombs on Russia . "Only goal in his career was to bomb Russia," he said. "From the time he was appointed, he only wanted to bomb his country."
 Anybody who stood in his way was blacklisted or murdered . 2 of his main henchmen were Senators Joseph McCarthy and Brian McMahon . McCarthy and McMahon were both Senators .
 J. Robert Oppenheimer was accused of being a ""Communist,"" and lost his top secret security clearance . He was put under surveillance by the FBI and lost top secret clearance .
 Due to the all-pervading influence of Strauss, Strauss was appointed head of the Strategic Air Command . Strauss, a kindred evil spirit, was appointed .
 The Strategic Air Command was originally established by the United States Army Air Forces in 1946 . It was considered part of the U.S. Army Air Force . The Command was established by 1946 .
 General Curtis LeMay was the driving force behind the creation of SAC as an ""independent" command . General Curtis "Mad Bomber" LeMay created the SAC in 1944 .
 During WWII, LeMay was responsible for the firebombing of Tokyo and 67 other Japanese cities . LeMay is credited with the fire bombing of 67 Japanese cities during WWII .
 Total casualties in the firebombing of Japan exceeded all the deaths from the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Total casualties exceeded the deaths of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima .
 Prior to 1948, SAC HQ was located in Washington City, but was moved to Offutt Field in Omaha, Nebraska, when general LeMay assumed command .
 The ostensible reason for the move was to provide more time to respond in case of a ""Soviet"" nuclear attack . The ostensibly reason for . the move is to provide . more time for the . response to a 'Soviet' nuclear attack in case .
 The real reason was to be far away and independent of Presidential and civilian control when the nuclear attack on Russia began, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the real reason is to be away from the White House .
 By 1956, LeMay had built up an awesome first strike ""peaceful"" thermonuclear arsenal . LeMay's first strike was a 'peaceful' first strike .
 Add to that the 20 Polaris submarines, 5 aircraft carriers, and the missiles stationed in Britain, West Germany, Italy, Italy and Turkey etc. etc. Add to . that . Add to the . 20 Polaris submarine, 5 . aircraft carriers and 5 missiles . Add . to that .
 The Russians had 20 hydrogen cobalt bombs hidden in the Ural Mountains . LeMay called this first strike capacity his ""Sunday Punch"" but in reality it was his "Sunday Suicide"
 Le May used the fake Russian missiles and Sputnk 1threat to build up his bomber fleet . General Curtis Curtis ""Mad Bomber" Le May . Le May. Le May built up his . bomber fleet with fake . Russian missiles .
 Edomite Lewis Strauss urged the President to launch an atomic attack on Russia . Lewis Strauss called for the attack during the Eisenhower Presidency . Strauss urged President Eisenhower to attack Russia .
 Eisenhower resisted such madness and he had a ""heart attack"" and ""stroke"" during his Presidency . Eisenhower resisted madness and had a heart attack and stroke during his presidency .
 LeMay was confident that the 1956 Suez Canal Crisis would provide an opportunity to use his arsenal . LeMay: "I'm not afraid to use my arsenal. I'm going to use it"
 It was done with the advise of 10 Downing Street, and Pinewood Studios near London, and was made with the help of Downing Street .
 He had to maneuver the Russians into firing the first shot in the nuclear war . Consequently, the Russians fired the first nuclear shot .
 The 1956 Suez Canal Crisis and the Hungarian Revolution looked like a good opportunity for LeMay to use his bombers . The Hungarian Revolution was a good time to use the bombers .
 The crisis was resolved peacefully by the President when he forced the British and French to back down . However, that crisis was not resolved peacefully . The President forced the French and British and British to withdraw from the country .
 Pope Pius XII had to ""retire"" in order for JFK to enter the White House . JFK entered the Oval Office in 1961 .
 Pope Pius XII requested that General Mark Clark not use black troops during the 1944 U.S. occupation of Roma . JFK needed the black vote for the vote .
 The previous Pope John XXIII was deposed at the Council of Constance in 1415 . He was replaced by Pope Benedict XVI .
 With the help of his father's millions, Jack Kennedy was ""elected"" President and inaugurated on January 20, 1961 . Jack Kennedy is the son of former President Richard Kennedy .
 McNamara's brother Bobby was attorney general and Robert McNamara was secretary of defense . His brother Bobby and brother Bobby were attorney general, defense secretary and defense secretary .
 British Secret Service agent Nikita Khrushchev was already premier of the Soviet Union when Fidel Castro came to power in 1959 . Fidel Castro was already prime minister of the USSR .
 Nikita Khrushchev came to power after the sudden death of Joseph Stalin in 1953 . He was the leader of the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 UKranian Nikita Khrushchev embraced fellow agent Fidel Castro during his visit to the United Nations in September 1960 . The two men embraced each other during the visit .
 Ominously, after he became President, Kennedy was ordered to appoint the ""Mad Bomber"" as Air Force Chief of Staff . Ominiously, after becoming president, Kennedy ordered the 'Mad Bomber' to be Air Force chief of Staff.
 With his hand on the Bible, LeMay was sworn in as Air Force Chief of Staff . LeMay is the Air Force's new chief of staff .
 President Kennedy appointed Air Force Chief of Staff by President Kennedy . General LeMay was the Air Force's first Air Force chief of Staff .
 Alarmingly, his position as head of SAC was taken by an even more dangerous lunatic named General Thomas Power . General Power is now the head of the Army's most dangerous branch of command .
 As Air Force Chief of Staff, LeMay was part of a 4-man commission called the Joint Chiefs of Staff . LeMay served as Air Force Secretary of Defense in the 1990s .
 The commission consisted of a chairman, the Chief of Staff of the Army, Air Force, and Confederate Naval Operations . The commission was formed by the Confederate Congress of 1861 .
 The only 2 people above them was secretary of defense Robert McNamara . McNamara and President Kennedy were in the top 2 places .
 President Kennedy was in over his head and he was clueless about reading high altitude spy maps . Unlike President Eisenhower, Kennedy was not in over-his-head .
 British Secret Service agent John McCone was head of the CIA during the Cuban false flag operation .
 British Secret Service agent Arthur Lundahl was his ""expert" on aerial photo reconnaissance . He was also an expert on aerial photos .
 Lundahl presented his ""proof"" of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba to President Kennedy on October 16, 1963 . Lundahl was the first person to present the evidence to Kennedy .
 President Kennedy shown high altitude photo reconnaissance images of Cuba taken from a U-2 spy plane . President Kennedy was shown photos of Cuba from the U.2 plane .
 President did not realize that the Russian ""nuclear missile" sites were just dummies constructed by the Argentine army . Little did he realize that  Argentina presidential President made the mistake .
 Nuclear weapons were never permitted outside Russia . Except on submarines, nuclear weapons were not allowed to be used in Russia .
 The only nuclear weapons that Russia allowed out of their great country were on submarines . Russia allowed nuclear weapons out of its great country on submarines.
 The KGB was responsible for guarding the nuclear warhead storage depots in the Soviet Union . The U.S. intelligence community was in agreement that the KGB was in charge .
 One of the features of nuclear installations in the Soviet Union seen on overhead photography was a series of heavily guarded internal security fences .
 KGB officers would exercise even more caution when such weapons were deployed outside the Soviet Union . It was believed that KGB would exercise more caution .
 It was also postulated that extensive security would be employed in Cuba, since there would be fear that the United States could mount a special-operations mission to capture the warheads . The warheads would have to be in a secure area in the event of a United States invasion .
 It was also believed that the Soviets did not have the equivalent sophisticated Permissive Action Links system, electronic or mechanical locks that prevent unauthorized use of the weapons, and that there would be a command organization near the weapons .
 Many of the ships carrying ""nuclear missiles"" to Cuba passed through the Turkish controlled Dardanelles and the British controlled Straits of Gibraltar unmolested .
 Bahía de Guantánamo is a bay located in the southeastern end of Cuba . The bay is located in Guantámo Province at the southeastern part of the country .
 The harbor is the largest harbor on the south side of the island . It is surrounded by steep hills which create an enclave that is cut off from its immediate hinterland .
 The base was established to make sure that millions of Latinos made it safely from Cuba and Puerto Rico to Florida . Millions of Latinos were made to make it safely .
 Fidel Castro made sure that the Cuban base was supplied with electricity and fresh pure drinking water . The base was also supplied with clean drinking water and electricity .
 Guantánamo Bay Naval Base ""Gitmo"" was acquired by the Confederate Navy in 1903 following the Spanish-American War . The base was acquired in 1903 .
 Incredibly, that war was started by another false flag operation when the USS Maine was blown up in Havana Harbor in 1898 . The war was also started by false flag operations in Cuba in 1898, when the Maine blew up .
 In Norfolk, Admiral Dennison ordered the evacuation of dependents of Navy and Marine Corps families from the sprawling Guantánamo base . The base covered almost forty-five square miles of eastern Cuba .
 Word was spread around Guantánamo that there would be an immediate evacuation . At 10 A.M. on Monday, word was spread .
 Everyone on the base had known that it would eventually happen, and no one was surprised . Everyone knew it would happen, but it wasn't surprising .
 Evacuees were told to pack one suitcase per person, tie up pets in their yards and leave keys to their houses on the dining room tables, and to stand in front of their houses ready to board buses . They were also told to leave pets in yards, to tie up
 All were under way by 5 P.M. en route to Norfolk-Little Creek area . All were on board by 5 p.m.
 After the evacuation, about 8,000 military personnel remained on the base .
 On October 22, a heavily-drugged President Kennedy made one of the most dramatic addresses ever made by a U.S. President . President Kennedy was heavily drugged when he made the speech .
 CIA Jackie was a close friend of Fidel Castro and was in Cuba at the time of the Castro coup d'etat . Jackie was also in Cuba during the Castro-era coup .
 President Kennedy never mentioned that the Soviet presence in Cuba was a violation of the Monroe Doctrine . President Kennedy did not mention that the presence of the Soviets in Cuba violated the Monroe doctrine .
 Khrushchev could have demanded that the British evacuate Canada . If he had, he could have called for the British to evacuate Canada, Khrushchev could have .
 Kennedy has ordered a strict quarantine of the island and increased close surveillance . Kennedy also ordered strict quarantine and increased surveillance .
 General Power broadcast the DEFCON-2 order to the Strategic Air Command . Without authorization, without authorization, general Power broadcast it .
 All that was necessary for World War III to begin was the false flag operation in Cuba . That looked like it would happen very soon . All that needed to begin is a false-flag operation .
 The Russians would not even give up control of any of their anti-aircraft missiles to the Cubans . The Russian government would not give up any of the missiles to Cubans, CNN says .
 The Russians and Cubans fought for control of a surface to air missile site on October 26 . The site was a Russian-Cuban missile site .
 There were 18 Russian casualties as the Cubans got control of the SAM battery and used it to down a U-2 spy plane piloted by major Rudolf Anderson . The U2 plane was downed by U.S. forces in Cuba .
 General Curtis was very eager to avenge major Anderson's death . He was preparing for an immediate strike on the SAM site .
 All Joint Chiefs were subject to civilian control, with the President as their Commander-in-Chief . Though they hated to acknowledge it, all the Joint Chiefs had civilian control . The President was their Commander in-Chief, and they hated it .
 President Kennedy appointed Robert McNamara as secretary of defense . McNamara's appointment was one of the best decisions he made, says President Kennedy .
 The President's brother Robert also saw eye to eye with McNamara on the need to control the Pentagon . McNamara was the President's Secretary of State Robert McNamara .
 Robert McNamara postponed Armageddon when he refused to give LeMay permission to invade Cuba . McNamara was forced to postpone Armageddon because of his refusal to allow invasion .
 Joint Chiefs had an operational plan to strike the Cuban SAM site at least 2 hours after a U-2 shoot-down . Joint Chiefs say they planned to strike at least two hours after the shooting down .
 The White House frantically contacted General LeMay and asked if the strike aircraft had been launched . White House realized that there was a standing order for the immediate destruction of a firing SAM site . The strike aircraft were launched .
 Jesuit Fidel Castro was also eagerly awaiting for the attack to occur . Not only was LeMay eager to attack the SAM site, but Castro was eager to see it happen .
 Argentine cruise missile fitted with 14-kiloton Pentagon nuclear warhead . Argentine missile was fitted with a 14 kiloton Pentagon nuke warhead.
 The stage was set for the perfect false flag operation if the U.S. invaded Cuba . The stage is set to be set for a false-flag operation .
 A small Argentine nuclear warhead, fitted to a ""Soviet"" cruise missile, was aimed at Guantánamo Naval Base . The Argentine warhead was fitted to the ""Soviet" cruise missile .
 The stand-down of U-2 flights over Cuba over Cuba continued, pending an investigation of Major Anderson's shoot-down . Major Anderson was shot down by a U.2 crew member .
 U.S. Air Force RF-101's and Navy F-8U low altitude reconnaissance planes were again over the missile sites on October 28 .
 This time, they were escorted by fighter aircraft armed to the teeth . Both alongside and prowling offshore, the aircraft were armed with fighter jets .
 There was no attempt to disguise the mission of the escort aircraft, which were prepared to strike any antiaircraft gun or missile site that fired on the unarmed reconnaissance aircraft .
 SAC and TAC crews were on alert status in ready rooms, their aircraft fueled and loaded with appropriate ordnance, including nuclear weapons . There were not only a substantial portion of his bombers in the air, but SAC crews also on alert .
 Robert McNamara refused to allow the invasion, so the false flag operation had to be cancelled . To the great disappointment of Castro, LeMay, Power, and SAC, SAC refused .
 President Kennedy, his brother Bobby, and Robert McNamara were the 3 men who postponed Armageddon in October 1962 . President Kennedy's brother Bobby and brother Bobby were among the men to postpone Armageddon .
 Of the trio, only Robert McNamara lived to old age and died a peaceful death . Of the three men, only McNamara died of old age .
 Robert Kennedy was not a Cold Warrior, and he was not anxious to start WWIII because he had 11 children . He was not an anxious about starting WWIII .
 President Kennedy was shot by British Secret Service agents as his wife looked on . President Kennedy's wife was in the crowd when he was shot .
 LeMay said that Kennedy "chickened out again" by refusing to order the invasion of Cuba, so LeMay gave the order for the President's assassination . Kennedy refused to order a Cuban invasion .
 Robert Kennedy ran for President in 1968 but he was the last person that LeMay wanted in the White House . Robert Kennedy is the last man LeMay ever wanted to run for President . LeMay says he wanted the Kennedy to be the president .
 President Kennedy was assassinated by his British Secret Service Praetorian Guard in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963, and Presidential candidate Robert Kennedy assassinated in Los Angeles on June 5, 1968, in 1968 .
 As a Presidential candidate, Robert Kennedy was also entitled to ""protection" by the British Secret Service . As a presidential candidate, he was entitled to protection by the Secret Service as a candidate .
 Robert Kennedy might have been President In 1968 but LeMay wanted Republican Nelson Rockefeller in that position . Rockefeller was Rockefeller's Republican presidential nominee .
 Rockefeller Amendment was introduced after the assassination of the President . It almost allowed Nelson Rockefeller to become President by appointment only . Rockefeller Amendment almost allowed the President to be appointed only .
 Had Rockefeller reached the White House he would have ordered a first strike on Russia . Rockefeller would have definitely ordered a strike on the Russia .
 Remember the 22nd of November Portuguese Christopher Columbus References . Bryant, Peter, Red Alert. Remember, Remember,