 U.S. and Soviet Union came as close as they ever would to global nuclear war . Khrushchev began secretly deploying medium range ballistic missiles and intermediate range missiles to Fidel Castro's Cuba .
 Once operational, these nuclear-armed weapons could have been fired against cities and military targets in most of the continental U.S. cities . Once operational they could have fired on most of America's continental United States .
 The U.S. Navy played a pivotal role in this crisis, demonstrating the critical importance of naval forces to national defense . The United States Navy was involved in the crisis in Afghanistan .
 Navy aerial photographic and patrol aircraft played a vital part in observing the deployment of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba and monitoring their withdrawal by sea . The purpose of the series is to inform today's naval personnel and other readers of the contributions made by the naval service to the nation .
 During this period, the Navy contained Soviet and Communist expansion, deterred nuclear and conventional attack on the United States, protected American trade at sea and ashore, and fostered the growth of democratic and free market institutions worldwide .
 In the fall of 1962, the U.S. and the Soviet Union came as close as they ever would to global nuclear war . The United States and Russia came close to nuclear war in fall of the year . The two countries fought over nuclear weapons .
 U.S. Navy aerial photographic and patrol aircraft played a vital part in observing the deployment of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba . They also monitored their withdrawal by sea .
 They are designed to provide a convenient user-friendly reference work to uniformly present authoritative knowledge that can be rapidly read or searched .
 The e-book format makes a great reference work and educational tool . Vast archives of important data that might otherwise remain inaccessible are available for instant review no matter where you are .
 Smashwords allows erotica and other types of adults-only books, but they must be marked adults only . This is a courtesy to our under-18 users .