 Officers and Directors 2 Navy News ..................2 Presidents Report. Here are some examples of officers and directors .
 The world's largest international maritime exer cise, RIMPAC provides a unique training opportunity that helps participants foster and sustain the co-operation relationships that are critical to ensuring the safety of sea lanes and security .
 Attended by 83 shipmates, spouses and guests, the city of Norfolk was shown in full display . The city was on display at the Norfolk Naval Base .
 Naval Station Norfolk is the largest such base in the world now that it has physically combined the 4) Naval Air Station . We enjoyed boarding and touring the USS Wisconsin and the MacArthur Memorial and Museum .
 We drove past our old, refurbished pier 7, got a view of the new, radically designed destroyer, USS Zumwalt . We were hosted for lunch at the Breezy Point Officers’ Club .
 Some folks took time opportunities to drive out to Virginia Beach, on what is now an eight lane highway . The two lane road of 50s and 60s was two lanes of two lanes in the 1960s .
 There were many enjoyable sites, but, disappointedly, none of them on East Main Street .
 Maury High School’s Navy Junior ROTC unit honored our banquet gathering with the Presentation of Colors . The Color Guard from Maury . High School's Navy Junior . ROTc unit honored the banquet .
 Attendees enjoyed an evening of dining, dancing and long distance calls to missed shipmates Andy and Flo Ulichney and Les and Sharon Mayer .
 The 2016 Business Meeting included the election of Directors for the service period of 2016-18 . Some Business Housekeeping .
 Two Directors, Tom Welch and Steve Schermerhorn, carried over from previous terms . Due to the lack of volunteers at the time of seeking new Directors, two Directors, were carried over .
 At the Board of Directors’ Meeting following the Business Meeting, a motion was made and voted upon affirmatively that the Director carry-over pattern must cease and new candidates must be sought .
 Newly elected carry-over candidates Tom Welch and Steve Schermerhorn volunteered to step down . New volunteers Dan Moffett and George Betts will be replaced by new volunteers . The election will be held on November 14 .
 George and Dan join earlier elected candidate, Al Sedler, as Association Directors for the service term 2016-18 . George and Al join earlier election candidate,  Al Sedler .
 Wes took over during the challenging period of late Spring with the influx of dues payments and incoming registrations for the Norfolk Reunion . Wes took control of the organization in late Spring .
 He handled it expertly and, additionally, also enhanced the financial reporting system and documents . He handled the situation expertly, he said .
 President John F Kennedy declared a quarantine against ships carrying offensive arms there . The quarantine was imposed after the Soviet Union was sending ballistic missiles to the island nation .
 Soviet freighter Atkarsk arrived in September 1960 at Nikolaev, the Black Sea port used for exporting weapons and military equipment from the Soviet Union . They were responding to a Cold War confrontation that had begun in 1960 .
 Khrushchev was arming Cuba less than a year after Castro had led a revolution that toppled the U.S. backed regime of dictator Fulgencio Batista . The Soviet Premier was strengthening his bond with Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro .
 A wrong move by ships such as the Sumner could launch a nuclear war . Eventually the arms transported to Cuba would include nuclear weapons . The day would come when the wrong move could launch nuclear war, says historian .
 Not since the Cold War had begun would so much depend on the ships and men of the U.S. Navy . "Not since the cold war had begun," the Navy says .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower responded to the rapidly strengthening SovietCuban alliance . Eisenhower prepared to proclaim a trade embargo of Cuba barring all exports except medical items and food .
 President Eisenhower’s decision came as Cuba was becoming a major issue in the presidential campaign of Vice President Richard M Nixon and then-Senator Kennedy . President Eisenhower's decision came during the presidential campaigns of Nixon and Kennedy .
 The Central Intelligence Agency revealed to the president-elect that covert plans authorized by Eisenhower spanned “a range of possible paramilitary operations” against Castro included a “combined sea-air assault by trained Cuban exiles coordinated with the guerrilla activity generated on the island”
 Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Later Anderson clashed with Secretary of De . Anderson was responsible for planning the Nafense Robert McNamara over the blockade’s quarantine of Cuba as well as preparing for forcement .
 The CIA picked up rumors in Miami’s Cuban émigré community that Khrushchev was deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba . The potential fire began to smolder in the summer of 1962, when the CIA was alerted .
 McCone was the successor to Allen Dulles, who had been forced to resign after the Bay of Pigs debacle . McCone succeeded Dulles as president .
 CIA assessment: McCone “was virtually alone” in his belief . CIA assessment of the time, McCone was ‘virtually alone’ in believing in the CIA .
 On 29 August, photographs taken by a U-2 spy plane revealed eight surface-to-air missile sites under construction . The sites are believed to be under construction in Russia .
 By then there was no doubt that thousands of Red Army soldiers—“technicians,” said the Soviets—were pouring onto the island . Thousands of Soviet soldiers were pouring into the island to fight the Soviet invasion .
 The Navy spotted a Soviet-built missile patrol boat off the Cuban port of Mariel . Photographs showed others moored nearby .
 National Security Council eased restrictions to get photographic proof of Soviet missiles in Cuba . But, determined to confirm reports that Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles had arrived in Cuba, the NSC eased restrictions on Cuba .
 The CIA U-2 was piloted by Air Force Major Richard S Heyser when the spy plane took off from Edwards Air Force base in California near midnight on 13 October .
 Heyser began his pass across a cloudless Cuba, 72,500 feet below . Four and a half hours later, at 0731 on Sunday, 14 October, began his flight .
 12 minutes after that, he veered eastward to land at Mccoy Air Force base (present-day Orlando International Airport), Florida . Twelve minutes after, he landed at present-day Florida's MCCoy base .
 Two rolls of film were transferred to an aircraft, which flew them to the Naval Photographic Intelligence center in Suitland, Maryland, where they were developed and positives made .
 The next morning, a Navy truck pulled up to a nondescript seven-story building in a run-down Washington neighborhood . The next day, the Navy arrived at the building and took it out of the building .
 Building had no outer sign that it housed the CIA’s National Photographic Interpretation center . They carried it into the building, which had no signs that it was CIA's .
 NPIC photo interpreters leaned for hours over light tables, peering at frames of the U-2 film through magnifying glasses and stereoscopic viewers . NPIC: "It was a very difficult task to do"
 They were convinced they were looking at evidence that could prove the Soviet Union had delivered MRbMs to Cuba . The Soviets were convinced the evidence could prove they had delivered the weapons to Cuba.
 Once operational, the missiles would be capable of hitting U.S. cities with nuclear warheads . Once operational they would be able to hit United States cities with nukes .
 CIA officers presented blowups of the photos to Kennedy on the morning of Tuesday, 16 October . Kennedy was briefed on the interpreters’ findings .
 This Newsletter is dedicated to all the men who served on these extraordinary ships in service to their country whether in times of war or peace .
 New Haven, Mo Wells Fargo ckg. Aboard Mt Mac ‘54-’59 . Last ResiAccounts .
 Date passed 12/’09 recent notification Wells Fargo $M $ 21,212.93 $ 10.26 $ 0.46 $ 4,000.00 $ 17,223.65 .
 If you have Webb $ 357.45 from your time on the Mighty Mac, you will receive a $357.45 personal remembrances . Bank Charges $ $ 5.00 from your bank charges .
 I must admit that I have cheated on you twice, since you’ve been gone, and it’s not fair to either of us. I must have done it twice, and I’m not sure how much of it is fair to you. It’
 Soldier asked fellow soldiers for any snapshots they could spare of their girlfriends, sisters or ex-girlfriends . The soldier, with hurt feelings, asked his fellow soldiers to take photos of their ex-loves .
 Ricky included all the other pictures of the pretty gals he had collected from his buddies . Ricky included the picture of Becky in his book . Ricky also included a picture of his other girlfriends .