 The class will be divided into six groups . Identify the Cold War Hot Spots around the world . Bridge the Gulch Political Cartoon Analysis is an analysis of the political cartoon .
 Poster Board Group Activity complete your own charts using the text based evidence the group highlighted and discussed from the text .
 Construct a poster board with the important information contained in the document . Create a visual representation of the Cold War conflict .
 The class will complete their charts based on the groups’ presentation of their text based evidence . Each group will then present and the class will then complete the charts .
 Berlin was an outpost of democracy and economic success deep within the communist zone – like a capitalist island within communist East Germany . The Berlin Blockade was an attempt to starve West Berlin into submitting to the communists . The Allied airlift signalled the West’s determination to use all resources
 Japan occupied Korea from 1910-1945 . Post WW2, Korea divided at 38th Parallel – USSR in North – United States in South . Goal: reunification UN in North Korea .
 Congo Civil War, or Congo Crisis, was a complex political tumult that began just days after Belgium’s granting of Congolese independence in 1960 . The Congo Crisis was the first of its kind in the Congo .
 Lasting four years, the associated violence claimed an estimated 100,000 lives including the nation's first Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba, and UN Secretary Dag Hammarskjöld, who was killed .
 The conflict began with the secession of the southernmost province of Katanga . The conflict ended with a united Congo emerging under the dictatorship of Joseph-Désiré Mobutu .
 The conflict also became the site of a dangerous Cold War “proxy” contest between western powers led by the U.S. and the Soviet Union-led Communist bloc . Congo Civil War was also a Cold War "proxy" contest between Western powers .
 Under pressure from western nations and in exchange for UN support, President Kasavubu purged his government of radical elements including Prime Minister Lumumba . Under pressure, the government was purged from power under UN support in exchange of UN support .
 The ultra-nationalist Lumumba, though supported by the Congolese, was viewed by Western business leaders as an obstacle to their continued investments in the diamond mines .
 Fearing Lumumba was secretly a Communist, the U.S. was particularly adamant about his removal from power . The United States was especially adamant about removing him from power.
 Any hostile action from Cuba would require the United States to attack Soviet Union . U.S. would need to attack the Soviet Union in response to any hostile action .
 Cartoonists may use simple objects to represent larger ideas or concepts . Simple objects represent larger concepts or concepts in cartoons .
 Cartoonists compare a simple image or concept to a more complex situation in order to help the viewer understand the more complex situations in a different way . Cartoonists may compare images or concepts to each other to help viewers understand them better .