 President Kennedy reveals in a televised address that there is evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba and calls for their removal . National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy alerted President John F Kennedy that a major international crisis was at hand .
 Russia had secretly placed nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles from the Florida coast . Russia placed the missiles in the Cuban territory 90 miles away from Florida's coast .
 Nikita Kruschev was certain he had the measure of the young president, who ultimately proved the Soviet Premier wrong . The young president was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy learned to be wary of the military experts after the botched invasion of Cuban exiles trying to remove Castro who were driven back at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy was wary of military experts following the failed invasion of exiles who were trying to oust Castro .
 During the 13 days in October 1962 when Armageddon threatened, the U.S. government spent 13 days on the ground in the Middle East . That experience would stand to him greatly during the 13-day ordeal .
 Two days earlier a U.S. military surveillance aircraft had taken hundreds of aerial photographs of Cuba . Two days later a United States military surveillance plane took hundreds of photos .
 CIA analysts deciphered in the pictures conclusive evidence that a Soviet missile base was under construction near San Cristobal, Cuba . The base is 90 miles from the coast of Florida . CIA analysts working around the clock, found the base .
 JFK snagged 1,200 Cuban cigars before the trade embargo . The most dangerous encounter in the history of the world and the Cold War rivalry between the two countries had begun .
 The United States moved its readiness for war to DEFCON 2 the last step before a nuclear war . The U.S. is now on the brink of nuclear war with Russia .
 The thirteen days marking the most dangerous period of the Cuban missile crisis begin . The 13 days mark the beginning of the crisis .
 President Kennedy and principal foreign policy and national defense officials are briefed on the U-2 findings . President Kennedy was briefed on findings .
 To avoid arousing public concern, the president maintained his official schedule . He met periodically with advisors to discuss the status of events in Cuba .
 Intelligence photos from another U-2 flight show additional sites; and 16 to 32 missiles . On Day 2, American military units begin moving to bases in the Southeastern United States .
 After, he has lunch with the Crown Prince Hasan of Libya . He then makes a political visit to Connecticut in support of Democratic congressional candidates .
 On Day 3, President Kennedy is visited by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko . He asserts that Soviet aid to Cuba is purely defensive and does not represent a threat to the U.S. On Day 4, Kennedy is met by Soviet foreign minister Andrei .
 Kennedy reads to Gromyko his public warning of September 4 that the ""gravest consequences"" would follow if significant Soviet offensive weapons were introduced into Cuba . Kennedy, without revealing what he knows of the existence of the missiles, reads the warning .
 This week in history: JFK signs the nuclear test ban treaty in 1963 . Day 4 was spent in discussion with his advisors, and on Day 5 President Kennedy returns suddenly to Washington .
 After five hours of discussion with top advisers, the President decides on the quarantine and blockade . President Barack Obama decided on the decision .
 Plans for deploying naval units are drawn and work is begun on a speech to notify the American people . Plans for deployment of naval units have been drawn and the speech is set to be made .
 President Kennedy meets with General Walter Sweeney of the Tactical Air Command who tells him that an airstrike could not guarantee 100% destruction of the missiles . Kennedy: The President meets with Sweeney to discuss the possibility of an airstrike . Sweeney: An airstrike would not guarantee the missiles' destruction .
 On Day 7, President Kennedy phones former Presidents Hoover, Truman, and Eisenhower to brief them on the situation . Kennedy phones the former presidents to brief the situation on Day 7 .
 Kennedy formally establishes the Executive Committee of the National Security Council and instructs it to meet daily during the crisis . The committee meets daily during crisis .
 Kennedy informs British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan of the situation by telephone . Kennedy also informs British PM Harold MacMillan of his situation .
 Kennedy reveals evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba and calls for their removal . Kennedy speaks on television, revealing the evidence .
 The Cuban president announces the establishment of a naval quarantine around the island until the Soviet Union agrees to dismantle the missile sites . The quarantine will be imposed until the Soviets agree to dismantle missile sites and to make certain that no additional missiles are shipped to Cuba .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk formally notifies Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin of the contents of the President's speech . Approximately one hour before the speech, Secretary Rusk . Rusk notifies the Soviet Ambassador .
 John F Kennedy had to ask matriarch Rose to stop contacting powerful world leaders . On Day 8, ships of the naval quarantine fleet move into place around Cuba .
 Soviet submarines threaten the quarantine by moving into the Caribbean area . Soviet submarines are threatening to move into the area .
 Soviet freighters bound for Cuba with military supplies stop dead in the water . But the oil tanker Bucharest continues towards Cuba .
 In the evening Robert Kennedy meets with Ambassador Dobrynin at the Soviet Embassy in Moscow . Robert Kennedy met with the ambassador at the embassy in the evening .
 President Kennedy drafts letter to Premier Khrushchev urging him to change course of events . Kennedy delivers iconic Berlin Wall speech in Germany on Day 10 .
 Bucharest, carrying only petroleum products, is allowed through the quarantine line . The Bucharest airport was closed to the public during the quarantine .
 U.N. Secretary General U. Thant calls for cooling-off period, which is rejected by Kennedy . Kennedy rejected because it would leave missiles in place . U.S. President Barack Obama calls for 'cooling-off' period, but Kennedy rejects it .
 A Soviet-chartered freighter is stopped at the quarantine line and searched for contraband military supplies . On Day 11, a Soviet-controlled freighter was stopped at quarantine line .
 Fidel Castro urges Nikita Khrushchev to initiate a nuclear first strike against the United States in the event of an American invasion of Cuba . Fidel Castro wrote a private letter to Khrushchchev urging him to do so . The letter was signed by Fidel Castro and Fidel Castro .
 Cuba's Fidel Castro with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev at the Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square, Moscow .
 Moscow demands tougher terms, including removal of obsolete Jupiter missiles from Turkey, is received in Washington . On Day 12, the second letter from Moscow demanding tougher terms is received .
 U-2 plane shot down by Soviet-supplied surface-to-air missile over Cuba . Major Rudolph Anderson is killed in the attack .
 President Kennedy writes a letter to the widow of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr., offering condolences, and informing her that President Kennedy is awarding him the Distinguished Service Medal, posthumously . The widow of Major Anderson receives the award .
 The 13 days marking the most dangerous period of the Cuban missile crisis ended on Day 13 . On Day 13, the 13-day crisis ended .
 Radio Moscow announces that the Soviet Union has accepted the proposed solution . Khrushchev letter affirms that the missiles will be removed in exchange for a non-invasion pledge from the United States .
 The young American leader has faced down the Soviet Union and avoided nuclear war in the process . He has avoided a nuclear war with the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 In refusing to use nuclear missiles Kennedy saved the world from incredible destruction . Kennedy went against at least one of his own advisors but saved world from destruction .
 JFK challenges NASA to put a man on the moon . JFK challenged NASA on this Day: "I want to go back to the moon"