 Two world superpowers, equipped with over 4,000 nuclear warheads in total, are flirting with a dangerous escalation of what had so far been a Cold War, one fought without direct confrontation . The two superpowers are equipped with more than four nuclear warheads .
 Both the U.S. and USSR have placed missiles in third countries close to each others’ borders . The missiles are pointed directly at enemy soil . Both the United States and USSR placed missiles near each other's borders .
 U-2 reconnaissance plane shot down over Cuba, where Soviet missile bases have been built up . Kennedy urged to retaliate militarily directly against the Soviets .
 American warships drop depth charges to force Soviet B-59 submarine to surface . U.S. warships dropped depth charges on Soviet submarine to force its surface .
 The submarine’s officers are unaware they are violating a United States naval blockade . They interpret the maneuvers of the United States warships as an act of war . The submarine's officers interpret the maneuver of the U.S. warships as a war .
 The Soviet submarine being threatened is carrying a nuclear-tipped torpedo . Had two men made different decisions, that could easily have been the day the world exploded into nuclear war .
 Since the Monroe Doctrine, the U.S. has increasingly asserted its power and influence over the Western Hemisphere . The U.N. has been increasingly asserting its power in the region .
 The United States was especially vigilant about communism penetrating the West . With the Soviet bloc a declared ideological enemy, the U.S. was vigilant about it .
 Fidel Castro took power in Cuba in 1959 after waging a guerilla war against US-backed military dictator Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro became Cuba's first president in 1959, replacing US President Eisenhower . Castro was the son of Cuban revolutionary leader Fidel Castro .
 He quickly converted the nation to communism, angering U.S. politicians who were engaged in a political conflict with the most powerful communist nation of all at the time .
 Eisenhower deemed Castro’s administration in Cuba unacceptable . Dwight D Eisenhower, the U.S. President at the time, deemed it unacceptable .
 Kennedy had second and third and fourth thoughts about the planned invasion . Kennedy had third and third thoughts about invasion .
 The strategy of sending in Cuban exiles had come about to make it seem it wasn't a U.S. government invasion of Cuba . The strategy was to keep the invading group small and clandestine, so they could infiltrate the island nation and win the support of even more anti-Cast
 Kennedy worried that the group was too small to be militarily effective, and too large to keep secret . Kennedy worried about the group's size and ability to keep it secret .
 The United States government had severely underestimated Castro’s forces and overestimated Cuban nostalgia for a U.S. puppet government on the island . The U.N. government had underestimated Castro's forces .
 Within 24 hours, the US-trained Cuban exiles had been defeated, and Kennedy’s administration was humiliated . The US government was humiliated by the defeat of the Cuban rebels .
 The effort to dismantle Castro’s regime continued with foiled assassination attempts throughout the year . Nevertheless, efforts to dismantle the Castro regime continued .
 Kennedy had told voters he would be tough on communism, and in politics, appearances matter most . Even though many top U.S. officials advised Kennedy that Cuba wasn’t much of a threat to the United States at all, Kennedy had said he was tough .
 Khrushchev wanted to assist the newly formed Communist government in Cuba against U.S. interference, while also looking for a possible bargaining chip to gain influence in West Berlin . Nikita Khrushchevs wanted to help Cuba against United States interference .
 "We had to establish a tangible and effective deterrent to American interference in the Caribbean," he said . As he said, “we had . to establish ... an effective deterrent”
 Khruschev sought to bridge the gap between U.S. and USSR nuclear capabilities . In addition, USSR and United States nuclear capabilities were vastly different at this time . The USSR and the United States .
 The Soviets had good medium-range ballistic missiles and intermediate-range missiles, though relatively unreliable ICBMs, aka intercontinental ballistic missiles . The Soviets, in contrast, had good, but unreliable, medium range ballistic missiles, experts say .
 Khrushchev figured missiles in Cuba would be an effective response to U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey pointed at the USSR . After all, the United States had already placed Jupiter missiles pointed at Turkey .
 From July to October of 1962, the Soviets started secretly transporting troops and equipment to Cuba . The Soviets secretly transported troops and supplies to Cuba from July through October 1962 .
 The operation was hardly a secret from Cuban civilians . 41,902 soldiers were deployed unconvincingly disguised as ‘agricultural specialists’ The CIA wouldn’t discover the nuclear plot until October .
 U-2 spy plane pilot Major Richard Heyser photographed a Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile being assembled on October 14, 1962 .
 This started the clock on one of the most tense, harrowing periods in U.S. history . This is one of America's most tense periods in history .
 The next day, Kennedy sees the photos and calls his closest advisors to a meeting in order to discuss United States options . Kennedy calls the next day to discuss U.S. options .
 He forms a group called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, EXCOMM . ExCOMM consists of five close advisors and nine members of the council .
 Suggestions thrown out in meeting are all over the map, ranging from a stern warning to the Soviet Union and Cuba, to an air strike and outright invasion of the island .
 Kennedy, ignoring his hawkish Joint Chiefs of Staff, chooses another path . Kennedy, reflecting on humiliating previous interventions in Cuba, rightly considering that a direct attack and invasion .
 He decides the United States will conduct a naval blockade of the island, although he calls it a “quarantine” instead . The United States decides the blockade will be a "quarantine" instead of a "blockade"
 A blockade is technically an act of war, and this one word difference would actually further escalate the situation . Because a blockade is . technically a war, it is technically a violation of the law . A blockade of the Philippines is a form of war .
 JFK dictates a letter to Khrushchev announcing that the U.S. will not permit Soviet shipments of weapons to Cuba . JFK dictates that the United States will not allow the Soviet shipments .
 The President demands that the Soviet Union dismantle the current Cuban missile bases and return all weapons to Moscow . The President further demands that all weapons from Cuba be returned to Russia .
 That night, Kennedy makes a serious public announcement regarding the crisis to the US public . Kennedy makes an announcement about the crisis that night .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff upgrades the US’ military readiness status to DEFCON 3 . Not full readiness yet, but increased vigilance with the Air Force ready to mobilize within 15 minutes .
 Kennedy is taking a bold, powerful stance in front of the American people . Another discussion entirely is taking place behind closed doors in EXCOMM meetings, he says .
 The Soviets already had missiles capable of attacking the United States from longer distances . The U.S. already had a missile system capable of hitting the U.K.
 The fact that the longer-range missiles were somewhat more unreliable didn’t mean much in the long run, says CNN’s John Sutter . “The fact that . the longer .range missiles . were somewhat . more reliable didn” mean much, he says
 The Kennedy administration knows that optics are important, and after the humiliating events of the last two years in Cuba, the U.S. cannot afford to look weak in the face of an aggressive Soviet act .
 Khrushchev receives Kennedy’s letter and sees his television appearance announcing the quarantine . Meanwhile, half-way across the world, he receives Kennedy's letter and see his television announcement .
 Khrushchev is unwilling to have weapon-carrying ships breach the U.S. quarantine line . However, he is not willing to allow weapons to enter the US .
 Soviet ships turned back by the US, except for a few carrying no weapons . Soviet ships were turned back, except a few with no weapons, according to the US .
 The tensions between the two Cold War superpowers are being felt all around the world . The tension between the U.S. and Russia is being felt in the wake of the Cold War .
 China starts publicly announcing its support of Cuba, while the citizens of West Berlin fear their freedom will end up trampled in any Soviet-US conflict . West Berlin fears their freedom may be trampled by Soviet-U.S. conflict .
 U.S. spy planes inform Kennedy that the Soviets’ missile site on Cuba is still being worked on and almost ready . Khrushchev is unwilling to breach the quarantine line .
 Kennedy and his administration upgrade the readiness status of Strategic Air Command to DEFCON 2 . Kennedy's calls to dismantle the site have gone unheeded .
 DEFCON 1, the highest level of military readiness in the United States, has never been called for in U.S. history . The highest level level of readiness has been never called for by the U.N.
 The upgrade to DEFCON 2, meaning war is imminent, underscores the grave nature of the crisis . So the upgrade means war is likely to be imminent .
 On October 26, Kennedy starts seriously considering the option of a U.S. invasion in Cuba and a direct strike on the missile site . Kennedy considered the option in Cuba on October 26 .
 President Obama is facing extreme pressure from Congress and EXCOMM to take military action . He wants to give his diplomatic option more time to work, but faces extreme pressure .
 Khrushchev sends a long, emotional message to Kennedy, detailing his fears of nuclear apocalypse . The message was sent around 2 AM Moscow time, around 2:30 a.m. Moscow time .
 In a private letter to the United States President, the Soviet leader writes, “If there is no intention to doom the world to the catastrophe of thermonuclear war, then let us not only relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to unt
 Khrushchev promises to remove the missiles in exchange for a simple U.S. assurance that they will not invade Cuba . The deal was made with the United States promising to remove missiles .
 The next day Khrushchev, apparently over whatever dark night of the soul caused him to reach out to Kennedy the night before, goes back on his conciliatory stance . However, the next day on October 27, he changed his stance .
 Soviets tracking an American U-2 spy plane conducting a reconnaissance mission over Cuba . Pilot spends well over an hour near secret locations of Soviet nuclear weapons . The plane was flying over Cuba and over Cuba for more than a half an hour .
 Only the commanding general is supposed to authorize a surface to air missile launch, he is nowhere to be found . The commanding general was supposed to be authorized to authorize the launch .
 Lieutenant General Stepan Grechko gives the order to shoot the plane down instead of shooting it down instead . Lieutenant general Stepan Grechko says the order is to shoot it down .
 Two missiles are fired; one of them manages to find its target, bringing down the plane . United States pilot Rudolf Anderson was killed in the attack .
 A hush falls over Kennedy’s meeting with his team as the killing of Anderson reaches their ears . The killing is the first time Anderson has been found to be killed .
 In Moscow, Khrushchev hears of the attack and starts to realize the situation is quickly careening out of control . The attack was the first time the Soviet Union had been involved in the bombing of the U.S.
 It was never his intention to come so close to nuclear war, the possibility which now seems increasingly likely, and is about to become an even closer call . The possibility of a nuclear war is now increasingly likely .
 At the same time the two leaders are deciding their next move, there is a problem at the quarantine line . The quarantine line is quarantined at the border with Mexico .
 The U.S. Navy drops a series of signaling depth charges close to a Soviet B-59 submarine to force it to surface . The United States Navy is dropping depth charges to force the Soviet submarine to surface.
 The submarine is equipped with a nuclear-tipped torpedo, one that it has orders to use if it is fired on . Unbeknownst to the crew, the submarine is armed with the torpedo . The submarine was ordered to use the torpedo if fired on by the crew .
 The submarine has been too deep in the ocean for too long to know the current status of the crisis . Unfortunately, the submarine is still too deep into the ocean to know what is happening .
 Captain Valentin Grigorievitch Savitsky assumes the charges being dropped on the B-59 are an attack, and that the U.S. and USSR are already at war . The charges are dropped, and the USSR is at war with the United States .
 All three officers on board need to sign off on the decision to launch a nuclear weapon from the submarine . However, all three officers must sign off if the nuclear weapon is launched .
 One man, Vasili Arkhipov, holds out, believing the situation might be a misunderstanding . The torpedo remains unlaunched, and a nuclear strike is narrowly averted .
 President Kennedy's advisers are clamoring for revenge after the U-2 plane was shot down . Kennedy’s advisers say they want revenge for the loss of the plane .
 Kennedy correctly suspects that Khrushchev did not authorize this air strike against a U.S. plane . Kennedy, however, correctly suspects this is not the case . Kennedy: "I don't believe it was a strike on a United States plane"
 Kennedy decides to ignore Khrushchev's second, angrier letter, as promising to withdraw missiles from Turkey would show U.S. weakness and risk NATO alliances . Kennedy decided to ignore the letter, saying it would show United States weakness .
 Kennedy: Ignoring the existence of an official enemy demand in a crisis is definitely a bold move, but one that Kennedy feels will pay off . Kennedy: "Ignoring the fact that an enemy demand is necessary is definitely bold move"
 JFK realizes that to preserve U.S. status and alliances, he has little other choice . JFK also realizes that . to preserve United States status, alliances and . alliances .
 EXCOMM members know JFK has also been secretly playing another hand this whole time . Little do the EXCOMm members know that JFK has played another hand . JFK has been playing a secret hand in the White House since 1964 .
 RFK is functioning as the President’s de facto chief of staff . As the missile crisis escalates, RFK has been in charge of the President's de facto staff . RFK: "RFK is working as the de facto Chief of Staff"
 JFK drafts JFK’s response to Khrushchev a promise not to attack Cuba in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles . JFK has sent his younger brother on a mission to find out what the deal is .
 Robert F Kennedy secretly meets with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly Dobrynin . Kennedy meets with the Soviet ambassador to the United States . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in Washington DC .
 The U.S. will remove their Jupiter missiles from Turkey, the ambassador says . The ambassador says they were planning to remove the missiles anyway .
 The removal cannot be part of any public deal between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, he says . However, he emphasizes the fact that for the sake of optics and alliances, this removal is not possible .
 Dobrynin conveys the message to Khrushchev, who is already fearful of an imminent war between the two nuclear superpowers . The message is believed to be a warning of an impending war between Russia and China .
 The Soviet premier decides to put an end to this crisis once and for all . Upon hearing the U.S. will accept the Soviets’ demands, even in secret, the Soviet premier decided to end the crisis .
 Castro is angry with what he perceives as the Soviets backing down in the face of U.S. intimidation . Most of the world breathes a sigh of relief after the US backs down .
 On November 20, after Kennedy was satisfied that all missiles had been removed, he ended the quarantine of Cuba . The Soviet Union started dismantling their missiles, and the Soviet Union began dismantling their own missiles .
 The US removed its Jupiter missiles from Turkey in April 1963 . Six months later, in April of 1963, the world wouldn't know this was part of the US-USSR pact .
 Kennedy won praise for his resolution of the crisis . Khrushchev ended up viewed as somewhat weaker, having given in to United States demands in exchange for peace .
 D.C. and Moscow have installed a "hotline" between Washington and Moscow to prevent a repeat of the crisis . The crisis was the result of the installation of a ‘hotline’ between the two countries to prevent further crises .
 It is terrifying to think that were it not for a few moments of hesitation on the parts of Kennedy and Khrushchev, or a man on a submarine such as Vasili Arkhipov, the world could have erupted in nuclear war in 1962 .