 On Wednesday, the United States and Russia extended an uneasy truce over nuclear proliferation . On February 3, the U.S. and Russia agreed to extend a truce over the issue .
 The New START seeks to impose limits to the nuclear arsenals of both nations . Washington and Moscow possess the lion's share of the world’s nukes — and the New START is aimed at limiting their arsenals . Washington
 Americans are used to the narrative that President Kennedy and his team of advisors were blindsided by the news that the Soviet Union, without provocation, were installing nuclear-armed missiles off the Florida coast in Cuba .
 After a tense 13 days, the Soviets blinked, and a nuclear holocaust was averted . The Soviets blink, and the world's first nuclear war averted by the Soviets .
 Khrushchev Remembers, first published in 1971, is a three-part memoir . It details life under Stalin and the key years of the Cold War . The memoir was published in 1970 and is now published in Russia .
 At the time of the crisis, the nuclear balance heavily favored the United States . The nuclear balance favored the U.S. at the time .
 By that year the United States possessed “about nine times as many nuclear weapons as the U.S.R.R.,” writes The Atlantic . The Atlantic.com: “The United States. possessed about nine times more nuclear weapons than the Soviet Union .
 The quality and deployment capability of the U.S. arsenal was also far superior to that of the Soviets, a fact that Khrushchev was keenly aware of . Furthermore, the quality of the United States arsenal was far superior .
 His solution — “nstall nuclear warheads without letting the United States find out they were there until it was too late to do anything about them” — was a tit for tat trade off and sent the world hurtling towards Armageddon .
 Khrushchev himself proposed a quid pro quo missile swap on October 27 . Kennedy had secretly accepted the deal, but it was never publicly announced .
 Khrushchev's death in 1971 only came to light in the late 1980s and after his death in the 1970s . A fact that only came out in the 1980s was only discovered in the '80s and '70s .
 Both leaders, clearly shaken by the apocalyptic possibilities avowed for greater nuclear deterrence . Both leaders expressed concern over the threat of nuclear war .
 In 1972, both Washington and Moscow signed the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty . Seven years later, they signed the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty I and SALT II, in an attempt to curb nuclear proliferation .
 The agreement signed this February simply follows a history of point, counterpoint agreements that were set in place by the 1962 crisis . The agreement was signed in February after a crisis in 1962 .