 The Life & Death of JFK—A GPO Collection November 19, 2015 . John F Kennedy was the 35th President of the United States .
 JFK's November 22nd, 1963 assassination was a defining moment in American history . JFK’s purposeful idealism moved and shaped our nation, his November 22th, 1963, assassination .
 President Lyndon B Johnson directed an independent commission to investigate Kennedy’s death . President Johnson directed the commission to look into the death of the president .
 GPO employees proofed, printed, and bound the official President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy . The Warren Commission Report is commonly known as the Warren Report . GPO printed, bound the report in 1964 .
 The free digital edition of the Warren Commission Report is available online through GPO’s Federal Digital System . The report was published by the Government Accountability Institute for the United States .
 GPO’s information products are a permanent tribute to a presidential legacy imprinted on the annals of U.S. history . From 1960s print to modern day digital, GPO's information products have been a tribute to the legacy of President Obama .
 Our guest blogger is Chelsea Milko, Public Relations Specialist in GPO’s Public Relations Office . She is a public relations specialist in the GPO .
 Last year I blogged about the various editions of the Constitution available as Government publications . Last year, I bloged about the different editions available as government publications .
 This time around, I’ve been thumbing through another publication that helps to put the Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, and a variety of other documents, speeches, and even songs and poetry, into the bigger picture of what it means to be an American citizen .
 It’s an extremely useful collection of songs, poems and symbols . Includes complete texts or extracts from notable American speeches . Includes songs and poems, poems, symbols .
 The Mayflower Compact, the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and other documents are not included . The brief sections on each put them into context so readers can perceive the continuum of American democracy through time .
 For new and aspiring citizens, a series of brief biographies of famous Americans who were not born in the U.S. makes for interesting reading .
 The Citizen’s Almanac is a terrific, well-illustrated source for all kinds of information about American history and citizenship .
 The book is perfect for Constitution Day or any other day when you need information about this country of ours . It's also an interesting read and a book that’s also a good read .
 You can browse through The Citizen's Almanac here, buy a single copy or a package of 25 for schools and civic organizations, or locate it at a library .
 The Star-Spangled Banner, The New Colossus, the Gettysburg Address, the Great Seal of the United States, I Hear America Singing, Marlene Dietrich, Martin Luther King, the Mayflower Compact, Robert C Byrd, Ronlad Reagan, Ronald Reagan .