 Anderson clashed with Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara over the blockade’s enforcement . Later clashed with secretary of defense over the enforcement of the blockade's enforcement .
 Twelve minutes after that, he veered eastward to land at Mccoy Air Force base in Florida . He landed at the base 12 minutes later .
 The president sat at the head of a conference table in the cabinet Room . The president was joined by his deputy chief of staff at the time .
 As the briefing began, he touched a hidden switch under the table, activating a tape recorder . He touched the switch to activate a hidden tape recorder under a table .
 This was the beginning of the first meeting of what would be called the excomm . The excomm consisted of members of the National Security council and other government officials to whom Kennedy turned for advice . Kennedy turned to them for advice, including his brother, Robert Kennedy .
 McNamara deferred to General Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint chiefs of Staff, who outlined potential military actions . McNamara said he would defer to Taylor's recommendations .
 The Joint chiefs of Staff, believing cuba would continue to be a potential cold War flashpoint, had directed Admiral Robert L Dennison to develop what became OPLAN 312 .
 Antisubmarine-warfare exercises also were scheduled, putting more ships and aircraft into the Caribbean . Antsubmarine exercises also put more ships, aircraft and aircraft in the area .
 Admiral George W Anderson, chief of Naval Operations, told all fleet commanders to be ready to order as many ships to sea as possible on a 24-hour notice .
 Joint Chiefs ordered strengthening of air defenses in southeastern U.S. Air Force bases and shore-based Navy and Marine Corps squadrons prepared for a possible invasion of Cuba .
 Gromyko insisted that Soviet aid to Cuba was defensive and did not threaten the U.S. He insisted that it was not a threat to the United States .
 Kennedy, without revealing what the U-2 had discovered, merely reiterated his warning . Kennedy did not reveal what he had discovered .
 Anderson ended his day working on the legal and logistical issues involved for a sea blockade of Cuba . Anderson worked on the logistical and legal issues involved in the blockade . Anderson said the blockade would be the first of its kind .
 Secretary of State Rusk suggested that “blockade” be replaced by “quarantine” because the latter “avoids comparison with the Berlin blockade,” the Soviet attempt in 1948–49 to block Allied access to the divided city .
 Anderson replied that a ship could be disabled and stay afloat . When Kennedy said the vessel might be unintentionally sunk, Anderson replied: "A ship could stay afloat"
 The oldest carrier in the Navy, she had been launched in 1942 and soon sailed into the Pacific . She fought in several battles and survived a kamikaze attack . She survived a devastating attack on the aircraft carrier in 1942 .
 The ship departed in September 1962 with sonar and electronic countermeasure equipment . Overhauled at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, she had departed with up-to-date sonar .
 For some lucky members of her crew, the day after arrival at Gitmo was to have been a liberty day . The day after arriving in the U.S. was to be the day of liberty day.
 At 0330 on 21 October reveille sounded for a surprised crew, and the Essex steamed toward her quarantine station .
 She was one of 44 ships in Task Force 136, under the operational control of Vice Admiral Alfred G “Corky” Ward, commander of the 2nd Fleet .
 Of the ships heading toward cuba, Ward was told, at least one “had missiles in her hold” and had to be intercepted . Ward: "At least one of the ships had missiles in their hold" Ward: At least one was intercepted .
 At the northern end of the crescent was the guided-missile cruiser Canberra with two destroyers . At the southern end were the cruiser Newport News and two destroyer destroyers. At the other end was the cruiser Canberra .
 Task Force 135, built around the carriers Independence andEnterprise and including 32 ships, took up stations off cuba’s southeastern shore . Task force 135 includes 32 ships including 32 vessels .
 On 22 October, Guantanamo’s Navy families were handed notices telling them that “Higher authority has directed theimmediate evacuation” of all dependents . All dependents were evacuated .
 The only women allowed to stay were Navy nurses, who might be needed in the darkening future .
 At 1630 that day, 4 Navy ships transported 2,400 people to the Norfolk Naval Station . Service families took them in .
 Other Marines were airlifted in, joining a motley defense force . Seabees from Naval Mobile construction battalions 4 and 7 and cuban volunteers from the civilian work force .
 By now, people beyond Gitmo knew there was some kind of crisis . But newspapers were not getting any reliable information from Kennedy or the tight-lipped members of excomm.
 At 1900 the president would make an important statement that would be carried on television and radio . Finally, as the Gitmo refugees packed their suitcases, the White House announced that at 1900 the statement would be broadcast on television .
 Joint chiefs ordered U.S. armed forces to DeFcON-3, an increase of readiness beyond normal . President Kennedy’s quarantine proclamation was part of the Joint chiefs order .
 The United States Strategic Air Command went to DeFcON-2, a state of readiness short of war that put SAc bombers aloft carrying nuclear weapons . The U.S. was not bluffing, it was a clear sign to the Soviet Union that the United States was
 Navy photographer’s mates removed film from the Crusaders’ cameras for processing and delivery to the NPIC in Washington . The film was taken to the U.S. Navy photographer's mates .
 Commander William B Ecker, who led the mission, was ordered to refuel and continue to continue to Andrews Air Force Base near Washington .
 A helicopter flew him to the Pentagon, where he was met by Admiral Anderson and General Taylor .
 Ecker, noting that his flight over the target area had been shorter than 30 seconds, advised chiefs to wait for the photographs .
 Accounts vary about their encounter at the Navy’s Flag Plot command center in the Pentagon on 24 October . The incident occurred at the Pentagon's Flag Plot Command Center .
 Aerial photography showed that the Soviets were still constructing missile sites and assembling IL-28 bombers . The Soviet Union was still building missile sites in the 1950s .
 Soviet surface-toair missile shot down a U-2, killing its pilot, Air Force Major Rudolph Anderson Jr. Then a Soviet missile also shot down the plane, killing the pilot . Anderson Jr.'s pilot was killed in the attack .
 President Kennedy decided not to retaliate, but the NSA wanted proof that the Soviets had done it . President Kennedy did not retaliate, and the NSA was looking for proof .
 USS Oxford was the security agency’s first signal intelligence ship . It was one of the strangest-looking vessels in the Navy .
 Three masts, each bearing tiers of antennas, sprouted from a main deck . The masts were each bearing masts and antennas .
 On the fantail was a 16-foot dish-shaped antenna that could bounce microwave signals off the moon to a ground station . A ground station could receive microwave signals from the moon .
 Operators picked up signals from Spoon Rest, NATO designation for Soviet early warning radar . Spoon Rest was Spoon Rest - a Soviet radar that was used by the Soviets in the 1960s .
 With the quarantine working, on 28 October the Soviets agreed to remove the ballistic missiles . The quarantine worked, with the Soviets agreeing to remove them .
 The United States agreed that it would not invade cuba. 37 eventually details of a secret agreement emerged . The U.S. agreed to not invade Cuba .
 The U.S. is dismantling several American air and missile bases in Turkey that had been rendered obsolete by the commitment of Polaris submarines in the region . The bases are believed to be being dismantled .
 The freighter Atkarsk left Soviet waters in September 1960 bound for cuba and was tracked by the NSA . It was back in cuba during the crisis .
 Kremlin officials ordered the Atkarsk to carry the last tactical nuclear warheads out of cuba on 20 November 1962 . And, according to recent revelations, top Kremlin officials had ordered it to carry out .
 Allen M Sumner DD-692, Sea Stories—chapter 5, www.dd-692.com/ sea_stories.com . Allen Sumner is the author of the book Sea Stories .
 1,400 is the number that appears frequently in accounts of the invasion . Of several estimates of several estimates, the number is frequently used in accounts .
 The Naval Quarantine of Cuba, 1962, Naval Historical center. www.history.navy.mil/faqs/faq90-5 .
 Stern was a historian at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library from 1977 through 1999 . Stern was at the JFK Presidential Library between 1977 and 1999 .
 Library began declassifying and releasing the secret Kennedy tapes in 1973 . Library began releasing the tapes in the 1970s .
 Ray S Cline, “A CIA Reminiscence,” Washington Quarterly , Autumn 1982, 91. Ray S. Cline . Cline: “The CIA is not the CIA. It is the CIA’s mission to find out what happened .
 At the time of the cuban Missile crisis, cline was the cIA’s deputy director for intelligence .
 The dialogue between President Kennedy and Admiral Anderson has been quoted by many sources without the specific time and place provided by Stern . Stern is the leading authority for the White House tapes’ content .
 Polmar and Gresham, DEFCON-2 , Appendix c, “ United States Naval Forces in the caribbean,” 309. Polmar . Gresha: “The U.S. Navy has been in the Caribbean for more than 20 years
 A resolution commemorating the dedication of the Strategic Air command Memorial during the 20th anniversary of its stand-down, 5 June 2012, www.govtrack.us .