 More articles, perspectives, editorials, and letters can be found at www.sciencediplomacy.org .
 Science & Diplomacy is published by the Center for Science Diplomacy of the American Association for the Advancement of Science . It's the world’s largest general scientific society, the world's largest .
 E William Colglazier's lifetime overlaps almost exactly with that of that of the Nuclear Age . War and Peace in Peace in the Nuclear age was published in 1945 . The author's life spans almost exactly as long as his life span .
 As the two of us enter our eighth decade, it is reassuring that the devastating use of nuclear weapons has not been repeated . The two countries are now in their eighth decade .
 Following the end of the Cold War, I did not worry so much about the likelihood of a nuclear crisis that could potentially destroy the world as we know it . After the war, I was more concerned about the possibility of a 'nuclear crisis' than a nuclear war .
 The recent confrontation with North Korea1 has reminded me that our number-one priority must be preventing nuclear weapons from ever being used again . The North Korean nuclear crisis has reminded us that our priority is not to use nuclear weapons .
 "How to do that consistent with protecting our nation and contributing to a peaceful world is the challenge," says President Obama . "The challenge is to be consistent with ... contributing to our nation," he says .
 Like many of my generation, my own personal and professional life has been affected by the disruptive threat and enormous implications of the Nuclear Age . Like many others, I have been affected personally and professionally by the threat and consequences of the nuclear age .
 When the atom bomb was dropped at the end of World War II, my father was an army officer on a ship in the Pacific preparing for the invasion of Japan . His father was a ship captain in the war's Pacific and was on the ship when the bomb was used .
 Much of my subsequent involvement with science and international affairs was inspired by distinguished scientific mentors who spent much of their time outside science working to prevent further use of nuclear weapons .
 E William Colglazier worked on nuclear issues for two decades after he had completed graduate school in physics . For two decades, he wrote about nuclear issues in science policy .
 In recent decades, my focus has been primarily on other aspects of science policy and science diplomacy . I've worked on science policy, science diplomacy and science policy for decades .
 The current political crisis with North Korea, though, has caused me to reexamine what I had learned, and perhaps forgotten, concerning war and peace in the Nuclear Age . I think I've learned a lot about the nuclear age, but I'm not sure what I learned about it
 Scientists, politicians, and diplomats have to return to the nuclear challenge . "I believe the focus of everyone—scientists, politicians and diplomats" must return to nuclear challenge. I believe this is the case for everyone, scientists and diplomats, to focus on the challenge .
 Trinity test, the first of its kind, occurred in the New Mexico desert in July 1945 . Only a few scientists involved in the project thought deeply about the long-term implications prior to the test . Trinity test was the first to be carried out in a nuclear bomb test .
 An effort was made by two groups with the Franck Report and the Szilárd petition to press for demonstration of the enormous destructive power of the bomb before using it . The government did not seriously consider this option .
 After presenting the many arguments offered retrospectively for and against dropping the bomb, we asked the students to evaluate these arguments and make their own judgment . The students are asked to evaluate the arguments and evaluate them .
 Many years later, as executive officer of the National Academy of Sciences, I had the opportunity to visit the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park .
 NAS, an independent nongovernmental American scientific organization, has partnered with Japanese governments since 1946 to follow the health effects of Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors and their children . The NAS has been working with Japanese scientific organizations since 1946 .
 Anyone who has visited the Peace Park and Museum cannot help but be deeply affected by the tragedy . Anyone who visits the park and museum cannot help to help but .
 "The lesson I gradually absorbed regarding the decision to drop the bomb was counter to what I previously thought," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I gradually absorbed the lesson I had previously thought"
 Truman would have made the same decision as Truman during World War II, says historian . Truman's decision to go to war in 1945 would have been the same as Truman's, he says . Truman: "Any American president during WWII would have decided to go against the odds"
 The priority of ending the war quickly by using a new weapon to spare U.S. casualties incurred in an invasion, made it almost impossible politically for a president to decide differently .
 We must avoid a future situation in which a political leader feels he or she has no choice or that the decision is preordained . That realization makes it absolutely clear to me that we must avoid the future .
 There is only one justification for having Science & Diplomacy nuclear weapons, and that is to decrease rather than increase the risk of nuclear war .
 In the current world-security structure, survivable nuclear weapons systems that pose the threat of retaliation are seen as necessary to deter a preemptive nuclear attack . survivable weapons systems pose the risk of retaliation, experts say .
 Oppenheimer opposed the development of the H-bomb, but approval was swift once the decision moved to the military and political levels . Oppenheim opposed the decision to develop the atomic bomb .
 The grim conflict, initiated by the North invading the South, resulted in the United States and its allies fighting Chinese as well as North Korean troops . U.S. and allies fought Chinese and North Korean forces .
 General Douglas MacArthur said he had wanted to drop atom bombs on enemy bases but never formally recommended this action . MacArthur said in an interview after the armistice that he wanted to bomb enemy bases .
 The United Kingdom, France, and China later joined the two superpowers as nuclear weapons states . The U.S. and China became nuclear weapons powers in the 1950s .
 Analyzing this crisis retrospectively makes clear that the existential danger was even starker than viewed at the time . Analyzing retrospectively, as has been done by scientists and historians in the U.S., Russia, Cuba, and Cuba .
 The nuclear weapons in Cuba were armed, U.S. generals recommended launching an attack on Cuba . Fidel Castro argued for preemptive use of Soviet nuclear weapons on the United States if Cuba were attacked . A Soviet submarine captain was dissuaded from using a nuclear torpedo on ships of the United
 Any number of missteps, including some that might have seemed reasonable in a crisis, could have triggered an initial exchange .
 Without active countermanding leadership, that could easily have led to a full nuclear war . The U.S. could have a nuclear war with North Korea, says President Obama .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were able to walk back from the brink with a quiet deal to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba and American missiles from Turkey . The deal was a quiet step back from a showdown between the Cold War and the Soviet Union .
 The people of the world will forever be grateful to these two political leaders. The world will be forever grateful to them, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 U.S. theater nuclear weapons were stationed in Europe to counter perceived superiority of conventional and nuclear forces from the Warsaw Pact, as the communist-aligned countries were known .
 The United States had a list of more than 100,000 targets in the Warsaw Pact and China . The U.S. had a target list of targets in both countries . The list included targets in Warsaw Pact, China .
 Deterrence continued to be a reality in preserving an unfriendly peace between the superpowers . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for decades .
 The SALT I Treaty,12 which limited strategic ballistic missile launchers, was signed in 1972 . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1972, limiting strategic missile launchers . It was signed under the treaty .
 Also signed in 1972 was the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty . Treaty advanced on the argument that developing robust defenses against ICBMs would be destabilizing . Treaty was advanced on argument that a robust defense would destabilize .
 Deterrence would be greatly weakened if either the Soviets or Americans were perceived to be able to launch a first strike without fear of a successful retaliatory nuclear attack .
 The Threshold Test Ban Treaty was signed in 1974, but never ratified by the United States Senate . SALT II with its limits on warheads and longrange delivery systems signed in 1979 . The treaty was never ratified .
 India became a nuclear weapons state with a ‘peaceful nuclear explosion’ in 1974 . India became the first country to have a nuclear weapon state . The country became a nuke state in 1974 with a 'peaceful explosion'
 Israel did so covertly without declaring its status . Pakistan probably had nuclear weapons by the mid-1980s . Israel and Pakistan did not declare their status .
 The proliferation of nuclear weapons states states moved slowly. Nevertheless, the proliferation of nukes was slow to move slowly .
 South Africa had developed nuclear weapons but later voluntarily dismantled these weapons and its program . South Africa voluntarily dismantled its nuclear program in 1994 .
 Technologies continued to progress, presenting opportunities and challenges for military planners . The U.S. military continues to focus on the future of the military .
 The United States sought to utilize highly accurate smart weapons, smart sensors, and stealth technologies to offset Warsaw Pact forces . The U.S. sought to use smart weapons and stealth technology to offset the Warsaw Pact .
 In the nuclear realm, air-launched cruise missiles, multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles, Trident submarines, stealth bombers, and stealth bombers were either in advanced development or being deployed . Mobile landbased ICBMs were also in development or deployed .
 The Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars proposal, of the Reagan administration, was promoted to develop U.S. defenses against Soviet nuclear weapons .
 E William Colglazier destabilizing and weakening deterrence . Critics saw SDI as Science & Diplomacy, and critics saw it as Science and Diplomacy .
 U.S. missile defense systems are seen as ineffective and easily overwhelmed by countermeasures, experts say . Many technical experts viewed the systems being developed by the United States as ineffective .
 SDI did pose an unprecedented technological and strategic challenge to the Soviet Union, though, which ratcheted up Cold War tensions . SDI was a technological challenge to Russia, but it did pose a threat to the U.S.
 Harvard Nuclear Study Group examined the central question of whether nuclear war is inevitable in a world of deterrence . In 1983, in the book Living with Nuclear Weapons, the study group examined the question .
 The solution was for nations to take continual steps to reduce the risk of nuclear war . Six authors from the natural and political sciences offered the solution .
 With enough time and gradual efforts to transform political relationships, even a long-term goal like nuclear disarmament might become possible . Nuclear disarmament may become possible, but it's still a long way away from success .
 The committee members had regular meetings with a similarly composed group of experts under the Soviet Academy of Sciences . Both sides briefed their governments, and both sides briefed governments .
 Influential Soviet scientists exposed to U.S. technical and strategic thinking through the dialogues pushed the Soviet government, especially the military and security services, to a new comprehension of strategic stability .
 A “window of opportunity” for arms control and arms reduction emerged in the political and diplomatic spheres in the next decade . These dialogues turned out to be enormously valuable when a ‘window’ of opportunity emerged .
 The United States and Soviet Union signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty in 1987 . The treaty eliminated medium-range nuclear weapons in Europe .
 These events signaled an end to the Cold War and a greatly reduced risk of nuclear war . The events signaled the end to nuclear war and greatly reduced the risk of war .
 Former secretary of defense William J Perry has written a book about the nuclear age . The Nuclear Age is My Journey at the Nuclear Brink is by William Perry . Perry's book covers the twenty-year period and the whole of the Nuclear Age .
 He was a young American soldier during the occupation of Japan . He was an analyst of the photos showing covert installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba . He led the development of smart sensors, smart precision weapons, and stealth technologies of the U.S. offset strategy .
 Perry participated in Track II dialogues with Soviet scientists during his government service . Perry was a member of Track II dialogue group .
 All this was before he became secretary of defense in the Clinton administration . All this is before he was Secretary of Defense .
 The former Soviet weapons complex was dismantled to meet treaty obligations to dismantle and destroy Soviet weapons of mass destruction and delivery systems . This latter effort was carried out in collaboration with the former Soviet weapon complex .
 E William Colglazier Perry was also at the center of that era’s nuclear crisis on the Korean Peninsula .
 In 1994, North Korea would not allow inspectors from the IAEA to complete inspections of the nuclear reactor at Yongbyon . The reactor is where fuel could be removed and reprocessed to recover plutonium to produce nuclear bombs .
 The U.S. updated its war plans, including the option of a preemptive missile strike on the reprocessing plant . The United States, in turn, updated its plans to strike the plant with the option .
 Jimmy Carter, serving as an envoy, relayed from Pyongyang the message that the North Koreans were willing to negotiate . After a tense standoff, former president Jimmy Carter relayed the message from Pyongyang .
 Agreed Framework resulted in suspension of reprocessing and reactor construction by North Korea in exchange for South Korea and Japan providing two light water reactors for producing electricity and the United States providing fuel oil . North Korea's nuclear program was suspended in return for South Korean and Japanese reactors .
 In civilian life, Perry agreed to lead the North Korean Policy Review near the end of President Bill Clinton’s administration . Perry was in charge of North Korea Policy Review during the Clinton administration .
 He also engaged senior North Korean military officials and hosted them in California . Kim Jong-won visited the U.S. in 2008 and 2009 .
 Bush ended the U.S. government’s dialogue with North Korea against the wishes of his secretary of state . Bush took office in 2003 .
 U.S. determined in 2002 that North Korea had a clandestine uranium enrichment program . Both countries withdrew from the Agreed Framework when it was determined .
 North Korea kept up development of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles . U.S. tightened sanctions, but North Korea continued to develop nuclear weapons .
 No other country has carried out nuclear testing since 1998 . September 11, 2001, attacks on the U.S. made even more urgent the priority of preventing terrorists from obtaining nuclear weapons .
 The detonation of a clandestine nuclear bomb in a major city would be 'devastating' It would be "beyond devastating" for a clandestine bomb to detonate in such a city, experts say .
 Making sure that does not happen has remained an overriding goal of all major powers . The U.S. wants to ensure that it doesn't happen again .
 In 2003, the U.S. government claimed the existence of WMD in Iraq and used this as a rationale for the invasion and overthrow of the Iraqi government . The United States government used this rationale to justify the invasion .
 The inability of Iraq to deter the U.S. invasion, combined with the ultimate fate of Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, caught the attention of North Korea . North Korea has not commented on the Iraq invasion .
 Shultz, as secretary of state, had been with Reagan at Reykjavik in 1986 . Shultz was with Reagan when he was in the Middle East at the time .
 Deterioration has continued to check the possibility of nuclear conflict between the superpowers . Even with emergence of a new Cold War between the U.S. and Russia, deterrence has continued .
 North Korea accelerated efforts to develop a nuclear arsenal and missile delivery systems, likely with help from Soviet missile designers . Kim Jong-un's new leader is likely to help develop the weapons, likely aided by Soviet missile makers .
 The United States underestimated the pace of progress under the new leader . Even though the U.S. has caused some problems for the missile program, it underestimated the progress of progress .
 The fate in 2011 of Muammar Gaddafi, who had given up Libya’s nuclear weapons program, was surely noted by North Korea . North Korea has not commented on the fate of Gaddafi .
 The Iran nuclear deal in 2015 was a milestone in utilizing diplomacy to reduce the chance of nuclear conflict . Iran's nuclear deal was a major success in reducing the risk of nuclear war .
 The Iranian scientist and diplomat wanted an equal partner in knowledge of nuclear weapons issues to be involved on the United States side . Ali Akbar Salehi heads that nation’s Atomic Energy Organization .
 Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz, a nuclear physicist, has joined the negotiations . The U.S. government has selected him to join the talks .
 The two scientists were able to reach closure on technical aspects of the deal . The deal was reached on technical terms .
 The North Korean development of a nuclear arsenal and delivery systems that could potentially threaten the U.S. mainland as well as South Korea and Japan has substantially raised the possibility of a disastrous conflict . North Korea's development of nuclear weapons has raised the prospect of a disaster .
 Knowledgeable observers have even given large probabilities for the likelihood of war . The situation in Syria has been described as 'highly likely' for years .
 I believe these frightening estimates are unrealistic, but they certainly get attention . I believe they are unrealistic but they get attention, but get attention.
 The estimates of hundreds of thousands of casualties if a war breaks out are not exaggerations . Nevertheless, Science & Diplomacy, December 2017 w w S c i e n c e nc e D i p l o m a c o r g War and Peace in the Nuclear Age
 The real danger is the possibility of the U.S. or North Korea taking preemptive action, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: North Korea is the real danger of preempting action .
 I believe this would lead to total war, with both sides using all their military power . I believe that this would be the worst of the situation in the world . Both sides would be using all the military power against each other .
 The prescription for avoiding nuclear war is as relevant today as it was thirty-five years ago . Applying the Lessons of the past, the Harvard Nuclear Study Group offers the advice .
 Following that advice obviously requires establishing a dialogue with the North Korean regime, no matter what we think of it, says the UK .
 Redlines drawn in some of the comments and echoed by some senior military leaders . Especially dangerous are redlines drawn by some of their comments, some of them being echoed by military leaders.
 These comments have raised the risk of a serious miscalculation that could lead to war . The comments have been raised by President Obama, who said: 'Miscalculation is a mistake'
 "We have no choice but to rely on deterrence to keep war from breaking out on the Korean Peninsula," says South Korean President Kim Jong Jong-won .
 The active diplomacy of the U.S. government has been effective in securing international support for sanctions through the United Nations Security Council . The U.N. Security Council has voted to impose sanctions on North Korea .
 The international body has implemented several rounds of increased sanctions on North Korea . This international body, which includes China and Russia, has implemented a number of sanctions .
 The sanctions are intended to impose severe economic costs for continued testing of nuclear bombs and ballistic missiles . The sanctions include severe economic penalties for continued tests of nuclear weapons and missiles .
 North and South Korean governments meet in January 2018 regarding participation in the Winter Olympics . Convincing North Korea to enter into diplomatic negotiations with the U.S. has so far been unsuccessful . The meeting of the North and the South has some hope for broader engagement .
 If sanctions don't happen soon, sanctions will likely be ratcheted up further and enforced more rigorously . Each side may persist in actions viewed as provocative by the other . If constructive dialogue doesn't happen, sanctions are likely to be more severe .
 It is in times like this when Track II diplomacy by scientists might be most helpful, scientists say . Track I diplomacy might be useful in times such as this time of crisis, scientist says .
 According to Western news reports, scientists and engineers who lead North Korean programs in nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles have an elevated status and many lifestyle privileges . North Korean scientists lead nuclear weapons programs have been elevated status, Western reports have said .
 Their prominent presence in smiling photos with Kim appears to indicate that the leader values them highly .
 Offering Track II dialogue with them that involves carefully selected nuclear scientists and security experts from the United States could initiate a more serious dialogue . Offering a Track II Dialogue with them would involve carefully selected prominent nuclear scientists .
 Chinese scientists who have been involved with American scientists from the U.S. NAS in Track II dialogues would be willing to extend an invitation and to host the first meeting .
 The American side might include distinguished scientific leaders who have previously engaged with North Korea on nuclear issues, such as Siegfried Hecker .
 It could include a bipartisan group of experts who have served in Democratic and Republican administrations . The panel could include Democrats and Republicans .
 Prominent candidates from Democratic administrations might include former secretary of energy Ernest Moniz . Former secretary of defense Ashton Carter might also run for president .
 The current secretary of defense, James Mattis, might be a source of names of experts who would be credible to the current United States administration .
 Even if the dialogues achieved nothing more than reinforcing deterrence and reducing the risk of conflict, they would be well worthwhile . The dialogues would reinforce deterrence and reduce the risk that could lead to conflict .
 They might accelerate serious diplomatic negotiations for seeking a permanent diplomatic solution to the standoff . They might even accelerate serious governmental negotiations .
 I worked for three distinguished scientists no longer alive who greatly inspired me as well as others with their efforts to reduce the threat of nuclear war . I was inspired by them, including those who died in the war .
 The Committee on International Security and Arms Control engages influential counterparts through its formal dialogues in Russia, China, and India . It also engages with other countries through projects and projects .
 It focuses on technical aspects of security issues at the frontiers of what nations can explore on a government-to-government basis, seeking to inform Science & Diplomacy, December 2017 .
 Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty was adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1996 . Treaty was followed by the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . Treaty is a result of a nuclear test ban on North Korea .
 China, Iran, Israel, and the U.S. have signed but not ratified the treaty . Iran, China, Israel and the United States have not ratified it .
 India and Pakistan did not sign the treaty and conducted tests in 1998 . Pakistan and India conducted tests on nuclear weapons in 1998, but did not agree to the treaty .
 Also worth reading is a recent book and three reviews of three reviews .