 I'm the executive director of the Davis Center for Russian and Eurasian Studies . I'm also a director at the Davis center for Russian, Eurasian studies .
 Professor Serhii Plokhii from the history department in Harvard's Ukrainian Research Institute will talk about his new book .
 "The fog of deception, mutual suspicion, unreliable and outdated information" made it so that we could barely see the other guy, let alone see his eyeballs . But the way you describe the book, in fact, the book is about a fog . "We could barely . see
 The book provides some new information on the crisis . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 "What's new here? Well, first of all, thanks to this wonderful introduction. What is new here?" she asks .
 "I'm certainly happy to be back on the platform provided by the Davis Center and again answering your questions and having this discussion, so thank you," she says .
 Russian diplomat says he was interested in the crisis for a number of reasons, including some personal . He lived in Dnipropetrovsk where every missile that was delivered to Cuba was built .
 There was an enormous amount of literature and I was started, of course, with the Robert Kennedy's ""Thirteen Days"" it was going from there and eventually I got lost . There was a lot of literature to go from there to the end of the story .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "I went to something that I normally do, I went to the primary sources. And then I went for a primary source. I'm not sure what I'm doing here."
 "What I saw there was actually very different from what I read in most of the books that I consulted. And what I saw ... was very different," he says .
 "A lot of confusion, a lot of uncertainty, miscommunication, and that's not the dominant narrative that at least exists in our literature," she says . "That's not a dominant narrative" she says. "I saw there was a lot . of confusion"
 "It's about the young but wise president and he was young, and occasionally he was wise, but there were a lot of mistakes and missteps on both sides," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "He was young and sometimes wise, and there were mistakes and
 I am relying on the memoirs coming from the Soviet side. But another new thing that is there is the degree of which I'm relying on memoirs . The memoirs will be coming from Soviet side, he says .
 Russian/Soviet writing on the crisis of the American one is not entirely new, but certainly not part of the mainstream . The U.S. and Russia have been at odds with each other .
 Historian: "I probably was the first historian to consult and maybe still is the only person who worked with those. And those are supplemented by the recently released or declassified KGB documents," he says .
 State Security of Ukraine Archive in Kyiv is based on the former KGB . The archive is housed in the former state security of Ukraine . It is now housed in a museum in Kiev .
 Crimea, Odessa and Odessa, and Nikolayev and so on and so forth, are now in Kyiv, Ukraine . Crimea is now part of the Ukraine-Crimea region .
 Only KGB reporting could provide access to the view from below that only KGB could provide .
 "I'll be happy to talk about that in more detail. And, again, that was something really, really interesting on a number of levels," he says .
 "I really dissatisfaction with the literature that is there and presentation of a new take on the crisis as a ""March of Folly,"" really. First new is maybe my dissatisfaction with literature that I really . Maybe my really dissatisfaction . with the . literature that was there and presented of
 I wanted to use that title from Barbara Tuchman's book, but it was already taken, so I went instead for, ""Nuclear Folly"" but it's clearly a nod towards her book . Actually that's one of the things that's so interesting is the references to
 He was extremely disturbed by this idea of sleepwalking into World War I by miscalculation and not understanding the other side, he said .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says the government is making the same mistakes . He says it's not the first time they've made the same mistake .
 The impression is that Kennedy was actually waking up and going to bed is this idea of misunderstanding, miscalculation. That is unbelievable because of the impression that he was waking up . That's unbelievable, he says .
 He was talking about that to Khrushchev when they met in Vienna, roughly a year or a year and a year-and-a-half before the crisis in 1961 .
 He didn't want to talk about misunderstandings and miscalculations, he was pushing the world revolution, he said . "He was trying to regress the disbalance in nuclear weapons," he added .
 Kennedy: "It was a big idea and a big thing, but it's amazing to what degree that they couldn't really read the signals that they were sending to each other"
 Kennedy, it never occurred to him why Khrushchev decided to put the nuclear missiles on Cuba, he says . Kennedy: "I never thought it would happen to him" Kennedy: Kennedy never thought of the nuclear missile threat .
 CNN's John Sutter talks with Kennedy about the dangers of missiles in Turkey . He says Kennedy was told by aides to Kennedy that missiles were in Turkey, but they were not . Sutter: "We have missiles in Turkish territory"
 US didn't have enough ballistic missiles, not any kind, but long-range ballistic missiles . And he meant that of times of Eisenhower and also the times when the U.S. didn't .
 Khrushchev never was able to figure out, of course, like it was the case with Stalin and was every Soviet leader . He was never able to, like Stalin or Stalin .
 "You can bully unexperienced American president and try to get from him this and that and that American president can be even scared at some point and be prepared to give you what you want"
 Kennedy was caught on tape saying, in the middle of the crisis, saying that, well I agree in McNamara and with others that the Soviet missiles in Cuba didn't change the balance . Kennedy was recorded saying, "Well I agree with McNamara"
 President Barack Obama said the U.S. faced a major threat to the United States . Obama said last week that the threat was a 'major threat' to the nation .
 Khrushchev who was making decisions on his own, his very little advice coming from anybody, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Krushchev made decisions to make decisions without any advice"
 "Couldn't imagine the circumstance in which Kennedy worked and functioned and what democracy was about," he says .
 This is just a couple of examples of not being able to understand where the other side was coming from . So this is just one of many examples of really not being understood where other side is coming from, says CNN.com senior correspondent .
 The White House took more than one day for a letter from crucial to high in the White House . The letter was taken more than a day for the letter .
 It's just, you read that you return you go back to the sources, you again maybe didn't understand something now that how much time it was needed to convey a message . "It's just the fact that when you return to the source, you have to go back and go
 The other guy did blink but they couldn't, they didn't know that it happened. They didn't notice for 24 hours right. Yes, the other man did blink . The other man didn't even notice that .
 Kennedy was still agonizing rather to give an order to attack the Soviet ships . They turned around. Kennedy was agonizing to give a order to .
 The decision was made after ships turned back 24 hours before that he was trying to make it .
 'We were dealing with a very different world in terms of the information technologists. So again, one of the examples that again we were dealing . Again, again, it was dealing with an extremely different world, says the BBC's chief executive .
 Robert Kennedy is trying to meet with some of the Russians in Washington to figure out what's going on. And you see over and over Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy's efforts to find out what is going on, he says. Robert Kennedy wants to know .
 "He's just unable to get any kind of clarity from those meetings," he says . "Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, absolutely," he adds .
 Debrynin was the last guy to learn about what was going Grambling . And the main reason was that he was the first guy to know about what went wrong . The main reason is that he learned about Grambling, he says .
 Public radio must give them instructions, specific instructions going to him . So when he was getting some communications on public radio must . He was getting instructions, he was given specific instructions .
 Khrushchev operated and was able to get away with that. And that just shows you the way how really Khrushvic operated, he says .
 President Obama spent no time at all conveying what was going on to Castro, Castro . Obama said he had no time to tell Castro what he was doing .
 Kennedy is agonizing for days and days how to sell the idea of removing American missiles from Turkey to NATO allies in Europe . He still can't figure out how to do that . Kennedy: "I'm trying to get the idea out of the way"
 Khrushchev didn't spent just one second on thinking how he would tell Castro what was going on, says historian . He says he didn't spend one second thinking about how to tell him what was happening to Castro .
 The assumption was that he was a junior member of the communist club which was in line, that he would literally follow orders coming from Moscow . He would literally almost follow orders from Moscow, according to reports .
 Castro refused, causing them a major major new crisis in that whole story . Castro refused to give up on Castro's request .
 "It's known to experts, especially working on the Soviet side of the history with Mikoyan but its not part of the American narrative," CNN's John Sutter says . "Mikoyan's role in the U.S. history is known but it's not part
 American narrative is still very much defined by ""Thirteen Days"" written by Robert Kennedy . American narrative still defined by the Kennedy family . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 When in fact there were 13 days, the entire crisis was going for more than one month . The crisis lasted more than a month, but the crisis was actually more than 13 days .
 The Soviets make this plan to put nuclear weapons in Cuba and don't talk to Castro about it until very late in the game . Castro refused to go along and wanted to grab the Soviet tactical weapons that were on the Island and the U.S. knew nothing about .
 They've already decided they're gonna do it and then someone decides they should check with Castro to make sure it's okay . Castro: "They're already decided to do it, then someone decided they would check with him"
 The Cuban leader was sent to convince Castro to take the missiles, but he was not consulted with the Cubans, he says . He says the decision was made before they checked with the Cuban government .
 Marshall Biryoizor was the person who sold the sale job . The sale job was the job that sold the job .
 Khrushchev was successful salesmen in terms of convincing Castro to take the weapons, but then he gave him what he wanted him to tell him, that there was no way of hiding the missiles . The missiles were more than 20 meters long under the palm trees which I don't know
 Khrushchev said there was no problem with that. But he went back to Moscow and said it was OK with that . He went back and said he would accept it .
 The role of Mikoyan in Khrushchev's inner circle is really, he's very much out of step with the yes men that are surrounding him here, writes David Frum . Mikoyans was the only member of the raw allegedly decision making body that should have visited Cuba
 "From the beginning, I mean, he might not be called dovish but he was definitely much more skeptical of the entire Cuban adventure than everyone else," he says . "He was definitely more skeptical" of the Cuban adventure .
 Khrushchev would be overruled anyway, it didn't matter, he says . "For me, for me, that was really a very interesting experience," he writes . "It was really an interesting experience. It was really interesting," he adds .
 Khrushchev had a lot of issues and problems with monitoring in particular, so with the old guard that he inherited from Stalin, he says . He says he assumed that in the early part of the . early . part of Khrush . of course, he said. "He had
 His secret speech at the 20th party Congress that was also part of his struggle for power within the political. Party .
 After 1957, I assumed that he had really full control over Political.com . But after 1957, he assumed that . He assumed that after 1957 he . had really . fully control over political.com.
 "There was at least one person who was not afraid to voice his opinion. And on a certain level this is true, but as you said, it was true," she said .
 Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky was fully playing on Khrushchev side . He was the minister of defense Marshal Rodion Malinovsky .
 Mikoyan was the only member of the procedural, who didn't betray Khrushchev two years later in 1964 in 1964 .
 "I couldn't help, but think about that comparison to the American and the Soviet system," he says . "Another thing that I was thinking about was, I couldn't think about ... that comparison," he adds .
 In the American system these members of the EXCOMM, Executive Committee, they mean a serve at the pleasure of the president . Well, in the U.S. system these . members of . EXCOMm, Executive . Committee, are members of a . Executive Committee . They
 The level of degree of of of the disagreements, the level of the discussion. But the level . of the disagreement, the . level of . the discussion, the levels of the . discussion . But the degree of degree . of disagreements . is the issue of discussion .
 Kennedy would find himself more than once on who's inside, says CNN's John Sutter . Kennedy would have to look for tactics and words, he says, but Kennedy would often find himself in the middle of a debate .
 In the Soviet case, none of those people are technically aids, they're all elected by the Central Committee . In the former USSR, they were elected by a Central Committee.
 The system is designed in the way that for them saying no to Khrushchev was really politically almost impossible . But the system was designed to allow them to say no to the government, it was almost impossible to do .
 Mikoyan was more senior than than than Khrushchev in terms of his services at the highest level of the party, and the state could afford to do that, even then to a degree .
 So one model was the rational actor, these countries and their leaders are acting rationally and doing what they can to protect their interests . So one example was the example of China, where it acted rationally to protect its interests .
 "Each institution has its own interests and that's what constraints the choices. That each institution has their own interests," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The leader is dependent on his entourage, both for information and for representatives that keep him elected or keep him in position . And the third one is what he calls government processes or government politics, which is basically that he calls .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy come from very different positions, says Kennedy . Kennedy was in a very different position, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Kennedy: "Krushchev was very different from Kennedy"
 Graham Alison wrote a wonderful book and it's amazing how many things he got right because the book was written before the Kennedy tapes really became available . Is that an accurate way of describing where you come down?
 "He didn't know what was going on on the Soviet side, all this information came much later," he says . "And certainly he didn't have any knowledge of what was happening on the Russian side," he adds .
 The Kennedy tapes became available after the Kennedy tapes were released . The book was revised with Philip Zelikow, but with the Kennedy tape, they revised it .
 "They were pretty much working very much in the dark on many things. But again, they were very much of the dark," he said . "But again, ... they were working very little on many of the things"
 In terms of Khrushchev, yes, absolutely, it's a great man making policy, says historian . "Yes, absolutely," he says of the Soviet leader .
 She wasn't controlled to a degree that, I don't know, maybe Stalin was at some point already waiting in his tenure, maybe late . Maybe Stalin was already waiting . Maybe late, maybe in fact, maybe .
 Khrushchev's vision and responsibility were his idea and responsibility, he says . But basically it was his vision and his idea, he said . The former Soviet Union leader says he is proud of his achievements .
 He was not in situations where he was not overruled but out voted by the members of his executive committee . And Miss Kennedy again, it's a little bit more complex because again, she said .
 "He would go along with an issue and either response to Khrushchev or the public statement that wouldn't be in line with whatever the consensus was around the table," he says .
 "She would invite only people whom she liked, whose position who she liked," she said . She would invite people to her home in order to see her family .
 Debrynin went to the United Nations to ask for a slap of the missiles . Another plan was to go to the U.N. and ask the General Secretary of the United nations to propose the slap .
 The EXCOMM served not really as a decision making body, but as an advisory body to the president . The Americans were obsessed with Berlin, the American EXCOM, is that the Americans .
 National Security Advisor, Bundy was worried that like, if we do a blockade of Cuba, then we'll have a blockade in Berlin, he says . And the two were inextricably linked to the point where they were linked to each other, Bundy says .
 CNN's John Sutter: "For the Americans, these two issues are really very tightly linked. And for the Americans," he says .
 Or was it again a question of miscalculation? Well, I am afraid that is another question of misunderstanding and miscalculculation and lack of good intelligence?
 Khrushchev really believed that the government question was solved with the building of the wall. What we have is that he really believed it was solved by the wall, says historian .
 For Khrushchev, that was even this the most dramatic moment that we all talk about, one of the most dangerous moments in the history of the cold war with episode at a Checkpoint Charlie .
 He already decided that again, there was the wall, he was not allowed to be pushed by Olbrich by the middle of his Germany to do anything else . "He already decided ... there was already the wall," he said .
 Kennedy believed that another flare up another major crisis was coming in Berlin before the end of 1962 . And Kennedy believed it was real, that that was for true .
 Berlin was the key factor on Kennedy's agenda during most of the crisis . Berlin was a key factor for Kennedy's efforts to deal with the Soviet Union .
 President Obama was much more hawkish during the first week of the crisis than we believe he is . And his thinking is part of his thinking that why he was actually much hawkish, he says .
 His brother portrayed him as a wise and dovish and so on and so forth. Because again his brother did an excellent job portraying him as as wise and . so on, so forth .
 President Bush was hawkish during the first week of the crisis, he says . He was advocating the idea that there should be surgical strike against the Soviet missiles in Cuba, against McNamara .
 He believed that once the blockade was introduced another step that Khrushchev would respond with blockade desperately . And one of the reasons why he was pushing for that solution was that, he believed that .
 He envisioned in nuclear war over Europe not much nuclear war in the Sargasso Sea, or in the Caribbean . And then he envisioned in . Europe, he envisioned . Not much nuclear . war in . the Caribbean, he said .
 Kennedy believed that that was for real. So again, it's another case of how Khrushchev was playing the Berlin card really Kennedy believed . Kennedy believed it was real .
 The Soviets fell victims of their own deception, as well. Now, the interesting thing is that the Soviet Union fell victims to its own deception. It's interesting that the Soviets, as also, also fell victims .
 We know now from the records of how Mikoyan was explaining what was going on to Castro, who was really upset by the way how things were going . The records show that Castro was upset with the way his government was going .
 Khrushchev himself believed that Kennedy could not be serious about Berlin, that Kennedy was playing Berlin card against, Khruschev . Kennedy was not serious about playing the Berlin card, according to Khruski .
 Both sides kept allies in NATO and Warsaw Pact in the loop of what was going on, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter asks whether NATO allies in Warsaw Pact allies were aware of what happened .
 It was mostly two superpowers in dialogue . What were they involved in any way or was it really just the two superpowered in dialogue?
 Khrushchev didn't spend much time thinking about informing Castro or the East European allies . The Soviets really acted, and the Soviets didn't think about informing the Castro or East Eastern allies . And the Soviets acted very quickly .
 The expectation was that Europeans would never understand the American reaction. Because of the expectation, Europeans would not understand the U.S. reaction.
 Europeans would think that will be overreaction to the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Europeans would be surprised to see the reaction to the Cuban missiles in the U.S.
 Kennedy knows that his advisors know that they openly discussed that Europeans were living next door to the Soviet union, to Soviet missiles for years .
 Americans would get paranoid about a couple of missiles in Cuba, that was beyond European allies understanding . European allies understood that the U.S. was paranoid about the threat .
 Turks agreed to take the American ballistic nuclear tipped missiles, Jupiters . Add on top of that, there was Turks who agreed to . Take the U.S. ballistic missile technology, the Turks said .
 President Barack Obama has been criticized for his decision to withdraw from NATO . Obama said the move was a "major issue of prestige" for the U.S.
 Kennedy never told either Europeans or Turks or anybody else that she was withdrawing missiles from Turkey . So at the end, Kennedy never said that she would withdraw missiles, he says .
 You dropped a teaser at the very beginning of our conversation about the unexpected things you saw in the KGB archives that you got in Ukraine . So it was part of the secret deal, so he never got enough courage to go there and to tell them what was going on .
 CNN's John Sutter asks: What the role of the KGB was in the crisis? He asks whether the communications that you reviewed gave you any idea of how the Soviets might have better understood Kennedy than we expected .
 "I personally was very interested to see the low morale of the 40,000 Soviet troops that were kept basically underwater for this terrible crossing of the Atlantic," says CNN's John Defterios .
 The book by Fursenko and Naftali that appeared 20 years ago was really a breakthrough in terms of opening to us some key issues about the decision-making process in framing and KGB report . But what is it that you discovered in those KGB archives that we didn't know before
 "What emerges from there is actually that KGB was not a major player," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "KGB was not major player. And what emerges from that is actually what emerges"
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs had Debrynin, in Washington and he was directly talking to Bobby Kennedy . Bobby Kennedy was in Washington .
 Military intelligence had it's communication with the White House and the KGB had nothing . The KGB was left out of contact with the U.S. military intelligence .
 Khrushchev's government was very low in terms of what he was keeping a low profile . He was also very, very low on the list of things he was doing to hide .
 Putin's main question was to cut KGB in terms of the numbers, in . terms of influence, he says . So his main question is actually to cut . KGB, he writes, is to cut its influence .
 The KGB was really a secondary player in that story compared to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, compared to military intelligence, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "So KGB was ... secondary player"
 KGB was really good at reporting about what was happening around them. But what KGB really good was is reporting . The KGB was good at covering up for the world's most important issues .
 The major concern is that the term of their service would be extended beyond three years . The term of service would extend beyond three .
 I got an email from one of the readers, actually viewers of one of my presentations about the book who was saying that was also the main concern of him and his friends were in the National Guard . By the way, yesterday, I got a email from a reader who was actually viewers
 The fact that the Soviets were able to bring to Cuba 43,000 people, not 10,000 as it was. Cuba was able to have more than 40,000 in Cuba . The Soviets brought to Cuba in the 1950s, Cuba was only 10,500 people .
 The ballistic missiles were not located on the Island until it was too late and until the end of the cold war the United States never learned about the tactical missiles . The U.S. did not learn about tactical missiles until after the war .
 The KGB report explains to us how the Soviets actually were able to hide all those people . So the KGB report and explains why the Soviets hid them .
 As you said, keeping between decks, underwater, almost suffocating and prepared that people would die on the ship from appendicitis or something like that but not allowing them to go to the hospital in the Debrynin . As you .
 The irony of that particular case, thank God the guys survived, but the irony was that he didn't know where the ship was going, no one on the ship knew where he was going but to the KGB and others . No information would go .
 KGB documents help us to explain how it happened. So that is the intelligence failure on the part of the U.S. The KGB documents show that it was a failure to act as a result of an intelligence failure .
 The Soviet military experienced humiliation as a result of withdrawal from Cuba, says historian . And another major contributing factor is the understanding of the level of humiliation that the Soviet military felt .
 "They were ordered to show to the American airplanes and ships and so on to open that Windex, to show their missiles," he says . "Not withdrawal per se but the fact that they were ordered ... to show what they had there," he adds .
 The Minister of Defense Rodion Malinovsky, who was close as possible ally to Khrushchev during the crisis, was close to the former leader .
 Once Khrushchev was removed, he had to explain to his commanders how him Minister of Defense became the part of the plot against the commander in chief . He had to tell them how he had been involved .
 His explanation was that never in history of the Russian army or the Soviet army actually went through that kind of humiliation . The Russian army never had such a humiliating humiliation, he said .
 The KGB files helped them to understand that it wasn't an excuse that he was basically talking to those commanders to something that they deeply felt, felt really really humiliated and independent, by the way how it was done .
 U.S. intelligence failures contributed to the downfall of Khrushchev in 1964, author says . "There's an incredible failure of intelligence from the United States. That contributor to a degree"
 Gary Wills writes that Kennedy behaved recklessly, writes that he acted recklessly . And then on the other hand, you have Gary . Wills says that Kennedy should not have been allowed to take risks .
 The argument is that Kennedy behaved recklessly on the basis of the information that he had available. Now the argument is ... that Kennedy behave recklessly, he had known more than anything .
 The information was much worse than what he had available . But, he says, the information was better than what was available .
 It wasn't reckless to be very firm in this situation, even though it created this crisis . And perhaps the argument then is that it wasn't at all reckless . Perhaps the argument is that the government was very firm, not very reckless .
 The Bay of pigs is a reference to the Bay of Pigs . The Bay is known for its recklessness, but it is also known for the dangers of pigs .
 The Bay of Pigs situation spoiled relationship between Kennedy and military commanders to a degree that it was almost impossible to repair . Another one was that the Bay of Pics situation spoiled Kennedy and the military commanders' relationship .
 Kennedy was actually not prepared to follow our chief's advice after what happened the Bay of Pigs . "Because Kennedy was ... not prepared" to follow his advice, he said .
 It's a big question who was to be blamed there but they were in groups with each other . It's not clear if they were to blame for the deaths of the children .
 Bobby Kennedy supported the idea of the invasion of Cuba but it was the most dangerous of the possible scenarios was supported by Bobby Kennedy . Bobby Kennedy was the president of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Kennedy was recklessness during the first week when he was advocating that the strike you can call it recklessness but also it's the issue of lack of information and intelligence . So again, recklessness of Kennedy during the . first week is the issue, he says .
 Kennedy joins the blockade or the quarantine group of his advisors . The Kennedy joins a group of advisors .
 "The biggest risk is the brigade of West Berlin but he realizes that it's less of a risk than attacking, the launchpads and missiles on the Island"
 U.S. and Russia are gradually dismantling all of the arms control treaties that were put in place since the days of the Soviet union . I know you're teaching a class on the international history of the nuclear age, and that .
 Two questions: Whether you can draw lessons from your crisis as we're calling it to to give us insights or ideas about how to avert the impending us China confrontation over Taiwan? And the second one is whether you can learn from your own crisis to help us avert it?
 Ukraine is so close geographically and otherwise as Cuba was for the United States. I never thought about that in those terms, in a sense of a sense that there is this belief in that for Russia or at least in Russia, that Ukraine is .
 The difference of would it be of that as far as I know there are no plans to put American ballistic missiles in Ukraine, he says .
 The last agreement signed by Gorbachev and Reagan was gone in August of 2019 . This is a big difference despite the dismantling of the cold war era agreements despite the fact that all of those agreements had gone by now 2019 .
 "We are in the middle of the new nuclear arms race," says President Obama . "It's not the beginning, but certainly in the beginning," says Obama .
 There are parallels between Ukraine and Cuba but there are also significant differences, says CNN's John Sutter . "There are significant differences" between the two countries .
 I was surprised to learn that now or 30 or more years after the end of the cold war the nuclear world didn't change much . I have no recipes on Taiwan but I can tell you that is something that I really was surprised . I was trying to look for whether there are any
 "We still have two nuclear superpowers, and there are still the United States and they're Russian and another is Russian," CNN's John Sutter says .
 "So they really in a difficult, in a different group of . a different class," she says . "They are in a very difficult group of people," she adds. "They're in a really different class"
 Russia and the U.S. are two heavyweights in nuclear arms control . It's very difficult to get them in, get involved and engaged in the agreement to control nuclear weapons or reduce nuclear weapons .
 U.S. and Russia have nuclear relations at odds with each other . China's nuclear program is different from that of the United States' and Russia's . The United States is looking at how to deal with nuclear China .
 Nuclear politics and geopolitics sometimes can be quite autonomous from each other . We can see that, we can't see that in the 1960s but we see that certainly in '70s and '80s . The first Salt 1 Agreement was signed between Nixon and Brezhnev .
 Biden and Putin agreed to promulgate for another five years, then New Start Agreement . Despite intense relations between the U.S. and Russia, they agreed to extend it for five more years .
 This is one of the examples that the nuclear politics can be much completely independent, but can be quite autonomous from the rest of the politics. This is the one of many examples of the . nuclear politics .
 "I think that autonomy should be certainly kept in the case of American genius politics," he says . "It's a good thing for America to be proud of its genius politics"
 I was here really on the thin ice. All right, let me pull you to shore with a different question . One of the things that you point out as being very different from the situation in the 1960s is that nuclear weapons have become a bit banal.
 The same way people were in the '60s mutually assured destruction is kind of out of fashion . "Mutually assured destruction" is out of the fashion, the author says. "The same way we were ... in the 60s is out," he says .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev "both terrified of nuclear war," says author . "The one thing that comes through that you're quite thankful for is that they're both terrified of nukes"
 Even though there are tactical nuclear weapons like the thought of actually using them in conflict is almost unconscionable . The thought of using such a weapon in a war is almost unthinkable, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I'm reading what you were saying towards the end of the book correctly. And that seems not so much to be the case now in if I'm . I'm not sure what I was saying about the book, but I'm sure it's not the case that is the case .
 Fear is not just a negative thing that forces you to act irrationally, it is a positive thing . Fear is a strong believer in fear as is not a negative .
 There is a lot of that, but also something that that can be put to good use . There is also a lot that can't be done with, and it's a good start to the season .
 Despite all this missteps, despite all this misunderstanding, this recklessness on the both sides, but most learn the crucial side . And on the answer to the question of why the ... why the... despite all the missteps ... despite all these missteps . Despite this misstep,
 Khrushchev and Kennedy shared fear, fear of nuclear war, says Kennedy . "There was one thing they shared, that one thing was fear of the nuclear war," he says .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev belong to the generation that lived through Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Both men were born in the same generation .
 The biggest hydrogen bomb ever tried in the world's history, it was all there . So custom Bravo, through Castle Bravo the first hydrogen bomb which went wrong with tar bomb went wrong .
 30 years after the war, North Korea's nuclear weapons are still part of the thinking of today's political elites . The U.S. and North Korea have been at odds with each other for 30 years .
 "This is not part of the public discourse that it should be. Again, I don't know the answer, but what I know for sure is this is not the answer," CNN's John Sutter says .
 The world is in some form of a nuclear arms race at least since the 2002 when the us abandoned the anti-ballistic treaty signed by Brezhnev and Nixon back in 1972 . The world has been in an arms race since the 1972 treaty was signed .
 "There is much of a discussion of that beyond the circle of really experts in the field. So we... there, there, and I don't think that there is ... there,’s there, he says .
 "That means that the public has as a whole doesn't have this degree of a healthy fear," she says . The public has a "healthy fear" of fear of terrorism, she adds .
 There are still two nuclear super powers in the world. If I can use that term that again nuclear weapon system was that their are still . If you want to know more about nuclear weapons, contact CNN iReport.com on Twitter .
 The plans are made for the years tactical nuclear weapons in the limited war . That the plans were made for . the . years tactical . weapons in . limited war.
 A local nuclear exchange in nuclear war is possible, says historian . Experts should decide whether this is reasonable supposition, he says .
 General Eisenhower didn't believe that there is such thing as a limited nuclear war, nuclear exchange . He believed that once you're in the battle, you just throw everything you got to get where you want to be or to save yourself .
 It's living that really two experts to discuss that and to decide on that. So, again I, and this was a question mark it's a living, it's not living that .
 I'm absolutely sure that we all not experts in to date development of nuclear weapons. But one thing that I am absolutely sure . is that we are not experts. We all not . experts in . to date developing nuclear weapons .
 Davis Center celebrates 50 years of collaboration between the U.S. and Russia . Davis Center has been in the forefront of American-Russian relations .
 There's shrinking channels of communication between the U.S. and Russia, at least since 2012 . So I hope that it doesn't take it a very big precipice in order to get us back to that healthy fear that you're talking about .
 The Non-Proliferation Treaty in '68 and Salt 1 and Salt 2 in the 1970s were the beginning of the non-proliferation treaty . And that was the beginning then then the Non-Punition Treaty in the '68 .
 The North Korea-U.S. nuclear arms control talks began in the 1950s and '60s . The talks were aimed at establishing some degree of trust and establishing the degree of control of nuclear weapons .
 I really hope that we will not need another crisis of that proportion really, to return back to the negotiation table. And again, I really . hope that . we will . not need to return to the . negotiation table again, says David Cameron .
 We are really in precarious by the missile crisis situation with uncontrolled arms race, there are very few agreements that are still in place that are left . You don't know what to expect from the other side. So we are in precarious .
 The number of nuclear States in the world is limited, nine . And we are in a situation where the number of the nuclear States is quite limited, 9 .
 Kennedy was afraid that by the end of 1960s there would have been at least 20 countries with nuclear capability . If you count the countries that basically have nuclear capability and can turn it into a bond within few short months, there are 40 .
 The Cold War is a very different kind of a challenge today compared to what it was during the cold war. And that presents a very . different challenge today . The situation is very different .
 "We're both in the business of education and hopefully educating experts on Russia, Ukraine and all sorts of countries," she says . "We hope to educate experts on what Russia and Ukraine can become," she adds .
 Do you think the dangerous posed by all of these extra drivers on the nuclear road are at all mitigated by the fact that we now have at least more access to information to travel, to exchanges with people from these other countries than we did in the 1960s?
 It doesn't take 24 hours now to send a note from the Kremlin to the White House, says CNN's John Sutter . "Absolutely no. Absolutely no," he says . Sutter: "I don't think it would be easy to send anything from Russia to the U.
 The rise of cyber warfare is very dangerous sign that things can be communicated very fast but not the kind of things that come from the place that you believe are coming. The improvement of IT technology, this is something that potentially is very helpful, but also dangerous, he says .
 "We are talking about a shorter period of time that communication can take place," says President Obama . "We're talking about talking to each other," says Obama .
 "There is the potential of miscommunication also arise in as well. But there is miscommunication, there is also potential for miscommunication," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "I think this is a very important factor, as long as the countries that are there are democracies. And in terms of people traveling here and there, this is very important . This is a good thing for people to go to the U.S.
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Friday .
 If the countries are much democratic or imprisoned authoritarian, "the ability of this personal contacts on the non-governmental that will influence the position of the government is diminished," he says .
 Serhii: "As citizens as people who are not maybe directly making those decisions or influencing in those decisions that's our only channel that we have to influence to influence the governments. But it doesn't that actually we should keep trying," she says .
 "Hedgehogs" make a very important appearance several times in the book . So I highly recommend that everyone read the book because ""Hedgehog"" make several important appearances several times .
 Serhii: "Well, thank you. Thank you very much. Thank us very much" Thank you to our audience members and...
 It was a pleasure and yes, I certainly encourage everyone to buy the book and read about hedgehogs that maybe is the most interesting part of the story . The author of the book, which is published by Simon Cowan, will be appearing on BBC Radio 4 tonight at 8pm