 Kennedy and Johnson Administration SSUSH21 Analyze U.S. international and domestic policies . Includes influences on technological advancements and social changes during the Kennedy and . Johnson administrations .
 Analyze the international policies and actions taken as a response to the Cold War . Analyze U.S. involvement in Cuba and the escalation of the war in Vietnam as a result of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution . Find out what happened in Cuba, Vietnam and Vietnam .
 Fidel Castro rose to fame as the leader of the Cuban Revolution in the 1950s . Fidel Castro was a young revolutionary named Fidel Castro in Cuba . Castro is now a prominent figure in Cuba's politics .
 The revolution overthrew the Cuban government led by Fulgencio Batista in 1959 and made Castro the communist leader of the country . Castro became Castro's communist leader in 1959 .
 His government has seized control of much of the land and property in the country . His government also seized control over the country's property and land .
 President Eisenhower refused to support the new Cuban dictator and broke off diplomatic relations . Castro had ties to the Soviet Union and had seized U.S. property in Cuba . President Eisenhower broke diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 Castro allied himself with the Soviet Union with the U.S. in order to get around the world . Castro allied with Soviet Union in the wake of the collapse of Cuba in 1959 .
 Eisenhower authorized the CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) to begin training anti-Castro Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba . The CIA (CIA) began training ex-Cuban exiles to prepare for the invasion .
 President Kennedy authorized the CIA operation to continue as planned . Kennedy succeeded Eisenhower as president in 1961, he approved the operation .
 Kennedy administration was a terrible failure and a huge embarrassment for the Kennedy administration . It turned out to be a disastrous failure and was an embarrassment for Kennedy administration.
 Many around the world wondered if the young president was up to the task of defending democracy against communism . It also left many wondering if he was ready to defend democracy .
 Castro allowed the Soviets to secretly put nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles off the coast of Florida . Knowing he needed a strong ally, Castro allowed them to put the missiles there . The missiles were placed in Cuba 90 miles from Florida .
 When United States spy planes spotted these missiles in October 1962, Kennedy responded . Kennedy responded by shooting down the missiles .
 Kennedy and Johnson Administration SSUSH21 Analyze U.S. international and domestic policies . Includes influences on technological advancements and social changes during the Kennedy and . Johnson administrations authorizing a naval blockade .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles in exchange for a US pledge not to invade Cuba . The U.S. also offered the Soviets a secret assurance that it would eventually remove United States missiles stationed in Turkey as well .
 The conflict originally began during the French colonial rule in the region . The United States became involved in the 1950s by providing economic and limited military aid . The U.S. has been involved in Iraq and Afghanistan since 1991 .
 Following French withdrawal in 1954, Vietnam was divided, with communist forces in the North and a pro-Western regime in control of the South .
 In the early 1960s, U.S. involvement began to increase; it lasted until the early 1970s . Then, in the early 60s, United States involvement in the Vietnam War increased .
 The democratic government of South Vietnam, supported by the United States, battled communist North Vietnam and the Vietcong . North Vietnam was supported by South Vietnam and a military organization called the Viet Cong .
 U.S. policymakers believed that if Vietnam came to be ruled by a communist government, communism would spread throughout Southeast Asia and perhaps beyond . United States policymakers believed if Vietnam became a communist regime, Communism would spread .
 Two U.S. destroyers stationed in the Gulf of Tonkin in Vietnam radioed that they had been fired upon by North Vietnamese forces . The incident occurred in early August 1964 .
 President Johnson requested permission from the United States Congress to increase the U.S. military presence in Indochina . Johnson requested the permission from Congress .
 On August 7, 1964, Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, authorizing President Johnson to take any measures he believed were necessary . The resolution was passed to promote the maintenance of international peace in Southeast Asia .
 This resolution became the legal basis for the Johnson and Nixon Administration’s prosecution of the Vietnam War . The resolution was passed by Congress in 1964 and 1965 .
 I didn't want to believe it at first-people protesting against us when we were putting our lives on the line for our country . I didn’t want to . believe it . ‘People protesting against . us when [people] were putting their lives on . the line
 Many of us would not be coming back and many others would be wounded or maimed. Many of them would not have been coming back. Many would be maiming or dying. Many were not coming back . Many would have been killed or injured in the attack .
 It was the end of whatever belief I'd still had in what I’d done in Vietnam, he says . 'It was the death of my life,' he says of Vietnam .
 Now I wanted to know what I had lost my legs for, and why others had gone at all . Now I had to find out what I'd done with my legs and why I'd gone .
 The Vietcong continually frustrated U.S. forces with its ability to use the region’s thick jungles to conduct guerrilla warfare . Ron Kovic, born on the Fourth of July, was born on July 4 .
 In 1968, the Vietcong and North Vietnamese army started the eight-month-long Tet Offensive . Tet Offensive was the start of the eight month-long offensive .
 It was the Vietcong’s largest and most damaging campaign of the entire war . The Vietcong's largest campaign was the most damaging of the war. It was .
 The Tet Offensive failed to achieve its goal of driving the Americans out of Vietnam . It did lead many people in the United States to question why Johnson had told them America was winning the war .
 Some Americans who had been quiet up until then raised their voices in protest against the war . This led some Americans to raise their voices against the Vietnam War .
 Many college campuses were home to groups formed to protest U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Groups formed in response to American involvement in the Vietnam War .
 The goals of these groups differed, but most favored ending the draft and removing all U.S. troops from Vietnam . The Vietnam draft drafters wanted to end the draft .
 Kennedy and Johnson Administration SSUSH21 Analyze U.S. international and domestic policies . Includes influences on technological advancements and social changes during the Kennedy and . Johnson administrations .
 Connect major domestic issues to their social effects including the passage of civil rights legislation following the assassination of John F Kennedy, and Johnson’s Great Society . Connect domestic issues with the social effects of their social impact .
 On November 22, 1963, an assassin by the name of Lee Harvey Oswald shot and killed the president in Dallas, Texas . Oswald shot the president as he rode in an open car with the first lady and the governor of Texas .
 The death of the young president left the nation stunned and in mourning . The nation was left stunned and mourning .
 The new president, Lyndon B Johnson, strongly urged the House and Senate to pass the civil rights legislation proposed by Kennedy in his honor . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 President Johnson pushed through the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . Despite fierce opposition from southern members of Congress .
 The act prohibited segregation in public accommodations and discrimination in education and employment . The act was passed by Congress in 1964 .
 64 was also the year that the states ratified the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution . It gave the president the power to enforce the new law .
 This amendment served to protect African Americans' voting rights by making the poll tax illegal . The amendment was passed by Congress in 1964 .
 Protesters in Selma, Alabama decided to march 50 miles to the state's capital in Montgomery, Alabama . That year, the Selma march brought national attention to the cause of civil rights . Protesters marched 50 miles from Selma to Montgomery to Montgomery .
 Televised scenes of the violence shocked people nationwide and increased support for the civil rights movement . The violence was the first time people had seen such violence in the U.S.
 The event became known as Bloody Sunday and was called an American tragedy by President Johnson . President Johnson called it a tragedy by calling it 'American tragedy'
 Thousands of whites and blacks descended on Selma to continue the march . Thousands of white and black people marched on the march in Selma, Alabama .
 King addressed a rally of nearly 40,000 people in front of the capitol building in Montgomery . Four days later, they arrived in Montgomery, Alabama, for a rally .
 President Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act of 1965 on August 6, 1965 . The act was signed by President Johnson in 1965 .
 It authorized the president to suspend literacy tests for voter registration and send federal officials to register voters in the event that county officials failed to do so .
 Kennedy and Johnson Administration SSUSH21 . Analyze U.S. international and domestic policies . Includes influences on technological advancements and social changes during the Kennedy . administrations .
 Following John Kennedy's assassination, Lyndon Johnson became the country's thirty-sixth president . This new law led to a huge increase in African American voter registration .
 In addition to pushing Kennedy's proposed civil rights legislation through Congress, Johnson also set out to implement what he called the Great Society .
 Johnson was more gifted at political dealings and had more success pushing his programs through Congress than his predecessor . Johnson was the Democratic leader in the Senate . He was more experienced in Washington than his predecessors .
 VISTA mobilized volunteers to work in poorer communities within the United States . VISTA is a non-profit organization that works in poorer areas of the U.S.
 It also established Job Corps for the purpose of educating and training inner city youth for gainful employment . Job Corps was established for educating inner-city youth for employment .
 HUD oversees housing needs, rehabilitates urban communities, and provides rent assistance to those living in low-income housing . HUD is responsible for housing needs and rehabilitation needs .
 It was initially headed by Robert Weaver, the first African American ever appointed to a presidential cabinet . It was also the first cabinet member to be appointed to the cabinet .
 Medicare and Medicaid were two of Johnson's most important innovations . Medicare, Medicaid and Medicaid are two of the most important health care innovations .
 Medicare is a program funded by the federal government and meant to provide medical coverage for the elderly . Medicare is funded by federal government .
 Medicaid is health care partially funded by the federal government and partially by the states . Meanwhile, Medicaid is funded by state and federal governments . Medicaid is a form of form of health care funded by states and federal government .
 While the Great Society had noble intentions and some successes, it also required large amounts of money . The Great Society required a large amount of money to build on .
 Many came to resent these programs because of what they saw as excessive costs and limited returns . Many saw these programs as too costly and ineffective . The programs are now being rolled out across the world .
 Political conservatism began to increase towards the latter half of the 1960s . As a result, political conservatism increased towards the end of the decade .