 The CIA had detailed intelligence identifying Soviet nuclear missile installations under construction on the island of Cuba, some ninety miles off the Florida coast . The night before, the CIA had produced detailed intelligence .
 His strategy proved successful; Soviets withdrew the missiles end nuclear war was averted . His strategy was successful; the Soviets withdrew their missiles .
 Soviets, Cubans, Americans learned how close the world had come to a nuclear conflagration . Three decades later, however, Soviets and Cubans learned about the threat .
 Thirty-six years after the Cuban missile crisis, new and important information about the crisis continues to emerge .
 Despite the passage of time, the U.S. government refused to declassify these documents, citing reasons of national security . The United States refused to release them, citing national security reasons .
 The papers from all the national security agencies involved were scattered throughout the executive branch . In the aftermath of the missile crisis, all the papers were scattered .
 This mini-archive of approximately three thousand records, totaling ten thousand pages in all, included contingency plans, military scenarios, minutes of Kennedy's Executive Committee, intelligence reports, analyses, chronologies, cables, and other highly sensitive State Department documents on the missile crisis .
 In April 1987, the National Security Archive filed a series of FOIA requests for these files . The Archive says the files were released in response to a FOIA request from the government .
 Archive has continued to pursue and obtain declassification of hundreds of important State, Defense, CIA, and NSC documents relating to the Cuban missile crisis . Since the publication of that collection in 1990, the Archive continues to pursue declassification .
 The availability of previously classified material has enabled scholars both to challenge the conventional wisdom and to revise long-standing historical interpretations of the events that took place before, during, and after October 1962 .
 Academic works on the crisis were dominated by Graham Allison's seminal book, Essence of Decision, which drew heavily on official memoirs to cast the episode as the ""classic"" model of crisis management .
 The declassified U.S. records have allowed scholars to highlight the inevitable distortions, limitations, and inaccuracies in the narratives of former Kennedy administration officials .
 The result was a new body of information that provides a much fuller picture of events . It fundamentally alters how the scope and meaning of the missile crisis has been and will be considered .
 A series of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev were declassified and released to the National Security Archive in 1992 . The letters show that the crisis lasted through late November of 1962, at the very least .
 New revelations about the missile crisis have also undermined its image as a paradigm of successful crisis management .
 This combination of unauthorized military and covert actions, misinterpreted military and political signals, and significant failures in intelligence, threatened to set a war in motion . This calls into question the assumption that severe international crises can, in fact, be managed at all, at all .
 The new documentation sheds light on what is perhaps the most important puzzle of the missile crisis, namely, what motivated the Soviets to deploy nuclear weapons in Cuba . New documentation, combined with testimony by Soviet and Cuban officials, also sheds light .
 A declassified military history of the Jupiter system reveals that the rockets became operational in April 1962 . Khrushchev's proposal, made the very same month, to deploy similar weapons in Cuba was made the same month .
 Documents lend credence to Khrushchev's claim that a primary Soviet motivation was the defense of Cuba against a U.S. invasion . In addition to the documents, the documents also shed light on the Soviet motivation .
 U.S. officials preferred free rein to intervene in Cuba over an international accord that would settle the Cuban missile crisis . In the end, the United States opted for free rein over a deal that settled the Cuban crisis .
 This book is an effort to tell the story of the Cuban missile crisis through a selection from the many documents that were generated by these extraordinary events . This book includes a selection of the documents generated by the events .
 National Security Archive's holdings of over four thousand documents, totaling some eighteen thousand pages . Those who want to study the crisis further are urged to consult the comprehensive bibliography included in this volume .
 Important documents generated by the Soviet and Cuban governments are also included in the book .
 Those readers who prefer to start with a comprehensive overview of events are urged to read the chronology at the back of the book in order to place the individual documents in the broader context .
 Documents do not present a complete picture of the extraordinary events surrounding the missile crisis . Admittedly, the documents reproduced here do not give a complete account of the events .
 U.S., Soviet, Cuban historians will be unable to present anything approximating a full account of the crisis, historian says . Until these nations' archives are opened to the public, historians will not be able to present an accurate account .
 There is more than enough accessible information to advance our collective education and sustain an ongoing discussion on how to prevent similar confrontations in the future . Public discourse on the Cuban missile crisis, however, need not wait .
 The requests were filed in the name of Professor Philip Brenner, a Cuba specialist and member of the Archive advisory board .