 The Soviets had installed nuclear missile silos in Cuba, just 90 miles off the coast of the U.S. The Soviets installed nuclear missiles in Cuba . Cuba was 90 miles from the coast .
 United States armed forces were put at their highest state of readiness . United States military was put at the highest level of readiness in recent weeks .
 Soviet field commanders in Cuba were authorized to use nuclear weapons if invaded by the United States . The fate of millions literally hinged on the ability of two men, John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev, to reach a compromise .
 Missiles in Cuba would double the soviet strategic arsenal and discourage a potential U.S. attack against the Soviet Union . Missiles would also discourage a possible United States attack against Soviet Union.
 For the U.S. the crisis began on October 15, 1962 when our planes spotted Soviet missile silos under construction . The crisis began with the discovery of Soviet missiles under construction in 1962 .
 U.S. airplanes with special cameras documented they did exist . They did exist. United States airplanes . They were filmed in the United States .
 Kennedy announced that an attack by Cuba would be considered an attack on the Soviet Union . Kennedy said an attack would be seen as a Soviet attack by the United States .
 Readiness level was raised to DEFCON 2 and the quarantine line was pulled back on October 25th . The quarantine line has been pulled back from the quarantines .
 Khrushchev proposed removing the Soviet missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . The missiles would be removed if the United States promised to not invade Cuba. Khrushche proposed removing them if the . United States agreed to remove them .
 On the same day Khrushchev sent a letter demanding removal of our nuclear missile in Turkey in exchange for the removal of their nuclear weapons in Cuba . The letter was sent to the Soviets in the same week as the letter demanded removal of Turkey's nuclear missile .
 Tensions began to ease when Khrushchev announced he would remove the missiles on October 28th . Tensions were eased when the missiles were removed from the Soviet Union .
 The United States had agreed to discuss removal of their missiles in Turkey only after the missiles were taken out of Cuba . The U.S. agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba only after they were removed from Turkey .
 The key players in the Cuban missile crisis were John Kennedy, Fidel Castro, and Nikita Khrushchev . The Soviets then withdrew the missiles and returned them to the Soviet Union .
 John Kennedy was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, on May 29, 1917 . He was a descendent of Irish Catholics who had immigrated to America in the previous century .