 Cuba openly aligns itself with the Soviet Union and their policies . December 19, 1960 Cuba openly aligned itself with Soviet Union . Cuba openly allied with the U.S. and its policies .
 January 3, 1961 The United States terminates diplomatic and consular relation with Cuba . The U.S. ends diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1961 . Cuba was Cuba's only ally in Cuba .
 President Kennedy pledges the U.S. will not intervene militarily to overthrow Castro . April 12, 1961 President Kennedy pledged the United States would not intervene in the overthrow of Castro .
 Backed by the U.S., a group of Cuban exiles invades Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in an attempt to trigger an anti-Castro rebellion . April 17, 1961, was the first invasion of Cuba by Cuban ex-Cubans .
 The invasion fails and more than a thousand Cuban rebels are captured by Castro's forces . More than 1,000 Cuban rebels were captured in the failed invasion .
 Castro announces that Cuba is taking measures that would make any direct U.S. attack on Cuba the equivalent of a world war . July 27, 1962, Castro says any direct United States attack would be equivalent to a war . Castro: "Any direct US attack against Cuba would be the
 He claims that the U.S.R. has invested greatly in helping defend his country . He also claims that he has been helped by the United States.
 Senator Kenneth Keating tells the Senate that there is evidence of Soviet missile installations in Cuba . August 31, 1962 Senator Keating told the Senate there was evidence that there were missile installations .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko warns that an American attack on Cuba could mean war with the Soviet Union . September 11, 1962 In a speech to the UN, Soviet foreign minister Andrei
 Kennedy orders a U-2 reconnaissance flight over western Cuba, delayed by bad weather until the 14th October 9, 1962 .
 October 10, 1962 Senator Keating charges that six intermediate-range ballistic missile bases are being constructed in Cuba . October 10th, 1962, Senator Keating claims that six intermediate-range missile bases were being constructed .
 A U-2 flying over western Cuba discovers missile sites . October 14, 1962 . U.2 flew over Cuba to find missile sites in 1962 .
 Photographs obtained by this flight provide hard evidence that Soviets have missiles in Cuba . Photos obtained from this flight show hard evidence of Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
 National Photographic Intelligence Center reviews photos taken during the U.S. Air Force flight and identifies objects similar to MRBM components . October 15, 1962 .
 McGeorge Bundy decides after hearing about the discovery of missiles in Cuba not to inform the president until the next day . Bundy decides not to tell the president that the missiles were in Cuba . Bundy: "I'm not going to lie to the president, but I'm going to tell him
 McNamara is shown the photographic evidence of the MRBMs at San Cristobal . McNamara was shown the photographs of the project at the time .
 At that meeting Kennedy and his advisors discuss possible diplomatic and military courses of action . Kennedy and advisers discuss possible military and diplomatic options .
 Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen meet the President at the airport and fill him in on what he had missed during that day's deliberations . Robert Kennedy was traveling to Washington, D.C. to meet with the President .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff and especially the Air Force strongly argue for an air strike . Ex-COMM discussed the possibility of a strike in Syria .
 After another U-2 flight on the night of the 17th, the military discoveres intermediate range SS-5 nuclear missiles . The U.S. military discovered the missiles in the U.2 flight .
 October 19, 1962 Kennedy departs Washington for scheduled campaign speeches in Cleveland and the West Coast . Kennedy was traveling to Cleveland, Cleveland, and West Coast for scheduled speeches .
 The full operation is reviewed and approved, and the President's television address is scheduled for the next evening . President's TV address will be broadcast the following evening .
 Kennedy is told by General Maxwell Taylor that an air strike could not guarantee to destroy all Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy is also told that a strike would not be able to destroy the Soviet missiles . Kennedy was in Cuba in 1962 when he visited Cuba .
 Another U-2 flight that day reveals bombers and Migs being assembled and cruise missile sites being built on Cuba's northern shore . Cruise missile sites were also being built .
 October 22, 1962 Congressional leaders assemble at the White House for a meeting with Kennedy . Kennedy was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 They are shown the photographic evidence of the Soviet missile installations . They were shown the photographs of the installations .
 The President addresses the nation in a televised speech, announcing the presence of offensive missile sites in Cuba . The President makes the announcement during a televised address .
 Kennedy orders six Crusader jets to fly a low level reconnaissance mission . October 23, 1962, Kennedy orders a low-level reconnaissance mission on a mission .
 Organization of American States unanimously approves of quarantine against Cuba . Organization of America approves of the quarantine . Cuba has been accused of spreading a deadly virus in Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy sends Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to talk with Ambassador Dobrynin . President Kennedy was in the midst of a crisis in the Soviet Union .
 Soviet ships en route to Cuba with questionable cargo either slow down or reverse course except one . October 24, 1962 Soviet ships on Cuban trip were intercepted by Soviet ships carrying questionable cargo .
 October 25, 1962 Kennedy sends a letter to Khrushchev laying the responsibility for the crisis on the Soviet Union . Kennedy sends the letter laying the blame for the collapse of the USSR .
 EX-COMM discusses a proposal to withdraw U.S. missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The proposal was discussed in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis . Ex-comm discussed the proposal in a bid to withdraw the missiles in Turkey from
 The Soviet ship Marucla is cleared through the quarantine . The ship was cleared through a quarantine .
 Kennedy says quarantine alone can not force the Soviet government to remove offensive weapons from Cuba . Kennedy believes quarantine alone will not force Russia to remove its offensive weapons . Kennedy says he believes the quarantine alone won't force Cuba to remove weapons .
 A CIA report from that morning states that there was no halt in progress in the development of the missile sites . Another reconnaissance flight reveals that the Soviets were also attempting to camouflage the missiles .
 Aleksandr Fomin, known to be the KGB station chief in Washington, requests a meeting with ABC News correspondent John Scali . Fomin was known to have worked for the KGB in Washington .
 Fomin proposes dismantling of Soviet bases under U.N. supervision in exchange for a public pledge from the United States not to invade Cuba . Fomin: U.S. should pledge not to attack Cuba .
 Khrushchev sends another letter to Kennedy proposing removing his missiles if Kennedy would publicly announce never to invade Cuba . Kennedy refused to remove the missiles if he would announce he would never invade Cuba again . Kennedy would have removed the missiles in exchange for an agreement to remove them .
 Plans for U.S. airstrikes on missiles in Cuba and for an invasion of Cuba go forward go forward . Plans for United States airstrikes on the missiles are still in place . The Cuban government has been accused of attacking Cuban missiles .
 Khrushchev proposes a public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. missiles in Turkey . The deal was rejected by the United States and the Soviets .
 Major Rudolf Anderson was the pilot of an American U-2 shot down over Cuba . Major Anderson was killed in the attack . The pilot was killed by the U.2 in Cuba .
 U-2 accidentally strays into Soviet airspace near Alaska nearly being intercepted by Soviet fighters . U.2 was flying over the Soviet Union in the early hours of the day .
 Dobrynin and Kennedy meet to discuss price of removing missiles from Cuba . Robert Kennedy and Robert Kennedy discuss removing the missiles from the country .
 Kennedy writes Khrushchev a letter stating that he will make a statement that the U.S. will not invade Cuba if the United States removes the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy: "The United States won't invade Cuba" Kennedy: The United States would not invade if the missiles were
 RFK secretly tells Dobrynin to tell Khrushchev that the U.S. would remove its missiles from Turkey within five months . But that could not be part of the formal agreement that would be announced to the world . RFK: The United States would remove the missiles from
 October 28, 1962 Khrushchev announces over Radio Moscow that he has agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba . October 28 was 1962 . October 29, 1962, Khrushchen announced that he had agreed to pull the missiles out of Cuba .