 He didn't live to see the impact of his presidency, or to fulfill all he set out to accomplish when he entered the White House in 1961 . He didn&#8217;t live to be president, but to fulfill his ambitions .
 Since his death in 1963, scholars and writers have clashed over everything from his responsibility for the U.S. military to his role in Vietnam . Some argue that Kennedy stifled the Civil Rights Movement, others argue that he expedited its progress .
 Kennedy &#8217;s presidency was one of the most remarkable aspects of his presidency . Other remarkable aspects, however, lent themselves to consensus, he says .
 He was the first Catholic president and the youngest elected president elected . He was different in spirit than those who preceded him .
 Kennedy brought a dose of youthfulness and energy to the job that captivated the nation . He was the oldest president elected since James Buchanan in 1857 . Despite his early stumbles, Kennedy was extraordinarily popular .
 Kennedy had his hands in some of the most significant events of the 20th century . As a consequence of timing too, Kennedy had to be timing too . Kennedy was a major figure in the world's history .
 JFK's abridged time in the White House included space exploration and the Bay of Pigs . JFK's ambitious plan to send man to the moon also included his ambitious plan for space exploration .
 President Kennedy was in office less than three years before his tenure came to an abrupt and bloody end .
 Kennedy came into office in 1961 at age 43, the youngest president ever to take office . Kennedy was the first Catholic president and youngest president of the United States .
 Kennedy brought a dose of youthfulness and energy to the job . Succeeded Dwight Eisenhower, the oldest president elected since James Buchanan in 1857 .
 Kennedy inherited Cold War tensions, a sluggish economy and simmering social unrest . He was the first peacetime president in more than two decades . Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 In his inaugural address, Kennedy acknowledged the profound challenges that lay ahead . Kennedy acknowledges the challenges of the nation's future .
 Kennedy took a responsibility that led him into perhaps the biggest blunder of his presidency . It was a responsibility Kennedy took to heart and one that quickly led him to perhaps the worst blunder .
 Just four months into his first term, Kennedy signed off on a plan to oust Cuban leader Fidel Castro . Kennedy's first term was the first term of his presidency .
 The U.S. provided training and supplies to Cuban exiles who were supposed to swiftly invade Cuba . The Bay of Pigs was supposed to be a swift invasion of Cuba and topple its communist leader .
 The rebels found themselves outgunned and lacking critical intelligence . Instead, the rebels were outgunted and lacked critical intelligence. Instead, they were left with a lack of resources .
 Their surrender was an embarrassment to Kennedy and a blemish on his early record in office . The surrender of the Soviet Union is an embarrassment for Kennedy .
 The following month he delivered an unexpected State of the Union address, recalibrating in the wake of his failure .
 Kennedy laid out a vision of using aid and other peaceful measures to stanch the spread of communism . In the speech, which he said was warranted by the ""extraordinary challenge" of upholding freedom .
 The speech was not a turning point, but his success, months later, in steering the United States from the brink of nuclear war, certainly was . Kennedy managed to strike a deal with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev that prevented the installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles
 The Soviets nixed their plan in exchange for the United State’s removal of missiles from Turkey . The U.S. removed the missiles in exchange with the removal of them .
 Kennedy's ability to appear cool and level-headed amid such a high-stakes crisis bolstered his image on the international stage . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared," says Kennedy .
 Kennedy was also navigating the growing conflict in Laos and Vietnam, which were falling into the sphere of communist influence .
 President Obama aimed for a measured approach, boosting U.S. aid and military presence in the region, without entering United States forces into combat . He aimed for the measured approach to the region .
 “We can help them ... but they have to win it, the people of Vietnam against the Communists,” he said . He also did not believe the United States should withdraw from Vietnam .
 On the domestic front, Kennedy found himself the target of criticism from both civil rights proponents and segregationists . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1964 .
 He ran on a pro-civil rights platform, once elected, he was reluctant to push too hard or early for legislation that would dismantle the country's system of racial inequality .
 Civil rights leaders were particularly critical of Kennedy’s appointment of southern conservatives to federal judgeships . Kennedy also failed to introduce a civil rights bill early in his presidency, critics say .
 Kennedy ordered federal marshals to escort a black student, James Meredith, into the school amid massive protests that later turned violent . The incident occurred in the wake of massive protests against Meredith .
 He submitted a civil rights bill toward the end of 1963 but died before its passage . He finally submitted the bill in 1963 but it was never passed .
 He did live long enough, however, to see other significant goals accomplished . He died long enough to see some of those goals realized .
 Kennedy died before Neil Armstrong and the Apollo 11 crew landed on the moon . Kennedy did live to see John Glenn orbit the earth, but he died before he did .
 He was able to watch the rapid development of the Peace Corp., which he established by executive order in 1961 . The Peace Corp. was established in 1961 by President Nixon .
 Hundreds of Americans traveled to developing countries with Kennedy's vision of peace, friendship and service . Kennedy consistently hammered in his major addresses .
 In his final speech, Kennedy was to tout America’s strength, but emphasize that strength should only be used in the pursuit of peace . Kennedy was never able to deliver the speech, which he never had the chance to deliver .