 Books typically address how Kennedy administration deftly, without triggering a nuclear war, forced Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev ‘to blink’ and remove the missiles from the Caribbean island .
 Little has been explored in terms of the Soviet and Cuban perspectives of events during the Soviet-Cuban era . Little has yet been known about how it impacted relations between the Cuban leader Fidel Castro and Kremlin .
 The author presents a narrative based on the experiences of his father, the Soviet diplomat Anastas Mikoyan . The author's father dealt with Castro before, during and after the crisis .
 The author, who served as his father’s secretary, was a first-hand witness to some of the events described in the book . In addition to the author, the author served as the author's secretary .
 These three elements give an insight into the Soviet and Cuban perspective of the crisis that has never been presented to an English-speaking audience . The three elements of the Soviet-Cuban perspective will be presented to English-language audiences . The film will be shown to an American audience .
 Chapter two introduces the Cuban Revolution and explains how ‘anti-American sentiments grew’ Chapter two explains how anti-American sentiment grew . ‘In 1959-60 the North Americans prepared our nation for socialism’
 Castro turned to the Soviet Union as relations with the U.S. soured . Castro's relationship with the United States has soured in recent years .
 Originally, the Soviets were going to quietly allow the tactical nuclear weapons to remain on the island because they were sceptical of the U.S. pledge to not invade Cuba .
 Castro's reckless talk, erratic behaviour and unpredictability prompted Mikoyan to conclude that prudence required their removal . Unfortunately for Castro, his reckless talk and erratic behaviour required his removal as well .
 Mikoyan’s diplomatic skills prevented a major rupture from occurring . This action on the part of Moscow strained relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union, but it did not .
 The author is to be credited with providing a fuller picture of the crisis, but it should be pointed out that this was made possible only due to the Soviet Union's demise .
 The documents section of the work come from Sergo Mikoyan’s own personal archives and the Russian Foreign Ministry Archive . The documents sections come from the personal archives of the Russian diplomat .
 The November Soviet-Cuban Crisis of 1962 only covers the November crisis of 1962, not the early Soviet-Cuba relationships or the October US-Soviet crisis . They only cover, however, the November Soviet crisis .
 The transcripts, telegrams, and official documents are insightful and show the difficulty of Anastas Mikoyan's task in convincing Castro that the USSR’s decisions were the correct ones . Nonetheless, the transcripts and documents show that the Soviet Union's decision was not the correct