 But Here Was Cuba reminds us how a world-ending Armageddon scenario came terrifyingly close to happening in real life . The film was shot in Havana, Cuba, in 1959 .
 Here Was Cuba is a classy piece of work with solid appeal as both history lesson and gripping true-story thriller . The film is premiering this week at Sheffield Doc/Fest in the UK .
 An angry JFK responded with a tense naval blockade, while military hawks on both sides prepared for all-out war . JFK responded to the blockade with an angry response .
 The guest list of first-hand commentators is also impressive, from White House insiders to elderly KGB generals and high-ranking Cuban communists .
 The late Kennedy advisor Ted Sorensen, in one of his last interviews, recalls the pressure-cooker mood inside the Oval Office . Ted's last interview was with the late Kennedy adviser .
 Sergei Khrushchev, son of the former Soviet leader, unpacks his father’s ambivalent feelings towards the “Evil Empire” of America . Sergei Khushchev: "Evil Empire" of America is the reason for the "evil Empire"
 Most moving is the anguished testimony of Alexay Ryapenko, a Russian army veteran who shot down Rudy Anderson . The only military fatality of the crisis was the USAF spy-plane pilot Rudy Anderson.
 The Top Celebrity Political Twitter Commentators Subtitled “a cautionary tale,” Here Was Cuba overreaches a little in its closing stages . The filmmakers attempt to draw parallels with 21st-century Iran, North Korea and Israel .
 The film is a pleasingly serious and thoughtful documentary with a handsome visual aesthetic . It's intercutting tinted monochrome archive clips of atomic-age devastation with footage of contemporary Washington, Moscow and Havana .
 Ray Harman’s moody, throbbing score also helps amplify the ever-present sense of impending doom . The film is set to be released in cinemas on May 1 .
 This tension is skillfully sustained throughout, given that everybody watching knows the ultimately peaceful outcome of this real-life end-of-the-world thriller .
 The Hollywood Reporter is a part of Penske Media Corporation . Watch the full interview with iReporters below .