 We choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they're hard . We are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one which we intend to win, and the others, too. We choose
 The Bay of Pigs Invasion was an unsuccessful attempt by U.S.-backed Cuban exiles to overthrow the government of the Cuban dictator Fidel Castro . The invasion was unsuccessful .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961 . Increasing friction between the U.S. government and Castro's leftist regime led to the break-off of diplomatic relations .
 Even before that, the Central Intelligence Agency had been training anti-revolutionary Cuban exiles for a possible invasion .
 The invasion plan was approved by Eisenhower's successor,John F Kennedy . Kennedy approved the invasion plan .
 On April 17, 1961 about 1300 exiles, armed with U.S. weapons, landed at the Bahía de Cochinos (Bay of Pigs) on the southern coast of Cuba . The Bay of Pigs was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 Hoping to find support from the local population, they intended to cross the island to Havana . Hoped to cross to Havana, the group planned to cross island to Cuba .
 It was evident from the first hours of fighting, however, that the exiles were likely to lose . The exiles are expected to lose, but the fight is unlikely to last long .
 President Kennedy had the option of using the U.S. Air Force against the Cubans but decided against it . President Kennedy also considered using the United States Air Force .
 By the time the fighting ended on April 19, 90 exiles had been killed and the rest had been taken as prisoners . By the end of the fighting, the rest of the exiles were taken as prisoner .
 The failure of the invasion seriously embarrassed the young Kennedy administration . It was the first time the U.S. government had tried to invade the Soviet Union .
 Some critics blamed Kennedy for not giving it adequate support and others for allowing it to take place at all . Some critics say Kennedy did not give adequate support for the event .
 The invasion made Castro wary of the United States . He was convinced that the Americans would try to take over the island again . Castro was also convinced that he would never be allowed to leave the island .
 From the Bay of Pigs on, Castro had an increased fear of a U.S. incursion on Cuban soil . Castro had a fear of an incursion from the United States . Castro feared an invasion of Cuba .
 The New Look policy, though initially useful, quickly became obsolete with the introduction of Intercontinental Delivery Systems, undermined the credibility of a deterrence threat . The policy was initially useful but became obsolete .
 The cornerstone of U.S. and European defense strategy was then threatened as the United States could no longer rely on nuclear threats to provide security for it and its allies . "The cornerstone of United States and European Defense strategy was threatened"
 Improvements in communication and transportation meant U.S. forces could be deployed more effectively, quickly and flexibly than before .
 Advisers persuaded Kennedy that having multiple options would allow the president to apply the appropriate amount of force at the right place without risking escalation or losing alternatives .
 U.S. would now have low-intensity options and therefore would be more likely to use them, rather than massive retaliation's all-or-nothing options . This would improve credibility for deterrence as the United States would have more options .
 Flexible Response was implemented to develop several options across the spectrum of warfare, other than the nuclear option, for quickly dealing with enemy aggression . Flexible response was developed in response to the threat posed by the U.S. government .
 Half the Strategic Air Command force put on permanent alert status . The survivability of the retaliatory capability was stressed, leading to the diversification of the strategic force .
 Kennedy doctrine did not include the ability to fight nuclear wars because of the idea that it would undermine deterrence was technologically unworkable, would fuel the arms race, and was not politically feasible . The Kennedy doctrine was not included in the Kennedy doctrine .
 Importance was also placed on counterinsurgency and the development of unconventional military forces . Unconventional tactics, and “civic action” programs like the Peace Corp. were also important .
 President John F Kennedy and Nikita Kruschev saved the lives of Nikita Nikita and President Nikita F. F. Kennedy .
 Nikita Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba in late April 1962 . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 Castro felt a second attack was inevitable since the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 . Castro felt the second attack on Cuba was inevitable after the failed invasion .
 The crisis began on October 15, 1962 when reconnaissance photos revealed Soviet missiles under construction in Cuba . For the U.S., the crisis began with reconnaissance photos of Soviet missiles .
 On October 22, Kennedy announced the discovery of the missile installations to the public and his decision to quarantine the island . Kennedy announced that he had quarantined the island after the discovery .
 He proposed removing Soviet missiles and personnel if the U.S. would guarantee not to invade Cuba . He proposed removal of Soviet missiles in exchange for a guarantee of not invading Cuba . The proposal was rejected .
 Khrushchev demanded the removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba . A U-2 was shot down over Cuba and EX-COMM received a second letter from Khrushche . A second letter was sent from the Soviet leader .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy suggested ignoring the second letter and contacted Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to tell him of the U.S. agreement with the first . Robert F. Kennedy: "I'm not going to let it happen, I'm going to make it happen"
 Further negotiations were held to implement the October 28 agreement . U.S. demanded that Soviet light bombers be removed from Cuba, and specifying the exact form and conditions of United States assurances .