 Soviet freighter Omsk arrives in Cuba with the first shipment of MRBMs . The first shipment arrived in the Soviet Union's first ever shipment .
 Air Force Major Richard S Heyser returns with photos of Soviet nuclear missiles being transported in Cuba . For the first time in two weeks the clouds don't block the view .
 Photos shot over Cuba are analyzed at the National Photographic Intelligence Center . The photos were taken over Cuba .
 U.S. Ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, sends a letter to President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 The count of missiles believed to be stationed in Cuba stands at 40 IRBMs . The public still does not know about the missiles .
 Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko in the White House . Kennedy does not reveal that he is aware of the missile build up in Cuba . Kennedy was not aware of Soviet missile build-up .
 General Walter Sweeney, commander-in-chief of the Tactical Air Command, tells President Kennedy that no air strike will destroy all the missiles in Cuba . General Sweeney: No air strike would destroy all of the missiles .
 President Kennedy sends the first of a series of letters to Khrushchev . President Kennedy sent the first letter to the Soviet Union leader .
 Fidel Castro announces a general mobilization and war alert throughout Cuba . Fidel Castro declares war alert in Cuba . Castro: "I'm going to go to war"
 President Kennedy broadcasts a live message to the nation and the world . "This Government, as promised, has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military buildup on the island of Cuba," he said .
 Evidence has established the fact that a series of offensive missiles sites is now in preparation of that imprisoned island . Within the past week, unmistakable evidence has established that the . evidence that a number of offensive missile sites are now in readiness .
 President Kennedy responds in another letter that the crisis is the fault of Moscow . Kharushchev sends another letter to President Kennedy . Kennedy responds to the letter saying the crisis was Moscow's fault .
 The Organization of American States approves a resolution calling for the removal of the missiles by unanimous vote . President Kennedy is not aware of the nuclear test until after the fact .
 General Thomas Power, commander-in-chief of the Strategic Air Command, raises the alert level to DefCon 2 without approval from President Kennedy . President Kennedy approved the action without approval .
 Construction on missile sites in Cuba continues at an accelerated pace . Construction on the missile sites continues at a rapid pace .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson presents evidence at the United Nations . The evidence was presented at a hearing in New York City .
 Walter Lippmann suggests a Cuba-Turkey missile trade . He says it could be possible to buy missiles from Turkey in exchange for Cuban missiles .
 An offer comes through ""an old, trusted friend"" of Khrushchev through ABC reporter John Scali . Castro authorizes Cuba's air defense forces to fire on all American aircraft within range .
 Castro authorizes Cuba's air-defense forces to fire on all American aircraft within range . Castro also authorizes Cuban air defense forces to attack U.S. aircraft in Cuba's airspace .
 Fidel Castro sends a letter to Khrushchev, who mistakenly interprets it as an appeal for a Soviet nuclear first-strike . Castro's letter was seen as a request for a nuclear first strike . Khushchev thought it was an appeal to Castro for a military strike .
 Another letter from Khrushchev emerges, adding the removal of missiles from Turkey as a condition, and signaling a possible political coup in the Soviet Union . The letter adds that removing missiles would be a condition for a coup .
 President Kennedy decides to accept the October 26 letter and ""pretend"" the October 27 letter doesn't exist . President Kennedy accepts the letter and "pretend" the letter didn't exist.
 The U.S. will deny such a claim if it is publicized, he says . He adds that the United States will deny it if it's publicized . The claim will not be publicized .
 Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F Dobrynin sent a cable to the Soviet Foreign Ministry, describing his conversation with Bobby Kennedy . The cable was sent from the Soviet Embassy in Moscow .
 The Soviet leader accepts the proposal in the president's October 27 message . Aside from sharing his concern that the crisis was spiraling out of control, the Soviet leader accepted it .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko sends a telegram to Kennedy to assure him that Khrushchev is ready to remove the missiles from Cuba . Ambassador Dobrynin asks Kennedy to contact Kennedy to tell him that he is ready .
 Castro explains his thinking in ordering to shoot down the U.S. spy plane . Castro wrote to Khrushchev in a letter explaining his decision to shoot it down .
 Cuban troops take up positions around Soviet nuclear missile sites . Cuban troops move into positions around the Soviet missile sites in Cuba .
 Khrushchev sends Castro a letter trying to justify his lack of consultation prior to the decision to remove the missiles . Khrrushchev sent the letter to Castro in an attempt to justify the decision . The letter was sent to Castro by Castro in order to convince him to remove missiles .
 UN Secretary General U Thant travels to Cuba to request Castro's cooperation . U. Thant's visit to Cuba is the first of his visit to Havana .
 Kennedy ends naval quarantine after hearing from Khrushchev that the IL-28 bombers will be removed from Cuba in 30 days . Kennedy ends the naval quarantine .