 He shared his impressions of that showdown from a Soviet perspective and the lessons for current and future leaders . He also shared the lessons of that clash with Soviet leaders .
 The largest misconception was the idea that America thought this crisis was about defending Cuba against possible invasion some broader implications with relations to Germany or infiltration into South America . “Theories that have nothing to do with reality.”
 The missiles in Turkey were the same as missiles in Italy and Great Britain . The missiles were in Turkey as well as Italy and Britain .
 Both sides began to deploy missiles in their own territories in 1962 . They are the first step in a standoff confrontation in 1962 when both sides began deploying missiles .
 Those missiles in Turkey would be removed from Turkey anyway in two or three years . Those missiles would have been removed from the country anyway, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The enemy at the gate, missiles on your borders -- like anything, is part of their historical experience . "The enemy at your borders, like anything," says President Obama .
 The U.S. bases that surrounded Soviet Union didn't create any panic . The obligation of the government was to deal with the opposite side . The American bases in Turkey or any other European country didn’t create panic .
 "I would compare Americans to a tiger that grew up in the zoo and then was sent into the jungle," she says . She says Americans are "like a tiger" who was sent out of the zoo .
 In 1962 they found they could be killed just the same as any others because of the crisis . In 1962, they were found to be able to be killed in the same way as anyone else .
 I'm not talking about the military, I'm talking about ordinary people. I’m not talking to the government, I‘m talking to ordinary people,’ says CNN.com .
 There was the Sputnik crisis, where President Eisenhower, with all his wisdom, could not convince Americans that Soviets would not launch a missile against them tomorrow because they have this technical capability . President Eisenhower was unable to convince Americans of the threat posed by the Soviets .
 Americans really believed that caveman bin Laden could destroy their country . Americans believed he could destroy the U.S. President .
 It is very difficult to understand the mentality of the other countries -- the Russians, the Chinese, the Indians, the Russians . It's very hard to understand why Russia and India are so divided .
 Americans exaggerate the outside threat because they’ve never experienced that threat before . Americans were lucky that they didn’t have natural enemies like Europeans and Asians through their millennia. all the time exaggerate .
 The Soviet Union had a 20-century with three major wars that fully destroyed their country . The Soviet Soviet Union was destroyed by three wars that destroyed the country .
 There was a very different understanding of the enemy on their borders . There was also a very much different understanding .
 On 9/11 some caveman terrorist was lucky to have destroyed buildings in the U.S. On September 11, 2001, some cavemen were lucky not to have been killed in the United States . The caveman terrorists were lucky to be able to destroy buildings in America .
 Washington, D.C., sees fortification around every governmental building, around the Congress, on the different agencies. But if you look in Washington, you see fortification .
 Only one thing could have successfully resolved the crisis—negotiation . Negotiating is the only thing to solve the crisis, negotiate .
 For Americans, it was the first time in all their history they realized they could be killed . For Americans it was a unique crisis, because it was first time they realized that they might be killed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They experienced threats many time in history starting with the Mongolian invasion . They experienced many threats many times during their time .
 The uniqueness of the North American civilization, they were protected by nature, they say . They were protected from extinction by nature . They say the uniqueness of North America civilization was preserved in nature .
 The first invasion on American soil was by the British in 1812, which has not made an impact . The first and only invasion on U.S. soil was the British invasion of 1812 .
 The Russians experienced invasions all the time in their history. And the Russians experienced these invasions . And the Russian government has been in touch with the U.S.
 The nation's relationship with war or its possible destruction is very different for the nation to their relationship with the nation . So it was very different to the nation, the country's relationship to war or their possible destruction. So it's very different .
 I am not talking about military leadership, which understood the threat and took all the measures to protect their country. I am talking about the threat, which is not military leadership . I'm not talking to military leadership. I'm talking to the people who understand the threat .
 American political leadership understood that missiles in Cuba didn’t change anything. U.S. political leaders understood that missile strikes in Cuba would not change anything, he says .
 The Soviets deal mostly with the government, with the president, not with the public, not the public . The Soviets dealt mostly with government—with the president -- not with public .
 It was the American president’s responsibility to deal with his own public, he said . It was also the responsibility of the president, he added .
 They had information on a limited basis given the centralized control of the media . The media had a limited access to the information they received .
 There was information that Soviet armed forces and the armed forces . The forces of the Warsaw Pact had to be prepared. There was also information that .
 There were no apocalyptic pictures in the newspapers, that tomorrow you could be killed . There was no apocalyptic picture of the future, says the author . But there were no pictures of the apocalypse, he says .
 It's important to know through your adversary where war would tip because of a mistake . But it’s important to be careful not to make a mistake.
 You can't step back because if you take one step back, your adversary will make one step forward . You can’t step back . If you’re going against your adversary, you're going to have to take a step forward. You’ve got to take
 Americans did not know there were 94 tactical nuclear weapons on the island . If the U.S. invaded at the time those weapons would have been used .
 Kennedy showed himself to be a very reasonable and very pragmatic politician . Kennedy showed he was a reasonable and pragmatic politician, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "After the meeting in Vienna, my father had a high opinion about Kennedy," says Kennedy's father . "I had a very high opinion of Kennedy," he says .
 Khrushchev thought Kennedy was weak and could be manipulated, he said . Kennedy was a weak man, but he was a strong leader, he added . Khrushchevitch said Kennedy thought he was weak, but Kennedy was manipulated .
 You will be able to explain to them, understand their position and find some peaceful resolution . You can also find some peace with your family, says CNN.com .
 "Imposing sanctions and unconditional surrenders is not really a productive way to negotiate," says President Obama . Imposing sanctions is not the best way of negotiating, he says .
 "I think it is a good lesson with our current confrontation with Iran or China or any other country," says President Obama . "We need to learn from this lesson," he says .
 He has covered legislation, acquisition and operations for the Sea Services since 2009 . He has also spent time underway with the United States Navy, United States Marine Corps and Canadian Navy .