 We were at the height of the Cold War, locked in a dangerous confrontation with the Soviet Union and a breath away from nuclear conflict . We were locked in dangerous confrontation . We are now at the peak of our Cold War .
 Castro made secret deal with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev to place Soviet nuclear missiles on his island . Castro was at the center of it all, having made a secret deal to put missiles there .
 Great acts of diplomacy by President John F Kennedy eventually won the day, and a disaster of epic proportions was avoided .
 Something else entirely haunts Cuban-Americans, many of whom escaped Castro’s regime by crossing the waters between Cuba and Florida in whatever manner possible .
 The atrocities perpetrated by Castro upon the Cuban people are very fresh in their minds . The atrocities are still fresh in Cuban people's minds, says Cuban President Obama .
 They remember the thousands of political prisoners he jailed, tortured and executed . They remember those he killed and tortured . They also remember those who he killed .
 They remember the property, belongings and personal freedoms lost to his communist ideals . They remember his property, personal freedoms and personal freedom .
 They remember that there’s not a family left unshattered in their homeland by his reign . They remember not a single family unharmed by the deposed regime . They say they remember that not every family was left unhaunted by the dictator .
 There are far too many among us who know nothing of the evils Castro should be remembered for . And yet, as made evident by social media posts on the night of his death and the days after, there are still too many people who don't know what Castro was responsible for .
 Too many simply see a frail, old man in a sporty sweatsuit that couldn’t possibly be a threat . Too many people simply see him simply as a frail and old man . He says he's not a threat.
 They are ignorant of his horrible place in this world, of his role in nearly starting a thermonuclear war, he says . "They are ignorant," he says. "Of course they are ignorant"
 Those who do not learn from history are doomed to repeat it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Those who don't learn from the past will repeat it," he says .
 Greenfield-Central play host Greenfield Central in the Premier League on Tuesday night .
 Investing in people should be an easy choice, says Holcomb . Investing is an easy decision, he says . Holcomb vs. Holcomb: Investing should be easy choice .