 The agents, long accustomed to averting their gaze during these frequent episodes, finally went around back fence and investigated . The agents went to the back fence to investigate .
 No word from the Secret Service if Bingo’s “Silent Night, Holy Night” played in the background . Mere months earlier dozens of Cuban exiles were infiltrating Cuba .
 Castro and Che Guevara’s KGBtutored secret police tortured dozens of people . Dozens died by firing squad and torture at the hands of the KGB-trained secret police . Dozens of people died in the process .
 Until today, the United States has complied with her promise to not interfere with Castro . After the Missile Crisis ""resolution,"" the U.S. Coast Guard and even the British navy shielded Castro from exile attacks .
 In the Florida Keys and Bahamas they were arresting and disarming the very exiles the CIA had been training and arming the month before . The CIA trained and disarmed the exiles in the Bahamas and Florida Keys .
 It's hard to imagine a President Nixon or Reagan quaking in front of Khrushchev's transparent ruse a la Kennedy . So much for the threat that so rattled the Knights of Camelot and inspired such cinematic and literary epics .
 Cuban freedom fighters who’d smuggled out the secret of the Soviet missiles found themselves stranded in a Cuba swarming with 47,000 Soviet troops .
 The scheduled boat runs to the Cuban coast to “exfiltrate” the freedom-fighters were canceled . So the scheduled boat . runs to ‘exfilter’s’ Cuban coast was canceled .
 Suddenly these rescue-runs were impediments to Camelot's delicate diplomacy, you see . Suddenly, these rescue runs became impediments . Camelot had to rely on diplomacy to get around the world .
 Castro and Che’s KGB interrogators and firing squads rubbed their hands and got busy . 18 months after the botched Bay of Pigs invasion, two months after his deal with Khrushchev a guilt-stricken JFK ransomed the surviving freedom-fighters back .
 On Dec. 1962, Cuban freedom fighters gathered with their destitute and traumatized families in Miami’s Orange Bowl to hear President Kennedy address them . Many on crutches others in wheelchairs, many in wheel chairs, gathered in Miami .
 The president continued in this vein and upon completing his tribute the Cuban freedom-fighters handed him their sacred battle flag . The gesture seemed to deeply move the U.S. president .
 Two months earlier this same Leader of the Free World had made a different pledge to Khrushchev, insuring anything but a Cuba Libre . But remember--two months earlier, the same leader of the free world had made an earlier pledge to the Communist Party .
 The pledge of allegiance to the U.S. was made by the President of the United States in 1953 . The pledge was made in honor of the pledge of loyalty to the nation .
 The pledge of liberty to the Butcher of Budapest has proven sacrosanct . The pledge to the United States of the greatest threat in her history has been trashed .
 Mimi Alford claims the President was always perfectly honest with her . Alford, on the other hand, says she was always honest with the President .