 Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information to Department of Defense .
 Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number . Respondents are advised to be aware of the need for a current valid
 I understand this document will be included in a research database and available to the public . The document is expected to be published in a database and made public .
 North Korea continues to develop and test nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles despite international pressure to cease such activities . North Korea is developing nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles and continues to test nuclear tests .
 DPRK, Blockade, Negotiate, Quarantine and Quarantine, Analogical Explanation Framework, Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro 16 .
 Report: Name of a person responsible for the report is listed on page 19b. Name of the person responsible is listed in this section of the report . Report: Report: Who is responsible for this report? Please contact us at any point in this article .
 The time was 8:00 a.m. and the president remained in bed still wearing his pajamas and dressing gown as he read the morning paper .
 North Korea has successfully developed and fielded nuclear-armed intercontinental ballistic missiles, intelligence officials say . The U.S. believes North Korea is targeting the continental United States . McMaster: Intelligence confirms North Korea's ability to develop nuclear-army missiles .
 Some reports describe the similarities between these events, while others point out the differences . Some of the similarities include the similarities and differences between the two .
 Strategic advisors and senior leaders often turn to historical events when confronted with new situations and challenges . Strategic advisors often turn historical events into new situations when confronted by new situations .
 Sometimes they misuse history to justify a decision or choose an inappropriate analogy, which can lead to flawed policy . Sometimes they choose to use an analogy to justify their decisions, which is often wrong .
 Historical analogies serve to inform judgment and enhance decision-making . In other instances, historical analogies can inform judgment, enhance decision making .
 Nikita Khrushchev believed the Soviets were in a position of weakness compared to the U.S. He believed the Soviet Union was weaker than the United States . The Soviet leader believed that the Soviets would be weaker in comparison to America . The Soviets were not strong enough to defeat the
 America possessed hundreds of missiles able to range the Soviet Union including assets in Great Britain, Italy, and Turkey . The Soviet Union only had about six missiles that could range the continental U.S. At the time, the Soviet had only six missiles .
 Russian missiles in Cuba carrying nuclear warheads threatened the security of millions of Americans . The threat posed posed a threat to the U.S. in Cuba .
 The primary reason why Kim Jung Un continues to develop and test nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles is to ensure survival of the Kim regime . The North Korean leader is determined to ensure his regime's survival .
 Kim Jung Un believes the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has a right to possess these technologies . Like his grandfather, Kim Il-Sung, and his father, Kim Jung Il, he believes the DPR is right to have the technology .
 On January 10, 2003, Kim Jung Il withdrew the DPRK from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons . North Korea no longer made North Korea subject to the Safeguards Agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency .
 North Korea stated its reason for withdrawing from the NPT was America’s threat to its security . North Korea said it withdrew from NPT due to the threat posed by the U.S. State Department .
 Withdrawal from the NPT allowed North Korea to resume missile testing, begin reprocessing spent fuel rods, and restart its nuclear facilities . With withdrawal from NPT . North Korea has resumed missile tests, reprocessed nuclear facilities and restarted missile tests .
 Pyongyang already has nuclear missiles capable of ranging Seoul, Japan, and Guam, experts say . U.S. and South Korean experts agree Pyongyang already possesses nuclear missiles .
 North Korea will develop the ability to attack the continental U.S. in the next two to five years, the U.N. says . Furthermore, North Korea has the capability to strike the continental United States, the president says .
 President Kennedy aimed to prevent the spread of communism in the Western Hemisphere . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy's assassination was the result of a CIA operation in Cuba .
 President Kennedy: "Let all our neighbors know that we shall join with them to oppose aggression or subversion anywhere in the Americas" President Kennedy explained in his inaugural address on January 20, 1961, that the U.S. will join with their neighbors .
 JFK learned that the Soviets had covertly placed offensive missiles into Cuba, the administration faced a crisis that lasted only 13 days . The crisis threatened the survival of numerous large U.S. cities and millions of lives .
 Events regarding North Korea have not yet reached a crisis point, but the political stakes involved with a nuclear North Korea remain a vital U.S. national interest . North Korea has accelerated its testing and the development of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles under Kim Jung Un .
 These provocative actions threaten to undermine America’s longstanding policy objective of a denuclearized Korean peninsula, the U.S. State Department says .
 The U.S. blockade of Soviet military shipments to Cuba set the conditions to coerce Moscow to negotiate an agreeable resolution . This 4 study reveals that the United States blockade set the . conditions for negotiations .
 A “blockade” constituted an act of war, so the administration changed the label to a ""quarantine"" of offensive weapons rather than a blockade of all materials . However, a 'blockade' constituted an 'act of war' so a 'quarantine' of
 To halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated . A strict quarantine is also being initiated to halt the buildup .
 Khrushchev sent a telegram to Kennedy on October 24, 1962, proclaiming that Soviet ships bound for Cuba would ignore the naval blockade . We are not denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1948 .
 The primary means of negotiating was a series of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev . The primary way of negotiating in the Cold War was to write letters between the two sides .
 Khrushchev included terms of negotiation stating, “We, for our part, will declare that our ships, bound for Cuba, will not carry any kind of armaments.” ‘We will declare . Our ships bound for . Cuba will . not carry . any kind
 Khrushchev decried America’s missiles in Britain, Italy, and Turkey in a letter to the Kremlin . The letter increased the Kremlin's demands for removal of U.S. missiles in Cuba .
 ExCOMM members believed this change would result in a political disaster for the Kennedy administration . Kennedy administration believed it would be a 'political disaster' for the administration .
 JFK personally delivered the letter to Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador to the United States, on the evening of October 27 . JFK's letter was delivered to Dobrynins, the Russian Ambassador to U.S.
 RFK and Dobrynin’s ongoing backchannel communication was perhaps the best informal communication method between Moscow and Washington . RFK's ongoing back channel communication was the best way to communicate with Washington .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization had collectively decided to deploy the missiles to Turkey . However, Washington could not publicly commit to the agreement because the alliance had agreed to do so . A unilateral decision, under pressure from the Soviets, to remove the missiles might cause the alliance to crumble .
 Moscow accepted Washington’s proposed solution confirming removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba under United Nations supervision in exchange for non-invasion pledge of Cuba .
 The dismantling of Soviet missile bases, transfer to Cuban ports, loading of missiles and 7 support equipment onto eight Soviet ships, and final departure occurred from November 5 to November 9 . The dismantling was part of the dismantling .
 The blockade remained in place until November 20, 1962, when the Soviets removed their IL-28 bombers from Cuba . The blockade was lifted when the Soviet aircraft were removed from the island .
 A strategy based on coercive diplomacy is also a sound approach for dealing with the North Korean threat . A strategy of coercive diplomacy also is also sound approach to dealing with North Korea threat .
 To appreciate this strategy, it is necessary to consider Kennedy’s decision to implement a blockade in light of other available options . Kennedy's blockade is a strategy that may be limited to a few days .
 The Do Nothing alternative accepted the fact that America was already vulnerable to Soviet nuclear missiles . Do Nothing accepted that the U.S. had already been vulnerable to the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons .
 Bundy initially argued for this option fearing that U.S. action would cause the Soviets to retaliate against Berlin . Bundy argued that the Soviets would not retaliate against the United States .
 ExCOMM members believed that the domestic political repercussions of inaction with regard to Soviet missiles in the Western Hemisphere would be intolerable . However, they believed that inaction would be unacceptable .
 If left unchecked, allowing the Soviets to maintain offensive missiles in Cuba could lead to further aggression elsewhere in the world . The U.S. should not be allowed to keep offensive missile bases in Cuba .
 The Trump administration could also elect to do nothing regarding the North Korean threat .
 The DPRK could retaliate against Seoul if the U.S. chooses to act . Like an anticipated Soviet response in Berlin, the DPRK could respond to Seoul .
 U.S. citizens are unlikely to support long-term inaction by the Trump administration amid rising concerns regarding North Korea’s nuclear program and ongoing missile tests . However, United States citizens are likely not to support inaction .
 Allowing Kim Jung Un to develop ICBMs capable of delivering nuclear warheads to U.S. cities would represent an existential threat that could have catastrophic results for America if left unimpeded .
 ExCOMM considered two forms of diplomatic pressure . Diplomatic pressure was considered to be the most effective form of pressure .
 Washington could provide Moscow an ultimatum to remove missiles from Cuba or face military action . Washington could also provide Moscow with a military threat to remove them from Cuba .
 If Khrushchev complied, then Moscow would not face public confrontation or a military response . Moscow would have avoided public confrontation, military response or a public confrontation .
 If the Soviets failed to remove their missiles from Cuba, then they would face a significant U.S. military response .
 A second form of diplomatic pressure attempted to negotiate with the Kremlin . The Kremlin has been trying to negotiate a deal with the Russian government .
 In exchange for the Soviets removing their missiles from Cuba, U.S. concessions might include withdrawing forces from the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay or eliminating Jupiter missiles from Turkey and/or Italy . The Soviets might also withdraw forces from Guantanamo Bay .
 The drawback to diplomatic pressure alone was that the Soviets could continue to emplace and operationalize missiles in Cuba while diplomats met . Diplomatic pressure was the only way to keep the missiles operational in Cuba .
 Kennedy also worried that negotiating for American missiles in Turkey would cause NATO to splinter . Kennedy worried that the U.S. would try to negotiate for American security at the expense of its allies .
 Washington could provide an ultimatum to Pyongyang where North Korea will face military action if it conducts any additional nuclear or missile tests . Washington could also provide a similar threat to Pyongyang if North Korea conducts any more tests .
 A failure to respond would embolden other state and non-state actors to conduct actions, which might threaten U.S. national interests . Failure to respond could embolden non-State actors to take action against the United States, experts say .
 North Korea has conducted both nuclear and missile tests since 2006 in spite of international pressure . It is unlikely that Kim Jung Un would succumb to such an ultimatum given the fact that he has conducted such a test since 2006 .
 Negotiations with the DPRK could threaten U.S. relations with key allies in East Asia and elsewhere . It could also threaten the United States' relations with East Asia .
 Negotiations must consider impact on nations like South Korea and Japan so as not to jeopardize relationships with them . Therefore, negotiations must consider the impact on countries like Japan and Korea .
 Our allies must not perceive negotiations as an attempt to improve U.S. security at their expense, says President Obama .
 ExCOMM members did not believe Castro would agree to the offer, and the approach would only provide advance warning of U.S. intentions .
 Castro did not control the medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . Soviet officials maintained firm control of them . In addition, Castro didn't control some of the missiles .
 In essence, this approach attempted to coerce Castro, and thereby Cuba, to depart the Soviet sphere of influence, but this approach did not address the problem of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba . This approach was an attempt at coercing Castro to depart Cuba, but did not solve the problem
 The United States could attempt a secret approach to halt North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs . The U.S. could try to halt N. Korea's nuclear and . missile programs, experts say .
 Such an attempt would proceed through an intermediary, such as China, which has the most influence on the Kim regime . The North Korean leader is expected to make a visit to North Korea .
 Washington must first understand Beijing’s interests in the Asia-Pacific region and its views on North Korea . To do so, Washington must also understand China's views on the North Korean issue .
 The invasion option sought to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba and overthrow Castro . Invasion option aimed at removing Soviet missiles and overthrowing Castro .
 The ExCOMM viewed this alternative as a last resort because it required a significant number of troops and risked bogging down U.S. operations in Cuba . General Maxwell Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, called the “deep mud” of Cuba .
 Kennedy did not want to risk a nuclear exchange or a showdown with the Soviets over Berlin that might lead to nuclear war . U.S. commitments to protect the city and its citizens from the Soviets and East Germans taking control .
 America could lead a large-scale invasion into North Korea in order to destroy or secure the DPRK’s nuclear and missile capabilities as well as pursuing regime change in Pyongyang . The U.S. could also pursue regime change and destroy the North Korean nuclear capabilities .
 Such an invasion would at the very least 11 require a massive force and would likely result in the U.S. performing longterm stability operations on the Korean peninsula . However, such an invasion of North Korea would likely require massive force .
 China would vehemently oppose such aggression and view it as a U.S. effort to force regime change and unify the peninsula, China says . China views it as an effort by the United States to unify North Korea .
 Beijing fears a large number of North Korean refugees flowing into China . Beijing views the DPRK as a necessary buffer between China and the U.S.-backed ROK .
 The risk of the invasion escalating to include war with China is all too familiar considering China’s intervention during the Korean War . China intervened in the war in Korea during the 1950s and 1960s .
 President Kennedy favored a direct approach, using air strikes to destroy known Soviet missile sites in Cuba . However there were several downsides to this option .
 An attack would also necessitate hitting air defense sites to protect attacking forces . The U.S. would also need to hit air defenses to protect itself from attacks .
 Additional targets would include airfields where Soviet MiG-21 fighters and IL-28 bombers were located that could retaliate by bombing the southeastern U.S. Additional targets were also possible .
 An air strike would likely result in the death of Russian personnel, and possibly non-combatants, at the missile sites . Second, an air strike likely would likely kill Russian personnel at the missiles sites .
 Such deaths would invite Soviet retaliation on United States forces in Berlin or missile sites in Turkey . U.S. forces would be attacked by the Soviets in Berlin, Berlin or Turkey .
 Third, the administration opposed an attack without providing advanced warning . The administration did not provide advanced warning of the attack .
 In World War II, Washington accused Japan of failing to provide advance warning before its air raid at Pearl Harbor . ExCOMM wanted to avoid similar accusations .
 An air strike in Cuba might not successfully destroy all of the Soviet missile sites . It would not prevent future deployment of Russian missiles in Cuba .
 Kennedy and his advisors discussed alternatives, but this option became less attractive . As Kennedy's advisors discussed options, this option was less attractive, they said . Kennedy said, "This option is no longer attractive"
 A U.S. air strike option would likely target North Korea’s nuclear production and storage infrastructure along with the associated delivery means . A United States air strike could target the North's nuclear production, storage infrastructure .
 A 2016 Stratfor scenario envisions F-22 fighters and B-2 bombers from the United States Air Force and hundreds of Tomahawk cruise missiles from the U.S. Navy’s Seventh Fleet conducting such an attack .
 A U.S. air strike on North Korea would confront the same challenges that faced when considering an attack on Cuban missile sites . The Kennedy administration faced the same challenge when considering a strike on the Cuban missile site .
 The “limited” strike would grow to include targeting air defense assets and airfields . First, the strike would be a ‘limited’ strike, targeting targets such as air defense and airfield .
 An air attack on nuclear facilities and delivery means would result in the death of both combatants and non-combatants inviting a North Korean military response . Second, an air . attack on North Korea's nuclear facilities would . result in an air attack .
 The DPRK would likely retaliate with a counteroffensive targeting Seoul with its artillery . The North Korea would likely target Seoul with an offensive offensive .
 North Korea’s Hwasong and Nodong missiles can range all of South Korea and U.S. military bases in Japan . The missiles can deliver chemical, biological, and nuclear munitions .
 Some estimate that the DPRK may already possess between two and five nuclear warheads, which would cause tremendous damage in terms of life and property .
 Third, the Trump administration would have to determine whether to provide advance warning of the attack . The administration would also have to decide whether to give advance notice .
 Such a warning would negate America’s element of surprise, which is critical for such an attack . The U.S. would not be surprised by such a warning, which would negate the element of shock .
 A U.S. air strike could not guarantee the destruction of all of North Korea’s nuclear production infrastructure, nuclear storage sites, and delivery means . The U.N. 13 air strike would not be able to destroy all of the North Korean nuke infrastructure .
 The suitability of an air attack to achieve the strategic objective of halting or setting back North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs remains in question . Therefore, an air strike would not be able to halt or set back the North Korean program, experts say .
 Such an attack would likely increase Kim Jung Un’s resolve to obtain nuclear ICBMs if he survives the strike . In fact, such an attack on North Korea would increase his resolve to get nuclear ICBM .
 The final option was a naval blockade to enforce an embargo on military shipments to Cuba . The blockade was imposed by the U.S. government .
 This alternative included two variants that coincided with those of those of the diplomatic option . The diplomatic option was a diplomatic option that included a diplomatic solution to the crisis .
 One variant added an ultimatum to the blockade whereby Washington would refuse to negotiate with the Soviets until they removed their missiles from Cuba . Another variant added that Washington would not negotiate with them until they remove their missiles .
 A similar ultimatum today is the United States precondition requiring North Korea to “cease missile testing cap development of nuclear program” prior to negotiations . The U.S. preconditions today are a similar to the U.N. pre-negotiations
 Such an approach would allow the DPRK to continue developing and testing nuclear weapons and missiles concurrent with negotiations . Today, such a such a policy would allow North Korea to continue to develop and test nuclear weapons, missiles .
 A “blockade” of North Korea will look somewhat different from U.S. naval ships in the ocean surrounding Cuba . The concept remains the same, but the concept is different .
 Existing UN Security Council sanctions could serve as a similar mechanism to coerce Kim Jung Un to the negotiating table . Existing U.N. sanctions could also be used as a means of coercion .
 U.N. resolutions prohibit United Nations member states from “direct or indirect supply, sale, or transfer” of weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile materials and technologies to the DPRK . They authorize member states to inspect North Korean cargo within their territory .
 The resolutions also prohibit any financial support that might contribute to nuclear and missile activities . The resolution also prohibits financial support for any support that could contribute to such activities .
 As North Korea continued to conduct nuclear and missile tests, later resolutions grew more comprehensive and far-reaching . North Korea's nuclear tests have led to increased tensions with the U.S.
 Sanctions include sanctions to freeze assets and ban travel of designated North Korean individuals and entities . They include sanctions that freeze assets, ban travel to North Korea . North Korea has been hit hard by the latest round of sanctions against Pyongyang .
 All refined petroleum products, including diesel and kerosene, are restricted to the North . They place strict limitations on crude oil exports from member states . They also limit the amount of crude oil exported from member countries .
 Resolutions prohibit bulk cash transfers and restrict access to the international banking system . Resolutions also restrict the use of bulk cash transfer .
 In order to coerce Pyongyang to negotiate, U.N. member states, including China and Russia, must cooperate . U.S. must cooperate in order to get North Korea to talk, says South Korean diplomat .
 The U.S. had a moral obligation to intervene in order to protect America, its citizens, and its allies in the Western Hemisphere . America's moral right to intervene was morally right to do so .
 Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, helped secure legitimacy for the quarantine . Stevenson served a critical role in securing legitimacy for quarantine .
 The United States is seeking a multilateral approach for dealing with North Korea . The U.S. is also seeking a multi-nation approach to dealing with the North Korean situation .
 By working through the United Nations, Washington has secured widespread support for sanctions targeting North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs . The U.N. has been working to secure widespread support and legitimacy for sanctions .
 U.S. Air Force pilot, Major “Rudy” Anderson Jr., died when a Soviet SA-2 surfaceto-air missile destroyed his U-2 reconnaissance airplane .
 President Kennedy assumed the attack was part of Khrushchev’s plan to escalate the crisis . President Kennedy and his advisors assumed it was a move to escalate tensions . The attack was the first time the U.S. was attacked by the Soviet Union .
 RFK ordered RFK to deliver an ultimatum 16 during his October 27 meeting with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin . RFK was ordered to deliver the ultimeatum 16 by President Kennedy . The event was significant for RFK and the Soviets .
 The United States Navy located four Russian submarines in the Atlantic Ocean responsible for securing Soviet ships in transit to Cuba . The U.S. Navy located the four submarines . The submarines were responsible for protecting Soviet ships .
 Soviet submarine B-59 carried a nuclear torpedo with a 10-kiloton warhead . The submarine was carried out by a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear bomb . The torpedo was carried by the Soviet submarine .
 According to Soviet regulations, the submarine had to receive coded instruction from Moscow in order to launch the nuclear torpedo . The submarine was ordered to launch a nuclear torpedo by the Soviet Union .
 No physical or technical measures precluded captain and officer in charge of the torpedo from launching the weapon . However, no physical or . technical measures were precluded the captain and . officer in . charge of a torpedo from launch .
 The U.S. Navy attempted to communicate its new procedure for signaling submarines to the surface . The B-59 crew never received Washington’s message regarding the new procedure .
 B-59 captain Valentin Savitsky ordered the nuclear torpedo made combat ready . He ordered it to be ready for combat . The torpedo was the first to be used in combat combat .
 The chief of staff of the submarine flotilla, Vasily Arkhipov, was a visitor on-board the B-59 and refused to support Savitsky’s plan .
 Arkhipov convinced Savitsky to surface his submarine thus averting the use of the nuclear torpedo . Savitsy was killed by a Soviet submarine in the Battle of the Azerana .
 In today’s struggle between Washington and Pyongyang, the potential for miscalculation is a very real possibility . Washington and North Korea are engaged in a bitter struggle .
 North Korea threatened to launch missiles to create “an enveloping fire” around Guam . In response, North Korea said it would create an “escapering fire’ around Guam’s island .
 President Trump tweeted, “Military solutions are now fully in place, locked and loaded, should North Korea act unwisely .” Two days later, President Trump said, ‘Military solutions were now fully-in- place .’
 America must not tolerate North Korea’s aggressive attempts to develop nuclear ICBMs capable of ranging the continental U.S. First, America should not tolerate N. Korean aggression . America must also not tolerate the threat of a nuclear ICBM .
 North Korea has not reached a point of crisis whereby the DPRK poses an existential threat to the United States homeland . The stakes are vital to U.S. national security. Second, while the situation with North Korea is not at an existential crisis, it is vital to United States national security
 Third, the implicit prescription for dealing with Pyongyang is coercive diplomacy . The implicit prescription is that coercive diplomacy is to deal with Pyongyang .
 The U.S. has a moral right to intervene in order to protect America, its citizens, and United States allies . The United States should intervene in Syria to protect the United States and its allies, the author says .
 The greatest danger is the risk of miscalculation leading to war or a nuclear exchange . Miscalculation could lead to a nuclear war or an exchange of nuclear weapons .
 Washington is pursuing diplomatic and economic pressure campaign to deal with North Korea . Washington is actively pursuing a diplomatic and financial pressure campaign .
 Trump administration would have to abandon these efforts to embrace the Do Nothing alternative . Therefore, the Trump administration .
 An attack seeking to secure or destroy North Koreas nuclear and missile infrastructure and force regime change poses significant risk to the U.S. and its allies . An attack on North Korea's nuclear, missile and nuclear infrastructure poses a significant risk .
 This option would likely lead to Chinese intervention and substantial loss of life and destruction, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The U.S. would also face a long-term obligation to stabilize the Korean peninsula following combat operations, if the invasion was successful .
 The invasion option is also inconsistent with lesson 5 because both domestic and international audiences would question America’s moral right to conduct such an attack given likely collateral damage to civilian populations and infrastructure .
 U.N. Security Council has approved multiple resolutions sanctioning the DPRK . It is likely that many member states would protest an invasion of North Korea .
 The implied recommendation, coercive diplomacy, is an approach combining the second option and the sixth option . It is consistent with the six lessons from the Cuba analogy, the author says .
 The second option, the third option, and the fifth option are consistent with the lessons from Cuba . However, the second option and third option would be consistent with Cuba's lessons, CNN says .
 If the president runs for a second term and secures the vote, then he will have an additional four years in office . If he wins, he will be able to run for another four years .
 The Trump administration is prudent in taking action now because it is unknown when the 20 DPRK will develop nuclear ICBMs capable of ranging the continental U.S. It is unknown if the administration will have a second term and if it will develop a second ICBM .
 This strategy is similar to America’s current diplomatic and economic pressurization campaign against North Korea that began in the spring of 2017 to compel Pyongyang to the negotiating table .
 This approach depends largely on the United Nations Security Council sanctions having their intended effect . The U.N. Security Council's sanctions have not yet been implemented, experts say .
 Rex Tillerson is calling for increased pressure from Beijing and Moscow to enforce sanctions . The U.S. Secretary of State is also calling for more pressure from China and Russia to enforce the sanctions .
 China must stop exporting crude oil to North Korean refineries . Russia must not permit North Korean laborers to work within Russian borders . North Korea must not work in exchange for wages used to fund North Korea’s nuclear program .
 The resolution limits the “supply, sale or transfer” of crude oil by member states to North Korea . In the case of China, the resolution limits China’s crude oil sales to the North .
 Member states must report the amount of crude oil they provide to the DPRK every 90 days . The North Korean state must also report how much crude oil it provides to the North .
 Resolution 2397 bans member states from providing work authorizations for DPRK nationals . It also requires member states to repatriate North Korean nationals earning income in their jurisdictions within 24 months from December 22, 2017 .
 If China and Russia cooperate, negotiations with North Korea could begin in 2018 or early 2019 . Talks could begin if Russia and China cooperate .
 U.S. could elect for bilateral negotiations with Pyongyang . Such negotiations could occur in a multilateral forum such as the U.N. or the United States .
 Washington could also attempt a secret approach with Beijing in a parallel effort to the pressure campaign . Washington and Beijing could also be involved in a secret effort to counter pressure .
 The PRC will not support a U.S. policy of regime change in North Korea or a policy aimed at unifying the Korean peninsula, it has said .
 The U.S. should not seek regime change in North Korea or unification of the Korean peninsula, author says . Such an approach would require assurances that the United States is not seeking regime change, he says .
 China likely prefers to remain the sole nuclear power in East Asia, enabling it to pursue regional hegemony in the Indo-Pacific region . Doing so might secure Beijing’s full cooperation, as China likely wants to remain nuclear power .
 A September 2017 Gallup poll surveyed 1,022 U.S. adults and found that 58% favor military action against North Korea . The poll also found 58% support economic and diplomatic efforts to get North Korea to reach its goals .
 A likely decision window for the Trump administration to conduct an air strike is sometime in 2019, after it has given its diplomatic and economic pressure campaign time to work .
 U.N. diplomatic efforts in the United Nations will likely gain further legitimacy for a strike if the current approach is unable to produce an acceptable settlement . Ongoing diplomatic efforts are likely to gain more legitimacy for the strike .
 The timing of the strike option could accelerate depending on North Korea’s development and testing programs . North Korea has a history of testing and development programs .
 The Ground-based Midcourse Defense portion of the United States Ballistic Missile Defense System is capable of defeating threats from North Korea’s nascent missile program . Even if the DPRK is able to develop nuclear ICBMs capable of ranging the continental United States, the U.S. Ballistic
 Six options considered by Kennedy and ExCOMM for addressing Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba provide realistic alternatives for President Trump . President Kennedy considered six options to address Soviet missile threats .
 These options help form a comprehensive strategy that will empower the administration to effectively deal with Pyongyang during President Trump's first term in office .
 North Korea continues to pursue nuclear ICBMs capable of reaching the continental United States . There is no easy solution for the DPRK threat, so Washington must carefully manage the North 23 Korean challenge .
 Korea, Munich, Dien Bien Phu, and the Vietnam Decisions of 1965 , 8-11. Korea, 9-11 . Korea, 10th anniversary of Vietnam's war with Vietnam in 1965 .