 The Soviet-American confrontation over Cuba in the fall of 1962 has been written about in more complete detail so soon after the event than the event .
 He gives more of the letter than two insiders, Theodore Sorensen and Arthur M Schlesinger Jr., in their books on the Kennedy era .
 The definitive book on the missile crisis has yet to be written, says author . But one must conclude that the definitive book is still being written, he says .
 The latter two provided many details Abel lacks and be has an outsider’s perspective they could not have . Abel lacks many details he lacks and the latter two lacked .
 It is evident that the Kennedy debacle at the Bay of Pigs and the President’s behavior at the Vienna meeting with Khrushchev led the Soviet leader to take the great gamble of putting missiles into Cuba . The Soviet leader took a great gamble by putting missiles in Cuba .
 The lesson of strength, and it can be applied to today’s problem in Vietnam and Southeast Asia, is that a major power such as the llU.S. must act on its own vital interests .
 President Kennedy lucky that the missile crisis was highly condensed in time . President Kennedy was lucky that he was able to pull out of the crisis .
 Every President has the power to surrender a vital . liijtficsst, with or without /Senate ratification . President Obama has the ability to surrender the . measure .
 JFK's triumph was that in such an age he sought the path between war and surrender . He fought to keep personal control of every detail and action .
 We hear the calm advise of Llewellyn Thompson, but we also hear him concede that “he just didn’t believe” the Russians would try to put missiles in Cuba . Thompson: "He just didn't believe’s the Russians . He just didn
 Robert Kennedy argued and won the case for the immorality of a surprise air strike at Cuba . Defense Secretary McNamara, too, showed a lack of international political sensitivities .
 Abel relates McNamara's attempt on the President’s behalf to guide the naval blockade A and Adm. A . Abel . Abel, for the first time, relates . McNamara . Abel relates .
 The Admiral was not reappointed Chief of Naval Operations the following June . And so the Admiral did not reappoint himself as Chief of Operations .
 Abel's account describes the missile crisis as a vast American victory and a milestone in Moscow-Washington relations . Abel: The missile crisis emerges from the Abel account as an American victory .
 Some, both at home and abroad, have begun to question that conclusion, but what has happened in the post-crisis period supports the majority view . The majority view is that the crisis has led to the collapse of the economy .