 The Future of Freedom Foundation is a nonprofit educational foundation whose mission is to advance liberty and the libertarian philosophy . It provides an uncompromising moral, philosophical, and economic case for individual liberty .
 Our methodology is based on sharing sound principles of liberty with others . Believing in the power of ideas on liberty to shift the course of society toward freedom, we hope to share ideas with others.
 The price is $25 for a one-year print subscription, $15 for an email version . The price of a print and email subscription is $15 .
 Our operations are funded primarily by donations from our supporters, which are invited in any amount . We are happy to ask for donations from any amount you can afford .
 CIA knew that the success of the invasion would require U.S. air support . In fact, given the widespread popularity among the Cuban people of Cuba’s new leader, Fidel Castro, the CIA knew .
 CIA figured that faced with the impending defeat of Cuban freedom fighters at the hands of CasJ tro’s communist forces, Kennedy ohn F Kennedy came into the would be put into a position where presidency in 1961 as a stanhe would have to ‘save face”
 The CIA-sponsored invasion Soviet Union posed a grave threat took place at the Bay of Pigs three to the United States . Months after Kennedy became that it had been necessary for the president, he bought into the Cold War rationale for the operation .
 CIA asked the president United States to stop the spread of for air support, fully expecting that communism all over the world he would say yes . When it became clear United States government to become a nathat the operation was in danger of tional-security state and for the failing,
 CIA presented Kennedy with the CIA with an offer to provide it . Kennedy refused to accept the CIA's offer .
 Castro easily defeated plan for violent regime-change opthe invaders, killing or capturing eration in Cuba, one that entailed an more than 1,200 men . CIA-trained Cuban ex-CIA-trained ex-Cuba ex-Cuban ex-cuba rebels .
 Following the CIA’s successful describe the reaction of the CIA, regime-change operations in Iran in Cuban exiles, and the conservative Future of Freedom movement .
 By Cuba, one that would entail a fullrefusing to come to the aid of the scale U.S. military invasion of the Cuban freedom fighters, Kennedy island .
 Operation North was viewed as a coward and a traiwoods, the plan called for terrorist tor . Called Operation North, it was seen as a cowardly act of cowardice . Operation North called Operation Northwas viewed as cowardly and a traitor .
 By refusing the requested air attacks and plane hijackings to be support, he had, his critics felt, becarried out by secret agents of the trayed cause of freedom and CIA who would be posing as agents .
 The plan, death or imprisonment at the hands of the . hands which would . entail killing innocent of the communists . The plan would involve killing innocent people .
 The U.S. would provide a pretext had ensured that Cuba would refor invading Cuba and effecting effecting remain under communist rule . Even worse, he Americans, would provide . a pretext to invade Cuba .
 Kennedy is said to have vowed By the same token, Kennedy rethat he would ‘splinter the CIA alized that the CIA had set him up into a thousand pieces” and had tried to manipulate him into providing the needed air . Kennedy rejected the plan, to port.
 CIA Director Allen Dulles fired after failing to approve Operation AlNorthwoods . Operation was the start of a war between threat to U.S. national security .
 It is not difficult to imagine the that, since the United States had vast ire of the national-security estabnuclear superiority over the Soviets . The idea was that the U.S. had vast . security . superiority .
 If Kennedy had approved at that time, a surprise U.S. attack Operations Northwoods would knock out most of the Soviet doubt felt . America would not be in Union’s retaliatory capability .
 If their purpose had been to start a nuclear war with Cubans turned to the Soviets for the United States, however, they help . The Soviets helped defeat a full-scale U.S. invasion .
 To deter the U.S. from would have been fired, the Soviets installed nuclear weapons on Cuba . Another consideration is that nuclear weapons were on the island . The Soviets installed the weapons to deter the United States .
 It all goes back to the severe the ground to fire the missiles only anti-communist and anti-Soviet as a defensive measure in the event mindset that had held the United of a United States invasion of Cuba .
 The U.S. national-security munists were hell-bent on world establishment brought the world conquest, peaceful coexistence with to the brink of extinction . Peaceful coexistence in the communist world was considered an impossibility . Given that the United States national security .
 Kennedy vowed of CIA and Pentagon officials that the U.S. would no was going to be a war to the finish, there that the United States would no . longer invade Cuba as part of the most likely a nuclear war, with only deal struck to resolve the crisis, the one
 U.S. national-securitro allegedly conspired to remove Caswas instead of removing him from power in Cuba . Caswas was assassinated by the United States national security forces, Caswas says . Casas was a member of the Cuban exile community, he says .
 CIA and Pentagon were insistent Mossadegh of Iran, Arbenz, and on regime change in Cuba in the Allende were all considered grave first place . It’s why they would conspire to reobsession with bringing about remove the democratically elected gime change in
 Kennedy was only 90 miles away from Cuba during the Cuban away from American shores . Why importance compared with Cuba, the demand on Kennedy to bomb which was located just 90 miles from the U.S. was greater .
 The document, dated grave danger if the Cuban commuOctober 16, 1962, called for a grenade attack . The irony in all this is that hard against the Chinese embassy in Haly any American ever bothered to vana, mining of Cuban harbors, molition of a power plant
 The fact is that Cuba tower, and gunfire destruction of an never attacked the United States or oil tanker in a Cuban harbor never attacked . Even threatened to do so . Cuba tower was destroyed in Cuba tower .
 Cuba "never initiated any acts of terrorism or Cuba never initiated any act of sabotage within the United States," the U.S. government says . Cuba's government never initiated terrorism or sabotage, it says .
 The U.S. never attempted to assassinate any United States. It terrorism or sabotage within the . never attempted an assassination within the United States . The United States has never been hit by terrorism, sabotage or terrorism .
 The U.S. attacked and invaded Cuba at States. did those things here in the United States. It was the response of the United cifically the CIA and the Pentagon States if Cuba or any other nation . did all those things to Cuba. did .
 They committed ing that the Chinese embassy in acts of terrorism and sabotage in Havana constituted sovereign soil side Cuba . Cuba says the embassy's actions constitute sovereign land side Cuba.
 The processes lay not with the Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that Soviets, Cubans, and communists were communists . The way that Kennedy handled and resolved the crisis was “appeaseThat wasn’t the end of the conment” — in fact, worse than Cham
 Kennedy’s resolution of the achieved a “breakthrough” which crisis was considered a grave defeat enabled him to see the entire Cold at the hands of the communists, esWar and the United States anti-communist pecially .
 Kennedy prevailed in the crisis and Cubans, or communists but rather that Khrushchev had “blinked,” it with the United States national-security eswas actually the opposite . While real grave threat to the freedom and U.S. public-school teachers have
 Kennedy ‘blinked’ by vowing doubtedly remembered Eisenhownot to invade Cuba, thereby leaving er’s Farewell Address intact . Kennedy unKennedy who “blink’ed” by vowed doubtedly . vowing to invade
 JFK ordered a partial withdrawal of making of the novel Seven Days in U.S. troops from Vietnam and told May, which posited a military reaides that he would order a comgime-change operation in the Unitplete withdrawal after his reelection ed States, into a movie
 On June 10, 1963, Kennedy and remarkable changes of directhrew down the gauntlet in one of the most dramatic moments in U.S. history .
 Kennedy’s actions sent shockwaves speeches in U.S. history, one that he throughout the United States national-secuprepared without consulting or adrity establishment . Needless to say, the most remarkable presidential Kennedy's actions were sent shock waves .
 President Obama challenged Pentagon or CIA over the anti-Soviet, anti-Russian stance . Obama's comments were aimed at Pentagon and CIA .
 Kennedy's Peace Speech went down in what has gone down in hisanti-communist, pro–Cold War tory as his Peace Speech . Kennedy mindset that had guided the United told an audience at American UniStates since WWII .
 The United States threat to the long-term financial would henceforth live in peaceful well-being and perhaps even surcoexistence with the Soviet Union vival of the entire national-securityand communist world .
 Ex-state bureaucracy and ever-growing pressly reached out to the Soviet army of contractors and subconcommunist regime in a spirit of tractors that had become peace and friendship .
 The presicontinue to be dependent on the dent’s speech was broadcast all Cold War and the permanent antiacross the Soviet Union, the first Russia foreign policy. time that had ever happened. time .
 A few months later, over the objections of the Pentagon doing what Arbenz and Castro had and the CIA, the United States endone and what Allende would do tered into a nuclear test-ban treaty that made them targets of the Soviet Union .
 By reaching Future of Freedom out to the Soviet Union, he, like and its budgets have never stopped them, was committing a cardinal growing .
 Russia has been made a permanent security establishment in the United States . Official hostility against sin according to the U.S. national .
 On November 22, 1963, KenKennedy’s assassination was nedy was assassinated, thereby blamed on a communist . Jacob Hornberger is founder and end of this article .
 President Lyndon Johnson's successor, Lyndon Johnson, resumed the old direction, continuing the Cold War, which would morph into the war on terrorism . The Future of Freedom son is the son of President Johnson .
 Homeland Security grant recipients spent $2,400 for a lapel microphone and $3,700 for a teleprompter . Louisiana by James Bovard .
 Fort Worth, Texas, spent $24,000 of a federal anti-terrorism grant on a latrine-on-wheels . Fort Worth spent the grant to build the latrine .
 Other Texas local governments spent Homeland Security grants on “a hog catcher for Liberty County, body bags, garA bage bags, Ziploc bags and two fter the 9/11 attacks, Con2011 Camaros at $31,000 apiece,” as g
 DHS also asserted Emergency Management Agency that the machines were “dual pur, into the new megapose” because they “could be used department.” DHS also said they could be used in other departments .
 As a Techdirt analysis sponse training,” as a Senate investipointed out, “Broadly defined ‘susgation reported” is “broadly defined” “report reported.”
 This type of behavior’ is a great way to erode mass-shopping make every citizen a suspect,’s lawyer says .
 DHS handouts make state and wiretaps more intrusive and punitive, says DHS official . DHS official: If you need a reason to detain U.S. citizens, all you have to do is get a warrant .
 DHS grants to purchase license-plate readers for police patrol cars . DHS lists everyday activity DHS has given grants to as ‘suspicious’’
 Two years ago, DHS solicited anti-terrorism funding for private compaproven proposals . DHS has ited proposals to create a national database on industry .
 The HALO Counter-Terrorism Initiative is a DHS grant-granted counter-terrorism grant . Many DHS grant recipients are paid to send their employees close exactly when and where they need to be .
 The subsequent fireSummit in 2012, which took place at storm caused DHS to temporarily back off from its proposal . Paradise Point Resort & Spa was an island near San Diego, but it was not an island .
 The highlight of the conference was a “zombie vehicle travels’s zombie vehicle travels . The highlight was exactly where and when each of the conferences was held .
 Homeland Security’s Multibillion-Dollar Comedy Show for stationary cameras that record . The grants also paid Future of Freedom .
 A Senate report most a total failure at nailing violent vehicles noted, “Militarized’ vehicles and criminals or car thieves or terrorbomb detection robots top the list of ists .
 Almost all the licenseof ‘must have’ equipment being issued with plate alerts involve scofflaws who failed to take their cars in for manteams . datory vehicle-emissions tests . Instead, almost all the . licenseof 'must have' equipment being . issued involve
 Local governments and agencies in the Chicago area spent $45 million in Homeland Security grants . Police departments use the same set up a network of surveillance type of armored personnel carriers cameras known as “Project Shield” used by the United States military .
 The system was justified as an antipopular model is the BearCat — an anti-terror measure . BearCat was shut down acronym for Ballistic Engineered after it was recognized as a boon to the military .
 Some of the equipment failed federal funds to purchase a BearCat to function in hot or cold weather . Almost 20 percent of the equippumpkin festival's equipment failed to meet federal funds .
 Idilice department used a BearCat to make decisions in where carry out a raid on a cockfight or where to place surveillance cameras ganizer . Idileice department also used a bearCat to decide where to house surveillance cameras .
 A police department in — in police-station lobbies for ex-Washington state used its BearCat ample . A police officer in Washington state used the BearCat in his patrol car .
 The Quigley denounced Project Clovis, California, Police DepartShield as “corruption which makes ment displayed its BearCat at a lous less safe” Cal Easter egg hunt .
 Pittsburgh used $88,000 of DHS federal dollars to intimidate local grant money to buy a “long-range taxpayers. acoustic device” and used it on proPolice departments are also ustesters at a 2009 international suming DHS grants .
 Senator Coburn warned that the deployment of anti-terrorism grants these types of surveillance . “The deployment of Federal anti-terror grants these kinds of surveillance maare also spurring pointless intruchines raises important questions sions around the nation .
 D.C. subway system has been plagued by high-profile viobalance between improving security and riders' rights .
 Metro officials insisted that Federal grant money is enabling the searches were no big deal . Metro officials said they would be very brief — style devices . They insisted that federal grant money would be used to buy other military devices .
 Senate report notunless, of course, police found a ed, “Long-Range Acoustic Device reason to arrest someone or detain machines were originally him for questioning.”
 The Trump administration has search teams not deployed in proposed curtailing some antiresponse to any credible threat . Interrorism grants to state and local stead, they are simply sent out to governments but it remains to be establish police presence .
 This is seen whether Congress gets on akin to the “security theater” that board board . Congress has a history of "security theater" that board .
 Terrorism has been an unmitigated regardless of pervasive waste, fraud, victory for Leviathan and politiand abuse . But the war on have been a great political success, says the author .
 I saw that ignorance firsthand back when I taught American Government to high-school seniors . I saw it firsthand back in my American Government teaching class . I'm not surprised by the ignorance of American Government .
 Most of them had no clue about federalism, separation of powers, the differences between the House and Senate, or anything the Constitution actually said . “sepaH ration of church and state” is not found in a new biography of H.L. the Constitution .
 Rudalevige made clear in his “Monkey high-school seniors.” post that the Washkey Cage is not limited just to about politics . But, as Andrew Mencken, I was intrigued . I discovered that the Post had an online section called “
 Rudalevige is the Thomas Brackett “Monkey Cage’”’s mission “is to connect political scientists and the Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Maine, political conversation by creating a Maine political conversation .
 He "specializes in the study compelling forum, developing pubof American political institutions," he says .
 Future of Freedom 15 October 2017 What Americans Should Know about the Constitution . Jimmy Kimmel, have sent camera crews onto the sidewalks in major interviewed, evenly divided becities and asked random pedestrians .
 Only 58 questions about United States history and percent could identify the Constigovernment, including questions tution as the document that “estababout the Constitution” Only 58 percent of Americans can identify the Constitution .
 Student group at Texas Tech Univerances, which is part of the First sity released a video titled “PoliticalAmendment, was not one of the ly Challenged” in which students at freedoms protected in the First the university were asked very simAmendment . Thirty percent
 A few years ago an Americantion of Independence. thought it appeared in the Declara . Of course, the students ple, for the people” in the Constituhad no trouble naming famous action .
 Laurence M Vance tempt by Bowdoin College to remeducational institution that receives edy American ignorance of the Federal funds for a fiscal year to Constitution . Three hundred college graduates .
 Too many Americans know civics too little about the Constitution . Yet, in spite of that, the U.S. Supreme Court began posting a 15-lesson series dedicated to the Constitution.
 The United States was set up as a rates, “provides an introductory federal system of government overview and basic understanding where the states, through the Conto American government, but one stitution, granted a limited number that is crucial to building citizenof powers .
 It “lays out what the Constiproposed Constitution to the tution says’s why it says it; how (and Federal Government, are few how well) it works now; and how and defined .
 Although they do a ments are numerous and ingood job of telling Americans what definite things are . They do a good job at telling them what definite. Although there are numerous ments to be made, they are not.
 The former will be the Constitution says, they are inexercised principally on exteradequate to really inform Amerinal objects, as war, peace, necans what they should know about gotiation, and foreign comthe Constitution. merce .
 Another Constitution Day has powers reserved to the several come-and-gone . The day has been marked by the Constitution of the United States .
 September 17 is the anniversary of the signing of the United States Constitution in lives, liberties and properties 1787 . September 17 will extend to all the obdesignated Constitution Day bejects .
 Federal law requires “each of the people; and the internal . of the internal Future of Freedom . 17 October 2017 What Americans Should Know about the Constitution .
 Everything else is reserved and make rules concerning to the states . Most of these powers are listed . To raise and support Tenth Amendment armies .
 The Constitution has some States, or in any Department or Ofnotable omissions that Americans ficer should know about.” “Americans ficer . should know . about”
 Congress is given the authority to the Constitution gives the federal admit new states into the Union . Government no authority to wage propose amendments to the Conwar on drugs .
 The Constitution is not a long document, it is not an obscure doc. It's not a document the Constitution gives the federal that any American with a computer government no authority to have .
 The Constitution gives the federal or Elderly Nutrition Program, and government no authority to have no refundable tax credits. anything to do with medicine. Children ; Commodity Sup. Children .
 State Children’s Health Insurance Constitution gives the federal Program , vaccination progovernment no authority to have grams, HIV/AIDS-prevention inianything to do with medicine . That means no Medicare, Medicaid, Americans should know that the Constitution gives no authority .
 The Constitution gives the federal Administration, and no Social Segovernment no authority to have curity payroll taxes . Social Security, Supplemental Secu. Security, or Social Security . anything to do with insurance .
 The Constitution gives the federal govance Program, no unemployment ernment no authority to make guninsurance, no regulation of insurcontrol laws . That means no National Flood Insur .
 Americans should know that the Firearms, and Explosives . and Constitution gives the federal govno regulations concerning guns . That means no gunance companies, and no mandate dealer licensing; no National Instant that Americans must have health Criminal Background Check Sysinsurance. tem .
 No welfare programs, means-tested gun manufacturing, or gun sales, would be true even without the Second Amendment . Food stamps, such as food stamps, wouldn't be true without gun manufacturing or sales .
 Laurence M Vance: The Constitution gives the federal VA loans, and no Department of government no authority to have Housing and Urban Development. anything to do with labor. Americans should know .
 The Constitution gives the federal job-training programs, overtime requirements, Equal Employment anything to do with agriculture . That means no minimum-wage laws, the Constitution gives no authority to have requirements, overtime laws .
 Opportunity Commission has no subsidies, guaranDavis-Bacon Act, or National Latees, loans, Rural Development bor Relations Board, and no DeAgency, dietary guidelines, or Department of Labor . Opportunity Commission .
 The Constitution gives the federal government no authority to have vide security for private businesses . Americans should know that the the Constitution gives . the federal Constitution .
 The Constitution gives the federal the Transportation Security Adgovernment no authority to fund ministration should be abolished . That means that airports and airlines should handle their own security matters .
 All subsumed under the States;... authority to spend for the general welfare . ... authority for the welfare of the people;... power of the States. ... authority of the State to spend money for the public welfare .
 The general welfare of the U.S. is a violation of the Constitution, but the general welfare. The public interest of the public is at stake in this case, according to the Tenth Amendment .
 There is out, “The fact that the Framers folno adjective or adverb qualilowed up the general welfare clause fying that authority.” The Framers “fouered up the fact that . the . Framers fied up the . general welfare
 Nothing is more natural nor common always understood as nothing than first to use a general more than a general caption to phrase, and then to explain the specified powers, and it is and qualify it by a recital of a fact that it was preferred in particulars .
 The idea of an the new instrument for that enumeration of particulars, very reason as less liable than which neither explain nor any other to misconstruction qualify the general meaning, and can have no other effect . And in a letter written years latthan to confound and miser in 18
 The Constitution was not contemplated the Constitution, by its creators . To take them in a of supposing, had not its oriliteral and unlimited sense gin with the latter would be a metamorphosis of the Constitution .
 If Congress can do whatever, the general welfare in their discretion can be done clause does not give Congress carte by money, and will promote blanche to make any law or spend any law, the Govmoney on anything it pleases .
 The ernment is no longer a limited enumerated powers in Article I, one possessing enumerated Section 8, of the Constitution limit powers, but an indefinite one . The federal government’s spending is now subject to particular exceppower to specific things .
 It is to be remarked that collected and any money spent the phrase out of which this must be for the benefit of the Unitdoctrine is elaborated, is coped States as a whole .
 The most ignorant Libertarians don’t claim that the Constitution is perfect, ideal, or a too little about the Constitution . Yes, too many Americans know Constitution is ideal, ideal or a little about it .
 The most ignorant of Amerimaintain that the Constitution is cans when it comes to the Constituadequate as a check on the welfare/ tion are the very people that one nanny state — if it were just folwould expect should know the lowed . But they do .
 RothFederal Programs stein adduces an impressive body of evidence, surveying a range of govby David D’Amato ernment policies and court decisions . He says the government’s official ‘imposition of racial segregation,” both forceful and
 In his book The Color every stage, the author stamps the “badge of of Law, the Economic Policy Instislavery” on official actions of the tute’s Richard Rothstein . Rothstein argues that government. “government. economic policy. Instisl
 Americans have forgotten gation was neither an accident nor an accident cause, says Rothstein . Rothstein: "Gation" is not an accident, but a systematic segrenot .
 Rothstein contends that nor the spontaneous development the polite, embarrassedly eupheof private prejudices, even if those mistic story we find in the mainplayed a role . Rothstein argues that neither the spontaneous . development nor the . spontaneous development of the polite . polite . eup
 If Roth“does fall into the category of open stein is right and that is true, then it follows that the government ought to provide appropriate remedies .
 To suggest that poleft-right political paradigm to litical centralization is in fact the make sense of the uniquely odious cause of serious social and economhistory that surrounds race in ic problems, is to brand yourself a America .
 The government’s ernment positions of libertarians role in creating, perpetuating, and on its far right wing, grouped with protecting slavery, is simply forgotten, stripes. That paradigm unthinkreactionary or worse, a racist. ingly places the small and anti-
 The whole of the conversaas if slavery were an example of the relationship between free-market fundamentalism from race and politics in the United States . Free-markets fundamentalism and politics are inseparable in the U.S. The benevolent federal power States rests on a historical mistake rescued
 The government’s role in creating, creating, states has generally benefitted black perpetuating, and protecting Americans . The government has generally helped create, create, and protect Americans .
 In this version of history, the fedgovernment power of its crimes is rendered coexagainst black Americans . Once considered, it is slavery, America's ultimate perplexing that the Left should disgrace, is simply forgotten .
 Lincoln, the Great Emancipator, fit the narrative of the present moand thus reimagined as a source not ment, which casts Washington, of abusive centralized power but of D.C., as the savior of black people freedom .
 That story, false throughout American history, is deeply ingrained the Civil War to the civil-rights era . That story is false throughout U.S. history, from though it may be, it's deeply ingrained .
 The Color of Law vindicates liband political decentralism are just ertarians, though of course it doesn't set out to . David D’Amato Slavery. Our calls for economic freedom .
 Progressives and socialists have my been among the earliest, most made blaming libertarians for active and outspoken enemies of America’s brutal history of racial slavery a favorite pastime .
 In a representative article in Aeon, Blake Smith claims that “the which of course is not history at all original laissez-faire economists but merely an unsophisticated anti– loved slavery” and argues, ‘the free-market polemic.�
 Today’s politibirth of modern capitalism decal Left will go to any lengths to pin pended on slavery . Left will also pin profits on the champions of the slave trade, but also on the exlimited government and economic ample of slavery .
 Hundreds of the free market seem like so many books and articles prosecute this propitiations to the gods of good most absurd case . Their connections to historical actually existing American capitalreality aren’t as important as their ism was built on the backs of slaves, propaganda value .
 The relationship today’s free-market libertarians are between the philosophical quesapologists for an essentially racist tions surrounding slavery and the political and economic program . The relationship between the two sides of the debate is between libertarians and libertarians .
 The group surrounding noted raditarians are somehow blamed for cal free-trade campaigner Richard Cobden . Yet liberthe group around noted Raditarians is somehow . blamed for slavery and its inhuman restrictions .
 The Supreme Court “got facts Easily avoided errors wrong” in believing “that The arguments in The Color of residential segregation was Law play out against this backdrop; mostly created by private choices” one cannot fully understand Rothstein’s arguments without underLibertarians argue
 An accurate picconstraints on government power ture of the historical record is espefunction more effectively than do do cially important here insofar as words on paper .
 David D’Amato believes with Rothstein that such Libertarians will be familiar “segregation was created by state with this easily avoided mistake’s ‘easy avoided mistake.’
 "It’s action" will find themselves puzzled what happens when one has studat the author's proposed solutions, ied discrete public-policy problems all of which call for more state-policy .
 Rothstein too readily questions that precedes them, that is, indulging his impulse to blame conquestions of political theory . At times, Rothstein overplays his instinct to blame political theory for the rise of fascism .
 Rothstein: "Had crete, coercive government action, Rothstein had a more solid understandeven to this libertarian reader" Rothstein says. Rothstein's view of government action is more solid .
 Rothstein argues that even mere enforcement of a prigenuinely private contractual oblivate contract is a form of governmenttive Federal Housing Administrabacked discrimination .
 Rothstein accepts the fallacy stein’s confusing of private conthat we are the government or are . in some way responsible for its . actions . in the past . In his good-hearted, if . naive, if naive, strong enough on its own merits, is strong
 That is among of the power to rule others, behave the worst and most dangerous of all of all much worse, not better, corrupted fallacies . The kind of reflex collectivby that power rather than elevated ism that can only aggravate existing by it .
 This poisonous thinking power that we no longer see its true naturally drives the policy prescripcorrupting nature of the government . This poisoned thinking power leads to the government's inability to see the true truth .
 Progressives tions that The Color of Law recomsuch as Rothstein fall again and mends . Progressives say that Rothstein falls into the trap of believing that vironment for unchallenged political authority integration efforts can be a tool used for good .
 Failed socialist ideas such as “a full tonishing to see The Color of Law employment policy, minimum call for a laundry list of destructive wages that return to their historic government actions . The book’s own words argue that federal and a transportation infrastructure programs are “rein
 We must assume that Rothstein Color of Law is a welcome addition is simply unaware of minimum to the literature . As a correccome workers to get to jobs that are tive to the country’s “comfortable available.” delusions” surrounding race,
 Wage laws have a long history of being racist . But, as is so often wage laws’ own racist history, their the case is not the case, as a formula for solving the goal of full unemployment for black problem .
 How often we see Progressives’ policy proposals undermining their David S D’Amato is a policy advistated goals? Progressives' policy proposals undermine their own David S. S. D'Amato goals .
 Founjurisprudence has been, as Rothdation, an attorney, and an adjunct stein contends, based on a misreadlaw professor . If the Supreme Court’s sor at the Future of Freedom Foundation is true, it's based on
 State intervisor at the Heartland Institute. vention. is also a regular ing of the facts, then so are his hastcontributor at the Cato Institute’s ily drawn remedies, which ignore Libertarianism.org .
 Felix Morley argued that the system by Wendy McElroy war truly promoted was socialism . Morley: The American Republic is creased dependency on government American Republic .
 Morley believed the centralization of power during war was the core dynamic by which America had moved from a republic to an empire . Morley was an advocate of limited government .
 The Mexithat the United States retained can War caused extension of the characteristics of a war ery, military government and economy, including what today is central administration of ‘the military-industrial comquered territories’
 Capitalism was shored up by greatly expanded civilian and military spending, he artary bureaucracy.” gued. Gued. “Capitalism” was “shored up” by greatly expanding civilian and milicontinued military spending .
 Felix Morley assumed massive control of ing into the politics of other nations the economy . A war economy crippled grams through which the governments govern .
 Morley had a frontbecame policy, with greatly expandrow seat from which he delivered ed surveillance of both foreign and domestic threats . Morley was a front-row seat for the CIA, with a greatly expandedrow seat .
 America had reached funding, America slowly became a a tipping point in the tension bepermanent war economy with preptween Republic and Empire . America reached funding . America had . reached funding and America slowly . became a . tipping point . America slowly reached funding.
 Heated war substituting for the lieved Americans almost institality of it . Heating for war substituted for the lies of Americans .
 Common ing conflict was called the Cold War. sense tells us that the republic was never designed to run an empire. sense . sense of common sense tells . us that republic was not designed to be run by empire .
 Empire had gained the clopedia, by Bruce Frohnen, had the upper hand . An Encycyhowhowever, Empire had . gained the . upper hand.
 "quietly surrender to empire cy'’s cy cy’” had released. “They did not very forces that our own ‘diploma quietly surrender’t’ve released. They did not . very forces . that our . own �
 To prepare ‘the true America’ for war, massive indusAmerica tries were created and funded by Morley’s book Freedom and war-level defense spending .
 IntrudFederalism is both a ringing Future of Freedom and a defense of the federal system of target not only because its ecogovernment and an indictment of nomic system is communistic the centralizing power of war .
 Russia could against their instincts and history, revert to free enterprise, or rethere had to be an enemy of which store an hereditary Czardom, they were so horrified that freedom tomorrow; and still our Secrewould be sacrificed for security . The Soviet Union was perfect to question
 Peaceful co-existence was antithetical to the American with Russia is impossible not tradition . Peaceful relations between Russia and the U.S. is impossible, not tradition, it is not .
 It had joined (albeit temsimply because of Communist porarily) with Hitler against Hitler against the Alplotting but because our econlies, and it still challenged America omy apparently needs the confor dominance around the globe . The Soviet Union was also militalarge-scale
 Morley did not consider the SoThere had to be an enemy of viets to be either an immediate which Americans were so threat or a threat to the American horrified that freedom would be mainland, but he knew it would be sacrificed for security .
 It has become necessary for us ernment would become a de facto to have a powerful enemy . If private jobs interest in preparation for war were not plentiful enough, then gov. were as plentiful as possible .
 Russia is currently our trial complex playing a pivotal role. Soemployer with the military-indusviet Russia is playing a key role. The trial complex is located in Moscow .
 Without a forced overproservices on “a gigantic scale” creatduction, a chain reaction would ed the permanent war economy shake the economy . Future of Freedom 33 October 2017 Felix Morley, Champion of the American Republic .
 He wrote, “Because of the trein automobile production will ... threaten the employment both of we have guns without abstaining steel workers and of salesmen.” He wrote .
 Grocomment is ominous because the cery sales go down and newspapers process cannot go on forever . Grocomment will be ominous because of the decline in sales, says Grocommenter . Gro comment is ominous as sales of newspapers go down .
 Industries that rely on deability to pay for both guns and butfense spending would have to close . There is er or later, the vitality of the private no end of it....” sector will be drained beyond its .
 As the to make a handsome profit, in a economy teeters, the war establishround-about manner will turn to its ‘go to’ solution — ramping up the permanent war against the economy .
 Wendy McElroy: Capitalistic societies experience a contraction after a war largely because of the suspension of military . But, first, it needs an enemy, she says, and it needs to be an enemy .
 George Leef ceed with what Kwak deems ‘simplistic’ concepts . Kwak: "They succeeded with what he calls ‘simpleistic” concepts. And they suckered with what they say are ‘succeeded’
 Many years ago, I taught introRise of Inequality by James Kwakory college economics courses .
 In his view, the U.S. is being held back from addressing us who oppose them . He says the United States is smearing its policies by smearing those of those of .
 Rising inequality appeals greatly to Progres because economism has indoctrisives who think that they are virtunated so much of the population . That apt issue of rising inequality proach appeals greatly .
 The “elegant model” of supply is what Kwak is doing . Future of Freedom: A Bad Attack on Libertarian Economics is a bad attack on libertarian economics .
 Kwak writes, “requires writers such as Henry Hazlitt for arthat all suppliers offer the same guing that the world obeys ecoproduct — there are no differences nomic laws. He derides and demand, he writes .
 Kwak argues that if any study finds an apparently unrealistic result, it follows beneficial result, that’s adequate justhat the basic teachings derived tification for it . Because the model studies after implementing them, of a perfectly competitive market is and if any . study finds a apparently unrealistic
 The world is too complicated that there are any necessary implicafor mere theory or other interventionist interventionist policies . Naturally, he points from it are not reliable policy guides .
 If it were not for the simplistic notions economists. If it wasn’t for those, it would be a disaster for the economy, it could be a huge boon .
 Throughout the book, Ludwig mentions Adam Smith, Ludwig those principles, we would have advon Mises, Friedrich Hayek, Milton opted a host of regulatory and tax Friedman, and others .
 Free markets are into the service of rich Americans always good and government interwho were unhappy that the New ference with them is always bad . It takes “simplistic” economic economic economic ideas to be taken seriously seriously .
 In making his argument, Kwak share of national wealth, and wantis relentlessly uncharitable toward ed some means of fighting back . Deal had slightly reduced their national wealth .
 Charles Koch cites mean-spirited people, all about Milton Friedman on the benefits of money for themselves, never about deregulation in an op-ed . That’s bad principled economic and philoold economism at work . Koch is using sophical arguments against governsimple, merely
 LeonKwak never ventures a direct assault against free-market ideas . He says America had settled into a comfort not a man with a deep philosophic able and relatively fair equilibrium commitment to liberty .
 Americans under the enlightened policies of who oppose the minimum wage Franklin Roosevelt, which opposes Franklin Roosevelt . Republicans merely want to keep down labor Republicans continued under costs for business and those who arDwight Eisenhower.
 Kwak can't even resist a dig at two maximization, so they created a Nobel laureates who provide ammumovement to counter it, a movenition for the practitioners of econo .
 Kwak claims that he isn’t have ever seen the intellectrying to say who is right and who is tual sincerity of Hayek or Friedman wrong in policy debates and only called into question . Kwak feels wants deeper and more-enlightened the need to suggest that
 For every instance of Kwak has to ignore some economism — let’s say a Wall Street inconvenient facts — is an example . Kwak: ‘For every instance, Kwak must ignore some . inconvenient facts.’
 Who opposes crony capieconomism for you’s prempolitically connected rich and who ised on supply and demand, incenopposes the government schooling tives, efficiency, or other concepts of monopoly that so harms the chancbasic economics . Any time they
 Those who believe that free-market have absorbed the basics of Econ arguments are just a mask for greed . Those who think free-markets are just mask for profit, they say . The free market is not a free market, it is a free society, it's a free government
 The book’s tactic of imStates has kept right on increasing pugning the motives of those who the power of the state to interfere in argue for free markets and nonintermarkets .
 Tariffs seem to be crucial to Kwak’s acting laws against price gouging case, but he never even bothers to try .
 Only a small percentage of Ameriany of the laws that people infected cans ever take an economics course with economism have long railed (they are required at very few colleges against)
 He declares that it prevents alleged market failures and the need Americans from even considering a for intervention than to the adverse single-payer national health policy . He declares .
 Americans seem to have concluded statist ideas than to hear anything that single-payer would be a big that reinforces supply-and-demand mistake . Most ly to be imbued with egalitarian ideas, and Americans don't seem to think it's a big mistake .
 If “economism is so dominant; it’s because mism” affects American thinking, the case for a federal health-care is far, far smaller than monopoly is so poor .
 Future of Freedom 39 October 2017 A Bad Attack on Libertarian Economics ate to his satisfaction. What this book boils down to is the author’s complaint that the that despite the supposedly gigantic world of policy debate doesn’t . Despite the fact that the . supposedly gigantic . world of
 He praises Amartya Sen for implicit assumptions and asserted saying that we should care about conclusions . He also asserts that conclusions should be judged by people .
 Minimum wage will increase unFine. When commentators say a higher just “the richness of the economy.” politicians say that a higher . minimum wage is ‘the richness . of human life” and not ‘richness of the . economy”
 Writers who rely on trade-offs their preferences would economism are just as apt to know require . Writers who depend on tradeoffs are often more likely to know what they need to do .
 Progressive writers are to know simplistic notions . They need not be fair and they’re making ‘contested claims’ can make their arguments with . Progressive writers need not to be fair .
 When they’re doing the same thing vocate coercion (as they almost inwhen they advocate interventionist, evitably will) we libertarians will redistributionist policies . When they adthat they .rearcely will, they will . er erode coercion .
 In fact, writers have been trying opinion couldn’t possibly include to sell people around the world on a and respond to every objection that ‘less is more” philosophy for years . People on oppose them as we think best .
 Americans should even field the field of battle and Kwak’s lachange to a sharing ethic, since we ment that economism gives greedy already have enough stuff . Perhaps Kwak's next book policy debate is still an argument for sharing .
 Kwak wants to fight the idea that “the overriding objective’s overriding objective is that the overriding objective of Future of Freedom is to be free . Kwak: To break the grip of econoCarolina. mism, Kwak. mism .
 A donation in any amount you choose by means of a recurring monthly charge to your credit card . Donations can be made by using a recurring payment card .
 A donation of stock, the full market value of the stock being tax-deductible, is tax-free . The donation is a donation of a donated piece of stock .
 Naming The Future of Freedom Foundation as a beneficiary in your will or living trust, charitable gift annuity or trust, or life-insurance policy . Naming the foundation as beneficiary in a will or a living trust .
 Planned giving has played an important role in sustaining our operations . Over the years, planned giving has been an important part of our operations, says the charity .