 The world stood at the brink of Armageddon for 13 days in October 1962 when President John F Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic . President Kennedy warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it .
 Low level photograph made Oct. 1962 of a missile site under construction in the San Cristobal area of Cuba .
 U-2 spy plane flying over Cuba snapped aerial photographs of Soviet missile sites that could launch nuclear warheads with little warning at the U.S. just 90 miles away . The U.2 plane was flying high over Cuba .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrej Gromyko meets with President John F Kennedy in the White House Oct. 1962 . Soviet foreign minister met with President Kennedy in October 1962 .
 Gromyko lied to Kennedy, telling him the Soviet Union had no missiles in Cuba . Kennedy told Kennedy that the Soviet Russia had no missile missiles in the country .
 President John F Kennedy makes a national television speech October 22, 1962, from Washington, informing the American pubic about the existence of the missles . Kennedy made the speech to the American public .
 He confronted the Soviet Union by announcing a naval blockade of Cuba until the missiles were removed . The blockade was imposed by the Cuban government in 1953 .
 McNamara ordered all Navy and Marine Corps enlistments and duty tours extended for up to one year to support the arms blockade of Cuba . Defense Secretary McNamara announced he had ordered the extension .
 President Kennedy is surrounded by photographers, as he sits at his desk in the White House, in Washington, D.C., on October 23, 1962, shortly after signing a presidential proclamation concerning the Cuba crisis .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro replies to President Kennedy's naval blockade via Cuban radio and television on October 23, 1962 . Fidel Castro was the first Cuban president to speak out against the blockade .
 10 of 17 Soviet ships carrying nuclear equipment steamed toward Kennedy's ""quarantine"" zone around the island, but turned around before reaching the line .
 Aerial view shows a Soviet ship carrying eight canvas-covered missiles and transporters, visible on decks .
 The United States destroyer Barry pulls alongside the Russian freighter Anosov in the Atlantic Ocean, November 10, 1962, to inspect cargo as a United States patrol plane flies overhead .
 "We're eyeball-to-eyeball, and I think the other fellow just blinked,"" U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk famously said, a quote seen as defining the crisis .
 The Soviet freighter, Bonronec, sails an Easterly course away from Havana on Nov. 22, 1962 . The freighter was the first to sail from Havana .
 Historians now say it was behind-the-scenes compromise rather than a high-stakes game of chicken that resolved the faceoff . Both Washington and Moscow wound up winners and that the crisis lasted far longer than 13 days . 14 of 17 historians now say that it was a behind-
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy met secretly with the Soviet ambassador on Oct. 17 . Washington would publicly reject any invasion of Cuba, and Khrushchev would withdraw the missiles .
 A soldier pauses to look at the outer casing of an old empty Soviet missile on exhibit as he works to paint it at the military complex Morro Cabana which is open to tourists in Havana .
 Images from the 126th Boston Marathon 16 photos . The race was held in honor of the Kennedy family .
 The world stood at the brink of Armageddon for 13 days in October 1962 when President John F Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic . Kennedy warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it .
 U-2 spy plane flying over Cuba snapped aerial photographs of Soviet missile sites . U.S. missile sites could launch nuclear warheads with little warning at the United States, just 90 miles from U.K.
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrej Gromyko meets with President John F Kennedy in the White House Oct. 1962 . Soviet foreign minister met with President Kennedy in October 1962 .
 President John F Kennedy makes a national television speech October 22, 1962, from Washington, informing the American pubic about the existence of the missles . President Kennedy made the speech in a national TV interview October 22 .
 Defense Secretary McNamara ordered all Navy and Marine Corps enlistments extended for up to one year to support the arms blockade of Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy is surrounded by photographers, as he sits at his desk in the White House, in Washington, D.C., on October 23, 1962, shortly after signing a presidential proclamation concerning the Cuba crisis . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro replies to President Kennedy's naval blockade via Cuban radio and television on October 23, 1962 . Castro was responding to the blockade via radio and TV .
 Soviet ships carrying nuclear equipment steamed toward Kennedy's ""quarantine"" zone around the island, but turned around before reaching the line .
 The United States destroyer Barry pulls alongside the Russian freighter Anosov in the Atlantic Ocean, November 10, 1962, to inspect cargo as a U.S. patrol plane flies overhead .
 "We're eyeball-to-eyeball, and I think the other fellow just blinked,"" U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk famously said, a quote that came to be seen as defining the crisis .
 Historians now say it was behind-the-scenes compromise rather than a high-stakes game of chicken that resolved the faceoff . Both Washington and Moscow wound up winners and that the crisis lasted far longer than 13 days .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy met secretly with the Soviet ambassador on Oct. 1962 . Washington would publicly reject any invasion of Cuba, and Khrushchev would withdraw the missiles from the island .
 Military complex Morro Cabana is open to tourists in Havana, Cuba, on Saturday . Cuban soldiers are painting Soviet missiles on exhibit at the military complex in Havana .
 President John F Kennedy, right, confers with his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy at the White House in Washington, D.C., on Oct. 1962 . The buildup of military tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union that became Cuban missile crisis later that month .
 Get the latest breaking news updates from CNN iReport . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter on Twitter .