 He has not been seen publicly since July 2006, when he underwent intestinal surgery . After a long absence from the public eye, he was purportedly shown in photographs in June of 2010, released by Cuban State News Agency .
 There is much that is not known of Castro's rural youth . In that sentence he told us the entire story of Cuba, and Castro . -Ronald Reagan .
 In the mountains the guidance of the bandit Cresencio Perez, and a few communist sleepers who had been placed in the Sierra for some time under the direction of stalinist agent Fabio Grobart was important .
 By 1958, military attacks against Batista's army were having some success, and the revolution was gaining national support . The support of the United States State Department, mediated by William Weiland was significant from the time of the Bogotazo, through the Bay of Pigs .
 The revolution finally succeeded in late 1958, and on January 1st 1959, Batista left the country . The revolution was successful and Batista died in 1959 .
 Castro welcomed the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba to deter an American attack . Castro had been in regular contact with the KGB since 1956 . Castro used Soviet arms during his guerilla war .
 Castro, all the while maintaining an ""anti-imperialist" political posture, would intervene extensively in the internal affairs of African nations through violence and war . Castro intervened extensively in Africa's internal affairs .
 On May 1, 2007, Castro did not attend Cuba's annual celebration of May Day, leading many to believe that he had died . Many thought that he was dead .
 Castro allegedly met with Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva on February 25, 2010 . There is no independent confirmation that this was not in fact a body double .
 In September of 2011, it was reported that a Venezuelan reporter had interviewed Castro . Independent media have not confirmed that this was not actually a doppelganger standing in for Castro .
 Castro met with Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff in February 2012 . In February 2012, the mainstream media reported that Castro had met with Rousseff . Castro has a history of meeting with Brazilian leaders .