 Kenya's President Kenyatta has been in Kenya since 2007 . He was in Kenya at the time of his death .
 We comfort ourselves with the image of a near-omniscient commander-in-chief able to draw on the vast resources of the world's most powerful military machine . The U.S. has been in the grip of a global security crisis since 2001 .
 Historical record suggests a more realistic -and human -picture of presidents stumbling about in the semi-darkness as they attempt to master the chaotic forces of history .
 In my book One Minute to Midnight, I tried to integrate the debates in the White House with a minute-by-minute account of events in the rest of the world . In his book, One Minute To Midnight, he wrote about the world's most recent events in Washington .
 Information flowing into the ExComm was often incomplete, misleading, or simply wrong . The ExComm is often incomplete or misleading information flowing into it .
 The president often had only a vague idea of what was happening in Cuba and the Soviet Union . He often had a vague notion of what happened in Cuba or Soviet Union.
 Neither he nor his opposite number in Moscow, Nikita Khrushchev, exercised full control of their own armies . Neither he or his opposite . number in . Moscow, Russia and the Soviet Union were able to control their armies .
 For all their mistakes and near-fatal miscalculations, they managed to avoid blowing up the world . And yet somehow, for all their . mistakes and . nearfatal . miscalculated miscalculation, they avoided blowing up . up . world .
 I was still daddy's little squirt during the bay of pigs, but shortly after this I was one of the million B00Mers . I was born between 1946 and 1964 .
 Some references state 46 to 64 but found more46-65. to 65 . I had always thought Boomers were 46 to 57. I found more references to the age range .
 During the height of the crisis each country would be looking for missile launches . The U.S. tested a missile during the crisis .
 I doubt anyone born in 64 or 65 or 65 had any common experience with someone born in 46 . I doubt any common common experience between those born in both ages of 46 and 46 .
 "My parents were born in 65 and 67, technically two different generations. My parents are technically two generations. I'm not going to be in the same generation. I want to be able to talk about my parents' generation."