 Kennedy is remembered for a composed and tactful approach to defusing the conflict . Khrushchev removed the Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba . Kennedy is known for his composed approach to the crisis .
 Less well known are the United States’ Jupiter nuclear missiles that were in Turkey at the time of the crisis, much less than their role in precipitating it .
 Despite their brief existence and tactical inferiority to other weapon systems such as the Polaris nuclear submarines, the Jupiters presented both major diplomatic problems for Kennedy .
 The removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey was secretly part of the compromise that resolved the most tense and celebrated war of nerves between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . On the one hand, removal of these Jupiter missiles .
 The Jupiters had little military value and were limited in their ability to deter Soviet attacks . But in the end they carried significant diplomatic value as bargaining chips for Kennedy .
 Sticky, problematic weapons that were obsolete even when deployed . However, they were also sticky and problematic weapons . The U.S. military says the weapons are now obsolete .
 The Kennedy administration was never impressed by the Jupiter missiles, yet it followed through with Eisenhower’s commitment to Turkey in 1959 and installed these nuclear weapons in Turkey .
 Roger Hilsman states that Kennedy had ordered the removal of the missiles from Turkey several times prior to the crisis . Roger Hilsman states Kennedy had ordered removal of missiles from Turkey several times before .
 The State Department did not act as forcefully as the President had, he says . This paper was written for Dr. David Frum . Dr. Frum stipulates that the State Department was not aggressive enough to act .
 Charles Hanson’s Advanced Placement United States History class will take place in the spring of 2014 . Charles Hanson's class will be part of Charles' class .
 Kennedy continued to explore his options, but never ordered removal . As his administration pushed forward with the installation of the missiles, Kennedy continued looking at his options .
 Kennedy avoided giving an order for the extraction of the missiles from Turkey for two key reasons . Kennedy avoided a decision to order the missiles to be extracted from Turkey .
 The U.S. did not want to disturb relations with Turkey and NATO, as both disapproved of withdrawing the missiles . President Obama also did not wish to disturb the United States’ relations with NATO and Turkey .
 It would be naïve to say that Kennedy had never wished to remove the Jupiters from Turkey before October 1962 . They were obsolete, had no retaliatory value, and they increased the risk of war by miscalculation .
 Historians and memoirists suggest Kennedy ordered removal prior to missile crisis because of the inherent problems with the weapons . Some historians say Kennedy may have ordered removal of the weapons prior to the missile crisis .
 President Kennedy considered the cancellation of the Jupiter program even before any of the nuclear missiles were delivered to Turkey . The Jupiter program was canceled before the delivery of the missiles .
 Kennedy questioned the scheduled deployment of the Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles at an NSC meeting on March 29th . Kennedy also questioned the plans to use the Jupiter missiles .
 The NSC memorandum confirms Kennedy had doubts regarding the Jupiters . Kennedy contemplated the possibility of reneging on Eisenhower’s commitment to Turkey .
 It is undeniable that the Jupiter missiles were technically obsolete, with operational and security flaws . The Jupiter missiles are technically obsolete with operational, security flaws, it is said .
 In February 1961, a month after Kennedy’s inauguration, the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy called for an Executive Session to discuss the vulnerabilities and flaws of the Jupiter missiles .
 By law, nuclear warheads were under American possession, with a two-person rule in place to prevent unilateral action . The nuclear weapons were under U.S. possession .
 The arrangement could be bypassed as easily as hitting the American “on the head with a blackjack” to acquire the key for launching the missiles, presenting the possibility of unauthorized firing of the missiles .
 A “$1.75 rifle” could render the missile inoperative . The missiles were extremely vulnerable; a $1.25 rifle could render them inoperative.
 At the time of the meeting, the Jupiters were not delivered to Turkey yet . The Jupits were delivered to the country yet . At this time, they were still in the process .
 Based on the instability of the Turkish government, the JCAE identified Turkey as a poor location for the deployment of the Jupiters . It suggested that a Polaris submarine should be deployed instead of a submarine .
 The JCAE raised important concerns that most likely played a part in Kennedy’s wishes to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey . Kennedy‘s wish to remove them from Turkey was likely to play a role in removing them .
 The Jupiter IRBM’s were positioned directly across from the USSR on the edge of the Black Sea . The Jupiter IRBM's were also highly provocative, as they were positioned .
 The Jupiters took hours to fire and were unreliable, making them only useful for an offensive surprise strike . This fact, combined with their provocative nature, suggested that the missiles only invited attacks instead of deterring them .
 The Soviets could be expected to either destroy the Jupiters themselves or take offensive action elsewhere in the world .
 Kennedy recognized the importance of being firm with the Soviets so as to not look weak to the rest of the world . Khrushchev was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Kennedy traveled to Vienna in the first week of June for a two-day summit with Khrushchev . On the heels of these two crises, Kennedy visited Vienna for a summit .
 Kennedy attended the summit meeting with President Barack Obama . The summit meeting turned out to be a brutal experience for the president .
 The new President was no match for the sixty-seven year old Soviet leader . He chastised Kennedy for the Bay of Pigs invasion, pointing to the hypocrisy of American foreign policy .
 The President knew that the Jupiter IRBM’s were flawed and contemplated the cancellation of their deployment to Turkey, but the Vienna Summit all but ruled out this possibility .
 George McGhee of the State Department delivered a memorandum to the President’s national security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, regarding the Jupiter missiles . On June 22nd, 1961, eighteen days after the conclusion of the summit, McGhee .
 President Kennedy had asked McGhee to “study and report on the matter” of the Jupiters instead of ordering him to take action . Kennedy had simply asked him to study and report the matter, not to act .
 McGhee suggested that the President should continue with the deployment of the IRBM’s to Turkey, “primarily” because the termination of the Jupiters’ deployment would imply that Kennedy had acceded to Khrushchev's threatening attitude at Vienna . McG
 McGhee established that the missiles were not deployed to Turkey as of June 1961 . Eisenhower had put the Jupiter plan in place through an agreement with Turkey . Kennedy’s administration installed the missiles after June 1961, McGhee said .
 The President’s embarrassment at the hands of Khrushchev in June caused a change . The President of the Soviet Union was embarrassed by the humiliation .
 Had he terminated the Jupiter program after the Vienna Summit, cancellation would no longer be viewed as a reasonable step prompted by the Jupiters’ real problems, it would have been seen as a rational step .
 The cessation of the program would have been seen as the result of Soviet pressure on the United States . Khrushchev’s dominance over Kennedy would have shown to the world, he says .
 President Eisenhower kept the terms of the Turkey-Cuba missile trade a secret to the public . The deal was kept secret to Turkey and even to former President Eisenhower .
 Kennedy intentionally refrained from telling Eisenhower about the Jupiter-Cuba missile trade . The deal was part of the deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev . Kennedy called Eisenhower the same day as the deal .
 Turkey and NATO strongly opposed removal of the U.S. ambassador from Syria . Removal could endanger the alliance and damage America’s credibility, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 NATO’s General Lauris Norstad voiced strong support for the continuation of the Jupiter deployment to Turkey in a telegram to Secretary of Defense McNamara . In April 1961, after the President raised the question of the deployment of the Jupiters at a National Security Council meeting
 JCAE report said Turks could easily gain control of missiles and unilaterally fire them at Soviet Union . Report: Turkey could easily control missiles and fire them into Soviet Union if it wanted to do so . The report was published by the U.S. State Department .
 U.S. manning of the missiles would prevent the possibility of unilateral action by the Turks, he said . He said the United States would not allow Turkey to unilaterally act .
 There is not a reliable system in place to prevent Turkish takeover of the weapons, the Turkish minister says .
 The Turkish government also diametrically opposed any suggestion of cancellation by the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration has been criticized for suggesting cancellation of the trip .
 At NATO meeting in May 1962 in Oslo, Norway, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul Nitze met with the Italian and Turkish Foreign Ministers to discuss the merits of withdrawing the Jupiter missiles . The Jupiter missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Turkey is unable to assess the military value of the Jupiters, says Turkey . The missiles are vital for psychological and political reasons, says Turkish official .
 Kennedy did not want to harm the already vulnerable state of U.S. relations with Turkey by removing the missiles . According to Undersecretary of State George Ball, Kennedy didn't want to hurt the already fragile state of American relations with the country .
 McGhee's memorandum referred to above also addressed Sarper's and Norstad's viewpoints . McGhee’s memorandum refers to Sarper’Sparper and N. Norstad. McGhee.
 Polaris submarines were expected to be in short supply for several years in 1961 . Polaris submarines are expected to last several years before being replaced with new ones .
 There were no readily available nuclear alternatives to the Jupiters for Turkey . The Kennedy administration also recognized the Polaris shortage problem . This is probably why Norstad viewed the Juppiters as militarily important .
 McNamara explained that there would have been a “psychological loss to the West” if the Jupiter program had been simply cancelled . The Jupiter program was replaced with another “modern system” such as the Polaris submarines .
 McNamara mirrored Sarper's and Norstad's views, and as Kennedy’s Secretary of Defense, probably influenced his own thinking during the summer .
 The Polaris submarines were not readily available to Turkey . Kennedy promised a promise but it was insufficient to meet Turkish expectations .
 Without a tangible alternative to the Jupiter IRBM’s, the President's reputation would be diminished in the face of Soviet pressure . The Turks would lose the symbolic token of American commitment .
 Kennedy could not risk weakening NATO alliance and offending a key ally in the Mideast . Kennedy was not willing to risk weakening the NATO alliance . Kennedy's decision to withdraw from NATO was a mistake .
 Turkey and NATO still objected to removal, the U.S. and the Soviet Union were still in a Cold War . The problems with the Jupiters still existed .
 The threat of nuclear escalation and decimation was more important than Kennedy’s political standing or his allies’ opinions, he says . The big change was the threat of a nuclear escalation, he writes .
 The Cold War was intriguing to me as well, because this oneupmanship and back-forth conflict between the two superpowers of the world occurred only a few decades ago . Overall, the Cold War is intriguing, because of the one-upmanship .
 The deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev that ended the crisis in 1962 ended in 1962 . The deal was a deal between the two leaders .
 In one interpretation, Kennedy ordered removal before October 1962 but his bureaucracy thwarted him . In another, Kennedy simply contemplated withdrawal, but never ordered his administration to do so .
 The Menlo roundtable is a round table of historical research . The first round of the roundtable was created by Menloven . The roundtable contains 41 pages .
 As evidenced by the term itself, ‘re-search’ demands a tenacious mindset to repeatedly search for information on the question or topic at hand . ‘Re-Search’ is a term for a person who repeatedly searches for information in order to find the answers to
 ‘raiding’ secondary sources to find insightful primary sources . Another approach that was very useful was 'raiding' secondary sources . ‘riding” secondary sources was ‘aiding‘ secondary sources,’ says author .
 Some of my best sources were found when I traversed through the footnotes of my secondary sources, which also gave me specific keywords to look for . Some of the best sources found were found by traversing through footnotes .
 As I found new information, I had to change my research question and my own viewpoint on the topic . As I find new information on the subject, I changed my own view of the subject .
 Selim Sarper, “An indispensable token…” in The Missile Crisis, by Elie Abel , 190. Selim .
 Ball, George W. The Past Has Another Pattern. Ball: George W.'s past has another pattern . Ball: "George W. has Another Pattern"