 Obama administration shelves Eastern European missile defense system . Decision provides hope for improvement in Russian-American relations .
 Proponents of the system already are accusing Obama of “appeasement,” wrongly but effectively conjuring up fears of Russia as a modern-day Nazi Germany, bent on world domination .
 Given the looming battle over missile defense, it behooves us to better understand why the Russians find this defensive system so offensive .
 To do that requires going beyond what most people think nuclear deterrence means and, instead, seeing its reality, see its reality . To do this is to go beyond the idea of nuclear deterrence .
 Neither U.S. nor Russia can use nuclear weapons against each other without being destroyed in retaliation . Most people believe that these weapons will never be used . Their destructiveness seems to ensure the peace, however .
 Nuclear weapons can be used in times of crisis, experts say . But that view ignores the more subtle use of nuclear weapons in such a crisis, they say .
 Khrushchev first contemplated deploying missiles in Cuba when he was confronted with a similar American threat in Turkey . The missile threat in Cuba was a similar threat to Turkey in 1960s .
 We deployed our Turkish missiles primarily as a “nuclear trip wire,” a warning to the Russians not to become aggressive with Turkey, or else . Khrushchev’s Cuban missiles served a similar purpose .
 The 1961 Bay of Pigs fiasco had humiliated Kennedy and led to repeated calls within the U.S. to invade Cuba in force and topple Castro . The Bay of Pigeas fiasco had led to calls for invasion of Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s Cuban missiles would serve as a Russian nuclear trip wire, a warning to us not to become aggressive with Cuba or else . Kennedy had to resist demands for air strikes to destroy the Russian missiles, even though a likely Soviet response would have been a tit-for
 The United States would have been treaty-bound by Article 5 of NATO to react as if the Soviets had attacked American soil, even though doing so would have resulted in tens of millions of American casualties . The U.S. then would have reacted to the Soviets' attack on American soil
 Any rational American decision-making process would have concluded that it would be far better to back down and admit that our Turkish nuclear trip wire had been nothing but a bluff .
 Only by pretending to be insane enough to use its nuclear weapons and invite its own destruction can either side preserve the limited value that those weapons possess . The U.S. must preserve the value of its own nuclear weapons, either side says .
 Each side is tempted to continue its bluff, hoping the other will back down first . In a crisis, each side hopes to continue bluffing, hoping to back down .
 Such a standoff has been described as a game of nuclear chicken, with the loser being humiliated and losing power, as happened to Khrushchev . The loser — and hopefully, there is only one — is likely to be humiliated and lose power . Such a showdown would be described as an
 A Russian-American crisis is like a play with two actors, each supremely vulnerable and using every prop at its disposal to mask its nakedness . The potential value of missile defense can be seen more clearly by recognizing that a crisis can be like that .
 Neither our Turkish missiles nor the Soviets’ Cuban missiles made a difference to 1962’s balance of power, but they were useful props, giving an ability to project a perception of additional power . Neither the Soviets nor the Turkish missiles were a difference .
 The Russians fear that even a rudimentary, untested U.S. missile defense will allow us to increase the intensity of our bluffs during a crisis . The Russians thus have reason to fear that . Even a rudimentary . untested American missile defense . defense will let us . increase the
 The Russians don't have to fear that it will give us a military advantage, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . To be afraid of our missile defense, the Russians don’t have to be afraid, he says .
 They don’t even have to fear that our leaders will mistakenly believe that it will happen . They fear that it won't happen, even if they believe it will .
 All they have to fear is that our leaders will act as if they believe that it does . The world's leaders must fear that it doesn't exist, and that they do .
 In nuclear chicken, the first party to behave rationally loses, so having one more prop to use in our act is dangerous to Russia’s interests . In nuclear chases, Russia loses if it is not behaving rationally, writes Andrew Hammond .
 At first, that might seem to favor the Eastern European missile defense — at least from our vantage point . But that might not seem to be the case, and it's not surprising .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin appears to be more irrational than his country's enemies . But appearing irrational increases the risk of a catastrophic outcome, he says .
 Failure to weigh the chance of a small gain against the risk of an infinite loss clearly can have disastrous consequences . Failure to pay attention to the risks of infinite loss can be disastrous consequences, says the author .
 "The need for our decision-making process to better balance potential gains and losses extends far beyond missile defense and national security," says President Obama .
 Lack of a framework led financial institutions to take excessive risks, an error costing us trillions of dollars . Lack of such a framework has led to financial institutions taking excessive risks . The error is now costing us billions of dollars, according to experts .
 As expensive as that mistake was, it pales in comparison to what we will suffer if our nuclear weapons strategy proves as faulty . The cost of the mistake was expensive, but it's far more expensive than the cost of trying to fix it .
 Before it is too late, let us learn from our now obvious economic mistakes and balance the risks associated with changes in our nuclear weapons posture against the risk of threatening to destroy civilization .
 His current project, applying risk analysis to nuclear deterrence, is described at NuclearRisk.org .
 If you agree that we should not stand idly by in tacit acceptance of this unacceptable situation, please send a link to this post to friends who might be interested and encourage them to sign up for this blog’s RSS feed .
 To better understand the problem and solution check out Soaring, Cryptography and Nuclear Weapons and our Frequently Asked Questions .
 Earlier emails to the group are on our Resource Page, along with other useful information . Earlier emails are on the Resource Page .
 Fortunately, tensions were defused before it created a full-blown crisis . Fortunately, the crisis was defused by a quick defuse .
 Until more prudent policies become the norm, the risk is still present . But, until more prudent policy is adopted, there is still the risk of the situation .
 Since 1982, my primary interest has been how fallible human beings can survive possessing nuclear weapons, where even one mistake could be catastrophic . But, since 1982, I've been trying to understand the fallible nature of nuclear weapons .
 Martin Hellman is the author of a new book, "Martin Hellman" He says he hopes the book will be published in the U.S.