 All Things Considered How Kennedy Stepped Back From The Brink Of War . Kennedy with the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 This surveillance photograph was used in Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara's special briefing on Feb. 22, 1963 .
 JFK Library and Museum, Boston, JFK Museum, JFK Library . President John F Kennedy gives his TV announcement of the Cuban blockade during the missile crisis .
 Kennedy meets with Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev at the United States Embassy residence in Vienna, Austria, June 3, 1961 . Kennedy met with Soviet chairman of Soviet Union in 1961 .
 The National Security Council met with President Kennedy on Oct. 31, 1962, in the Cabinet Room .
 JFK signs the Cuba Quarantine Proclamation Oct., 1962, in the Oval Office . JFK Library and Museum, Boston, is home to the JFK Museum .
 A P2V Neptune U.S. patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 . Robert Knudsen, White House / JFK Library and Museum, Boston .
 A meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, advisers to President John F Kennedy, in the Cabinet Room on Oct. 1962, was held in 1962 .
 A map prepared by the CIA shows areas and cities within range of nuclear missiles launched from Cuba in October 1962 . JFK Library and Museum, Boston, JFK Library, Boston .
 Rudolph Anderson Jr. was shot down and killed over Cuba during the October 1962 crisis . He was the first pilot to be shot down in Cuba .
 On Oct. 1962, the national security adviser handed President John F Kennedy black-and-white photos of Cuba taken by an American spy plane . The photos were taken by a U.S. spy plane in Cuba .
 The sites were close enough — just 90 miles from the United States — and the missiles launched from there could reach major American cities in mere minutes . The missiles were launched from the sites were just 90 .
 For a two-week period, Kennedy consulted with his closest advisers about what to do . Kennedy consulted for two weeks before deciding whether to take action .
 The president's group of advisers would later be known as the ""Ex Comm,"" short for the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The group would later become known as "Ex Comm"
 Four days after learning about the missile sites and meeting daily with the Ex Comm, Kennedy had made up his mind . Kennedy had met daily with Ex Comm. and met daily .
 This quarantine would keep the Soviets from bringing in any more military supplies . This so-called quarantine would stop the Soviets bringing in more supplies . The quarantine would also stop the Soviet Union bringing in military supplies.
 That same day, Kennedy came clean to the nation about what he had done . Kennedy was forced to resign from the White House .
 Oct. 1962, marked the first time the president spoke publicly about the missile crisis . The president spoke about the crisis in October 1962 .
 Kennedy: "No one can see precisely what course it will take or what costs or casualties will be incurred" Kennedy says in a televised speech . Kennedy says he's not sure what will happen next .
 Rudolf Anderson Jr. was shot down during a reconnaissance mission over Cuba . He was the first pilot to be shot down in Cuba .
 In secret, the United States agreed to remove all of its missiles from Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union . The U.S. agreed in secret to remove the missiles from the country .
 We can be grateful for Kennedy's clear, disciplined thinking that pulled us back from the precipice, she adds . We can't begraced for Kennedy, she says, but we are grateful for his clear thinking .
 It then moves to the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston from April 12 through Nov. 2013 . The Kennedy Museum will be open in November 2013 .
 On October 16, 1962, the president's national security adviser handed him black-and-white photos of Cuba taken by U.S. spy planes . The photos were taken by American spy planes taken by Cuban spies .
 President Kennedy asks CIA analyst Arthur Lundahl about the discovery . Lundahl is a CIA analyst who worked for the CIA in the 1960s .
 The sites were close enough just 90 miles from the United States to reach major American cities in mere minutes . The sites are close enough to reach the U.S.
 President Kennedy consulted with his closest advisers about what to do . Kennedy consulted for a two-week period fraught with tension . President Kennedy consults with closest advisers to what he should do .
 The president had a secret tape recorder rolling . Today, we know what they said, because of the president's secret recording .
 It showcases audio as well as documents and artifacts from the Cuban missile crisis . It showcases the audio and documents from the crisis .
 The president wanted to avoid, to find a resolution before those missiles are ready to be launched, he says . "Each passing moment, those missile sites are getting closer and closer to being fully operational," he adds .
 Kennedy turned to his group of advisers known as the EXCOMM to help find a resolution . Kennedy's advisers are known for their work on finding a resolution for the Vietnam War . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 It's the kind of conduct one might expect from the Soviet Union, not the U.S., not the United States, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's the sort of conduct that might expect to be expected from Soviet Union"
 In tapes, President Obama's advisers accused him of being a coward for not taking quick military action . The tapes will show how they were baiting him, accused almost just falling short of calling him a coward . He says the tapes will reveal how his military advisers, particularly Curtis LeMay
 Four days after learning about the missile sites and meeting daily with the EXCOMM, Kennedy made a decision . Kennedy made the decision to launch the missile program . Kennedy: "I'm going to make a decision"
 On the 22nd, he met with leaders of Congress, and they urged him to take military action . President Obama met with them on the day of the attack .
 Senator Richard Russell, majority leader from Georgia, tells Kennedy that responsibilities to our people demand stronger steps . Russell: "It's a responsibility for our people. We need to be responsible for our responsibilities," he says .
 That same day, President Kennedy came clean to the nation about what was happening . President Kennedy told the nation what he had been doing .
 October 22nd, 1962 marked the first time the president spoke publicly about the missile crisis . October 22th, 1962, marked President Nixon's first public address on the crisis .
 Air Force pilot Major Rudolf Anderson was shot down during a reconnaissance mission over Cuba on October 27th, 2013 .
 President Kennedy's clear, disciplined thinking pulled us back from the precipice . Stacey Bredhoff says we can be grateful for JFK's clear thinking that pulled us from the cliff .
 Half a century later, it's just a great time to look back with this perspective and with the wealth of historical resources that have become available in recent years and take another look at this moment in history .