 Peter Kornbluh, an expert on history's closest brush with a Third World War, describes the events through declassified documents .
 Cigar Aficionado is a weekly feature on cigars, cigars and cigar smoking . See the entire article in CigarAficionado, available soon on newsstands .
 If needed, U Thant was to undertake his own UN initiative to end the crisis . Called on the Soviets to withdraw the missiles in Cuba, and the U.S. to withdraw missiles in Turkey . If necessary, U. Thant planned to withdraw them from Cuba .
 A UN proposal, the message inferred, would provide Kennedy with the needed political cover to agree publicly to such a deal . The message was implied that a UN proposal would provide the necessary political cover for Kennedy .
 Kennedy reached out to Castro through a third-country intermediary in a concerted effort to bring the crisis to an end . Kennedy made an approach to Castro, reaching out to the fiery Cuban leader .
 The President ordered the ExComm to look again at "alternative courses of action" to the use of force . The ExComm has been ordered to look at alternatives to force . President Obama ordered the action after his dramatic October 22 presidential address .
 The idea was to coax Castro to eject the missiles along with the Soviets by opening the door to Cuba's return to the West . Castro's government was hoping to coax him to eject missiles by allowing Cuba to return to West .
 The State Department recommends sending an approach to Castro through a Latin American representative in Cuba . Such an approach would be made to Castro, the U.S. State Department recommended .
 Brazil had maintained strong ties to Cuba after the revolution . Headed by the populist president João Goulart, Brazil had a longstanding interest in being a mediator to improve relations .
 At the ExComm meeting on October 26, President Kennedy approved the clandestine back-channel communication . President Kennedy met with President Kennedy at the end of October 26 .
 He overruled the objections of CIA director John McCone who insisted on safeguarding the agency's right to covertly continue its efforts to overthrow Castro .
 A top secret/eyes only cable from the Secretary of State to the United States Ambassador Lincoln Gordon in Rio stated that it was time to ""discuss with Castro alone RPT alone"" a way out of the missile crisis .
 Of course this now means giving up the offensive nuclear capability being established in Cuba and sending home Soviet military personnel, on which help can be given if needed .
 Many changes in the relations between Cuba and the OAS countries, including the U.S., could flow . From such actions many changes could flow, says the Cuban government .
 Ambassador Gordon passed the message to Brazil's foreign minister at a midnight meeting on October 27 . U.S. embassy officers translated it into Portuguese and typed it onto plain paper . Ambassador Gordon then passed it to the foreign minister .
 By the time Brazil's emissary General Albino Silva arrived in Havana on October 29, the Soviets had already announced they were withdrawing the missiles . Castro had heard the news on the radio and was furious at Khrushchev for negotiating a deal without consulting him .
 The urgency and relevance of Kennedy's Brazilian back-channel message had been eclipsed by events . Kennedy's message was overshadowed by events in the country's most recent crisis .
 McNamara: There could be no such thing as successful crisis management in the nuclear age . Therefore a global project was needed to eliminate weapons of mass destruction, he says .
 To be sure, 50 years ago the world came closer than ever before to atomic annihilation . The atomic bomb was the closest ever to being annihilated .
 Both sides got something their leaders needed to save face and evade the horror of nuclear war . But more commitment than luck was involved in the extensive efforts to find a diplomatic solution .
 The image of the resolute president has given way to the resolution president, committed to extricating the U.S. and Cuba from the danger of war in the dark shadow of the bomb .
 Of all the international crises in modern times, the Cuban missile crisis deserves a full understanding, by policy makers and citizens alike . The crisis is one of the most complex crises in history, and it is the first to be fully understood .
 Only when all archives have been opened, declassified, will the historical record be complete, historian says . The U.S. and Moscow and Havana will be able to appreciate the legacy of the Cold War .
 Maintaining secrecy around the missile crisis is, quite simply, a threat to global security, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 December Cigar Aficionado is on newsstands November 6 . Cigar aficionado will feature a full feature of the December issue of CigarAficionado magazine, November 6.
 An analysis of all of the cigars rated by Cigar Insider this year . The Cuban Cigar Powerhouse The Magazine Subscribe The Magazine .
 The Ascension Family-owned cigar brand Southern Draw Cigars is releasing a new size to their Jacob’s Ladder line . Dec 20, 2021 Cuban Double-Nine Dominoes are released .
 My Father Garcia & Garcia Robusto is on its way to tobacconists across the country . Sep 20, 2021 is the launch date of a new line of My Father cigars .