 Analysis includes correspondence from October 16 th to October 28 th , 1962, in a total of fifteen letters . The analysis includes correspondence between October 16th and October 28th .
 The paper engages with Kennedy's perceptions of reality and the use of language as socially constructed pattern . Kennedy's perception of reality is the subject of the paper .
 First, the article identifies dominant narra tives in American political discourse, then examines how these dominant discourses were manifested in diplomatic correspondence . Finally, attempts to examine how domestic narratives influenced interpretation and understanding of events during the crisis .
 The paper focuses on semantic aspects of the conversation between the two leaders, power dynamics, use of language and the narrative performed in order to transmit the message . It also focuses on the power dynamics of the leaders .
 Using Critical Discourse Analyses, the author aims to identify power relations instituted in the correspondence at the discursive level . The author uses critical analysis of the correspondence to identify the power relations in correspondence .
 In August 1962, American U-2 aircraft spotted air defence missiles in Cuba, causing escalation of the situation between U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Cuban missile crisis was the period characterised by intense communications and miscommunications between the Kremlin and the White House .
 From October 16 to October 28 of 1962, Kennedy and Khrushchev exchanged approximately 15 letters . The content of those letters varies from attempts of de-escalation of the situation to assertive demands and confrontations .
 A positivist approach has been dominating most of the scholarly work on the Cuban missile crisis . However, positivist approaches have been dominated by the crisis .
 The dominance of empiricism has limite d the space for epistemological debates about the construction of knowledge about the Cuban missile crisis itself .
 Most of the works on the topic focus on the general pattern of correspondence, facts and historical details . Most of these works are written on the subject of correspondence .
 Social constructio n of knowledge and understanding of ""reality"" shaped and influenced JFK Kennedy's or Nikita Khrushchev's perceptions and actions during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Letters also include personal correspondence, congratulations about various occasions and even anecdotes shared between the two leaders .
 Using a postcolonial approach, they claim that efforts to produce a critical oral history enabled to see events of October 1962 from the Cuban perspective, long excluded from interpretative debates involving only superpowers . They claim that . efforts to . produce an oral history of events enabled to . see events
 Karlsson and Acosta have tried to emphasize on the crisis from a Cuban perspective . Karlsson has also tried to highlight the crisis in Cuba from a different perspective .
 By adding local and human dimensions they focus on historical, archaeological and anthropological reflections . They focus on the historical and human dimension of their work .
 Jervis offers analytical points about the political psychology of leaders . He suggests that Kennedy’s and Khrushchev's decisions are fundamentally speculative . He also suggests that JFK and LBJ's decisions were speculative .
 15 letters exchanged during the crisis were used as the main data for analyses .
 In the following paper, the author utilises the Critical Discourse Analysis of diplomatic correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev to underline the importance of American discourse, values and ideologies manifested in the language of the letters .
 The following paper seeks to analyse how American value-centric discourse on the Cuban missile crisis influenced diplomatic negotiations between Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 The paper engages with Kennedy's perceptions of reality and the use of language as a socially constructed pattern . The paper is published by the University of Cambridge .
 In order to do so, the author identifies the dominant narratives in American political discourse . He examines how these narratives were manifested in diplomatic correspondence .
 The final part of the paper attempts to examine how did American narratives prevalent during Cuban missile crisis influence interpretation and understanding of the events during the crisis .
 Alternative approaches and post-modern theorizing continue to influence international relations theory . The popularity of alternative approaches continues to influence contemporary international relations theories .
 Current epistemological positions involving the notion of communicative acts hence open an unexplored dimension of the Cuban missile crisis . Current views on the Cuban crisis are open to a new dimension .
 Behind simple telegraph texts, one can focus on meanings beyond the sentences and broader discourses manifested in them . One of the meanings behind the telegraph text can be found in the context of the text .
 In the following paper, the author uses theory as a critique through postmodern paradigms . In the paper, he uses theory to critique the postmodern paradigm . The author also critiques postmodernism through theory .
 The theory is used in a dialectical manner, to make sense of the construction of reality and knowledge, and how an understanding of this ""reality"" by engaged actors influenced the Cuban missile crisis . The theory uses a dialectic manner, making sense of construction of knowledge .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev's power dynamics, use of language and narrative performed in order to transmit the message to each other . Kennedy and Krushchev’s power dynamics, their power dynamics and use of . language .
 The main objective of the paper is to examine how American discourse, values and ideologies manifested in language use in the diplomatic correspondence influenced negotiations between Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 discourse analysis is becoming increasingly popular, especially between young scholars opting for more critical post-modern approaches against mainstream methodologies . In the backdrop of the emergence of alternative approaches t o IR methodology, discourse analysis .
 In total, fifteen letters were exchanged during the 13-day period . 15 letters exchanged during that time .
 This multidiscip linary approach focuses not only on semantic aspects but on production and reproduction of knowledge and power via utterances . The approach focuses on producing and reproducing knowledge via utterance, rather than semantic aspects .
 The following paper is an attempt to incorporate this threefold analysis . The paper is based on the analysis of three factors in order to find out what happened in the past .
 CDA is particularly useful when dealing with primary sources such as letters . CDA can be used to deal with letters, letters and letters .
 Data analysis was conducted deductively as themes under which codes were categorized were derived from theory and other research findings . Codes were defined during the analysis, but data analysis was done deductively .
 The presented paper includes, although not limited to examining, examining main themes in conversations and speeches, but also puts emphasis on actor's perspectives and language use . The paper includes .
 The term ""discourse"" has to be briefly defined . The United States, empowered by the binding energy of the universe, was to become the universal container""
 Discourse has been widely used expanding disciplinary boundaries of academic to non-academic studies . The term discourse has been used expanding the boundaries of the academic discipline . Discourse is a form of discourse that expands disciplinary boundaries .
 Michel Foucault's works are one of the most important in the field . Michel's works of the philosopher's work are considered one of his most important works .
 Decision-makers attempt to minimize differences between a message sender and an addressee . He argues that decision-makers must accept credulity of meta-narratives for both sides .
 Rethinking epistemological and ontological frameworks of the events of October 1962 implies a reconstruction of the dominant U.S. narrative . The events occurred in October 1962 .
 American Narratives, Po stmodernism, and the Atomic Age"" gives a deep insight into American's perception of the world order in a nuclear age . The book gives an insight into America's view of the atomic age .
 Nadel emphasizes the narrative of capitalism vs socialism and American's thrive on capit alist competition . Nadel also emphasizes the role of capitalism in American society .
 Three main narratives are discussed below identified from the letters and the literature review . The letters and literature review provide an overview of the letters .
 Hegelian concepts of ""the other"" and ""othering"" have become popular in critical discourses that construct the self in opposition to the other . The self is constructed in relation to the self, and the other is the self .
 Edward Said's ""Orientalism"" exposes how Eurocentric tradition of dualisms created the notion of Oriental – the discourse of exclusiveness and domination vis-a-vis less civilized East . Said's work on Orientalism first published in 1978 .
 Relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union exposed different power dynamics . Even though the relations between the United States and the . Soviet Union, position of superiority was still in a play .
 The Soviet Union was the Other and the enemy because it did not share capitalist western ideology and values . If the U.S. was the ""community per excellence" in the Soviet Union, the Soviets were the Other . The United States was the community per excellence .
 It was a powerful state with nuclear weapons that could challenge the U.S. dominance in the world politics . Moreover, it was also a powerful country with nuclear arms that could . challenge the United States dominance .
 The United States used these differences to justify and legitimize their hostility towards the Soviet Union . Answering this question is beyond the scope of this paper, but one can argue that the United States .
 This delineation between Us and You can be seen as one the indicator of Othering . The delineation is seen as an indicator of othering . This is a sign of the 'Othering'
 The process of attributing unwanted features to the Other is also characteristic of the ‘othering’ Another pattern, that is also a characteristic, is the process of assigning unwanted features .
 Kennedy's strong stance against Castro during presidential campaign and failure in Bay of Pigs invasion influenced Kennedy's high sensitivity towards the Cuban missile crisis . Widespread anti-communist discourse in American society influenced Kennedy .
 Projecting unwanted features such as unpredictable, moody and impulsive behaviour to the ""other" can be seen a s a common strategy in the enemy construction . Historians are mirrors of meta-narratives and discourses that influence the interpretation of reality .
 Othering involves historical heritage, culture, ideology and political discourse . Therefore, Othering is a complex process that involves historical, culture and ideology .
 Soviets could never be equal to Americans because they could not adopt the American way of life . This discourse of power and knowledge from the position of superiority has a lot in common with Orientalism .
 Possession of the atomic weaponry established a new f m orm of power relationships . Possessions of atomic weaponry set up a new power dynamic .
 Nuclear power became an integral part of the U.S. narrative that it was justified to be the watchdog of global security . Nuclear power is now a vital part of America's defense policy .
 This position implied the depiction of the United States as God's chosen nation by possessing nuclea r weapons . This position also implied that the U.S. had nuclear weapons . The U.K. was portrayed as a God-selected nation by God .
 The U.S. acquired the title of the ultimate guarantor of the global peace, thus qualifying itself to talk on behalf of the other nations . Under this discursive field of ""containment""
 This extra ct from Kennedy's letter is a manifestation of the American narrative declaring itself as the protector of its allies, and ultimately of all the nations adhering to capitalist ideology .
 The United States has openly violated the United Nations Charter, violating international norms of freedom of navigation on the high seas . The U.S. has openly taken the path of grossly violating the U.N. Charter, according to the United States, the path has been the path .
 None of the leaders interpret the Cuban missile crisis as a confrontation between solely two superpowers but seeks to legitimise their actions by talking on behalf of the ""other states"" or nation . Khrushchev does not ""globalize" the threat on the whole hemisphere but mostly refers to the
 Kennedy's and Khrushchev's letters refers to the distinction between capitalist and socialist market, and more broadly the way of life . Analysis of the correspondence will be conducted using the actors’ definition of ideology .
 In order to avoid an ontological error in defining the ideology, the author will briefly examine it in Foucaultian sense . The author will then move to the ""traditional"" understanding of “communism vs capitalism” ideological positions .
 The main focus of the notions “discourse’s and “ideology” is on power relations, writes David Frum . Frum: "Discourse and Ideology" is about power relations .
 He argued that power is dispersed in society, possessing both productive and repressive characteristics . He argues that power should be dispersed, not dispersed, in society .
 In Foucaultian sense, one can assume that a political leader's system of thought is as much affected by ideology as the one of an ordinary citizen's . Therefore, a politician's ideology is as important as that of a person's .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were both influenced by the narratives accepted and widespread in their societies . Therefore, both men were influenced by narratives accepted by their societies, such as Kennedy .
 The correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev is abundant with direct references to their ideological standpoints . The correspondence was abundant with references to the two sides .
 Khrushchev's letter articulates the essence of the communist vs. capitalist debate . Letter was sent to President Kennedy on October 26, 1962 . Letter articulates essence of communist vs capitalist debate.
 Both leaders depict ideological differences as the main justification of their objectives as they both interpret Cuban missile crisis from their ideological standpoints .
 The relationship between ideology and ideology has never been simple during the Cold war . The relationship was never more simple than in the Cold War .
 Both sides’ rhetorical commitment to the ideology was used to legitimize their objectives seeking world domination . Both sides ’re committed to the ideologies of the ideology .
 This rivalry depicts the power relations between the United States with the capitalist dominant ideology and the Soviet Union, with marginalized communist ideology still looked down . The rivalry depicts a rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviets .
 Khrushchev sees balance between the two ideologies as a guarantee of peace . American discursive field on communism is inevitably negative . Khrushvich sees t he balance between communism and peace .
 Different discourses lead to different interpretations of different interpretations . Misinterpretation of different discourses leads to different meanings .
 The American discourse on the place of the United States in world politics largely determined what could have been considered a threat to its security . The U.S. role in the world was largely determined by the American discourse .
 Containment policy shaped and influenced the US's stance towards the Soviet expansion . Any attempt of the Soviet Union to strengthen its position on the international arena vis-á-vis its dealing with other states, was interpreted as a threat to the US’s position and its national security .
 First, reason probably was differences in backgrounds including social, cultural and ideological . Second, reason was differences of backgrounds, including social and cultural .
 Both leaders interpreted the crisis through their own ""truths", delegitimizing the opinion of the other . Both leaders interpret the crisis as their own "truths"
 This discourse on the USSR significantly shaped Kennedy's actions during the Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy acted in the wake of the Soviet Union invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 All the means located there, and I assure you of this, have a defensive character, are on Cuba solely for the purposes of defence . We have sent them to Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government .
 The ""truth"" that actors tell is constrained by discursive frameworks imposed upon them . The truth is constrained to be constrained by the discursive framework imposed on them, says the author .
 All knowledge, as Foucault would argue, is determined by institutional, political and social pressures . These frameworks circulating at the time, and all knowledge is determined, he says .
 The failure in Bay of Pigs invasion, upcoming elections, and opinions coming from the Executive Committee of the National Security Council shaped and influenced his interpretation of the Cuban missile crisis .
 The American discourse portrayed communism in self-evident negative terms . Accepting capitalism as a superior ideology happened in the backdrop of excluding the communist discursive positions .
 The presented paper on a discursive level examined the correspondence between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev as an articulation of dominant American narratives . Conclusion: The paper examined the relationship between Kennedy and Khrushcheva .
 The paper dealt with the analysis of how values, culture, ideology and the American narratives manifested in the language use influenced the interpreta tion and understanding of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Following Foucault's work on discourse, it aimed to show the importance of political framing . Claimed that discourse s shape the interpretation of the texts .
 Different discourses employed by the U.S. and USSR voicing cultural narratives and ideologies were examined under broader framing, as those they shape the understanding of reality and identity .
 The paper drew on the importance of language, selective or unconscious use of vocabulary as a manifestatio n of discourse .
 The second narrative dealt with the discursive field of ""containment"" under which the United States acquired the title of an ultimate guarantor of global peace . The U.S. became the world's most powerful state of power in the world .
 This paper argues that the perception of the United States as a ""community per excellence"" influenced American political elites' understanding of the Soviet actions on Cuba .
 The third narrative examines the discursive field of the ideological rivalry of between capitalism and socialism under the broader framing, which includes but is not limited to the political and economic theory of social organization .
 The paper focuses on the Foucaultian tradition of understanding an ideology emphasizing power relations within which dominant narratives are produced and reproduced .
 F Kennedy reveals how ideologies and cultural narratives can be manifested in the language use, shaping and influencing communication . He reveals how can ideologies and narratives be manifested by language use in communication .
 The systems of thoughts manifested in the discourse played an important role in the diplomatic correspondence during the Cuban missile crisis . Therefore, the systems of thought played a key role in diplomatic correspondence .
 The main focus of this paper was the American narratives and Kennedy's position . This paper focuses on Kennedy's role in the American narrative .
 The USSR's narratives were also briefly examined to give deeper insight into the perceptions of both sides . However, the Soviet Union's narratives also were briefly examined .
 This paper implemented postmodern critique to examine how the dominant American narratives were articulated and manifested in the language of the diplomatic correspondence . How did the American discourse on the Cuban missile crisis and ideological meta-narratives shape diplomatic negotiations between Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 Instead of emphasizing historical facts and empirical accounts gained through the positivist epistemology, a reflectivist approach provided deeper analysis . This approach provided a deeper analysis of the history of the world .
 Arguing that any form of diplomatic negotiation or outcome can be subjectively understoo d and interpreted through different lenses can open up new opportunities for further discussions about construction of the knowledge about the Cuban missile crisis . Argued that any sort of diplomatic . negotiation . can be . subjectively
 J B Baillie, 2d ed., rev., rev. and cor. ed., G Allen & Unwin. Translated by J B. Baillies, 2nd ed., 2d . ed., . and cor., throughout . .