 President Obama was the first president born in the 20th century . He was the youngest president ever elected and the youngest ever elected president .
 The CIA and the exiles hoped it would trigger a mass uprising that would overthrow Castro . Castro was overthrown by the U.S. in 1961 . Castro's government was overthrowing Castro .
 Some of the exiles were killed, others imprisoned, some were imprisoned . Some were killed and others imprisoned. Some of them were killed .
 The United States paid $53 million in food and medicine for their release . The U.S. paid the men's release in exchange for their food .
 Khrushchev promised to challenge the blockade, calling it outright banditry . The blockade was called 'Banditry' by the Soviet Union . Khrushchevitch promised to take action against it .
 In schools, children practiced air raid drills, a common occurrence during the Cold War . Air raid drills were common in schools, common occurrence in Cold War era .
 People who had built bomb shelters stocking them with food and other provisions began stocking them . People who built shelters began stocking up supplies .
 We\u2019re eyeball to eyeball, said Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and I think the other fellow just blinked . We’re eyeballing each other, said Rusk .
 On November 22, 1963, President and Mrs. Kennedy went to Dallas, Texas, to mend . President Kennedy and his wife were in Dallas to mend a broken heart .
 His car raced to a nearby hospital, where doctors frantically tried to revive him . He was rushed to a local hospital where he was pronounced dead .
 In the fall of 1963, public opinion polls showed that Kennedy was losing popularity because of his advocacy of civil rights . Similar presentations have been made in the past .
 The election of 1960 was the closest since 1884; Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon by fewer than 119,000 . John F Kennedy defeated Nixon by less than 120,000 votes in 1960 .
 Vice President Richard Nixon was the Republican nominee in 1960 . MA Senator John Kennedy was the Democratic nominee for President .
 JFK John F Kennedy is elected president in 1960 – Senator from Massachusetts . Youngest and glamorous Wife was Jackie, John F “Jack” Kennedy .
 The election of 1960 was the closest since 1884; Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon by fewer than 119,000 votes . Kennedy defeated Nixon by 119,00 votes in 1960 .
 Republican Richard Nixon offered experience . Served 8 years as VP . Had foreign policy experience during the critical stages of the Cold War . Promised to keep promises to keep .