 Russia's "Kommersant" is also a political commentator with Russia's “Kommerant’s” publishing house .
 Sergey Strokan is a journalist, essayist and a poet . He is a winner of the Maximilian Voloshin International Literary Award and a member of the Union of Russian Writers .
 Cuban soldier paints a SAM-2 missile deployed during the missile crisis of 1962 at Morro Cabana complex, on October 11, 2012 in Havana . Author of three poetry collections, winner of Maximilian Voloshin International Literary Award .
 Moscow and Washington are quietly marking the 50th anniversary of the event . It is a rare moment of truth in US-Russian relations, which are currently facing new and critical tests .
 Khrushchev was obsessed with competing with the U.S. superpower – taking them on in all spheres, from weaponry and space exploration to muddy fields of agriculture . Well, at some point, the Soviet leader was obsessed .
 It is not America, but the Soviet Union which had to reinstate itself as the world leader, Khrushchev believed . The Soviet Union had to be reinstates itself as a world leader .
 This is how Soviet nukes were moved to the other part of the world, closer to U.S. shores, forcing President Kennedy to respond . President Kennedy had to respond to the threat .
 They are the heritage of the Cold War, and have no place in today’s world. They are heritage of Cold War. They’re heritage of cold war. They're heritage of today's world. We are not going to war. We will not go to war
 Some will say that, 50 years after Cuban crisis, it is sheer idealism and wishful thinking to believe that leaders of today would ever follow this principle . Some say it's too early to think that leaders today would follow the principle, considering wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya,
 Kennedy ordered U.S. ships to fire depth charges at Soviet submarines to force them to surface . Kennedy ordered the use of depth charges to force the ships to surface in Cuba .
 The fourth lesson for US-Russian relations is that labeling each other the number-one foe, as Mr Romney does today, is a shabby and odd practice, to say the least . This is an outdated, obsolete mentality .
 National egos and paranoia give way to new pragmatism, usually discovered with enormous difficulty after crises and mistakes . However, disasters can easily be avoided when national egos give way, writes David Cameron .