 Cuba's struggle with the Russians after the Missile Crisis . 3rd-party JavaScript libraries jqueryeasing and Dynamic Drive Terms of Use require the . notices below .
 Cuba's struggle with the Russians after the Missile Crisis led to the collapse of the Cuban government .
 Sad and Luminous Days will provide an important counterpoint to the stream of simplistic books about the missile crisis that are sure to appear, says author .
 Cuba has achieved some major breakthroughs that aid in our understanding of contemporary Cuba . Cuba has been a source of inspiration for Cuba's revolutionary revolution .
 I have known for some time that we in the Kennedy administration misunderstood the Cubans and Russians. "We have known that we have misunderstood some of the things we did with the Russians and Cubans," he says .
 In Sad and Luminous Days, we learn the many ways the Cubans and Russians misunderstood each other . We learn how those misunderstandings made the crisis as dangerous as it was .
 The principal lesson-the necessity of achieving realistic empathy with one's adversary- is especially salient at a moment when the U.S. has declared a 'war on terrorism' involving potential confrontations between the United States and many smaller countries .
 An Inside Account of the Man and His Era, by His Son, Sergei Khrushchev, shows stark differences between Cuba and the Soviet Union during the half-dozen years that followed the 1962 missile crisis .
 The differences arose from the way the Soviets negotiated with the U.S. in 1962, without prior consultation with the Cubans . Those differences arose in the way Soviet-Cuban negotiations were negotiated .
 This wonderful book amply demonstrates, however, that this view of empathy is false . It derives from a fundamental misunderstanding of what empathy actually entails . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a Pulitzer Prize winner .
 The events of September 11, 2001 demonstrate how profoundly tragic may be the result of our failure to reach a deep and comprehensive understanding of how the world looks through the eyes of our adversaries . The events occurred in the wake of 9/11 .
 After Sad and Luminous Days, no one will be able to write the same way about Castro's relationship with the Kremlin . Castro's friendship with the Russian government will never be forgotten, says Schlesinger .
 Every so often a work of history comes along that turns conventional wisdom on its head and brings to light previously mysterious, indeed hidden nuggets of truth .