 Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations . Please help us improve our knowledge of events in this article .
 This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay . This article states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic .
 First strike capability is a country's ability to defeat another nuclear power by destroying its arsenal to the point where the attacking country can survive the weakened retaliation while the opposing side is left unable to continue war . First strike can be achieved by destroying the country's arsenal .
 The preferred methodology is to attack the opponent's strategic nuclear weapon facilities , command and control sites, and storage depots first . The preferred method is to target the enemy's strategic weapon facilities .
 Historical analysis 3 Terms used 4 Likely first strike weapons systems . First-strike enabling weapons systems 6 Other possible first-strike weapons systems. Anti-first-strike countermeasures 7 Anti-First-Strike countermeasures .
 Decreasing tensions by mutual adoption of minimum credible deterrent posture . Destabilizing role of land-based MIRVed ICBMs could destabilize role of missile defense . See also 11 References 12 External links .
 Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Please help us improve our knowledge of events in this article .
 During the Cold War period, NATO and the Eastern Bloc built massive nuclear arsenals . NATO and Russia built massive arsenals, aimed, to a large extent, at each other .
 Leaders on both sides of the Iron Curtain realized that global thermonuclear war would not be in either power's interest, as it would probably lead to the destruction of both sides, and possibly nuclear winter or other extinction level events . However, they were never used, as after a
 Both sides refrained from deploying systems capable of unanswerable nuclear strikes against either side . Therefore, at times, neither side deployed systems that could be used against each other .
 Each side doubted the other side's commitment to not deploy first-strike weapons, or even in the event of their deployment, to not strike first .
 Some first-strike weapons were deployed; however like most nuclear weapons, they were never used . Some of the weapons were used in the Cold War .
 Only the People's Republic of China and India have declarative, unqualified, unconditional no-first-use policies . Of the nuclear powers, only two have declared no-First-use policy .
 In 1982, at a special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, the Soviet Union pledged not to use nuclear weapons first, regardless of whether its opponents possessed nuclear weapons or not . The Soviet Union has never used nuclear weapons before .
 The United States has a partial, qualified no-first-use policy . The U.S. will not use nuclear weapons against states that do not possess nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction . Large-scale missile defense systems are not first-strike weapons, but certain critics view
 Ronald Reagan's proposed Strategic Defense Initiative would have undermined the premise of mutual assured destruction . Critics say the proposed defense systems would lead to nuclear war, according to critics .
 According to game theory, the side not building large-scale missile defenses would have an incentive to launch a pre-emptive first strike while such a strike could still get through . Such a strike would still be possible, according to the theory .
 Historical background This article possibly contains original research . Use this article to help people understand today's featured events in the U.S. Historical background .
 Please improve this article by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations .
 First-strike attack, the use of a nuclear first strike capability, was greatly feared during the Cold War between NATO and the Soviet Bloc . First- strike attack was a major fear of the Soviet-NATO alliance .
 At various points, fear of a first strike attack existed on both sides . Both sides feared of a possible first strike .
 Misunderstood changes in posture and well understood changes in technology used by either side often led to speculation regarding the enemy's intentions . Misunderstanding changes to posture and technology used in either side led to increased speculation regarding enemy intentions .
 The USSR tested their own nuclear weapons in 1949, surprising the U.S. with their first test in 1949 . The United States tested their first nuke test in 1950s .
 The United States tested their first hydrogen bomb in 1952 at Ivy Mike . The USSR quickly tested their own thermonuclear weapons, with a test in 1953 of a semi-thermonuclear weapon of the Sloika design, and in 1956, with the testing of Sakharov's
 1956 saw the suppression of Hungary by the Soviets . In the U.S., a powerful social backlash was afoot, prompted by Senator Joseph McCarthy . Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were executed in 1953 after conviction of espionage .
 The atmosphere was further inflamed by the 1957 launch of Sputnik, which led to fears of Communists attacking from outer space . There were also fears that if the Soviets could launch a device into orbit, they could equally cause a device to re-enter the atmosphere .
 John F Kennedy capitalized on this situation by emphasizing the Bomber gap and the Missile gap . The bomber gap and missile gap were areas where the Soviets were perceived as leading the United States .
 The 1960 U-2 incident, involving Francis Gary Powers, as well as the Berlin Crisis, along with the test of the Tsar Bomba, escalated tensions still further . The 1960s U.2 incident and Berlin Crisis also escalated tensions .
 The arrival of Soviet missiles in Cuba was conducted by the Soviets on the rationale that the United States already had nuclear missiles stationed in Turkey . Fidel Castro wanted to increase his power, his freedom of action, and to protect his government from US-initiated prejudicial resolution of ideological disputes
 During the crisis, Fidel Castro wrote Khrushchev a letter about the prospect that the ""imperialists"" would be ""extremely dangerous"" if they responded militarily to the Soviet stationing of nuclear missiles aimed at U.S. territory .
 Both sides in the Cold War realized how close they came to nuclear war over Cuba . US-Soviet détente for most of the 1960s and 1970s . Both sides sought to reduce tensions in Cuba .
 Recently declassified interviews with high level former Soviet nuclear and military–industrial planners reveal that Fidel Castro continued to favour nuclear options during the later Cold War . According to former Soviet General Andrian Danilevich, Cuban leader Fidel Castro pressed the USSR to take a tougher line against the United States
 The Soviet Union sent experts to Cuba to spell out the ecological consequences for Cuba of a U.S. nuke strike . Cuba's Castro Castro was angered by the prospect of a nuclear strike on the United States .
 Tensions were inflamed again in the late 1970s and early 1980s with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the Soviet deployment of the SS-20 Saber and SS-18 Satan . The general says Castro quickly became convinced of the undesirability of such outcomes .
 NATO's deployment of these missiles was a response to the Soviet deployment of the SS-20 Saber, which could hit most European NATO bases within minutes of launch . NATO deployed the missiles in response to a Soviet deployment .
 Mutual deployments led to a destabilizing strategic situation, which was exacerbated by malfunctioning U.S. and Soviet missile launch early warning systems, a . Soviet intelligence gap that prevented the Soviets from getting a ""read"" on the strategic intentions of United States leaders, as well as inflammatory United
 A war scare occurred during 1983 due to the inopportune timing of a NATO exercise called Able Archer, which was a simulation of a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union . This exercise happened to occur during a massive Soviet intelligence mobilization called VRYAN, that was designed to discover intentions
 Neither side sought nuclear conflict, even though it threatened to break out on multiple occasions . Neither side wanted to engage in nuclear weapons .
 Both sides had a deep and continuing fear that the other nation was seeking to start a nuclear conflict, or, at least, thought such a conflict was ""winnable"" and would not be deterred by the threat of nuclear war .
 Both sides adopted aggressive military and nuclear strategies that were misinterpreted and countered by the other side, furthering distrust . This led to both sides adopting aggressive, confrontational military, nuclear strategies, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Neither side intended to start a nuclear war, but were extremely concerned about the possibility of it . Neither side adopted strategies to slow down nuclear capabilities .
 United States military strategy in the European theater was confined to responses to potential Soviet aggression against NATO countries . The U.S. military strategy was limited to responding to potential Russian aggression .
 Soviet military theory was dominated by the theory of the ""deep operation" – a large-scale combined-arms offensive into enemy-held territory – rather than a nuclear offensive . The theory of a combined-arm offensive was dominated in the Soviet military .
 Soviet conventional superiority was shown by the fact that the Soviet Union certainly was prepared for war in Europe, having massed armored, mechanized, artillery, and air forces poised along the Inner German and Czech borders . NATO considered the use of tactical nuclear weapons to stop the ""steamroller""
 NATO's position changed in the 1970s and 1980s, in favor of trying to stop a Soviet offensive through the employment of a doctrine involving non-nuclear AirLand Battle to try to buy time to either throw back the invader or work out the issues at hand through diplomacy .
 Both sides were willing to use nuclear weapons, if necessary, to not lose the war at hand . Both sides agreed to use nukes to protect themselves from the enemy .
 Both sides relied on military strategies that could have still caused a general nuclear war . Neither side was actively pursuing a first-strike policy . The leaders of orthodox communism believed that ""peaceful coexistence"" with the ""imperialist"" powers was possible .
 Andropov was followed as Soviet leader by Konstantin Chernenko, who in turn was followed by Mikhail Gorbachev, who brought a far less ideological approach to the relations between the superpowers . Gorbachachev helped build an atmosphere of trust between the two .
 Gorbachev and Reagan nearly brought about the disarmament and destruction of ICBMs, long-range SLBMs and, possibly even nuclear weapons themselves at a groundbreaking disarmament summit in 1986 . These new attitudes on both sides nearly brought . about the . disarmament .
 The sticking point causing agreement to be unreachable was the SDI Program . Missile defense continues to be an issue for the Russians today .
 This measure of accuracy assumes that everything up to the point of impact works correctly . The accuracy of this measure is based on the fact that everything in the air is hit correctly .
 Conventional science of the period contemporary to the Manhattan project came up with these measures so as to reasonably analogize the incredible energy of a nuclear detonation in a form that would be understandable to the military, politicians, or civilians .
 Trinitrotoluene was and is a high explosive with industrial and military uses . It is around 40% more powerfully explosive than an equivalent weight of gunpowder . It has industrial, military uses and is 40% stronger than gunpowder.
 Later generation missiles with much improved accuracy made counterforce attacks possible . Counterforce attacks against the opponent's hardened military facilities were possible .
 This is due to the inverse-square law, which predicts that the amount of energy dispersed from a single point release of energy dissipates by the inverse of the square of distance from the single point of release . The law is based on the law of inverse square law .
 The power of a nuclear explosion to rupture hardened structures is greatly decreased by the distance from the impact point of the nuclear weapon . The result is that the power of the explosion is lessened by distance from impact point .
 A near-direct hit is generally necessary, as only diminishing returns are gained by increasing bomb power . So a near direct hit is sometimes necessary, says the author .
 Single warhead, variable yield 5-50 kt, CEP 50 m with active radar terminal guidance . CEP is a single warhead with a variable yield of up to 50 kt .
 Short, 7-minute flight-time and range of 1,800 km, designed to strike C4ISTAR installations, bunkers, air fields, airfields, air defense sites, and ICBM silos .
 Guidance systems and re-entry vehicles moved to Minuteman III missiles . Decommissioned; however, guidance systems were moved to missiles .
 Any missile defense system capable of wide-area coverage, especially those enabling destruction of missiles in the boost phase, are first-strike-enabling weapons . These weapons allow for a nuclear strike to be launched with reduced fear of mutual assured destruction .
 Such a system has never been deployed, although a limited continental missile defense capability has been deployed by the U.S. The U.N. has deployed only a handful of missiles in the region .
 This does not apply, in general, to terminal missile defense systems such as the former U.S. Safeguard Program or the Russian A-35/A-135 systems .
 Limited-area terminal missile defense systems, or C4ISTAR facilities, may, in fact, be stabilizing because they ensure survivable capacity, and/or survivable de-entry capacity .
 This also might not apply to a ""non-discriminatory" space-based missile defense system, even if it is—actually, precisely because it is --of global reach .
 Such a system would be designed to destroy all weapons launched by any nation in a ballistic trajectory, negating any nation's capability to launch any strike with ballistic missiles, assuming the system was sufficiently robust to repel attacks from all potential threats, and built to open standards openly agreed upon and
 The missile attains a temporary low altitude orbit only a few minutes after launch . The missile is launched at a time of about four hours .
 The guidance system for the missile is an inertial guidance system with an additional star-sighting system . The system is used to correct small positional errors that have accrued during the flight . The missile's guidance system is inertial .
 GPS has been used on some test flights but is assumed not to be available for a real mission . GPS has not been used in some of the missions, but it is assumed that it is not available for real missions . GPS is used only on a few test flights, but could be
 Trident I-C4 has a range of over 4,000 nmi, and the Trident II-D5 can surpass 6,000 nmi . The absolute ranges of the missiles are classified and withheld from public domain for reasons of national security .
 Some experts believed that the single-warhead 25 megaton version of R36-M was a first-strike weapon targeted against Minuteman III silos . It is widely accepted that Soviets never had a first strike strategy .
 Retired Soviet military officers say SS-18 was targeted against heavily fortified command-and-control facilities . However, a much more logical explanation comes from retired military officers, who say it was aimed at heavily fortified facilities .
 The reason is that a single 25 megaton warhead could take out only one hardened missile silo if the silos are sufficiently separated . The silos probably by only 2–4 km, depending on the amount of hardening because of the inverse square law .
 The power of a nuclear explosion to rupture hardened structures is greatly decreased by the distance from the impact point of the nuclear weapon . Therefore, the power of the explosion is much lessened by distance from impact point .
 Only diminishing returns are gained by increasing bomb power . Therefore, a nearly direct hit is generally necessary, as only diminishing returns of increasing power are gained .
 The only purpose for gigantic nuclear weapons like the SS-18 25 megaton variant is to take out extremely hardened targets, such as NORAD and NORAD . NORAD, located at the Cheyenne Mountain Complex; . Federal Emergency Management Agency . located at Mount Weather; or Site
 This could be a useful weapon for a decapitation strike, but that is a very risky move . Both the United States and Russia have extensive countermeasures against such methods . Full countervalue retaliation would be the likely fate for any state that unleashed a first strike .
 To maintain credible deterrence, nuclear-weapons states have taken measures to give their enemies reason to believe that a first strike would lead to unacceptable results . To maintain credibility, states take measures to make their enemies believe a strike would result in unacceptable consequences .
 Main strategy relies on creating doubt among enemy strategists regarding nuclear capacity, weapons characteristics, facility and infrastructure vulnerability, early warning systems, intelligence penetration, strategic plans, and political will .
 The aim is to create the impression of the maximum possible force and survivability, which leads the enemy to make increased estimates of the probability of a disabling counterstrike . In terms of strategy and politics, the aim is . to cause the enemy . to believe that such a second strike would
 Second strike is the possibility of the victim of the first-strike launching a retaliatory second strike on the attacker . The victim of a first strike may have launched a second strike .
 Nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines carrying submarine-launched ballistic missiles are considered the most survivable component of the nuclear triad . Increasing SSBN deployment is seen as a result of increasing SSBN deployments .
 The depths of the ocean are extremely large, and nuclear submarines can generate their own oxygen and potable water . Nuclear submarines are highly mobile, are very quiet, have virtually unlimited range and can generate oxygen and water .
 It is unlikely that any conceivable opponent of any nuclear power deploying ballistic missile submarines can locate and neutralize every ballistic missile submarine before it launches a retaliatory strike in the event of war .
 To increase the percentage of nuclear forces surviving a first strike, a nation can increase SSBN deployment and the deployment of reliable communications links with SSBNs .
 Land-based ICBM silos can be hardened . Hardening or mobilizing land-based nuclear assets can also be done in the US .
 No missile launch facility can really defend against a direct nuclear hit, but a sufficiently hardened silo could defend against near misses . The silo can be used to protect against a near miss .
 ICBMs can be placed on road or rail-mobile launchers, which can then be moved around . ICBm. launchers can also be placed in vehicles and launchers that can be moved .
 As an enemy has nothing fixed at which to aim, that increases its survivability . As a result, the enemy has no fixed targets at which it can aim at, it increases its survival chances .
 The effectiveness of a first strike is contingent upon the aggressor's ability to deplete its enemy's retaliatory capacity immediately to a level that would make a second strike impossible, mitigable, or strategically undesirable . Launch on warning, Fail-safe, and Fail-deadly,
 Intelligence and early warning systems increase the probability that the enemy has the time to launch its own strike before its warmaking capacity has been significantly reduced, which renders a first strike pointless . The risk of a strike is that a strike will not be launched by the enemy before it has time to
 Alert states can have the effect of advising a potential aggressor that an escalation towards first strike has been detected and therefore that effective retaliatory strikes could be made in the event of an attack . Alert states are used in the internal management of a country's military .
 Looking Glass, Nightwatch, and TACAMO are United States airborne nuclear command posts . They maintain survivable C4ISTAR links with United States nuclear forces . Looking Glass and Nightwatch are U.S. airborne nuclear commands .
 In the event of significant political-military tensions between the nuclear powers, they would take to the skies . They would provide survivable communications in the case of enemy attack . The U.S. and Russia are the world's only nuclear powers .
 They can directly initiate launch of all American ICBMs via radio and satellite communication . They can also signal SLBMs to launch and send bombers on their strike missions .
 The United States government has several command and control bunkers . NORAD is tunneled into the granite of Cheyenne Mountain Complex, outside Colorado Springs, Colorado .
 It is believed to be able to withstand and to continue to operate after a nuclear direct hit . It is thought to have been designed to withstand a direct hit by a nuclear bomb .
 Site R, located at Raven Rock, Pennsylvania, is believed to be the Pentagon's relocation site if Washington, DC, is destroyed . Mount Weather, located in Virginia, is the other C4ISTAR bunkers in the U.S.
 The Greenbrier, located in West Virginia, was once the site of the Supreme Court of the United States and Congress's relocation bunker . It is no longer a secret but now a tourist attraction .
 The Russians also have equivalent or superior capabilities in that area and have a system called SPRN . SPRN can detect nuclear launches and provide early warning so that any such strike would not be undetected until it is too late .
 The Dead Hand fail-deadly computerized nuclear release system is based at Mount Yamantaw in the Urals . However, their unique capability can be found with their unique and special capability .
 The Dead Hand is named for either the dead man's hand in poker or the deadly man's switch in dangerous or deadly machinery . It can be turned on whenever the Russian leadership fears a nuclear attack .
 Dead Hand can give final authority for the release of nuclear weapons to military officers in a bunker under Mount Yamantaw . Allegedly, if it detects a loss of communications with Moscow as well as nuclear detonations inside Russian territory, it can then launch Russia's arsenal .
 Mount Yamantaw is believed to be capable of withstanding multiple direct nuclear detonations . The site is thought to have been able to withstand multiple direct detonations in a single nuclear blast .
 Few intercontinental Chinese nuclear platforms are intercontinental . Most of the platforms are deployed on the Russian-Chinese border . That may not be true with regards to China's stance with regard to Russia .
 Russia and China have had military conflicts in the past . Unlike relations of the U.S. and China, they have not had a military conflict . Russia, China have not been involved in any military conflicts .
 China has improved its early warning systems and has renovated certain of its platforms for intercontinental strike, which may or may not be due to the U.S. missile defense system . In recent years, China has upgraded its early-warning systems .
 In general, China's leaders do not greatly fear a first strike, because of their posture of inflicting unacceptable losses upon an adversary, as opposed to the American and Russian policy of trying to ""win" a nuclear war .
 The Chinese arsenal is considered to suffice in ensuring that such a first strike would not go unavenged . The arsenal is thought to be sufficient to ensure that such an attack would not be thwarted .
 The United Kingdom and France have sophisticated nuclear weapons platforms, and their nuclear strategies are minimum credible deterrent-based . The United States and France are the only two countries with credible deterrents .
 Both countries have ballistic missile submarines, armed with intercontinental submarine-launched ballistic missiles, to ensure a second-strike retaliation anywhere in the world . The U.S. and South Korea are both armed with missiles capable of second strikes .
 Both have nuclear policies that are believed to be effective deterrence towards a would-be nuclear strike against themselves, NATO, European Union members, and other allies .
 Unlike decapitation strike or countervalue strike, counterforce strike might result in a potentially more constrained retaliation . Counterforce strike may result in less constrained retaliation, and a more constrained response .
 The SS-18 Satan was deployed in 1976, and was considered to threaten Minuteman III silos, which led some neoconservatives to conclude a Soviet first strike was being prepared for .
 Pershing II, the Trident I and Trident II, as well as the MX missile, were developed . This led to the development of the B-1 Lancer, the Pershing I and the Trident II . The MX missile was developed in the 1950s .
 MIRVed land-based ICBMs are considered destabilizing because they tend to put a premium on striking first . Land-based missiles are more likely to be destabilizing than ones that would strike first .
 When a missile is MIRVed, it is able to carry many warheads and deliver them to separate targets . The missile can carry multiple warheads, delivering them to different targets .
 The START II agreement was never activated, and neither Russia nor the USA has adhered to the agreement . As such, this type of weapon was intended to be banned under the START II deal .
 This section does not cite any sources. This section discusses the role of missile defense in the United States .
 Any defense system against nuclear missiles such as SDI will be more effective against limited numbers of missiles launched . SDI defense system is more effective than any other system launched, experts say .
 At very small numbers of targets, each defensive asset will be able to take multiple shots at each warhead, and a high kill ratio could be achieved easily . At small numbers, each shot could be fired at multiple times .
 As the number of targets increases, the defensive network becomes ""saturated"" as each asset must target and destroy more and more warheads in the same window of time . The number of targeting increase increased as each asset targets more and more .
 Eventually the system will reach a maximum number of targets destroyed . After this point all additional warheads will penetrate the defenses . The system will eventually be able to destroy any more warheads .
 A state that is not building similar defenses may be encouraged to attack before the system is in place, essentially starting the war while there is no clear advantage . Instead of waiting until they will be at a distinct disadvantage after the defenses are completed, the state is at a disadvantage .
 One of the easiest ways to counter any proposed defenses is to simply build more warheads and missiles, reaching that saturation point sooner and hitting targets through a strategy of attrition . Second, one way to counter such a defense is to build more missiles and warheads, reaching saturation point faster .
 A nation with a defense system is actually encouraged to engage in a counterforce first strike . Defense systems are more effective against small numbers of warheads . A counterforce strike is more likely than a first strike would have been possible .
 The smaller retaliatory strike is then more easily destroyed by the defense system than a full attack would be . The smaller strike is more easily defeated by the defenses system than the full attack .
 This undermines the doctrine of MAD by discrediting a nation's ability to punish any aggressor with a lethal retaliatory second strike . The U.S. should not be able to retaliate with lethal second strike, the author says .
 BDM Federal, Inc., contractor to Federal Government, U.S. America.