 After the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion failed, Castro felt a second attack was inevitable . Castro felt it was inevitable that a second invasion of Cuba was inevitable after the failed invasion .
 He approved of Khrushchev 's proposal to install missiles on the island . Consequently, he approved of the proposal .
 When the United States expressed their concerns, the Soviets claimed they were merely providing Cuba with weapons to defend themselves in the event of future U.S. attacks . The Soviets claimed the weapons would be used to defend Cuba from any attack by the U.K.
 The situation required U.S. diplomatic involvement was the Reagan Doctrine . The Reagan Doctrine was used in the 1980s to deal with a crisis in the Middle East .
 In the 1980 election, Ronald Reagan advocated the elimination of all assistance to the Nicaraguan government . Ronald Reagan was elected president of Nicaragua in 1980 .
 President Nixon condemned the ""Marxist Sandinista takeover of Nicaragua"" and pledged support for Nicaragua . As a candidate, he ran on a platform that condemned the Marxist Marxist Sandinistas . He pledged support to bring the nation together again .
 President Roskin used a doctrine that president used according to Roskin . Then write a 3-5 page paper on the doctrine that he used .
 Your research must include at least four credible sources, apart from your textbook . Your research will need to include four sources, including a textbook .
 U.S. diplomatic efforts during the president’s time in office. Summarize a situation that required United States diplomatic efforts . Summarized a situation .
 More than any other event, it defined the roles that virtually all nations played in almost 50 years ago . The U.S. has been involved in more than 50 years of the Vietnam War .
 It was a truly WorldWide War, a content between two rival superpowers between the United States and the Soviet Union . For many years, the entire planet was held hostage to the threat of nuclear annihilation .
 The Truman Years 1265 Words 6 Pages . Summarize a situation that required U.S. diplomatic efforts during the President’s time in office . The Cold War and United States Diplomacy: The Truman years .
 Truman took office on April 12, 1945, after the death of President Franklin D Roosevelt . Vice President Harry S Truman was the first president to take office in 1945 .
 Truman was unknown to most when he was selected as vice president for Roosevelt’s forth term . Truman was chosen for Roosevelt's forth term in 1945 .
 When Ronald Reagan ran for President, he strongly campaigned against the growth of communism . Ronald Reagan strongly campaigned for President in 1980s .
 He was convinced that most of America 's problems in the world could be traced to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union 's determination to extend its influence abroad through military pressure .
 The Cold War was the state of military and political tension between Western countries, especially the United States, NATO allies, and the communist nations, particularly the Soviet Union and other countries .
 On April 12, 1945, Harry S Truman, the Vice President of the United States, was elevated by the sudden death of Franklin D Roosevelt to the Presidency of the U.S. The Cold War was named so since it did not feature any features .
 Truman faced many obstacles, yet formed many doctrines as solutions to these obstacles . Harry S Truman’s time in the Presidential office he faced many challenges . Truman formed doctrines to solve these problems .
 Kennedy had been passionate about the issues of war and peace since when he was young . Kennedy had a passion for peace and peace, and was passionate about it .