 The American government were hopeful that this invasion would lead to an uprising against Castro . The U.S. government were hoping that the invasion would end Castro's rule of Cuba .
 The U.S. government was forced to pay $53 million in food and medical supplies to have the captured invaders returned to the United States . The United States government was unable to hide the fact that the U.K. government had been involved .
 From Castro’s view point this invasion was evidence that the USA was working actively to overthrow his government . Castro's government was overthrown by the U.S. in 1953 .
 The twelve days of the Cuban missile crisis were the most frightening of their lives . For many people the 12 days were the worst days of their life .
 Kennedy had promised to get tough with the communists . Kennedy had been elected president of the United States in 1960s .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro had taken power in Cuba, he soon took actions to nationalise American companies . In 1959 he took action against the US companies .
 In response to this the U.S. stopped buying Cuban sugar and refused to supply Cuba with oil . In response, Cuba stopped buying sugar and stopped buying oil .
 The U.S. government became increasingly concerned about the new Cuban government . This led to a fear that the U .S. might intervene against the new government . The new government was overthrown by the Cuban government in 2009 .
 In 1961, Cuban exiles trained by the U.S. staged an invasion of Cuban territory at the Bay of Pigs . The invasion was quickly repulsed, but was quickly destroyed .
 Castro soon became convinced that the U.S. was serious about invading Cuba . Castro was convinced that he was serious . Castro became convinced of the threat of an invasion .
 Shortly after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro declared Cuba as a socialist republic . Castro entered into close ties with the Soviet Union in the wake of the failed invasion .
 Few believed that Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba could seriously change the strategic balance of power . Few in Washington, DC seriously believed that .
 The United States had around 10 times as many nuclear weapons as the Soviets . The U.S. had 10 times more nuclear weapons than the Soviet Union .
 In 1961, the United States started deploying 15 Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Turkey . The U.S. deployed 15 Jupiter missiles to Turkey in 1961 .
 These directly threatened cities in the western parts of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was founded in the early 1930s .
 Soviet premier Khrushchev publicly expressed his anger at this missile deployment . The missile deployment was the first of its kind in the Soviet Union .
 The deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba was the first time they moved missiles out of the USSR, can be seen as Khrushchev’s direct response to the United States missiles in Turkey .
 Having medium range ballistic missiles on Cuban land meant that the Soviet Union had the capacity to threaten Washington DC with a flight time of less than twenty minutes . Washington DC could be threatened with less than 20 minutes of flight .
 Khrushchev planned the deployment in May 1962 and by late July over sixty Soviet ships were en route to Cuba . Some already carrying military material .
 Director of the CIA John McCone was told by French intelligence that the Soviets were planning to place missiles in Cuba, therefore he warned President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy’s administration team had received repeated claims from Soviet diplomats that there were no missiles in Cuba and that no plans had been made to deploy any . Soviet diplomats said they were not interested in starting an international crisis .
 It was a U-2 flight in late august 1962 that photographed surface to air missile sites being constructed . It was the first time a U.2 flight was able to fly over the country .
 On September 4 1962 Kennedy told congress that there were no offensive missiles in Cuba . Kennedy said in 1962 that there was no offensive missile missiles in the country . Kennedy told Congress that the missiles were not on Cuba .
 September 8 1962 saw the first consignment of SS-4 MRBMs unloaded in Havana, with a second shipload arriving on September 16 . September 8 was September 8, 1962 .
 Cuban population noticed what was happening and hundreds of reports reached Miami, all of which were considered false by U.S. intelligence . Hundreds of reports were sent to Miami .
 The missiles were not discovered by the U.S. until a U-2 flight photographed images showing the construction of an SS-4 site near San Cristobal . The missiles are believed to have been built in the Philippines .
 Initially the U.S. government kept the information secret, only telling a small number of key officials . Initially the United States government kept it secret .
 President Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations in a televised address on October 22 . President Kennedy made the announcement in October 22, 1963 .
 He proclaimed that any nuclear attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union . America would respond accordingly to any attack, he said .
 Kennedy placed a naval quarantine on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments arriving there . Kennedy placed the naval quarantine . Cuba was then forced to quarantine itself .
 International law dictates that the word quarantine was used rather than blockade . International law dictated that quarantine be used instead of blockade .
 Establishing a blockade would have been classed as an act of war and war had not been declared between the U.S. and Cuba . Establishment of a blockade could have been classified as a war act .
 President Kennedy organised a secret meeting of senior advisors at the White House . Kennedy organised the meeting after photographic evidence showed Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba had been confirmed .
 The group met frequently from 16 October to decide how to respond to the threat . They met frequently to discuss how to deal with the situation .
 An immediate bombing strike was disregarded straight away as was an appeal to the United Nationsthis was felt to be to time consuming . An appeal to United Nations was also disregarded .
 This narrowed the choice to a naval blockade and ultimatum of a full scale invasion . The choice was narrowed to a full-scale invasion . This narrows the choice of naval blockade to full scale invasions .
 The blockade was chosen although some members of the group were requesting tougher action . Finally the blockade was finally chosen . The blockade is the first time the blockade has been chosen by the group .
 The U.S. had concerns that the soviet’s reaction to the blockade may turn into escalating retaliation . The Americans had concerns about escalating retaliation from the soviiet .
 Kennedy spoke to the American public and to the Soviet government in a televised address on October 22 . Kennedy was speaking to the public and Soviet government . The address was broadcast from October 22, 1962 .
 He confirmed the presence of missiles in Cuba and announced the decision for a naval blockade as a quarantine zone of five hundred nautical miles .
 He also warned that the military were prepared for any eventualities, and accused the Soviet union of secrecy and deception .
 The U.S. received solid support from its European allies . British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, could not understand why a diplomatic solution could not be considered .
 Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy on October 23 and 24 . in these he claimed the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the Soviet Union had peaceful intentions . in the letters he claimed that the missiles were a deterrent .
 The Soviets had two different deals delivered to the U.S. government . The Soviets delivered two deals to the American government .
 On October 26, they offered to withdraw missiles if the U.S. would guarantee they would not invade Cuba or support any invasion . On October 25, the Cuban government said they would withdraw the missiles if they were not attacked .
 The Soviets broadcast on public radio for the withdrawal of the United States missiles in Turkey in addition in addition to the demands of the day before . The next day October 27, the Soviets broadcast a request for withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey from Turkey .
 The crisis peaked on the 27 October when a U-2 aircraft was shot down over Cuba . The U.2 was the first U.S. aircraft to be shot down in Cuba .
 At the same time Soviet merchant ships were nearing the quarantine zone . The quarantine zone was also being quarantined at the time .
 Kennedy responded by publicly agreeing to the first Soviet deal and sending his brother Robert F Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to privately agree to the removal of the missiles in turkey .
 Khrushchev ordered the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The Soviet ships turned back and the missiles were turned back . The missiles were removed from Cuba in October .
 President Kennedy ended the quarantine on 20 November 1962 . Satisfied that these missiles had been removed, the quarantine was lifted .
 The compromise reached satisfied no one, it was a particular embarrassment for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union who had not made public the withdrawal of the missiles in Turkey . After the Crisis the compromise was reached, but it was not public .
 The Soviets were portrayed as retreating from circumstances they had started . But they could have made this look just the opposite and positioned themselves as the USSR saving the world from nuclear war .
 Cuban people felt they had been betrayed by the Soviets in whom they had trusted, with all the decisions being made by Kennedy and Khrushchev . The Cuban people were angry at the decision made by the Soviet Union .
 The purpose was to create a way that the leaders of the two major Cold War countries could communicate directly to solve any future crisis . The purpose of the project was to help solve any Cold War crisis .