 Late in 1961, President John F Kennedy approved a covert plan to undermine or eliminate President Fidel Castro .
 Nikita Khruschchev angered by U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Soviet Premier decided to protect Castro and alter the balance of power by shipping missiles to Cuba .
 U-2 spy-plane photographs revealed irrefutable evidence of offensive missile sites under construction in Cuba . The secret plan required deceiving American officials in Moscow and Washington .
 The president reeled off the names of key members of the National Security Council . Bundy told Bundy to organize a meeting for later that morning . Bundy says the meeting will be held later that day .
 President Kennedy summoned his brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, to the White House . He then summoned the attorney general's brother, Robert F. Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 RFK exclaimed upon seeing the U-2 pictures . JFK was talking with his daughter, Caroline, only a month short of her fifth birthday .
 JFK and his advisers knew that nothing was to be gained from emotion and panic and that any effort to humiliate the Soviets would only make the situation worse . Tensions were high, but JFK knew that . Nothing was to gain from emotion .
 Kennedy pored over the aerial photos with a large magnifying glass supplied by Arthur Lundahl, director of the National Photographic Interpretation Center . This was one case where a favorite Kennedy family maxim, ""Don't get mad, get even,"" did not apply .
 The president hit the switch under the conference table, activating a concealed tape recorder . Deputy CIA Director Marshall Carter began by explaining what the photographs of a missile site in San Cristobal revealed to his trained eye .
 For several minutes, Carter and Lundahl continued to focus on the technical specifics revealed by the photographs . They continued to talk about the technical details of the photos .
 Graybeal interjected before the president had finished his question . "It's good to have men like Curt LeMay and Arleigh Burke commanding troops once you decide to go in,"" he said .
 In short, he respected the military as soldiers but not as policy makers . "I respect the military, but respect them as soldiers," he said .
 Kennedy pointedly ignored Taylor's request and began to speak in an obvious effort to control the agenda of the meeting and demonstrate that the commander-in-chief was in charge . Kennedy then began speaking in an attempt to show that he was in control .
 He was initially hesitant and uncomfortable, repeatedly tripping over his words . "Let me just say a little a little about a . . . what the problem is," he said. "From . . the point of view," he began .
 He then became progressively more confident and lucid, telling the chiefs that if the U.S. did nothing, the Soviets would end up with a significant military base from which to pressure the United States and damage American prestige in the world .
 Kennedy could not push aside his Cold War blinders, any more than Joint Chiefs or ExComm, to even consider the possibility that the weapons in Cuba were at least in part a genuine Soviet commitment to defend their Cuban allies against American subversion and attack .
 General LeMay jumped aggressively into the discussion, giving no indication he had understood the grim contingencies raised by the president . His use of the personal pronoun sent a clear message he would listen to chiefs' advice, but the decision was his .
 This blockade and political action I see leading into war, he says . This is what I see as leading to war . This . uh . . . blockade and . . political action, he said, will lead to war. This blockade .
 LeMay has gone well beyond merely giving advice or even disagreeing with the commander-in-chief . LeMay had gone beyond merely saying advice or disagreeing .
 He had taken their generation's ultimate metaphor for cowardice, the 1938 appeasement of Hitler at Munich at Munich, and flung it in the president's face . The president had taken the 1938 Munich speech as a symbol of cowardice .
 JFK's father, Joseph P Kennedy, was ambassador to England between 1938 and 1940 . He was a supporter of appeasement as ambassador to the UK between 1938-40 .
 President Kennedy, in a remarkable display of sang-froid, refused to take the bait . Moments later, LeMay renewed his attack .
 "You're in a pretty bad fix at the present time,"" LeMay said, almost taunting the president . Kennedy had not heard or perhaps thought he had heard wrong .
 A comprehensive effort was launched to inform foreign leaders and U.S. embassies and consulates around the world of the imminent blockade . MONDAY NOON NOON, OCTOBER 22, is when the blockade begins .
 Cubans and Soviets received a clear signal that something was up when the evacuation of U.S. military family dependents began at the Guantanamo naval base in Cuba . JFK prepared to speak to the nation on television that evening .
 Some 2,500 family members had 15 minutes to pack one bag each . By 4m, some 2,000 family members were on their way to Norfolk, Virginia .
 JFK was determined to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war if the Soviets reacted to the blockade or possible air assaults in Cuba by attacking American missiles in Turkey . The president had first raised this issue on October 20, recommending that the Joint Chiefs of Staff issue new orders to American personnel on the Jupiter
 Nitze: "McNamara and I wrote out a suggested instruction from him to the chiefs, and we took it up with the chiefs" Nitze reported that the chiefs agreed with the idea . Nitze said that he wrote out the suggested instruction and took it to the heads of
 "We gotta do is make sure these fellows do know, so that they don't fire 'em off and think the United States is under attack," she says .
 Nitze: "I've got your point, we'll do it again,"" Nitze replied . Nitze retreated, finally retreating. Nitze said, "I'm not going to let them go. I've got my point"
 Some strained laughter broke out at the resolution of this ""difference of opinion,"" Bundy relieved the tension by telling Nitze, in a tongue-in-cheek tone, ""Send me the documents, and I will show them to a doubting master"
 Nearly 20 leaders of Congress from both parties summoned to Washington from all across the country and flown to Washington in military aircraft .
 Some of the leaders resented being informed of Kennedy's decision barely two hours before his speech to the nation . Kennedy made the decision to withdraw from the White House .
 As a member of Congress, JFK had never been an insider, and many of his colleagues had dismissed him as an indifferent legislator at best, a playboy at worst . JFK never was an insider . JFK's career spanned more than 30 years .
 The meeting began with detailed briefings by CIA Director John McCone and Lundahl . Now, whether they liked it or not, he was the president; but that did not mean they would passively accept his decisions .
 The president undoubtedly watched the faces of his congressional allies and adversaries, wondering what they were thinking . The president watched the face of his colleagues and adversaries .
 JFK concluded the briefings with a review of the options discussed over the past seven days of secret meetings specifically appealing to the Republicans in the room . JFK sent McCone to brief former president Dwight D Eisenhower .
 We called for a meeting of the Rio Pact countries and hope to get a two-thirds vote for them to give the blockade legality . The Rio Pact nations are meeting to discuss the blockade .
 If the situation deteriorates further, the blockade could be tightened . The blockade could also be tightened if the situation worsened further .
 You have warned these people time and again, in the most eloquent speeches I have read since Woodrow Wilson, as to what would happen if there was an offensive capability created in Cuba, says President Obama . "You have warned [the U.S. government] about what would
 The Soviets, he declared, had challenged ""the announced foreign policy of the United States" The Soviets had challenged the U.S. foreign policy, he said .
 I think that you . . . should assemble as speedily as possible an adequate force and . . and . and clean out that situation . And I think . that situation should be cleaned out that way, he says .
 "The time's gonna come, Mr President, when we're gonna have to take this gamble," he says . The time is coming, he says, for the risk of nuclear war .
 "I don't know whether Khrushchev will launch a nuclear war over Cuba or not," says George S. Eisenhower . Eisenhower: "Krushchev may launch a nuke war on Cuba ... but not on Cuba"
 JFK explained, "we can't invade Cuba" because it would take several days to assemble and deploy the men required for an invasion . JFK said, "Senator,"" JFK explained: "We can't invasion Cuba"
 Russell: "So that's what we're doing now" Kennedy replied impatiently . Russell would not relent . Kennedy: "We're doing what we need now"
 Russell: JFK told JFK that Berlin would remain a hostage in any case . Russell: "No" when JFK bluntly replied, ""No,"" Russell declared brusquely that Berlin remained a hostage . "No," he said .
 Russell: "Oh, my God, I know that,"" Russell exclaimed, not even letting the president finish . Russell: 'Oh, I'm going to be a hero'
 Senator J William Fulbright, another influential Southern Democrat, weighed in against the president's chosen course of action . Senator Fulbright was a Democrat in the South .
 The president again reminded Fulbright, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, that an invasion would require a direct attack on 8,000 Russians . Russell remained silent, but he must have been gratified .
 JFK: "It would be foolish" to expect that the Russians would not regard that as a far more direct thrust. And I think that it would be . foolish" JFK said .
 I think that the inevitable result will be immediately the seizure of Berlin. And that's the result of the Berlin seizure, he says . He says .
 Kennedy: "We don't know where we're gonna end up on this matter. I'll say this to Senator Fulbright,"" Kennedy continued .
 "We just tried to make good judgments on a matter on which everyone's uncertain," she says . "We're not trying to make bad judgments. We're trying to do good things," she adds .
 John F Kennedy switched off the tape recorder and headed for the Oval Office . "I guess that's it,"" Halleck concluded .
 At 7:06, President Kennedy signed the quarantine proclamation in the Oval Office . He certainly noticed that all of the congressional flak had come from Democrats .
 JFK, RFK, Taylor, and Bundy remained behind after the meeting and talked informally . JFK and RFK remained behind for the rest of the meeting .
 JFK's secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, interrupted with a message that Jacqueline Kennedy was on the telephone, and the president left to take the call . The president left the phone to take a call from his secretary .
 Kennedy brothers were alone in the Cabinet Room when JFK returned to the White House . Kennedy brothers had been left alone in Cabinet Room . When JFK returned, the brothers were left alone .
 Robert Kennedy contended that the South American countries and Central American countries voted unanimously for the move . Robert Kennedy said that the reaction from the rest of the allies and everybody else, say that you had to do it .
 Castro received reliable new intelligence that U.S. airstrikes and an invasion could be only a few days away, Castro says .
 In Moscow, Khrushchev approved a plan to defend Soviet installations in Cuba against an American assault . President Kennedy became increasingly irritable at the morning ExComm meeting in response to nearly unanimous opposition .
 JFK: "This is unsettling now, George, because he's got us in a pretty good spot here. Well,"" JFK retorted sharply . JFK: "this is unsettling . Well," JFK said .
 Ball suggested pulling the rug out of under Khrushchev by releasing his October 26 letter . Ball suggested releasing the letter would be a way of getting the rug to be pulled out of the closet .
 Later that evening, a small group of ExComm members joined President Kennedy in the Oval Office . Later that night, the ExComm met with President Kennedy .
 JFK revealed that his brother was about to hand-deliver a new letter for Khrushchev to the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . JFK requested advice on what the attorney general should say .
 Once the president announces there will be an invasion, he won't be able to reverse himself . "Once he announces there is an invasion," he will be able't reverse himself, he says .
 President Kennedy told Dobrynin to contact Robert Kennedy at once and tell him that a reply to the president's message would arrive shortly . Gromyko instructed Dobrynkin to direct Dobrynins to direct Gromykos to contact Kennedy . Kennedy's message was expected to arrive shortly,
 The Kremlin had apparently received a report that President Kennedy had scheduled a television address on Sunday afternoon presumably to announce an invasion of Cuba . The Kremlin received the report .
 Khrushchev decided not to risk sending his message through the unreliable diplomatic channels . Instead he broadcast it immediately over Moscow radio . The message was broadcast over the radio .
 CIA Director John McCone had gone to Mass an hour earlier after hearing on his car radio that the Kremlin would shortly make a significant announcement . McCone: "I'm going to Mass. I want to make it clear that this is not a secret"
 The president reacted to Khrushchev's message with surprise, relief, and some skepticism . The president responded with surprise and relief, but skepticism .
 The Soviets had systematically deceived the U.S. about putting missiles in Cuba . Gromyko had lied to the president in the Oval Office . The Soviets, after all, had systematically misled the United States .
 They also urged JFK to order sweeping airstrikes in Cuba in 24 hours, followed by an invasion, unless irrefutable evidence proved that missile sites were being dismantled .
 General Taylor dissented but agreed to transmit the message to McNamara . General Taylor agreed to send the message . The general agreed with McNamara to send it to him .
 A groundswell of elation had overwhelmed the White House . Stephen's, however, was not the only reaction to the election .
 The United States missiles in Turkey were withdrawn, a Moscow-Washington hot line was established, and the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was negotiated . The U.S. missile tests were withdrawn in Turkey . The nuclear test ban treaty was negotiated in 1953 .
 Sheldon M Stern served as historian at the John F Kennedy Library from 1977 through 1999 . The Kennedy administration never abandoned its commitment to bring down Castro .