 I began some basic research to explore the topic further, and then immersed myself in the next few days . I began researching the possibility of finding a cure for cancer .
 I got a closer perspective on the life of the President and his brother, the Attorney General, during the event . "I learned about the topic in depth and substantially more than from any other source," he says .
 There were also many great quotes that I was able to implement into my writing . I was also able to use some of these quotes to help with my writing style .
 I wanted to make sure I included as much of both the American and Russian perspectives as I could get my hands on despite the commonly seen American-biased details of the event . These sources were also helpful in my writing .
 "I’d done an exhibit the previous year, and wanted to try something new," she says . "I wanted to do something new. I wanted to create something new"
 "Since the word count for papers is higher, I also felt that I could express my ideas better, rather than using more artistic measures in an exhibit," she says .
 Cutting down words was a problem for me last year as well as this year . But with some effort, I was able to get my word count down to the limit .
 "I tried to get an earlier start in my project this year and found it quite beneficial to managing my time," she says .
 Careful deliberations and debates took place during the argument to ensure the best possible outcome for the safety of the countries directly involved, and the world .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Chairman Nikita Khruschev were able to make good judgments and form peaceful solutions to their opposition . President Kennedy was able to set an example and resolve their conflict without firing nuclear weapons .
 During the crisis, the constant communication between U.S. President John F Kennedy and Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev is credited as what saved the opposing superpowers from the risk of nuclear war .
 Letters exchanged between the conflicting leaders, debates between their advisors, and diplomatic negotiations of ambassadors prevented a Third World War provoked by the dispute over nuclear weapons .
 The resolution of the event paved the way in terms of communication for future generations of leaders, and demonstrated the importance of global correspondence .
 Although the nations were allies in World War II, the U.S. was skeptical of the Russians’ communist government . The United States and the Soviet Union were allies during the war but were skeptical of Russia .
 The fear of communism skyrocketed when McCarthyism was a campaign led by Senator Joseph McCarthy . Thousands of people were wrongly accused of supporting communism . McCarthyism caused thousands of people to lose their jobs or suffer other severe consequences .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro, the leader of Cuba, allied with the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro's Cuba was allied with Soviet Union in 1959 .
 President Kennedy decided to launch an attack on Cuba in 1961 with the goal to overthrow Castro . The United States and the Soviet Union’s Caneira 4 tensions escalated further .
 The assault, called the Bay of Pigs Invasion, failed . Within a day the forces supporting the United States had surrendered . The assault failed, and within a day, the U.S. forces supported by the Soviet Union surrendered .
 The Soviet Union secretly placed missiles in Cuba in response to the Bay of Pigs Invasion . The missiles were placed in Cuba to provide a defense system for their ally .
 The news reached the United States in October of 1962, when a man named Richard Heyser passed over San Cristobal, Cuba in a reconnaissance U2 flight and photographed a Russian missile being assembled on the island .
 He learned SS-4 missiles were capable of reaching the United States . Soon he learned the missiles were able to reach the U.S. He learned that the missiles could be used to launch a nuclear bomb .
 The President considered his options -one being a full-scale invasion on Cuba or another, a bombing of the country -but instead he settled on establishing a naval blockade to prevent the delivery of additional weapons .
 President Kennedy made an announcement broadcasted across America, warning about the missiles being assembled in Cuba . Kennedy made the announcement on October 22nd, 1962 .
 In order to prevent panic when Americans were informed of what was going on in Cuba, the President tried to communicate honestly and assure their safety .
 The United States held its breath, Caneira 5 but thankfully no firearms were raised . The Soviet ships stopped short of the line of naval vessels . No firearms raised .
 Many letters were sent between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev between October 22nd and October 28th, 1962 .
 Through these communications, the two negotiated peace terms while the tension rose . The two had to negotiate peace terms through communications .
 In their letters, Kennedy and Khrushchev both wrote that they wanted to come to terms and avoid nuclear war at all costs . In the letters, they said they both wanted to avoid war at any cost .
 Khrushchev proposed he would disassemble the missiles that had been shipped to Cuba in exchange for the removal of the “Jupiter” missiles from Turkey, which had been stationed there earlier .
 The Kennedy Administration initially decided to ignore Khrushchev’s second letter and agree to his original terms . American officials accepted the secondary terms and agreed to withdraw Caneira 6 missiles from Turkey .
 Both leaders knew that if they were, their families and citizens could die . "Both leaders knew they were going to kill themselves, and their families," she says .
 Both recognized that if nations erupted into full-scale war, their countries and even the world could be annihilated . Both knew that if a war broke out, the world would be destroyed .
 The two leaders worked to better understand each other and the obligations they had to their countries and people . By making decisions in their best national interests, the two leaders wrote letters back and forth .
 Some members favored a blockade as a first step . Some strongly opposed it, instead arguing that a full-scale invasion was the better choice . Some members of the House of Representatives supported a blockade .
 In his memoir, Robert Kennedy describes the President acknowledging the pressure on him and believing that Chairman Khrushchev is simultaneously undergoing similar pressures . Robert Kennedy described the President as acknowledging the President's .
 After the crisis, Khrushchev’s son was interviewed about the Russian perspective on the event . The interview was conducted by the son of the late Soviet leader .
 Without this communication, one country may have fired weapons on the other, resulting in full-scale nuclear combat and millions of deaths . Caneira 7 was key to understanding that each leader wanted to avoid nuclear war that ultimately was the key to avoiding nuclear war .
 Because of this communication, the two countries avoided the imminent danger of starting a third World War . The two nations avoided the danger of war, and the war was avoided .
 There was a constant fear among the Americans that a “miscalculation a mistake in judgement” would be made when the ExComm debated over taking next steps in the crisis . There was also a fear of a ‘mistake” in judgement .
 Kennedy’s advisors split between invasion or blockade . Despite the split decision, the group was aware that a unified decision was necessary .
 If not, Soviet ships could deliver more weapons to Cuba, further posing a threat to the U.S. The United States has been warned that if not, more weapons could be delivered to Cuba .
 The idea of multiple perspectives and checks and balances continues to be used in American presidencies in the form of the presidential cabinet . This idea of a president's cabinet is still used in the United States .
 Attorney General Kennedy assisted his brother, the president, in his decision-making process . Throughout the predicament, he assisted in his brother's decision to act .
 More importantly was his role in the last days of the conflict . More importantly, he was a key figure in the fight against the Taliban .
 The meetings were arguably one of the most beneficial methods of communication during the event . The deliberations were immediately received and negotiated, whereas the letters took time to reach the disagreeing leaders .
 After the crisis, communication between the U.S. and Russia improved between the two countries .
 The construction of the phone line was intended to prevent the leaders of the two nations from struggling to understand each other’s intentions again .
 This crisis is a good example of the increase of diplomacy in government leaders’ circles of advisors . This is the first time a crisis has been solved by diplomacy in the country's leaders .
 The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons is on the political table . In January of 2021, in January 2021, the treaty will be in force .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev’s communication also set a precedent for future leaders . Ronald Reagan and Soviet Chairman Gorbachev had incredible relationship between them .
 The idea of communicating between nations is one that we can apply to conflicts in the twenty-first century . It can be used to communicate between nations in the 20-first-century .
 Communication and peaceful collaboration between political parties could make a difference in the division of the United States . Peaceful collaboration could make it a more united country .
 In Caneira 10 this case, we can communicate studies, vaccine recipes, and information between countries to understand mutations of the virus .
 Making accords or passing laws which help improve the circumstances of the climate crisis, for example, can be agreed upon across countries too .
 It is easier to solve issues if we are willing to band together and negotiate with countries than if nations stand alone . It is better to solve problems if nations band together than if they stand alone, he says .
 If we can be open to the views of others as we work with foreign countries, we can accomplish more to resolve issues that impact everyone . We need to be more open to others' views as we try to solve issues that affect everyone .
 The first step into solving any issue, whether on a smaller or larger scale, is trying to understand the aspects and goals of the other perspective involved, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Although it can be difficult to allow ourselves to hear the other angles of the situation, it can help us to resolve problems . We need to be able to hear other angles in order to solve problems .
 The only way they successfully did so was through letter communication and ambassador negotiations . "The only way to succeed is to communicate with the U.S. and the world," the author says .
 This source is a transcript of John F Kennedy’s address to the U.S. saying that missiles were being assembled in Cuba . This transcript is based on Kennedy's speech to the United States in 1961 .
 I found this transcript more helpful to me than a video of the 35th president’s statement because it was easier to find quotes that supported my thesis . I found it easier to use than video of Obama's statement because of the quotes .
 The television was one of the ways communication was spread to the entire country . It was essential to help citizens prepare for potential threats from Cuba, the document says .
 Ambassador Dobrynin’s cable to the Russian Ministry he explained his view on the crisis . In the cable, he said: “The crisis is not over, but it is a very serious matter of concern”
 I think it is important to support both of a conflict’s perspectives as much as possible . This source helped me to see what the Russian perspective the less often told one was like was like .
 A cable was sent directly from Dobrynin during the last few days of the crisis, CNN says . CNN's John Sutter says it was a direct link to the cable .
 This book was one of my most helpful sources since it gave me a focused and specific view of the crisis from Robert Kennedy, the president’s brother, who assisted President Kennedy and advised him .
 It gave me a sense of the immense pressure and responsibility on the part of the President because it was written by a person who was closely involved in the event as well as being close to him .
 Robert Kennedy was directly involved during the entire crisis, he says . He says he knows this is reliable as it is written by Robert Kennedy .
 This is another letter Kennedy wrote to Khrushchev during the crisis, except it was shorter and only outlined and confirmed information I already obtained from other sources . This is a shorter version of Kennedy's letter .
 The letter displayed the diplomats the two national leaders attempted to remain during this time .
 Document was transcripted from the original letter President Kennedy sent to Khrushchev . Document is reliable since it's from original letter from Kennedy sent .
 This source confirmed facts I’d already learned about and gave me a specific quote to help support a specific point in my project about historical impact . This quote was a quote from a source that helped support a point in the project about the historical impact.
 The letter is a transcript of the letter Kennedy sent to Khrushchev on October 28th, and it is primary because it was directly written by John F Kennedy during the crisis .
 This document helped me gain insight into the position of the Russian/Cuban alliance in contrast to the typical United States’ story . This document was published by the U.S. State Department of State Department .
 I think it is important to see both sides of an argument, and this document certainly helped me do so . Most of the articles I found were written from the perspective of the United States .
 This is a primary source and is a transcript of an actual document written so I can tell it is reliable . This is not only a transcript, but it is a direct transcript of the actual document .
 Kennedy: "This letter helped me to prove the ideas I claimed to be true, and continued to give me insight on the Russians’ perspective"
 Nikita Khrushchev’s son's son was able to compare the reactions to the crisis from two different sides of the argument . The son of the former prime minister of the Soviet Union was assassinated in 1968 .
 This was an interview conducted about the crisis from someone who experienced the event . It is a primary source . The interview was conducted by someone who witnessed the crisis .
 This site is maintained by historians and comes from a long-trusted administration, so I can tell it is reliable for my research purposes . This site comes from the same administration as historians .
 History.com, A&E Television Networks, 27 Oct.09, www.history.com/cold-war.com .
 History.com, A&E Television Networks, 4 Jan. 2010, www.history.com/topics/cold-war/cuban-missile-crisis .
 It detailed the most prominent events during the crisis and helped me to get a general understanding of the topic and major events . The book was published in 2007 and 2008 .
 History.com is a well-trusted site, and the information I gathered here paralleled the facts and statistics of other sources I found . I can tell this source is reliable because it's a trusted site .
 The author of this article is credible as he teaches at the UCLA International Institute's Center for Middle East Development . The source is secondary since the majority of events discussed are based in 1962 during the Missile Crisis .
 This article gave me a bit more information on the communicative impact of my topic, and the aftermath of the Cuban Crisis . This article gives me some more information about the Cuban crisis .
 I could tell that this source is credible because it is based in a reliable institution and the information I already acquired from other sources paralleled the contents of the article . The author of this article has been interviewed by CNN iReport .
 I know this source is secondary, because it was published after the crisis and it was not a first-hand account of the event . It is not the only source I know, but it is a secondary .
 National Archives, 20 Dec.17, www.archives.gov.gov/publications/prologue/2012/fall/cuban-missiles.html.
 I found several quotes and paraphrases that I was looking to use as support for my argument, which made this resource particularly beneficial . I found a quote and paraphrase that I used to use to support my argument .
 I know this source is reliable because it is government-based, and since it was not written by a person with a first-hand account, I know that the source is secondary . I know it is a reliable source, but it's not the source .
 This source helped me to connect my research project and the historical significance to the greater importance and influence of today’s world in 2021 . This source provided an insight into the importance and importance of the world in the future .
 This source is secondary due to the fact that it is not a first-hand account, and it is reliable because it is organization-based . This is not the only account that is not first hand account .
 Caneira 20 United States Department of State, U.S. State, history.gov/milestones/1961-1968/cuban-missile-crisis .
 It proved to be well thought-out and held some important information about the positive consequences relating to communication during the Cold War as the crisis was resolved .
 I know this one is a secondary source because it is not directly from a person who experienced/was involved in the crisis . The author of this article does not know how much of the crisis has affected the country .