 Identify methods that the CIA used in gathering intelligence . been approved for release through the Historical Review Pro 2. been approved . Identify CIA methods that were used in collecting intelligence. Identify method that was approved for . release through Historical Review .
 Analyze documents to identify factual information and points gram of the Central Intelligence Agency . Analyze document to identify facts and points of view .
 Explain to students that they will be investing in the United States and the Soviet Union . Explain to the students that the students will be investi the U.S. and Russia .
 The hostility gating methods that the CIA used to gather intelligence became so severe that both nations feared the other might launch revealed that a military buildup was taking place . In time, the hostility gated methods became more severe .
 Both nations embarked upon a military buildup to deter way intelligence was gathered . The U.S. and the U.K. have been at odds with each other for years .
 The buildup included strengthening alliances as well as military might . The buildup was part of a push to strengthen alliances and strengthen the military .
 Fidel Castro declared his support for the Soviet Union in 1959 . In 1960, scarcely a year after assuming power in Cuba, Fidel Castro seized power . In 1959, shortly after taking power, he declared support for Soviet Union .
 The United States soon had a Soviet satellite approximately ninety miles from diplomatic relations with Cuba . The U.S. soon severed relations with the Soviet satellite . The satellite was located in Cuba 90 miles from the United States .
 In the spring of 1961, it responded to this situation by including the invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961, failed and Castro attempting to invade Cuba . In hopes of toppling the Castro regime, it continued to advocate revolutionary communism in Central Cuba .
 Following this failure, the Agency was informed that Soviet ships were delivering missiles to Cuba . The Kennedy administration actively pursued other measures toward delivering missiles .
 Operation revealed that the Soviet missile installations were already in place MONGOOSE, were clandestine and interagency in nature, di in Cuba . These measures were collectively known known as Operation Operation Operation .
 MON of the CIA is to gather intelligence for the President . In addition to sabotage operations under MON of CIA, the CIA's main job is to spy on the President.
 McCone was Director of Central Intelligence in 1962 . McCone had served as Secretary of the Air Force under Truman and chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission under Eisenhower . He was a successful west coast engineer .
 McCone took great interest in the Soviet a publication of the buildup in Cuba and did what every good intelligence analyst is Joint Committee supposed to do . He imagined himself in the other fellow's shoes .
 The Joint Committee on Historians and Archivists was es tinental ballistic missiles with which to directly threaten the Soviet Union in the late 1960s . Khrushchev had few interconceptions with the missiles .
 None of these could reach the United States from to identify mutual interests among those who study society's records and those who preserve and Soviet soil .
 McCone correctly guessed that it was that piece of real Andrew W Mellon Foundation, two investigative teams estate . With financial assistance from the Cuba, McCone said, it was the real estate of the Mellon Foundation .
 The results of their efforts have been compiled into this new 59-page publication . The results are compiled choice, including Berlin .
 McCone's own top analysts on CIA's Board of National Esti mates had similar reservations about his theory . McCone: 'Top analysts' on CIA board had similar doubts .
 In four meetings with top Administration officials, including two with the president, McCone attempted to warn about what he feared the Soviets were planning . McCone: "The Soviets are planning. They are planning to attack us," he said .
 He left for France on honeymoon with his second wife . Then, believing he had made his point, he left for the country with his wife .
 McCone learned of the news in France, Army Intelligence had earlier passed to the West . McCone believed this discovery corroborated his theory of the discovery .
 The intelligence community could tell the Presi however, did not agree . As a result, the intelligence community was able to tell the President .
 This was an extremely important factor, since it allowed the putting in SAMs to defend Cuba from United States attack . Pointed out that these were defensive dent that he had sufficient time to make a thoughtful decision, rather than offensive missiles .
 The Soviets planned to use their SAMs step back from the brink, says McCone . More likely, leader of the free world to evaluate his options, he says .
 John McCone's insight to discourage the U.S. from flying its U-2s over Cuba may have saved the president from Soviet missiles . Without that, the intelligence community might not have effectively blinding the United States to the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 His analysts did not find timely warning he needed to make a peaceful solution to the crisis possible . His analysts found this reasoning persuasive .
 During the month while McCone was away, SAMs were discovered in Cuba, but refugee and agent reports flooded the CIA warning yet again of the suspected presence of offensive missiles .
 CIA headquarters gathered intelligence for so long, with none proven correct, that CIA HQ gathered and how President Kennedy was informed . But there had been so many of these reports and will have an opportunity to investigate how intelligence was gathered .
 A delay of almost five days followed McCone's ultimatum, Closing the Lesson . Using the information from all the documents, have the considered all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnais .
 On 14 October 1962, a lone U-2 under Air Force com mand photographed the evidence that the Soviets were placing medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba .
 Much of this intelligence came from aerial photography, which increased dramatically after the missiles' dis . Linda Miller is an American government teacher in Fairfax, Virginia .
 Other intelligence, especially identification of the missiles Virginia. Virginia. Other intelligence. Virginia .
 She has received many teaching awards, including and evaluation of their operational readiness, came from material Virginia Council for the Social Studies Teacher of the Year .
 Oleg Penkovsky of Soviet Mary McAuliffe is the Deputy Chief CIA History Staff . Mary McAuliffe was the Soviet leader of the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 We do not believe the measures to achieve a . higher degree of action readiness for Soviet and bloc forces are being taken on a crash basis . We believe the . measures to . achieve a I higher degree . of action . readiness for . Soviet and . bloc forces . are being . taken
 Communist re | action to the United States quarantine action to Cuba has not gone beyond the highly critical but uncoramitting state ment issued yesterday by the Soviet government . The Soviet government issued a highly critical state ment yesterday .
 Surveillance of Cuba indicates continued progress in completion of IRBM and MRBM missile sites, says Cuban military .
 Buildings believed to be able to afford nuclear storage are being assembled with great rapidity . Buildings are believed to have a capacity to store nuclear material .
 Cuban naval units have been ordered to block ing positions at Banes and Santiago Bays . Cuban naval forces have been told to block positions at the Banes .
 Survey of Soviet shipping shows 16 dry cargo and 6 tanker ships en route to Cuba . Survey of . Soviet shipping showed 16 dry . cargo and six tanker ships were en route . to Cuba.
 Of these 22, nine j are in positions which would permit arrival by the end of October . Nine of these 22 are currently in positions that would allow arrival by end of month .
 Official world reaction shows a generally favor able response to the U.S. action, particularly in Latin America . Latin America is generally supportive of the United States' actions .
 OAS representatives approved a resolution endorsing the quarantine without opposition . One abstention was due to lack of instructions . The OAS members approved the resolution without opposition, one abstenictation was .
 Cuban national, A 12 C53 97-year-old, was born in Havana, Cuba, in 1962 . The average intelligence of a Cuban national is below average .
 On 17 Sep 62, about 2100 hourcjMl^jravcling by automobile from Havana toward toy heme in Pinar del Rio, I observed a convoy of 10 motorcycles, l6 trucks, ond eieht trailers .
 The last units of the con voy were at the entrance to Guanajoy, Havana, Havana . Although the vehicles were scattered over, a distance, I am of the opinion they were all part of the same convoy .
 The leading element of the convoy was five motorcycles driven by unarmed Rebel Army soldiers . Their function appeared to be clearing civilian traffic ahead of the civilian traffic .
 The trucks were followed by eight Soviet-built flatbed-type trailers j approximately 32 feet long, seven of wtech were carrying what looked like tubes extending over the entire length of the flatbed and completely'\ covered with canvas .
 I did notice what looked like large metal prongs sticking out from under the canvas at the rear of the trailer . However, I did not notice what appeared to be metal prongs sticking out of the canvas .
 "It looked like a piece of radar equipment. Although I don't know too much about . .. it, it looked like ... it, was radar equipment," she said .
 Rebol 5 Army soldiers are armed with five motorcycles driven by unarmed Rebol soldiers . The trucks were in turn follo^d by five motorcycles . The motorcycles were turned into trucks driven by the soldiers .
 Because of darkness and rain I could not distinguish who 4 the drivers of any of the vehicles in the convoy were . Because of the rain I was unable to distinguish the drivers .
 On 17 Sep 62, about 2100 houroro^wMl I Havana toward my homo in pHLHLHLHHB Pln I I of 10 motorcyclca, 16 trucks, and eight t I the Central Highway toward Plnar del Rio .
 Since I I came direction as the convoy, I passed I voy at the entrance to Guanajay, Havana /p I Scries C72^7, and then passed the leading ele I j after Artcmisa, Finer del Rio /Grid coord 19 I i ET2
 Although the vehicles were scatte I opinion they were all part of the some convoy* I I 2.2. Although the . vehicles were . well-known, they were . part of a convoy of vehicles . I think they were part of . a convoy*.
 The leading element of the convoy was five I Rebel Army soldiers whose function appeared to b I traffic ahead .
 The motorcycles were followed by I carrying about 30 Rebel Army soldiers armed I and rifles . The motorcycles followed by 30 Rebel soldiers armed with rifles .
 I could not distinguish what I was carrying since it was completely covered with canvas . The trailer was covered in canvas .
 ' I I notice what looked like large metal prongs sticking out from under the canvas at tho rear of the trailer . However, I did notice what appeared to be metal prong sticking out of the canvas .
 The trucks were in turn followed by five motorcycles driven by unarmed Rebel 5' J I I I A Army soldiers .
 Because of darkness and rain, I could not distinguish who the drivers of any of the vehicles in the convoy were . Because of the rain and darkness, we were unable to distinguish who 4 I I I i i the drivers were .
 Acting Director of Central Intelligence in Cuba . Recent Soviet military activities in Cuba included Soviet military activity in the 1950s and 1960s .
 U-2 photography of 29 August confirms extensive Soviet military deliveries to Cuba in recent weeks . U.2 photography shows extensive military supplies to Cuba . In recent weeks, the U.S. military has also been involved in Cuba .
 Surface-to-air missile sites, guided missile boats, and additional land axmaments were observed* 2.2.3.4.5 . Surface to air missile sites were also observed in the area .
 SAM equipment has been located at one additional site . The small amount of permanent construction at these sites and the speed ocf the work Indicate the program is pro-ceeding on a crash basis .
 111 will be required to operate each site . C A TirfrrtTTTrm will be needed to run each site. 111 will operate each of the sites .
 Soviet personnel will man the sites for at least the 9 to 12 months while Cubans are being trained . Soviet personnel doubtless will be manning the sites .
 Eae one area of SAM activity in Oriente province probably will be followed by several others in the vicinity . Eae says SAM activity is likely to continue in the near future .
 The pattern now emerging suggests as many as 2k sites may eventually be set up to blanket the entire island . At least 8 Kbnsar-class missile boats have been delivered to Cuba in recent weeks .
 Obese PF-llke boats carry two missile launchers each, with the radar guided missile effective against surface targets to ranges of between 15 and 17 miles .
 Some Cuban naval personnel have received training in the USSR, but it is not known If this Included Kbmar training . B Some Cuban personnel have been trained in the Soviet Union . B
 These boats are in addition to 13 or more torpedo boats and 6 submarine chasers delivered by the USSR earlier this year . These boats were added to the Soviet fleet .
 Tbe pfcotograpfay shows that current deliveries to Cuba also contain land armaments, including tanks and possibly self-propelled guns .
 Reports indicate other shipments have contained artillery, tanks, and possibly combat aircraft, but these have not been confirmed .
 The photography of 29 August tinned up the highest number of MIG aircraft yet noted, some of the most of the aircraft ever recorded .
 We believe Cuba's aircraft inventory includes approximately 6C MIG Jet fighters, including at least a dozen MIG-19s . Cuba is believed to have a total of six MIG jet fighters .
 Soviet shipments of military equipment and personnel to Cuba show no sign of letting up . Soviet military equipment, personnel have been sent to Cuba in recent years .
 A About 16 Soviet dry-cargo ships are now en route to Cuba, of which at least 10 probably are carrying military equipment .
 Routine Soviet deliveries of economic aid and trade goods are being made largely on Western ships* At least 1,700 Soviet military technicians arrived in Cuba in late July and early August in connection with these military activities .
 At least 1*300 more Soviets are arriving unannounced this week; no reports an their activities so far so far . Co At least 300 more Soviets expected to arrive unannounced .
 Construction of the remaining SAM sites began in late September or early October . The remaining sites were considered less vital than those listed above to the protection of the bases in Cuba .
 Work probably began on the SAM site at Siguanea on the Isle of Pines in the last week of September and on the sites at Esmeralda, Chambas, Maldonado, Santiago de Cuba, Ciego de Avila, and Deleite