 The series of conflicts that caused the crisis started in November, 1954, when Fulgencio Batista1 gained power and ignored problems within Cuba . The crisis began in November 1954 when Batista gained power .
 Batista’s authoritarianism created great unrest in the Cuban people because he didn’t care for his citizens . Batista's authoritarianism led to unrest in Cuba, says CNN.com .
 Batista’s autocratic regime gave Socialist ideals to a Cuban Revolutionary named Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was a revolutionary in Cuba . Batista gave Castro the Socialist ideals .
 The Cubans became tired of excessive corruption and exploitation of their people’s land by their government and the U.S. government . There is no better incentive for rebellion than a repressive government, writes CNN.com.
 Fidel Castro arose with the outraged Cubans and ignited the flames of revolution creating violent conflict within Cuba . Fidel Castro was a rallying leader, a leader of the Cuban revolution . Castro was the leader of Cuba's revolutionary revolution .
 Once Castro won the revolution, he seized power in 1959, and ironically created another dictatorship . Once Castro seized power, he created a dictatorship . He seized power and created a new dictatorship .
 Castro was Cuban President from 1940-1944, later became dictator of Cuba . Castro imposed a “socialist program,” displayed by taking private Cuban land . Castro then imposed a 'socialist' program, displaying by taking Cuban land on private land .
 Castro expropriated over three million acres owned by United States companies . The rapid development of a socialist country so close to the U.S. mainland must have been an alarming situation to the United States .
 The Central Intelligence Agency created a plan of aggression toward Cuba which would spark conflict between the two nations . In fact, the plan was created by the CIA and the CIA .
 The Cuban Air Force was supposed to be bombed, but U.S. bombers were shot down before reaching the airstrip . The Cuban air force was shot down .
 The United States lost the only skirmish against what was seen as a weak nation with no chance against the CIA-trained Cubans . The U.S. lost the most recent skirmish in the war with Cuba, but it's seen as weak .
 The United States failed to invade Cuba and didn’t even destroy one Cuban plane . The U.S. failed to even destroy a Cuban plane.
 The invasion was a dramatic failure that would severely damage the U.S.’s ego and their global prestige . The invasion would have been a disaster for the United States, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 The United States government knew that with one wrong step, the United States could potentially be​ ​obliterated, so tensions in the U.S. government were at an all-time high .
 With the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the U.S. had to react efficiently . The United States had to act quickly to prevent the spread of missiles .
 U.S. officials opposed this plan due to fear of Soviet retaliation . United States officials opposed it due to fears of Soviet reprisals .
 This plan was not wise because​ ​it​ ​would be seen as an act of aggression. This plan would be not wise, it would have been seen as aggression. It would not be wise to try and kill people, it is not wise to do so, it's not
 The United States would not have wanted to​ ​be the cause of WWIII, a tremendous fear during the Cold War . The U.S. would not want to​​ ​ be the cause for WWIII .
 The second option was to blockade Cuba from any imports of offensive weapons . The other option was a blockade of Cuba's own weapons imports .
 The blockade, or quarantine, was the better option because there was no military strike . Overall, the blockade was the best option because of the lack of a military strike.
 The quarantine just flexed U.S. military might, but this was still a conflict which only worsened the crisis . Instead, it just flexes United States military might . The quarantine only flexed the United States' might .
 One mistake could turn the conflict into nuclear war . In this situation, United States President John F Kennedy had to think efficiently .
 Kennedy informed the American people of his decision during his “Address on Cuba” on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy made the announcement during his address on Cuba in 1962 .
 The naval quarantine was the best decision, but it was a smaller conflict which didn’t help the overall crisis . It was the smallest conflict in the history of the U.S. Navy . The quarantine was a good decision .
 President Kennedy said a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba was being initiated . This was the first time the naval quarantine was ever publicly mentioned .
 The U.S. government didn't provide the necessary funding to create enough public fallout shelters for the people . The United States government didn’t provide the . necessary funding for the shelters .
 This created a feeling of betrayal within the minds of Americans because they trusted the government to keep them secure . The government created a 'betrayal' for Americans because of their trust in government .
 It was seen as neglect caused the insecurity of thousands and the feeling that no one was safe inside their homes during the crisis . Instead of neglect, neglect caused thousands of people to feel unsafe in their homes .
 People started to realize that “the government wasn’t going to save them,” says President Obama . Americans had to adapt, Obama says, and adapt .
 Despite the approaching climax of the crisis, citizens were shocked to realize that nuclear missiles could rain upon them without warning, taking away everything they worked for .
 John F Kennedy reported on the Soviet Arms Buildup in Cuba, Oct. 1962 . Kennedy: "People started taking things into their own hands"
 The conflict between the U.S. government and the people was at an all time high, but the crisis with Cuba wasn’t over . The United States government had to focus on averting that crisis first . The conflict with Cuba isn't over .
 Castro kept the severity of the crisis a secret from the Cuban people while rallying them at the same time . Castro kept it a secret to keep the crisis hidden from the public while rallying the people .
 Castro made a smart decision because through this conflict, he sparked nationalistic ideals in his citizens minds . Cubans were heard chanting, “Patria o muerte” in Cuba during the conflict .
 Pro-Castro Cubans felt extreme passion for their country during the crisis which blinded them to the possibility of nuclear annihilation . But they were not completely oblivious to the crisis .
 Cubans stocked up on food but did not create fallout shelters, unlike many Americans . Cubans stock up food but didn't create shelters .
 Batista's regime, Castro’s revolution, and expropriation of businesses . Batista regime and Castro's revolution were overthrown in Cuba . The revolution was the first of its kind .
 The Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, wrote a letter to Kennedy, pointing out that a ‘quarantine’ was against international law . Kennedy: "A quarantine is not a quarantine, it is a violation of international law"
 Khrushchev attempted to frighten the United States into submission, but this letter’s intentions were ineffective . The letter would only escalate the “quarantine” conflict further . The U.S. and the Soviet Union have been at odds for decades .
 In a letter from Kennedy to Khrushchev, Kennedy stated, “I hope that you will issue… instructions to your ships to observe the terms of the quarantine”22 This letter is of utmost importance because it brought the crisis closer to it’s climax .
 The most prominent phrase was “the violation of the freedom to use international waters... is an act of aggression which pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war” In this sentence Khrushchev used the U.S.’s own principles against them
 Khrushchev’s intimidation did not work, and the quarantine conflict remained in effect . While meant to intimidate Kennedy into discontinuing the conflict of quarantining Cuba, the conflict did not end .
 Khrushchev wrote yet another letter to Kennedy proposing a compromise involving the United States missiles in Turkey . With nuclear war looming ever so closely, he proposed a compromise with Kennedy .
 He stated that under United Nations inspection, missiles would be removed from Cuba and Turkey . He said that under U.N. inspection they would remove missiles from Cuba .
 Kennedy also demanded that the 22-year-old wrote a letter to Nikita Khrushchev . He also demanded the 22nd anniversary of his death .
 This was the first time that compromise was ever suggested, and the letter would prove to be effective, diplomatically .
 Kennedy wrote back on the same day accepting the terms of the compromise . Once Kennedy received this letter, he wrote back .
 All construction of missiles in Cuba would have to be halted in order for the compromise to proceed, he said . He also stated that in order to the compromise, all construction of missile construction would be halted .
 Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy saying he agreed to the terms of the compromise and ordered his men to dismantle the missiles in Cuba . On the last day of the crisis, Kennedy said he agreed with the terms .
 This compromise showed that diplomacy could prevent a potential nuclear crisis even if the two countries had extreme differences in their prefered ideologies . The compromise showed diplomacy can prevent a nuclear crisis .
 In 1966, the Soviet Union began to mass produce Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles . This renewed tension between the two countries . The Soviet Union also began mass production of intercontinental ballistic missiles .
 In order to secure the relationship between the two countries, it became essential for the two nations to compromise on a treaty limiting the creation of nuclear weapons . The two countries signed the treaty in 1998 .
 The United States and the Soviet Union agreed on slowing down production of nuclear vessels . This was the first time that the U.S. and the . Soviet . Union agreed to slow down production .
 SALT also displayed that the U.S. and Soviet Union could civilly agree upon something . SALT was the first time the United States and Soviet Russia could agree on something .
 Nikita Khrushchev's letter to John Kennedy, Oct. 1962, was signed by John Kennedy . This agreement showed the people of both nations that even if they had ideological differences and past disputes, they could work together . The agreement showed that the two nations could overcome ideological differences .
 This led to the possibility of more compromises between the two countries . This also led to a possible compromise between Russia and the UK .
 Over the next fifty years, the Soviet Union fell, and the West “won’t” the Cold War . The Cuban economy was going into recession . The West ‘won” and the Cuban economy went into recession.
 Once the Soviet Union fell, Cuba lost it’s most important trade partner . Cuba has lost it's most significant trade partner in the past .
 The Cuban economy relied solely on a world superpower to keep it stable, and suffered without one . The country's economy relied on the strength of the world's superpower . Cuba's economy has suffered without a stable source of stability .
 During the recession Cubans wanted to emigrate to the United States . The mass emigration only hurt the U.S. and Cuban relations .
 The influx was due to Castro allowing any Cuban that wanted to leave, leave the island through Mariel Harbor . Castro allowed the influx of Cubans to leave through the harbor . The influx of Cuban refugees from the island was largely due to a lack of Cuban citizens .
 Once in America, immigrants were sent to refugee camps, sometimes for months . Once in the U.S. they were forced to live in refugee camps for months.
 A U.S. naval base’s Cuban refugee camp cost the United States $35 million . A United States naval base in Cuba cost the U.N. government $35million to build .
 Castro’s decision to unleash a flood of immigrants at great cost to the United States enforced the idea in the U.S. that the countries relations weren’t going to improve . Castro‘s decision . to unleash . a flood . of immigrants enforced the . idea
 Raúl began an “economic reorientation” during this process . The U.S. noticed the socialist government slowly becoming more capitalist . This sparked interest and incentive for the United States to mend relations between the two countries . The United States could influence Cuban decisions .
 President Obama stated in his Cuban Policy Changes Speech, “American businesses should not be put at... disadvantage, and... increased commerce is good” With fewer restrictions on American business in Cuba, the American economy would have another income .
 This could effectively open American businesses to the Cuban sugar industry creating more income for the U.S. economy from import taxes . Cuba’s economy would benefit by taxing exports. This could also benefit the Cuban economy .
 Cuba will have a more stable economy, and the U.S. would have another trade partner . A good relationship is beneficial for the two countries because Cuba will benefit from a good relationship with the United States .
 Having a secure relationship with the U.S. helps prevent the chances of another crisis between the two nations . Also helping prevent the chance of a further crisis between Russia and Ukraine .
 Robert Kennedy’s words stayed true to many as the relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union healed during the Cold War . Robert Kennedy's words were true as the United States and the USSR healed .
 U.S. and Cuban relations continue to use compromise to heal from past conflicts . They also stay true today as United States and Cuba relations use compromise . The two countries have a history of using compromise as a way of healing .
 There were multiple “missile trailers’, suggesting that missiles were already at the site . Multiple ‘missile trailer’s’ suggested that missiles had already been deployed . There were also multiple ‘Missile trailers,’ suggesting that they were already there
 Photo shows the rate of construction of the missile sites was increased . The photograph was taken by the U.S. government .
 Interviewees that were involved in the crisis when they were children were interviewed . Interviews were made with interviewees who were involved with the crisis as children .
 The source also explained some key details of what it was like in Cuba at the time . The source said that the Cuban government was in control of Cuba .
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum​, www.jfklibrary.org/Asset-Viewer/sUVmCh-sB0moLfrBcaHaSg. John F. Kennedy Library .
 This primary source is an audio clip of John Kennedy’s Address on Cuba . The primary source of this article is the audio clip from John Kennedy's Address on the Cuba .
 I will use this in my main event because this is when the people of the United States learned about what was going on, and this would cause my short term impact . This would be when this would be the time I would be able to use this information to help my cause .
 Office of the Historian​, United States Department of State, history.state.gov.gov: "frus1961-63v06/d67.67"
 Kennedy responded to Khrushchev’s offer of a compromise . I used this letter because I used it because it was Kennedy's response to the offer of compromise .
 The missiles were to be removed from Cuba and Turkey under U.N. inspection . The letter explained that the missiles would be removed under United Nations inspection .
 Kennedy explicitly said that any work being done in Cuba to create missiles must stop before any deal is made . Kennedy said any work on Cuban missiles must be stopped before a deal is reached .
 This is going to be used in my main event because it was another step into creating the Compromise to the situation . This is the first time I've used this event in the main event . I hope it will be used as a main event for the next year .
 Kennedy acknowledged that there was going to be a quarantine around Cuba . This was the first time that Kennedy acknowledged there was a quarantine . This letter is important to my main event because this is the first .
 Kennedy informed Khrushchev to tell Soviet ships all of the terms of the Quarantine . In fact Kennedy informed Kennedy to tell the Soviet ships about the terms .
 "I used this memoir because it was a good primary source for my main event," she says . "It was a great primary source," she adds .
 The memoir helped with the understanding of how it was inside of the white house during those thirteen days . Robert Kennedy was part of the Kennedy 14 administration . The memoir was written by Robert Kennedy .
 This letter has significant importance to my main event and will be used in it . In this letter Khrushchev is accepting the idea of the compromise . This letter is significant to the main event, the president says .
 Nikita Khrushchev wrote to John Kennedy as a response after Kennedy’s letter about his address on Cuba . The letter was a response to Kennedy's letter about the country's address in Cuba .
 Khrushchev talked about how in this case the United States were disturbing peace . Khrushchev explained how the U.S. was the aggressor in this incident . The United States was not only disturbing peace, but also disturbing peace in the world .
 This is one of the many letters that will be sent throughout the Crisis between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev . This was also used in my main event because this was also a letter .
 Khrushchev explained that those missiles have been there way longer than the missiles in Cuba . Plus Khrushche explained that Khrushsche explained that the missiles are there longer than those in Cuba. Plus he explained that they are still there .
 I used this in my main event because it was when a compromise was first brought up. I used it in the main event . It was when I was talking about a compromise being brought up .
 Letter from Nikita Khrushchev to John Kennedy was used to show John Kennedy's perspective . John Kennedy used the letter to show the perspective of Nikita, the Russian leader .
 In this letter Khrushchev talked about how the U.S.’s idea of a quarantine is horrible and against international law . Khrushchen talked about the idea of an international quarantine . The letter was published in 1964 .
 Khrushchev said the U.S. is bringing the world closer to nuclear war . The former Soviet leader also said the United States is bringing nuclear war closer to war with the world .
 I used this letter in my main event because of how Khrushchev talked about the U.S. bringing the world closer to Nuclear war . The letter was used in the main event of the event .
 Low-level photograph of San Cristobal no. 1. shows extensive tracking from surging construction and possible missile readiness drills . San Cristabal no. 2 is believed to have been conducting missile drills .
 The White House President Barack Obama​, U.S. Goverment, obamawhitehouse.gov.gov, says .
 I used this transcript of Obama’s Cuban Policy Change speech because it is important to my long term effect . I used it to help my own cause of Cuban policy .
 Obama explained how the relationship between Cuba and the U.S. will change for the better, CNN's John Sutter says .
 National Public Radio: "Childhood memories of the Cuban missile crisis are still vivid"
 I used this interview because the interviewee was with her family in Cuba during the crisis . This interview was taken from the interview with a Cuban woman in Cuba .
 Maria Salgado was the interviewee and included mainly how she personally felt because of the crisis . Salgado included how she felt personally about the crisis and how she was personally affected by it .
 I used this source in my short term impact of how the Cubans felt during the crisis . I used it to help explain the impact of the crisis in Cuba .
 U-2 photograph of MRBM site two nautical miles away from the Los Palacios deployment . Second set of MRBMs found in Cuba .
 This is a great secondary source that gave a lot of information about the background of the Bay of Pigs . This is one of the best sources of information on the history of the bay .
 I used this to help explain where the Bay of Pigs happened and how it got its name . I used it to explain where it happened and why it was named .
 I used this book because it gave information about what type of Soviet missiles were placed in Cuba . I used it to give information about the type of missiles that were placed there .
 Questia​, www.questia.com/newspaper/1P2-38617354/the secret-trail-to-u-s-cuba-relations-diplomat-relations .
 This source gave me information about the relations between the U.S. and Cuba . This source also provided information on the relationship between Cuba and the United States .
 It also explained how Obama increased relations between the United States and Cuba . The U.S. has increased relations with Cuba .
 I used this in my long term effect to help explain the compromise that occurred during my long-term effect . The compromise occurred during the compromise .
 I made this a secondary source because it was not made by anyone who experienced the negotiations between Cuba and the U.S. in 2014 and 2015 . The negotiations between the two countries took place in the summer of 2014 .
 This is in my Historical context because it helped me explain why my main event was caused. This was in the context of the historical events in which the main event occurred .
 The part I used in this resourceful book explained how Cuba started “Nationalizing’s” their country . The part of the book was explained by the author .
 Encyclopedia of World Biography​, 2nd ed., Detroit, Detroit, Gale Research, 1998 . Encyclopedia: "The world's first person to write a biography"
 It tells the reader a summary of Fulgencio Batista’s life, but most importantly it tells the readers about his relation to the Cuban Government and what role he played in Cuba .
 Batista was the cause for Castro’s Revolution which would later cause the United States to intervene . I ended up using this in my historical context because Batista . The U.S. would later intervene .
 I used this Newspaper because it gives information about Castro’s overall life . I used it to give information about his overall life.
 The information that i decided to emphasize on was when he staged his Rebellion. But the information that I decided to . emphasize on is when he . staged his rebellion .
 This event was at the end of Fulgencio Batista’s reign over Cuba therefore I used it in my historical context . This is a historical context of the event in Cuba .
 This is a short passage that summarizes about the Bay of Pigs Invasion attempt . It was written by the author of a book about the invasion of Cuba .
 It explains when and why the plan was made up, who it was approved by, and the 20 specifics of the invasion . It explains about when, why and why it was made-up, and how it was created .
 This source did go extensively into the details about the response plans to Soviet missiles in Cuba, so I used this source mainly for the details . This source went into details about response plans for the Cuban missiles .
 Chatham House the Royal Institute of International Affairs, www.chathamhouse.org/publication/ia/cuba-relations-escaping-shacklespast .
 I used this research report because it gave me incite about my long term effect. I used it because I wanted to know about the long-term effect of my depression .
 President Obama's administration dealt with the U.S. and Cuban relationship, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "My long term effect is the relationship between the United States and Cuba today, and this report gave me information on how the Obama administration handled it"
 "It was very helpful in the sense that it gave me information mostly about how people felt at the time," she says . "I was very happy to be able to talk to people about how they felt"
 This newspaper had important information about the American made refugee camps for Cubans . The camps were made in the U.S.
 Office of the Historian​, United Stated Department of State, history.state.gov.gov: "Salt.com: 1969-1976/salt"
 This was an amazing source because it gave information about the SALT pacts. This was a great source of information . This was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in SALT .
 I found this research report rich with information about the Cuban economy . I found it very interesting and insightful .
 It helped explain to me the Cuban dependency on the Soviets for a stable economy . The Cuban dependency to the Soviets was a key factor in Cuba's economic stability .
 I used this source because it gave me a lot of information about the Cuban refugees . I used it because it was a good source of information .
 The information that I used from this source is found in my long term effect when I talked about Cuban refugees . The information was found in this article by the author of this article .