 1960 was a leap year starting on Friday of the Gregorian calendar . It was the 1960th year of the Common Era and Anno Domini designations . 1960 was the 960th and 960th years of the 2nd m illennium and 60th of the 20th century
 It is also known as the ""Year of Africa"" because of major events, particularly the independence of seventeen African nations, that focused global attention on the continent . The independence of African nations intensified feelings of Pan-Africanism .
 Cameroon gains independence from French-administered United Nations trusteeship . January 1 Cameroon is granted independence from the French- administered United Nations .
 Although refused service, they are allowed to stay at the counter . Although they are refused service they are not allowed to leave at the counters .
 Six months later, the original four protesters are served lunch at the same counter . The event triggers many similar non-violent protests throughout the Southern U.S.
 Coors is later found murdered, and Joseph Corbett, Jr. is indicted for the crime . Coors was later found dead and Corbett was indicted .
 The United States announces that 3,500 American soldiers will be sent to Vietnam . The U.S. will send more than 3,000 American soldiers to the country .
 Abdul Rahman of Negeri Sembilan, 1st Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia, dies in office . Abdul Rahman died in office of Abdul Abdul Abdul Rahman .
 He is replaced by Hisamuddin Alam Shah ibni Almarhum Sultan Alaeddin Sulaiman Shah .
 All people from Latin America are listed as white, including blacks from the Dominican Republic . There are 179,323,175 United States residents on this day .
 President Syngman Rhee resigned from that office after a nationwide pro-democracy protest . Rhee was the first South Korean president to step down from office .
 Tiros I prototype on display at Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum . Several Soviet surface-to-air missiles shoot down an American Lockheed U-2 spy plane .
 Francis Gary Powers of the Central In telligence Agency captured . The pilot of the plane captured by the Central Agency .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower signs the Civil Rights Act of 1960 into law . Eisenhower signed the act on May 6, 1960 . The act was the first act of the civil rights era .
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration approves birth control as an additional indication for Searle's Enovid . It will make it the world's first approved oral contraceptive pill . The FDA says birth control will be an added indication for the drug .
 A joint Swiss and Austrian expedition makes the first ascent of the Asian mountain Dhaulagiri, the world's 7th highest mountain . Francis Gary Powers wearing special pressure suit for stratospheric flying . The world's seventh highest mountain is the highest in the world .
 The Diet next approves a mutual security treaty with the United States . The United States and Germany will sign a treaty on mutual security .
 This megat hrust earthquake ruptures from Arauco to Chiloe Archipelago, causing the most powerful earthquake on record and a destructive basin-wide tsunami . The most powerful quake on record was caused by an earthquake in Peru .
 June 1 New Zealand's first television station begins broadcasting, in the city of Auckland . June 1 is the first time New Zealand has a national television station .
 Five days later, it unites as scheduled with the Trust Territory of Somalia, to form the Somali Republic . The Somali Republic was formed from Somalia's Trust Territory .
 Ghana becomes a republic, and Kwame Nkrumah becomes its first President . July 1 is the first anniversary of Ghana's first republic .
 A Soviet Air Force MiG-19 fighter plane shot down a U.S. Air Force reconnaissance plane over the Barents Sea . The plane was shot down by a six-man RB-47 Stratojet reconnaissance plane of the United States .
 Four of the U.S. Air Force officers are killed, and the two survivors are held prisoner in the Soviet Union . The two survivors were held prisoner by the Soviets in the USSR .
 The Somali Republic unites as scheduled with the five-day-old State of Somaliland to form the Somali Republic . Concurrently, it unites with the State of Somali Republic to form Somalia Republic .
 Fidel Castro nationalizes all American and foreign-owned property in Cuba . In response to the U.S. embargo against Cuba, Fidel Castro had nationalized property . Castro: "I'm not going to let it go, I'm going to do it. I'm not sure what
 He is also the first man to make a solo crossing of the Atlantic Ocean in a gas balloon . The first man fully to witness the spherical curvature of the Earth, he is the first to see the curvature .
 In Moscow, American U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers is sentenced to 10 years in prison for espionage . U.S. pilot Powers was convicted of espionage in Moscow in October .
 The Soviet Union launches the satellite Sputnik 5, with the dogs Belka and Strelka, 40 mice, two rats and a variety of plants . The satellite was launched in the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 This satellite returns to earth the next day and all animals are recovered safely . All animals were recovered safely from the satellite .
 Sultan Hisamuddin Alam Shah, Sultan of Selangor and 2nd Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia, dies in office . September 1 . September 2 . September 3 .
 Abebe Bikila is the first person from SubSaharan Africa to win Olympic gold in the marathon . He is running barefoot in a world time, running bare foot in the world time . He becomes the first African runner to win gold in a marathon .
 Nigeria becomes independent from the United Kingdom . Nnamdi Azikiwe becomes its first native-born Governor General . October ■ October 1 ■ Nigeria is independent .
 Nikita Khrushchev pounds his shoe on a table at a meeting of the United Nations General Assembly . His way of protesting the discussion of the Soviet Union's policies toward Eastern Europe was his way of protest .
 A large rocket explodes on the launch pad at the Baikonur Cosmodrome, killing at least 92 people of the Soviet space program . At least 92 of the 92 killed were Soviet astronauts .
 Martin Luther King Jr. secures release from jail for traffic violation in Atlanta . King was arrested for a traffic violation and taken into custody in Atlanta, Georgia . King's release comes after he was found guilty of traffic violation .
 Michael Woodruff carries out the first successful kidney transplant in the UK . He carried out the operation at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary .
 Richard Nixon is the second youngest man to serve as President of the United States . He is the youngest man elected to this position . Richard Nixon was Vice President Richard Nixon, to be the youngest person elected to be President .
 The African and Malagasy Organisation for Economic Cooperation was established . Polaris missile test December . The test was the first of Polaris missile tests in the world .
 Geoffrey Francis Fisher, talks with Pope John XXIII for about one hour in Vatican City . Fisher talks with the Pope for one hour at the Vatican . Fisher and the Pope met for the first time in the 1960s .
 This is the first time that a chief of the Anglican Church had ever visited the Pope . This was the first visit to the Pope by a top Anglican church chief .
 Pierre Lagaillarde, who led the insurrections in 1958 and 1960 in Algeria, fails to appear in court in Paris, France . He was arrested in Algeria in 1960 and 1958 .
 He has reportedly fled with his four fellow defendants to Spain, en route to Algeria . He is believed to have fled with four others to Spain . The other defendants are believed to be in Algeria .
 Supreme Court of the United States declares that segregation in public transportation is illegal in the U.S. Segregation in public transport is illegal . The Supreme Court declared that segregation was illegal .
 The United Nations Security Council is called into session by the Soviet Union in order to consider Soviet demands for the Security Council to seek the immediate release of former Congolese Premier Patrice Lumumba .
 Mary Martin's Peter Pan is presented as a stand-alone 2-hour special on NBC, instead of as part of an anthology series . December 8 For the first time, Peter Pan will be presented as an independent 2 hour special instead of being part of a series .
 This version, rather than being presented live, is shown on videotape, enabling NBC to repeat it as often as they wish without having to restage it . This version of the Golden Globes will be shown on tape, instead of live, on NBC .
 All of the original children have, ironically, outgrown their roles and are replaced by new actors . Although all of the adult actors repeat their original Broadway roles, all of them have outgrown .
 French President Charles de Gaulle's visit to Algeria bloodied by European and Muslim rioters in Algeria's largest cities . December 9 ■ French president Charles De Gaulle’s visit to Algerian capital is bloodied .
 Planned as a 13-part drama, it becomes such a success among viewers it will continue past its 10,000th episode in its 60th anniversary year . The drama will continue to be shown six times a week in 60 years .
 December 11 MGM's The Wizard of Oz is rerun on CBS only a year after its previous telecast . CBS begins the tradition of annual telecasts of the film of the same year .
 The Supreme Court of the United States upholds a lower Federal Court ruling that the State of Louisiana's racial segregation laws are unconstitutional, and overturns them . December 12, the Supreme Court upholds the lower court's ruling that a lower court had upheld the state's segregation laws .
 Emperor Haile Selile Selisie of Ethiopia is the new emperor of Ethiopia . Crown Prince Asfaw Wossen Taffari is the son of the emperor .
 Antoine Gizenga proclaims in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that he has taken over as the country's premier . December 14 ■ Antoine gizengi proclaims he has become the new premier of the country .
 King Mahendra of Nepal deposes the democratic government in his country, and takes direct control himself . December 15 ■ King Maendra of Nepalese deposes his country's democratic government and takes control .
 Secretary of State Christian Herter announces that the U.S. will commit five nuclear submarines and eighty Polaris missiles to the defense of NATO countries .
 Minoru Nii-ara, Adam Clayton, Joe Ranft, Joe Rahn, Courtney B Vance and Kirby Puckett are featured . Rosa Beltran is a Mexican writer, lecturer, and academic .
 February 9 Adolph Coors III and February 10 Aloysius Stepinac, Yugoslav Roman Catholic prelate . February 10: Giles Gilbert Scott, British architect and British philosopher . February 9: Adolph . Coors. III .