 Some Russian nationalists said Yeltsin should threaten the West with nuclear missiles as Nikita Khrushchev did during the missile crisis in 1962 . Some Russians have called for the West to use nuclear weapons as a threat .
 Yeltsin, under tough criticism from nationalist and communist opponents at home, has been trying to limit NATO expansion . The Russian leader has been under pressure to limit the NATO expansion of Russia .
 The Cuban crisis was triggered by the deployment of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba . Cuban crisis triggered by Soviet deployment of nuclear weapons .
 Vladimir Zhirinovsky: Russia should use the same tactic against NATO now . He says Russia should do the same thing against NATO . Russia's ultranationalist says it should use same tactic now .
 NATO wants an agreement with Russia before a July 8-9 summit meeting in Madrid, Spain . NATO plans to name its first new members of Central and Eastern Europe .
 Yeltsin: "They also must not deploy weapons and military hardware, especially nuclear, in newly accepted NATO members" Yeltsins says Russia must not use nuclear weapons in newly-accepted nations .
 Negotiators have agreed to form a new Russia-NATO council that will allow Moscow to have a direct voice but not a vote in decisions . Moscow will not be allowed to vote in the new council .
 'YELTSIN LIKENS NATO SPREAD to CUBAN CRISIS', says St. Louis newspaper . 'Yeltsin LIKens NATO SP READERS' report .
 A key Soviet missile base in Cuba was apparently attacked by Cuban troops at the height of the crisis . The base is believed to have been attacked by Soviet troops during the Cuban crisis .
 The attack occurred hours before an American U2 spy plane crashed near the base . Three Soviet soldiers may have died in the attack, the Washington Post reports .
 Mikoyan confirmed the spy plane was shot down, but said it was 'a very grave mistake' by a low-level commander acting without authorization . He said the incident was a 'very grave mistake by a very low level commander'
 He said it is still unclear whether the commander was Cuban or Russian . It is unclear if the commander is Cuban or not Russian .
 Soviet leaders at the time were never informed of a conflict with the Cubans, Mikoyan says . Soviet leaders were never told of the conflict, he says . Mikoyans traveled to Cuba at the end of the 1962 crisis with his father .
 Neither my father nor his colleagues ... knew anything about fighting,' said Mikoyan, now editor of the Magazine America Latina . 'Neither my father or my colleagues knew about fighting'
 The Boston Globe reported that in closed session at the conference a Soviet adviser said Soviet military officials installing the weapons in Cuba did not follow orders to camouflage the site from U.S. reconnaisance flights .
 President Kennedy demanded that the Soviets remove their missiles and their deployment and launch facilities . Clear photographs of the installations taken by U.S. reconnaisance planes led to President Kennedy's demand that the Soviet missiles were removed .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw missiles from Cuba at the conclusion of the crisis without telling Cuban leader Fidel Castro . Castro was extremely upset when informed of the Soviet leader's decision .
 Hersh's report said the National Security Agency did not break the Soviet code until 10 months after the crisis . Hersh: The code was broken by the NSA 10 months before the crisis began .
 Hersh said the NSA learned of an attack the night of Oct., 1962, on a Soviet surface-to-air missile site near a naval station at Banes, on the island's northeastern coast . Hersh: In decoding messages, Hersh learned of the attack on the night
 NSA analysts concluded the fighting was between Soviets and Cubans, Hersh reported . The intercepts did not specifically name the attacking force as Cuban .
 The intercepts indicated at least three Soviet soldiers were killed and 15 others were wounded in the fighting, the report said . At least 15 other people were wounded, the intercepts said .
 On the morning of Oct. 1962, a top secret American spy plane crashed near the missile site . President Kennedy assumed the Soviets had shot down the U2 with a missile from the site .
 Mikoyan said it was a low-level, unauthorized commander - who ordered the shooting of the plane . He said he could not identify the commander as either Cuban or Soviet .
 "We came to the conclusion that it was human error by some small commander," says CNN.com's John Defterios . "It was a very small mistake," he says .
 'He wouldn't confess because it was a very grave mistake,' Mikoyan said . 'It was a grave mistake. He wouldn't admit it,' he said .
 The U2 crash, which the United States declined to officially confirm at the time, influenced Kennedy to send his brother, Robert, to meet Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, report says . RFK memoir says the crash influenced his brother to send him to meet the ambassador . The
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba and the United States agreed to remove Jupiter missiles within five months from Turkey and Italy . The crisis was resolved when the U.S. and the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles out of Cuba and pledge not to invade .
 I'm not a history enthusiast, nor do I recall much of anything about 1962, but when I talked at length with George about ""Awaiting Armageddon,"" I was fascinated .
 She has written a book for ordinary Americans about the reaction of ordinary Americans to an extraordinary possibility that the world might come to an end at any moment . She says ordinary Americans react to the possibility of the world ending .
 The memory of that terror accompanied George to Hickory High, from which she graduated in 1970 . George triple-majored in American studies, history and Latin .
 George worked for a variety of newspapers, including the Detroit Free Press from 1983 to 1990 . She made the decision in 1994 to get out of the newspaper business . She was the deputy managing editor at the Philadelphia Daily News .
 It was when George was working on her doctorate that the memory of her fifth-grade fright became a vehicle that drove her down the road of authorship . George: "It was when working on a doctorate, the memory became the vehicle"
 October 24, Memphis police spotted a man holding a pick and standing over a manhole as he tried to determine whether his family could take refuge under the city's streets . George included an anecdote George included in her book .
 She uncovered a story about neighbors warning neighbors with fallout shelters that they'd kill the shelter owners in order to have a safe place to put their own families . She also uncovered that neighbors also warned neighbors that they would kill the fallout shelter owners .
 Ten-year-old Alice George was clearly afraid, and the Civil Defense drills performed at her elementary school served only to fuel her fear . Alice George says she is afraid of the military .
 The driver surveyed a desolate scene of abandoned buildings, ventilation shafts sprouting like mushrooms from cracked asphalt . Three small mounds topped with steel doors yawned open in the midday sun . The driver, Karen Gros, of Waterloo, surveyed the desolate scene .
 The facility once served as one of the spear tips in this nation’s Cold War standoff with “the Rooskies,” as “Dr. Dr. Bob’d’S.” The visitors had traveled to this incongruous setting
 From 1960 to 1968, the site contained dozens of Nike Hercules missiles armed with nuclear warheads . The site was located four miles south of the little town of Hecker . It was used to carry out the missile tests .
 Nike Missile Site SL-40 formed the St. Paul Air Force base . With identical defense compounds at Pacific, Marine and Grafton, the Hecker base — officially designated Nike missile Site SL -40 — formed the Nike missile site .
 St. Louis area’s defensive ring against long-feared waves of bombers from the Soviet Union . The area was once considered a major U.S. base in the region .
 The 14-acre launch site is set to go at private auction on July 12 to the highest bidder . Operational elevator pads and bay roofs, generator buildings and pump house are included .
 Proceeds from the sale will benefit the property’s owner, the Career Center of Southern Illinois . Proceeds will be donated to Career Center, which runs a career center .
 The vocational school took ownership of the property in the early 1970s after the army shut it down . The school was shut down by the army in 1970s .
 Career center still has classrooms and offices in buildings that were once the base barracks and radar center . The career center is still located in the former base barracks .
 Buy-A-Farm, the company running the auction, opened the site to the public on Thursday and Friday . The auction is expected to take place in the next week .
 Some visitors had only a vague notion of the tense national mood during the period of the base was in operation . Some visitors, such as 10-year-old Tyson Johnson, had only an vague notion .
 Another visitor brings a front-line perspective to one of the country’s darkest periods . Another visitor brought a front line perspective .
 John Dreas, 74, of Casevyille, was stationed at Hecker as a missile crewmen from 1962 to 1964 . Dreas was stationed in Hecker's Hecker from 1962-1964 .
 Auction manager Wayne Keller has fielded inquiries from across the country about the site . Auction manager Keller says he's fielding inquiries from all over the U.S. about the auction .
 He has heard from a Monsanto scientist interested in using it as testing facility for plants . Monsanto scientist wants to use it as a testing facility .
 A beverage distributor said the three magazines would be ideal as warehouses . The three magazines are expected to be used as warehouses by beverage distributors .
 A military buff would turn it into a museum for his collection of restored military vehicles .
 Chuck Nitsch, 59, of Hillsboro, inspected the property as a possible renewable energy home site . Nitsch: "It's a great place to live in"
 Keller noted that similar sites around the country have been re-purposed by doomsday preppers as residences . Some sites have swimming pools in pits that once housed hydraulic equipment for the missile elevators .
 A Peoria, Ill., man who co-authored a book on Nike missile sites said that the Hecker base is one of the best-preserved . The base is located in Hecker, Illinois .
 Air defenses operated by the army from 1950 to 1974 . “Rings of Supersonic Steel’s” air defenses operated in the St. Louis area .
 Hecker magazine interiors are in fine shape at the Hecker site . Compared to the rust, disintegrating asphalt and peeling paint that mark the surface equipment and support buildings, the interiors at the site are fine .
 Berhow said the army’s strategy was based on waves of Soviet bombers sweeping over the Arctic Circle to bomb America with conventional and nuclear weapons .
 “There were some real issues with morale and discipline amongst the missile men,” he said . “Much of the time was just sitting around," he said. “But much of the . time was sitting around; there was some real morale . and discipline .
 She recalled as a child that some soldiers would help out at her family’s farm . She recalled how she was a child when she was growing up .
 Nike sites began shutting down nationwide after the emergence of intercontinental ballistic missiles . With the diminishing threat of attacks from manned bombers, the Nike sites shut down nationwide . Nike sites were shut down in response to the threat of manned bombers .
 The last active sites, located in Florida, closed around 1980, Berhow said .
 William Ecker pulled the nondescript khaki flight suit from a family closet to make it a museum piece . Ecker, who died in 2009, pulled it out of his closet and it was a family museum piece on the anniversary of his flight .
 Photographs taken on Ecker's low-level flight over Cuba were used by the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations to help prove Soviet missiles were being stockpiled in Cuba . Photographs were used two days later by the United States .
 After nearly two weeks of extreme tension, the Cuban missile crisis was peacefully defused . The crisis was peaceful and ended with a peaceful resolution .
 The suit has no military patches or labels with Ecker's name because he was flying a secret mission . Ecker was flying on a mission with a secret team .
 If his RF8 Crusader jet had been shot down, the Navy wanted to be discreet . If his plane had been hit down, it would be the Navy's first plane to be shot down .
 Ecker carried only a prisoner-of-war card in case he was captured . The pilot's son, David Ecker, said he carried only the card . Ecker's son says he carried a prisoner of war card to avoid capture .
 This is the museum's first personal artifact from the missile crisis . While the museum has spy planes from the era in its collection, this is its first personal item .
 Ecker's flight was featured in the movie ""13 Days,"" recounting the Cold War standoff 50 years ago involving then-President John F Kennedy and the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev .
 The letters show that despite verbal assurances to Khrushchev, Kennedy ultimately refused to agree to any pact prohibiting the U.S. from attacking Cuba . Kennedy ultimately agreed to a pact barring the United States from attacking the island nation .
 Since the end of the missile crisis, exiles have perceived the KennedyKhrushchev exchanges as the principal obstacle to ousting Castro by military means .
 After Moscow withdrew its missiles from Cuba, the FBI began cracking down on exile paramilitary groups to prevent them from launching raids against the island . The FBI has cracked down on the groups since the withdrawal of missiles from Russia .
 Several hundred exiles signed the letter to Bush at WAQI-AM Radio Mambi, seeking Bush's blessing for renewed raids . The exiles want Bush to continue raids .
 Valdes-Dapena and her husband, Carlos, fled Cuba in 1988 after state security agents raided their home in Havana . The couple was forced to flee Cuba after their home was raided by Cuban security forces .
 Radio Mambi commentator and general manager Armando PerezRoura says he wants at least 100,000 exiles to sign it by Feb. 15 . He plans to deliver it to the White House when he delivers it to President Barack Obama .
 The date is the anniversary of the beginning of the Cuban war of independence in 1895 . The Cuban war began in 1895 and is now the Cuban capital of Cuba .
 State Department official rejects notion that Bush would sanction military action . White House made no comment Tuesday, but State Dept. official familiar with Cuban affairs rejects idea .
 Ariel Ricardo, a Cuban government spokesman in Washington, said the U.S. will not attack Cuba because it knows Cubans will defend their homeland fiercely . Ariel Ricardo said the United States will not be attacked by Cuba . Ricardo: The United States knows Cuban people will defend Cuba fiercely .
 In Miami, Perez-Roura said the release of the KennedyKhrushchev letters is not enough to satisfy the aspirations of certain exiles to renew military operations . The letters were released in the wake of the break-up of the Cold War .
 The commentator launched the letter campaign last week in anticipation of the release of the KennedyKhrushchev letters .
 Former political prisoner Andres Vargas Gomez said White House sanction is needed to prevent official interference with possible future raids . He credited the idea to former political prisoner Vargas .
 Other exile leaders welcomed the release of the correspondence . KennedyKrushchev correspondence .
 Andres Nazario Sargen, secretary general of the paramilitary organization Alpha 66, says the letters show exiles again can take up arms against Castro . He says exiles can now take up weapons .
 The exile military option is unrealistic in light of the end of the Cold War, dissidents say . Ramon Cernuda and Ricardo Bofill, who represent prominent dissidents in Cuba, said the exile option was unrealistic .
 Fifty years ago during the Cold War, the world came the closest it ever has to an exchange of nuclear weapons between the Soviet Union and the United States . The world came closest to a nuclear exchange between the two countries .
 President John F Kennedy was briefed on Oct. 1962, about the Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile being assembled for installation in Cuba, just 90 miles from U.S. shores .
 President Kennedy and his team wrestled with a diplomatic crisis of epic proportions . For more than 10 days, President Kennedy faced an epic diplomatic crisis . President Kennedy's team faced a 10-day diplomatic crisis that lasted 10 days .
 Pitt Professor of History Peter Karsten also wrestled with the crisis from a cryptography room on the USS Canberra . Professor Karsten spoke from a cryptonymist room on board the ship .
 Then a legal officer with the Navy, Karsten was responsible for decoding orders for the admiral aboard his ship who commanded the destroyer screen during the crisis .
 The lectures are free and open to the public . Those wishing to attend must register in advance by e-mailing Beverly Brizzi at beb38@pitt.edu .
 Additional presentations by Pitt faculty will follow the keynote address . 11:30 a.m. ET . Additional presentations will follow .
 For any queries with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com .
 Gore, who as Lord Harlech later founded television channel HTV, was a personal confidant of John F Kennedy .
 The world teetered on the brink of nuclear war in November 1962 . Ormsby-Gore told JFK to ignore suggestions of a high-level international conference to ease the crisis .
 The revelation is one of a series found in recently-unearthed material on Ormsby-Gores career . BBC interviews found in attic and papers from Kennedy Library in Boston .
 Macmillan said nothing publicly but instructed Ormsby-Gore to make his concerns known . This time his ambassador did as he was told .
 The Cuban missile crisis at the height of the Cold War saw the U.S. and the Soviet Union locked in a standoff for more than a month over the issue of Soviet missile deployment in Cuba just 90 miles off Florida coast .
 The crisis culminated in the naval blockade of Cuba and fears the two superpowers would begin a nuclear war .
 Macmillan and Kennedy spoke four times on a hotline during the crisis . Ormsby-Gore told in advance what the Prime Minister would say .
 Ormsby-Gore told Kennedy to ignore Macmillan's plan to draw superpowers away from war .
 The debate over whether the blockade of Cuba was legal or not the White House called it a quarantine for that reason also has echoes of the 2003 invasion of Iraq, which raised similar questions .
 BBC Wales has also gained access to a number of interviews with Lord Harlech . The interviews were recorded by a researcher in the late 1960s . BBC Wales also has access to interviews with the Welsh politician .
 The tapes had lain in an attic for more than 30 years, and have only now been released . They were released following a request by BBC Wales journalist Guto Thomas to the Kennedy Library .
 He played a critical role in the relationship between Macmillan and Kennedy . He was a key figure in the British government's relationship with the Kennedy administration .
 After retiring from the post in 1965 he took up his seat in the House of Lords . He founded Harlech Television later HTV in 1968 . After retiring in 1965, he returned to the Lords .
 Heyser, who lived in Apalachicola, died Monday at a nursing home in Port St. St. Louis .
 The retired Air Force lieutenant colonel said in a 2005 interview with The Associated Press that no one was more relieved than he that the crisis ended peacefully . He said he was relieved that he and others in the U.S. were able to get through the crisis peacefully .
 President John F Kennedy announced to the world that the photos proved the Soviet Union was building secret sites for nuclear-tipped missiles 90 miles south of Key West .
 Kennedy summoned Heyser to the White House after the pilot made five flights over Cuba in nine days . Kennedy summoned the pilot after he flew over Cuba five times in a nine-day period .
 Third pilot was killed in a crash while training for the Cuban mission . Third pilot died in crash during training for mission .
 CIA pilots take photos of anti-aircraft missile launchers in Cuba . CIA pilots earlier had taken photos of missiles launchers in the country .
 Air Force pilots assigned to search for suspected sites of offensive missiles that could strike the U.S. The Air Force was assigned to look for sites that could hit the United States . The pilots then searched for sites of possible targets .
 He retired in 1974 after 30 years of service . He returned to Apalachicola, where he was born and raised .
 From that derived many of the worst events of the last two decades. And from that, the worst things of the past two decades, have happened .
 President Kennedy defused a situation that might have led to nuclear war, experts say . Kennedy's actions may have saved the lives of millions of Americans .
 Nikita Khrushchev forced to withdraw Soviet missiles and bombers from Cuba, at little cost to America . U.S. was forced to pull missiles from Cuba .
 Kennedy promised never to help Cuban freedom fighters liberate their island from Castro's Communist tyranny . Kennedy promised to never help liberate the Cuban people from the Communist regime .
 The Cuban community in Miami remains bitter . President Obama consigned the Cuban people to a loss of self-determination .
 Monroe's words long stood as a pillar of security for American freedom . Until Kennedy capitulated 25 years ago, they stood as pillars of security .
 In 1962 the Soviets did, as promised, withdraw their missiles from Cuba . In 1962, the Soviets promised to pull them out of Cuba .
 The U.S. has installed bases for nuclear submarines and fighter planes that carry nuclear bombs or cruise missiles . The bases have since been installed for submarines and planes carrying nuclear weapons .
 In other words, the Soviets broke their word not to use Cuba as a base for nuclear bombs . The Soviets broke that promise, and it was a violation of the law .
 The Kremlin has used Cuba as a springboard for spreading Communist tyranny throughout the Western Hemisphere and the world . Moreover, the Kremlin has also used Cuba to spread Communist tyranny .
 The Sandinista junta in Nicaragua was steered by Castro in its 1979 seizure of power from the legitimate forces that had overthrown dictator Somoza . Castro was in charge of the junta .
 The Sandinistas make regular trips to Havana for advice on keeping their Leninist regime in power . Sandinista make regular visits to Havana to meet with Cuban officials .
 Unless the Nicaraguan freedom fighters -the contras -restore freedom there, the Kremlin will turn Nicaragua into the firstRed Army base on the North American mainland . The Kremlin is turning Nicaragua into a base for the Red Army .
 The Soviets have also used Castro's military as proxies to conquer Angola and Ethiopia . The Soviet Union has also used the Castro regime as proxies in the past .
 The cost of Kennedy's timidity has been at least a million deaths from war and forced famine . The cost, an indirect but real result of Kennedy’s timidity, has been the death toll of at least one million .
 Another indirect consequence of Kennedy's diffidence was a quick worsening of the Vietnam war . The Vietnam war worsened by a quick deterioration of the war .
 The Soviets gave Hanoi the green light to open a full-scale assault on South Vietnam . Seeing how weakly America reacted, the Soviets gave the U.S. green light . The U.N. responded weakly .
 The cost, in American lives and domestic strife, was incalculable; it still burdens us . The cost of the war in Iraq and Afghanistan is incalculated, but still burdens the United States .
 After 25 years of appeasement and detente, the Soviets have gone from enjoying but a fraction of America's nuclear force to superiority in almost every area . The Soviets enjoy superiority in nearly every area of the world .
 Oct. Oct. should be a national day of mourning for the passing of America's control over her own destiny . Perhaps Oct. October is a day for mourning .
 The film recreates the tension surrounding the Cuban missile crisis and JFK's White House . The film is based on the tensions surrounding the crisis in Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration's confrontation with Nikita Khrushchev's Soviet Union didn't end in a nuclear cataclysm . All you have to do is look at a window and note that the landscape isn't scorched and barren to ascertain that the war didn't come to an end .
 ''Thirteen Days'' is a cinematic account of the crisis set mostly within the White House . It's quite remarkable that it's so taut and exciting . The film is set in the backdrop of a White House crisis in Washington .
 Those who remember those anxious hours of October 1962 will surely feel extra goose bumps crawling down their necks . Shots of military forces being amassed on both sides of the conflict will be shown .
 Even younger viewers should be entranced by the way the movie watches John F Kennedy and his administration desperately try to keep abreast of events .
 Some White House veterans have criticized the move for elevating Kenneth O'Donnell, Kennedy's chief political adviser . Some say it misleadingly elevates the status of Kennedy's political adviser, Kenneth ODonnell .
 Kevin Costner is one of the movie's producers . O'Donnell, played by Costner, was only on the periphery of the missile crisis . This line of argument runs that he was not involved in the crisis .
 This may be so, but it ignores how dependent the movie, as a movie, is on O'Donnell's character . "This is a movie that's dependent on the actor's performance," the reviewer says .
 O'Donnell, by happy accident, was a middle-class family man . He becomes a crucial identification figure for the audience, as well as an explicator of events .
 O'Donnell was a friend of Kennedy (Bruce Greenwood) and of his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy (Robert Kennedy's) brother, so he is able to interact with the brothers, who operate in near-tandem, intimately . The movie stars Bruce Greenwood and Robert Greenwood .
 O'Donnell is also a convenient dramatic figure, in that he can verbally explain certain twists to the audience that would go unsaid by more directly involved participants in the response . He is also also a handy dramatic figure .
 O'Donnell plays a kind of Doc Holliday to the Kennedys' Earp brothers . Beyond that, he also plays the role of the Earp family members .
 Director Roger Donaldson has structured the film like a genre film . The Western comparison is apt because director Donaldson is working from an intricate and engrossing script by David Self .
 From the onset of the crisis, the Kennedys faced with a cadre of advisers recommending a strong military response to the Soviet gambit . From the start of the . crisis, they are faced with . a strong response to a . strong military reaction .
 Maxwell Taylor, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and éminence grise Dean Acheson (Len Cariou) wanted to respond with air strikes against missiles followed by invasion of the island . These men wanted to strike against missiles, followed by an invasion .
 JFK was instinctively opposed to this tactic, figuring that it would lead to a Soviet move in Berlin and from there to all-out nuclear war . JFK thought it would end up leading to a nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 He had trouble coming up with a counter-plan, though, and when he did he still faced active opposition from his military staff . When he did come up with an alternative, he faced active resistance from his staff .
 According to the movie, the generals and admirals not only disapproved of the relative restraint of the blockade option but actively sought to undermine it . The movie is based on the film, directed by George Clooney and directed by Robert De Niro .
 Curtis LeMay is depicted as a particularly flagrant offender, using his prerogatives as head of the Strategic Air Command to order provocative military actions . LeMay ordered provocative military action in the wake of 9/11 .
 The movie manages to bounce an awful lot of balls off this creative tension . The movie is set in a tense world of tension .
 There are constant political trap doors springing open and journalists poking around the hubbub of activity . The UK has been in the grip of the White House since 2001 .
 Despite the obvious fact that there were no outright battles, the movie does include several exciting scenes of other kinds of military confrontations . The movie includes one of reconnaissance flights over Cuba and of American and Soviet ships playing chicken at sea .
 "There's a strange dread, tinged with excitement, hanging over the whole story," says author . "It's not just a story, it's a story that hangs over the entire thing," she says of the book .
 Maybe it's similar to the emotional fallout endured by people who have just escaped a life-threatening situation . The emotional fallout may be similar to that of a person who has just escaped an injury .
 Once adrenalin subsides, you begin to realize just how close you came to expiring, and then the fear, and a thrill, upsets your emotional equilibrium . Once the adrenalin subides, the thrill, and the fear of an expiring is a thrill .
 You can point out all the movie's qualities, but it's the visceral response that makes the movie . "It's the movie. It's the story that makes it feel like you're in it"
 The look back into the past when we walked on a tight rope and didn't even realize how taut and slippery it really was . We look back to the days when we were able to walk on tight rope .
 Dino Brugioni was the Chief Information Officer of the National Photographic Interpretation Center at the time . He worked with a team to analyze images taken by U-2 spy planes flying over Cuba . The images were taken by the U.2 spy plane .
 Brugioni briefed President Kennedy, explaining which structures could indicate the presence of Soviet missile sites . Brugionsi briefed the president on the sites .
 The Cuban missile crisis began 25 years ago this week . The U.S. and the Soviets tiptoed to the brink of nuclear war and peeked over the edge . The two-week showdown began in 1987 .
 Neither side liked what it saw and at the last moment both backed away from each other . Neither side was happy with the outcome of the game .
 Neither side has again allowed tensions or events to escalate to the frightening level they reached during the fall of 1962 .
 At the height of the crisis, the U.S. and the Soviet Union were 'eyeball to eyeball' over the long-range nuclear rockets Russia had secretly placed in Cuba . The crisis lasted from Oct. to Oct. 1962, Secretary of State Dean Rusk said
 Kennedy and his top advisers decided on Saturday, Oct. Oct., that if the Soviets did not agree to remove the missiles by Sunday, the U.S. would launch an air strike no later than Tuesday, Oct., to destroy them . According to crisis participants and books written on the
 A massive invasion of Cuba involved perhaps 100,000 U.S. combat troops . That was to be followed by a massive invasion by the United States in Cuba . The invasion was planned for Cuba in the 1950s .
 The Soviets agreed to dismantle the missiles in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . How many Soviets and Americans might have been killed will never be known because of the deal . The Soviets agree to dismantle missiles in October .
 During the crisis, top government officials and reporters were told never to be more than 15 minutes from the White House . Top government officials would have been evacuated with the president .
 Military forces of both nations were placed on maximum alert . The United States nuclear bombers were ordered into the air .
 The missiles in Cuba, when operational, were capable of hitting cities as far north as Boston, as far west as Denver and as far south as Lima, Peru . When operational, the missiles were able to hit cities in Boston, Denver and Peru .
 What follows is a day-by-day account, based on books and interviews, of how the U.S. was locked in a potentially deadly duel with the Soviet Union . The United States was the irresistible force of the United States .
 Two American U-2 spy planes unknowingly captured on film from 13 miles over San Cristobal, southwest of Havana . U.S. spy planes were flying over Cuba to check reports of an arms buildup there . First evidence that Russia was building offensive missile sites .
 They had never placed a similar offensive capability in Eastern Europe . The Russians had never had a similar capability in eastern Europe .
 The U-2 photos taken Sunday are studied by intelligence analysts . Analysts find evidence that launching sites for offensive missiles are being built .
 Bundy is told of the discovery at 8:30 p.m. but chooses not to tell Kennedy that night . Bundy is not told of discovery at the time of discovery . Bundy was found dead at the scene of the murder of his wife .
 JFK learns of missile sites from Bundy and orders more U-2 flights . Kennedy learns of the missile sites and orders U.2 flights to the U.S. Bundy was killed by a missile strike .
 He quickly forms a secret group of top trusted aides, dubbed EXCOM, for Executive Committee of the National Security Council . ExCOM is the group that he quickly forms .
 EXCOM members, including military, diplomatic and political advisers, are told not to tell their wives or secretaries about the missiles . ExCOM members include military, political and diplomatic advisers, who are told to keep quiet .
 Cabinet members type their own letters and memos to ensure secrecy . Some Cabinet members feared that if word of the discovery leaked before a decision was made, Kennedy would lose the initiative to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev .
 Some EXCOM members push immediately for an air strike to wipe out the missiles . The missiles, which are not yet operational, have not yet been deployed .
 Kennedy aware that new U-2 photos show missiles at launch sites for the first time . Kennedy keeps a normal schedule by campaigning in Connecticut for Senate candidate Abraham Ribicoff .
 EXCOM meets without Kennedy, as it often did so so his presence would not inhibit frank talk about options . ExCOM meets with Kennedy as it does so he often does so so he can be frank frank talk .
 Six options are discussed, ranging from doing nothing to a naval quarantine to a surprise attack . Six options include doing nothing or doing nothing .
 The president's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, becomes discussion leader . He argues that a Pearl Harbor-style surprise strike runs counter to U.S. tradition .
 The president keeps his longstanding appointment with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko . He does not confront him with United States photos of the missiles . The U.S. president does not present photos of missiles to Soviet foreign minister .
 Rusk observes that if the Cuban missiles are not removed 'we go down with a whimper' Rusk: 'If the Cuban missile is not removed, we go down'
 Kennedy campaigns in Illinois and Ohio, where he develops a phony cold so he can return to Washington and deal with the crisis . Kennedy: "I developed a fake cold so I can get back to Washington," he says .
 Officials make plans to broadcast a Kennedy speech on the crisis directly to Cuba via commercial radio stations . Officials plan to broadcast the speech to Cuba directly to commercial radio .
 Lines run to station doors without telling station managers, who are asked one hour before Monday's speech to carry it . Lines are run to stations doors without knowing station managers are asked to carry them . Lines run without telling stations managers, which are asked an hour before the speech .
 The president expresses a preference for more limited initial action instead of an air strike . The president, during a long, bitter EXCOM meeting, expresses his preference for a limited strike .
 More than 1,000 Marines go to the United States Naval base at Guantanamo in Cuba . Ships head for the Caribbean .
 Bundy urges James Reston of the Times not to print it for national security reasons . Bundy urges Reston to print the story on national security issues . Bundy: "It's national security for the U.S. to protect our people"
 To decoy reporters, U.S. diplomats from other areas come to the White House and are told to be visible . Diplomats from other countries come to White House to be seen .
 The Pentagon lies about the Caribbean troop buildup; Guantanamo dependents are evacuated . The Pentagon says it's not a secret that the U.S. is sending troops to the Caribbean .
 U.S. will quarantine all offensive weapons to Cuba as a first step . Obama says any ship from any port found to carry weapons will be turned back or sunk .
 He calls for emergency meetings of the Organization of American States and the United Nations Security Council .
 The military goes on worldwide alert, missile launch crews are put on 70-hour weeks . B-52s with nuclear bombs in their bellies are sent aloft, where they remain for 30 days .
 Soviets criticize United States 'piracy' but make no military response to quarantine . Soviets criticize U.S. 'piracy', make no response to the quarantine . The Soviets criticize the United States for its quarantine .
 At the United Nations, Soviet diplomat Mikhail Polonik tells U.S. diplomat Ernest Weiner, 'This could well be our last conversation' At the U.N. in the Soviet Union, Mikhail Polanik tells Weiner: 'This is the last conversation. This could well
 Two African nations honor a United States request and refuse landing and refueling rights to Soviet planes . The move prevents the Soviets from bypassing the naval blockade and shipping weapons to Cuba by air . The U.S. requested that the African nations refuse landing rights .
 Kennedy rejects Khrushchev's call for a summit meeting until after the Cuban missiles are withdrawn . Kennedy rejected the call until after after the missiles were withdrawn from Cuba .
 Khrushchev admits the missiles are in Cuba and threatens to use them if necessary . Westinghouse executive William Knox is called to a meeting with Khruschev in Moscow .
 He also warns that Soviet submarines will sink United States ships if any Soviet ships are stopped by the U.S. quarantine .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson questions Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin about the missiles . The confrontation occurred in a dramatic U.N. Security Council confrontation . The United States and the Soviet Union were involved in the fight over the missile .
 Zorin responds that Stevenson will get his answer 'in due course' and that he does not want to be questioned like a prosecutor interrogates a witness . Stevenson says he wants to know if he will be questioned by a prosecutor like a criminal .
 In the Caribbean, the first Soviet ship is intercepted - a tanker carrying no weapons that is allowed to pass without being boarded to give the Soviets more time to consider their position . The first ship to be intercepted is the first to carry no weapons .
 A Panamanian ship under Soviet charter, the Marucla, becomes the first Russian ship stopped at sea . It was the first stop at sea since the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 The United States readies 5 million leaflets in Spanish to be dropped over Cuba before a possible air strike . U.S. readies leaflets before possible attack on Cuba .
 Alexander Fomin, a Soviet diplomat in the United States, calls ABC News State Department correspondent John Scali . Fomin talks to Scali about his experiences in the U.S. State Department . Scali: Fomin is a former Soviet diplomat .
 Fomin proposes three terms for settling the crisis and asks Scali to relay them to top U.S. officials . Fomin and Scali meet privately at a restaurant, Fomin suggests three terms .
 Terms call for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The terms on which the crisis eventually resolved would be resolved . Those terms essentially call for removing Soviet missiles in Cuba from Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote a personal letter to Kennedy outlining the terms for ending the crisis . Kennedy gets the same terms as Fomin's letter .
 A U-2 spy plane is shot down over Cuba and another operating near Alaska accidently strays over Russian airspace . A U.2 plane operating in Alaska accidentally strays into Russian airspace over Cuba . A Russian spy plane was shot down in Cuba .
 Moscow demands removal of United States missiles from Turkey also be part of the deal . In Washington, the U.S. can reply to Khrushchev's personal letter of the night before . Another more formal, more harshly worded letter arrives from Moscow .
 EXCOM members wonder if the new hard-line letter means Khrushchev is no longer in control in the Kremlin . ExCOM members also wonder which of the three Soviet overtures to respond to .
 Robert Kennedy proposes that the U.S. respond to the most favorable terms of all three and ignore the unfavorable terms . Kennedy: "The United States should not respond to all three"
 With the Cuban missile sites nearly operational, the president decides that if the crisis is not over by the next day, plans for an air strike the following week will proceed . With the crisis not over, he decides to strike if it is not .
 The crisis is over and both sides back away from the brink of war . Both sides back from brink of conflict in Iraq .
 The Soviets agree to dismantle the missiles in Cuba and return them to Russia . In a response to Kennedy's orders, the Soviets agreed to return the missiles to Russia.
 U.S. missiles in Turkey are removed later but not part of the deal . United States missiles are removed after they are found in Turkey . The deal ends with the removal of the missiles .