 Search Death by Fidel by Fidel Dr. Dr. Fidel Castro . Plus Search Join Plus Plus Plus .
 I’ve been lecturing on the man every fall semester for 20 years, spending two or three weeks on him, his ideology, and the beautiful country he destroyed, he says . He says he's lectured on him and his ideology every fall .
 It's ironic that the day he died I finished two long chapters on him for a book manuscript . A family friend visiting for Thanksgiving just happened to ask how much longer I thought the 90-year-old despot might continue to live .
 The Cuban leader was responsible for millions of deaths since seizing Cuba in January 1959 . Millions more would have died if he had gotten his way in October 1962, he says .
 No one knows how many poor souls he tossed into his jails, from political dissidents to priests to homosexuals . Unfortunately, no one truly knows, akin to how many political dissidents and priests he tossed .
 Fidel’s prison-state has never permitted human-rights observers . It's reminiscent of how he never permitted the elections he repeatedly promised in the 1950s . Fidel never allowed the elections .
 From the late 1950s to the late 1990s, it’s estimated that Castro killed between 15,000 to 18,000 people . Between 1950s and 2000s, the Cuban leader executed between 18,500 to 15,500 people .
 Cuba is a surreal island of no boats, where boats are banned—because people with boats flee . Cuba is also a strange place where boats with boats are not allowed in .
 Castro government drops large bags of sand on them from high above . Castro government sends military helicopters to drop the sand bags .
 These numbers do not capture the level of Fidel’s brutal madness, says Fidel Castro . But here, too, these numbers do .
 Consider the actual millions he badly wanted to kill, especially here in America, especially in America . Consider how many people he wanted to be killed, especially by the U.S. consider the millions he wanted .
 If Fidel Castro had his way in October 1962, the U.S. would have been leveled by atomic bombs . Little Cuba would’ve ceased to exist .
 The fact is that Fidel recommended to Nikita Khrushchev that Cuba and the USSR together launch an all-out nuclear attack upon the United States, literally igniting Armageddon . Fidel recommended that Cuba, the Soviet Union and the U.S. together launch a nuclear attack .
 The firing of those missiles alone would have led to at least 80 million dead Americans, which would have been half the population, plus added tens of millions of casualties .
 In response, the Soviets would have automatically launched on America from Soviet soil . In response to the U.S. launch, the Soviet Union would have launched a missile .
 Under the terms of their NATO and Warsaw Pact charters, the territories of Western and Eastern Europe would also erupt . The territory of NATO and the Warsaw Pact would erupt, according to the terms .
 Once the smoke cleared, hundreds of millions to possibly over a billion people could have perished, with Western civilization in its death throes . Hundreds of millions of people may have perished as a result .
 If Fidel Castro had gotten his way, he would have precipitated the greatest slaughter in human history . Fidel Castro's son says Fidel Castro would have led to the slaughter of millions of people .
 Alexander Alekseyev was so stunned at what Castro told him that he stood frozen, speechless, crushed . The Russian ambassador to Cuba said he stood "speechless" and "crushed"
 As McNamara learned, this was Fidel’s big chance to die as a “martyr” for Marxism-Leninism . McNamara: This was a big chance for him to be a martyr .
 The world averted nuclear war through the leadership of Khrushchev and Kennedy . No thanks to bloodthirsty lunatics like Fidel Castro and Che Guevara, who were ready to blow up the world .
 Paul Kengor is professor of political science and executive director of The Center for Vision & Values at Grove City College . He says he is disappointed by the outcome of the debate on immigration reform .
 Frank Marshall Davis: How America’s Adversaries Have Manipulated Progressives for a Century . Davis: Obama's Mentor and Dupes: How the U.S. has manipulated Progressives in the past century .