 Tensions are high between the two super-powers over the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 and the siting of missiles by the USA in Turkey in Turkey .
 Fidel Castro led a communist revolution in Cuba in 1959 which ousted the USA-backed President Fulgencio Batista . Castro led the Cuban revolution against the US-backed Batista government .
 Castro repelled the 1961 USA sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion by 1,500 Cuban freedom fighters most of whom, within 3 days, had either been killed or captured . Most of whom were either captured or killed in 3 days .
 The Hawks wanted to undertake immediate airstrikes on the missile installations on Cuba, followed by an invasion to topple Castro’s regime . The Hawks were hoping to topple the Castro regime .
 JFK receives photographic proof that the Soviet Union is deploying nuclear missiles to prevent Soviet vessels ‘right under his nose’ on Cuban soil . JFK received photographic proof of a naval blockade that was being enforced by the Soviets .
 JFK was in a bind but fortunately he had read ‘The Arthur Schlesinger, who was on ExCom at the time of Guns of August’ by Barbara Tuchman which chronicled the Bay of Pigs deliberations . ‘Our the staggering chain of events that led to
 JFK didn’t want to go down in history, along with Soviet Union leader Nikita Khrushchev, as one of the men that started a nuclear war – but he needed to demonstrate a forceful & decisive response . JFK’s response to the threat of nuclear war was
 People – being open to 2) To stimulate free-wheeling discussions, meetings were held in informal other people’s views this is settings, with no formal agendas .
 ExCom would be broken into two groups themself in the shoes of that would work up the detail of their others, seeing things from preferred option and then reconvene. Their perspective would be then re-examined .
 Decision-making in a crisis is stressful. Each sub-group exchanged their worked-up preferred option paper with the other . Sub-group then exchanged their preferred options paper with other sub-groups .
 Create time and space for high-quality thinking; if possible, try not to be rushed . Create the time for high quality thinking . If possible, don't be rushed.
 Some of the ‘hawks’ became ‘doves’ – initial opinions shifted as the detail was worked-up . Initial opinions of the 'hawks' became 'doves' as the details of the deal were worked-out .
 Need to get everyone to focus on the big picture and presented to JFK for him to make the ultimate decision to transcend narrow agendas . collaborative leaders must also be decisive, says JFK .
 JFK opted for a naval blockade. Be inclusive; set the framework; engage staff, create staff . Be inclusive. Set the framework. Create staff. Create a framework for staff .
 Bring in knowledgeable experts who can bring in new addressed the threat posed by intelligence and different perspectives – irrespective the nuclear missiles on Cuban soil and of the blockade of Cuba . Be open to differing viewpoints. of their position, status or employer .