 We met at lunch to make the final touch ups to our essay . We printed out our editorial cartoon and coloured it in .
 Fea and Amberly wrote their reflections, while asha coloured in the cartoon . Amberly and Fea wrote the reflections and drew the cartoon for the first time .
 “If you won't even say you're sorry, you're no sort of King at all,” said Bartholomew in Dr. Dr. Martin Martin in the novel .
 The book Bartholomew and the Oobleck is about the greedy and proud King Derwin who hires royal magicians to create a new weather element . The book is based on the story of Derwin's quest to find a new element in the weather .
 The result, oobleck, falls from the sky causing a sticky mess which wrecks havoc on the Kingdom of Didd .
 The problem is resolved when the king takes responsibility for the disaster and apologizes . The king is finally resolved when he apologizes to the king .
 He grew tired of the four common weather elements of rain, sun, fog and snow, and desperately wants something new to prove his might as King . He has grown tired of rain and sun, and needs something new .
 His resentment of the status quo was much like Fidel Castro's outlook on Cuba’s dictatorship government . His resentment was similar to that of the Castro regime in Cuba, which ruled out democracy .
 King Derwin is not capable of creating a new weather element by himself . He summons a higher power in the form of his Royal Magicians to carry out the task .
 Unlike the other harmless elements, the oobleck would cause devastation . However, unlike the others, it would cause damage .
 Castro and King Derwin both brought in higher powers to fulfill their aspirations, but both higher powers later cause a destructive change . Castro and Derwin brought in more than a billion dollars to fulfill aspirations .
 In the book Bartholomew and The Oobleck, when it arrives, it wrecks havoc on the citizens of Didd . In the novel, Bartholemomew is played for the first time in the book . Bartholeomomom is the main character in Barthol
 The oobleck causes people and animals to get stuck in the sludge, without any hope of escaping . People and animals are stuck in sludge without any chance of escaping.
 When the Oobleck falls on the Kingdom of Didd, the citizens are frightened by the menacing green blobs falling from the sky and rendered powerless . The citizens of the Kingdom are rendered powerless, just like the citizens of America .
 The United States tried many times to resolve their problems with Cuba and many of their attempts were futile . The U.S. tried to solve their problems many times with Cuba .
 Bartholomew tries to warn citizens of Didd by sounding the horn and asking the general for assistance . But the horn is covered in Oobleck and the general is too arrogant to realise that the problem was a problem .
 The American public feared the worst, and knows that the missiles could potentially reach U.S. soil with devastating consequences . American public knew the missile could reach American soil .
 In Bartholomew and the Oobleck the citizens are worried because they do not know when they will go away and can't do nothing to help the situation .
 Kennedy could do nothing but have faith in Kennedy's decisions . Similarly, the American people could also do nothing to support Kennedy's decision .
 The countries involved could reach a peaceful agreement or the crisis could result in war . The crisis could end in a peaceful solution or end in war.
 Possibly a third world war and, most likely, with the help of the nuclear missiles that caused the crisis in the first place, complete destruction of cities, countries, or even the entire earth . The world is about to end with nuclear weapons .
 Bartholomew abandons his fruitless efforts to warn the people about the sticky oobleck and returns to King Derwin . It's at this point of the story where Bartholomomom is forced to abandon his efforts .
 Bartholomew gets angry with the king and demands an apology for the mess he's created . Bartholemomew is angry at the king for creating a mess he created in the world .
 Bartholomew tells King Derwin that the least thing he can do is apologize and if he does not, he's no sort of king at all . Then, he tells him to apologize for his actions .
 The kingdom of Didd and the entire world are saved . Luckily, for the world, a deadly end is avoided . The end of the world was avoided .
 The stories both start with a character, King Derwin and Fidel Castro, becoming frustrated with some aspect of their lives . The stories all start with the characters being frustrated with each other .
 These characters take action to remove this frustrating aspect and enlist a higher power for help . Characters take action and enlist the help of a higher-power for help.
 In both situations, this help they enlist causes much trouble, and causes people to get ""stuck"" in a sticky situation that has potential to end fatally . In both cases, people get stuck in situations that need help .
 The fact that the book and the crisis follow a similar pattern demonstrates how well Dr. Peter Bergen handled the crisis, Dr. Bergen says . The book and crisis follow similar patterns .
 He understood that greed and pride can be detrimental and that sometimes apologizing is the best thing to do . He said he understood that .
 Its length allows this book to include detailed facts about the Crisis .
 His only bias is that, as he is American, he does seem to believe that the United States authorities were right and the Soviets wrong . This is only seen by the way he presents his facts and doesn't interfere with the truthfulness of them .
 This can be seen by the pages of source notes and bibliography included in the book . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 This historical documentary, hosted by internationally acclaimed writer Tom Clancy, commemorates the 40th anniversary of the crisis . It was produced by the Discovery Channel commemorating the 40-year anniversary .
 The book goes into detail about the Soviets' plan to secretly transport and set-up missiles in Cuba . It also details the American's discovery of the missiles and the agreement that marked the end of the crisis .
 This is a very reliable source because some of it's information is from first-hand interviews of people in the American and Soviet military, as well as real video and photos that were taken during the crisis .
 The facts shown are not twisted to fit personal opinion, but rather documented as they occurred from dependable, unfiltered primary resources . CNN.com will feature a selection of CNN iReport .
 Defcon2 gave a very clear and informative time line . It was especially useful to plan out the essay event by event .
 It was also very useful when looking into more specific information about the Soviet’s plan and the Americans’ discovery of the weapons .
 This article states that U Thant actively mediated and helped resolve the crisis . This article has been amended to clarify that this article does not refer to the fact that Thant was actively involved in resolving the crisis.
 He appealed to Kennedy and Khrushchev to allow time to resolve the naval blockade peacefully . He successfully appealed for time to allow the blockade to be resolved peacefully .
 This source is a reliable source as it comes from the Ottawa Citizen, a well respected newspaper . The Ottawa Citizen is a respected newspaper.
 Walter Dorn is a professor at the Royal Military College of Canada and Chair of the Canadian Pugwash Group . Robert Pauk is a research associate and UN peacekeeper and UN Peacekeeper . The authors are well qualified to discuss military matters as well .
 Some bias might be that the article is overtly enthusiastic about the role of U Thant during the crisis . The article might be biased .
 In addition, all of our other sources merely mentioned U. Thant and did not go into detail about his contribution to resolving the crisis .
 This gave us a new perspective on the crisis, that the crisis was not only resolved just by Kennedy, but also by U Thant in his tireless quest for peace . The crisis was resolved by U. Thant and Kennedy, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 We used this source in our essay to explain the contributions of U Thant and Kennedy that helped resolve the conflict . We also use this source to explain how the conflict ended .
 This book has a section entitled ""Notes" which provides a list of references used to write this book to assure readers of its truthfulness . This book also contains a section titled "Notes" to assure you of its accuracy .
 As this book is the longest it also has more space to go into a bit more detail than some of the other books . This book is also the longest of all the books .
 This book explains the beginning of the cold war and the beginnings of the friendly relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union . The book also explains the mounting tensions and panic associated with the threat of nuclear war .
 This book explains in detail about the Communist relationship of Cuba with the Soviet Union and tensions felt in America during the crisis . In addition, this book also explains the relationship between Cuba and the USSR .
 The information in Catherine's book is reliable as there are many sources that Catherine used to write her book and many suggestions for further reading . Catherine used many sources for her book, including the sources she used .
 Catherine seems like a well-learned lady, with a masters in English language . Catherine seems to have a master's degree in English .
 This source had more information of the Bay of Pigs Blunder and the ascension into power of Fidel Castro than our other sources . It did not have as much about the difficult decisions President Kennedy had to make to get the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 In addition, U Thant is not mentioned much in this book, though he is important to the resolution of the crisis . In addition to the crisis, he is also not mentioned in the book .
 Information on the Bay of Pigs invasion was useful, as some of the other books barely had any information on the invasion . In particular, the information was useful for the book .
 Catherine’s book provided good detail on all the events that happened during the Crisis, especially the beginnings of the crisis, and how the missiles are discovered by the Americans . Catherine provided a good detail about the events during the crisis .
 Fea finished her annotated bibliography, made the new changes to her part of the essay, and finalized the outline for the editorial cartoon . Fea also finished the bibliography and made the changes to the essay .
 Tonight Fea will write her reflection and color in the editorial cartoon . Fea also writes a reflection on her reflection in the daily cartoon .
 Amberly organized all of the drafts, edited a version of the essay, complied everybody's changes together but mostly kept the sanity of the group . Amberly arranged all the drafts .
 Amberly helped Asha by editing her two sources for the annotated bibliography, and helped her with the format . Amberly also edited the bibliographies for Asha and helped with the bibliography .
 Asha made the changes to her part of the annotated bibliography and helped Fea decide what to do with the editorial cartoon .
 Asha asks Mr Blauer what he thought of our editorial cartoon . She also asks him what he thinks of the cartoon .
 Mr Blauer thought that we should show Khrushchev in a more concrete way and also use a different picture to depict Kennedy . He also wanted to use a picture of Kennedy to depict him .
 He also thought that we should name the lawn Cuba, so as to make our picture clear . The lawn in Cuba should be named Cuba, he said .
 Amberly’s work for tonight is to write compile the annotated bibliography together and to have a family member look over the essay for her . Amberly also has to compile a bibliography and annotate the bibliography .
 Asha’s work is to edit the essay very thoroughly and to write this blog post . Asha edited the essay and wrote the blog post.
 "We still have a lot of work to do, but since we have the full class tomorrow, I am sure we can get the project done with great success," she said .
 In class, we went over possible ideas for the editorial cartoon .
 Outline of U.S. with Kennedy face in center, outline of Cuba with Castro+Krushchev faces in center . Both countries covered in oobleck .
 Missiles dripping with oobleck, based on Cuban flag, pointed at American flag . In the end, we decided to go with the third idea .
 Asha took home one book, while Amberly took two . Amberly also took home two books .
 Amberly has scanned the timelines from all of the books as Amberly scanned them for Fea and Asha . Amberly also scanned the timeline from all the books . Fea is currently in a relationship with Fea .
 Asha got some pages about operation mongoose and President Kennedy’s reaction to the Cuban missile Crisis from Amberly, that Asha had asked for on Friday .
 These scans were important, because they enabled us to use more than one source to write our paragraphs, and had additional information than the other source .
 Fea and Asha sent their parts to Amberly, who put each of the parts together to make the first draft . Amberly's first draft of the book was completed by Fea, Asha and Amberly .
 Fea still hadn't written in her in-text citations, so she spent most of the class doing that . Fea: "I don't know what I'm doing, I'm going to do it. I don't want to know what's going to happen"
 Amberly spent time doing the citations, as on the pages Amberly sent, there were no page numbers or bibliographical information . Amberly also spent time with Asha doing citations .
 Amberly spent time improving the introduction so that it gave a good summary of the Cuban missile crisis, the book Bartholomew and the Oobleck . Amberly: The things that happened during the book and during the crisis were related were related .
 This would prove to be a difficult thing to do, since most of the information is necessary . This would be difficult to explain, but most of it is necessary to do .
 Fea came back, which was lovely, since now we could start working on the essay . Thursday January 6th, 2011 .
 We divided the essay up into three parts, which is equal to the number of people in the group, as you might have guessed . The essay is divided into three groups and divided into four parts .
 Derwin orders his Royal Magicians to make a new weather: Fearoyal Magicians make the Oobleck: FEA. FEA . ASHABartholomew tries, unsuccessfully to warn people: ASHA. ASHACitizens of Didd get stuck in O
 Soviet Union was looking to find other nations to spread Socialistic ideal to the Western World . The Soviet Union wanted to spread its Socialistic ideals to the West .
 The Soviet Union feared that they would lose Cuba, a fellow communist nation, to a U.S. invasion . Cuba was ruled out of communist territory by the Soviet Union .
 That prompted them to place missiles in Cuba to keep the country in the state that they wanted . That prompted the Cuban government to place them in Cuba . The U.S. placed the missiles on Cuba in order to keep it in the Cuban state .
 At first, King Derwin refused to admit the disaster he’d caused .
 The Soviets tried to deny that they had any offensive weapons stationed in Cuba . The Soviets denied the claim in the 1980s .
 In the end, King Derwin admits that he was wrong, and summons the Royal Magicians to get rid of all the Oobleck .
 The Soviet Union admits to having missiles in Cuba, and later removes them . Soviet Union later removes the missiles .
 Fidel Castro nationalizes more than 1 billion dollars worth of American property . This was the table that resulted . King becomes angry for the weather .