 Diplomatic relationship frozen well beyond the end of the Cold War but moved toward normalization during Obama administration . U.S. President Barack Obama's policies were largely rolled back under President Donald Trump .
 Start 1959 Fidel Castro arrives in Havana after Fulgencio Batista's ouster . Fidel Castro arrived in Havana in 1959 after the Batista was overthrown .
 Fidel Castro establishes a revolutionary socialist state in Cuba after he and a group of guerrilla fighters successfully revolt against President Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro and his guerrilla fighters revolt against the Batista government .
 Batista flees the country after seven years of dictatorial rule . Batista was supported by the U.S. government for his anticommunist stance .
 Castro nationalizes all foreign assets in Cuba, hikes taxes on U.S. imports, establishes trade deals with the Soviet Union . Castro also nationalizes foreign assets, hikes tax on United States imports, and establishes trade agreements with Russia .
 Eisenhower retaliates by slashing the import quota for Cuban sugar, freezing Cuban assets in the United States, imposing a near-full trade embargo, and cutting off diplomatic ties with the Castro government . President Dwight D Eisenhower retaliated by slashing Cuban assets and freezing diplomatic ties .
 President John F Kennedy deploys a brigade of 1,400 CIA-sponsored Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro . The Bay of Pigs invasion was a plan developed and approved by Eisenhower administration .
 The Cuban military defeats the force within three days, after several mishaps disadvantage the invaders and reveal U.S. involvement . The Cuban forces defeat the invaders in three days .
 U.S. administrations over the next several decades conduct covert operations against Cuba . Despite the failed invasion, the United States continued to conduct covert attacks on Cuba .
 Kennedy administration imposes embargo on Cuba that prohibits all trade . Embargo was imposed February 7, 1962 .
 Cuba, whose economy greatly depended on trade with the United States, loses approximately $130 billion over the next nearly sixty years, according to Cuban government and U.N. estimates . Cuba's economy relies heavily on trade, with the U.S. losing approximately $ 130 billion over 60
 Kennedy demands the Soviet weapons be removed and orders a naval quarantine of Cuba, igniting a thirteen-day standoff . In response, Kennedy orders the Cuban government to remove them from Cuba .
 With the threat of nuclear war on the horizon, the U.S. negotiates with the USSR via back channels . The United States and the USSR negotiated with each other in the early 1950s .
 Kennedy secretly agrees to withdraw U.S. nuclear missiles from Turkey within a few months if Soviet Union withdraws its missiles from Cuba . Kennedy secretly agreed to withdraw the missiles if the Soviet Union withdrews its missile from Cuba.
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev accepts the deal and announces he will order the missiles removed . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union in 1961 . The deal was the first time the missiles had been removed .
 Kennedy prohibits U.S. nationals from traveling to Cuba . The following July, Kennedy prohibits United States nationals from visiting Cuba . Kennedy: "The next July, 1963, was the first time the United States had been allowed to visit Cuba"
 Days later, President Lyndon B Johnson announces he will open United States borders to all Cubans . Immigration bill gives preference to Cuban migrants with family ties to United States citizens or residents .
 The United States State Department estimates 270,000 Cubans have arrived in the United States since Castro took power . The U.S. State Department says 270,00 Cubans are now living in the U.K.
 In November 1966, Johnson enacts a law that allows Cubans who reach the U.S. to pursue permanent residency after one year . The law was passed by President Johnson in November 1966 .
 President Jimmy Carter reaches an agreement with Castro to resume a limited diplomatic exchange . Officials from the two countries will be able to communicate regularly .
 The United States opens an interests section with a small staff in its former embassy in Havana under the auspices of the Swiss embassy . The U.S. opens a small interests section in Havana with small staff .
 Cuba opens an interests section in Washington, DC, under the auspices of the embassy of Czechoslovakia . Meanwhile, Cuba opens a interests section under the influence of the Czech-Czechoslovakia embassy .
 Cuba faces intense pressure from thousands of Cubans hoping to flee the country . Cuba's economy suffers from a spike in oil prices and the continued U.S. embargo .
 Castro says anyone wishing to leave Cuba for Florida may do so from Mariel Harbor over the next six months . Ten thousand Cubans crowded at the gates of the Peruvian embassy to gain asylum . Castro: Anyone wishing to depart for Florida can do so within six months from Cuba .
 President Carter welcomes Cubans to the United States “with open arms,” and as many as 125,000 Cubans take part in the boatlift . President Carter: "With open arms"
 President Reagan designates Cuba a state sponsor of terrorism . Castro government censured for providing support to militant communist groups in African and Latin American countries .
 Cuba maintains that “acts by legitimate national liberation movements cannot be defined as terrorism,” according to a U.S. State Department report . Cuba maintains it is not terrorism .
 The designation is largely a symbolic act . Due to the heavy economic sanctions already in place, it is a symbolic move . The designation was largely a result of heavy sanctions already imposed .
 May 20, 1985 United States Launches Radio Service for Cubans . Radio Marti begins broadcasting news and entertainment programming to Cuba .
 The federally funded station was proposed by Reagan in 1981 . It was created by Congress two years later .
 Castro suspends an immigration agreement that would have allowed up to twenty thousand Cubans a year to immigrate to the U.S. The agreement would have provided for repatriation of some three thousand Cuban nationals with criminal records or who suffer from mental illness .
 Bush signs the Cuban Democracy Act . The act increases U.S. economic sanctions on Cuba . Bush signed the measure .
 Bush said Cuba’s “special relationship with the former Soviet Union has all but ended” The move follows the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Bush said the relationship between Cuba and the USSR “all but ended .
 The legislation limits the amount of U.S. currency traded with Cuba . The legislation also limits the amounts of United States currency exchanged with Cuba.
 The act does, however, offer a path to normalizing relations that is conditioned on Castro’s government making significant economic and political reforms . The act is also conditional on significant economic, political reforms by Castro's government .
 Havana and Washington implement two accords aimed at addressing the thousands of Cubans attempting to enter the U.S. annually . The accords are meant to ease the flow of Cuban refugees to the United States .
 The first follows an abrupt policy change by President Bill Clinton in August 1994 that calls for all Cubans rescued at sea to be brought to the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay . The first time Cubans have been brought to Guantanamo Bay since 1994 .
 The second accord establishes the “wet foot, dry foot” policy . Cubans intercepted by U.S. authorities at sea are sent home . Those who make landfall in the United States are allowed to remain and pursue permanent residency .
 The agreement also allows for more than thirty thousand Cubans detained at Guantanamo Bay to enter the U.S. on parole status . The deal also allows more than 30,000 Cubans to enter Guantanamo Bay on parole .
 Clinton signs the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act, better known as the Helms-Burton Act . Act tightens and codifies the United States embargo .
 The Cuban military shot down two U.S. civilian planes over waters off Florida last month . It comes several weeks after the Cuban military downed two US civilian planes . The Cuban government shot down the two planes .
 Some U.S. allies denounce it as a violation of international law . Among other provisions, the statute penalizes foreign companies that do business with Cuba .
 The law stipulates that sanctions may only be lifted after Fidel Castro and his brother Raul are no longer in office . Cuba has moved toward free elections and a free press, and it has released political prisoners, the law says .
 Clinton administration charges five Cuban counterintelligence officers in the United States with conspiracy to commit espionage, among other illegal activities .
 The officers were sent by the Castro government to infiltrate Cuban-American exile groups in Miami . They were arrested in 1998 and found guilty in 2001 of spying .
 Two are released at the end of their terms, in 2011 and 2014, and the remaining three are released on December 17, 2014, as part of a prisoner swap for a U.S. intelligence officer held in Cuba .
 Elian Gonzalez, the sole survivor of an attempt by his mother and ten others to reach the United States by boat, ignites a media storm .
 The Clinton administration is faced with deciding whether to allow the child’s Miami relatives to keep him, or send him back to his father in Cuba, the position of the Cuban government . The child's Miami relatives are supported by the Cuban-American community .
 A federal appellate court gives Elian’s father the power to act on his behalf in immigration proceedings . After a seven-month battle in U.S. courts, the father of Elian was granted the power of the court to act in his case .
 Elian is returned to his family in Cuba after the United States Supreme Court declines to review the case . Elian was taken to Cuba by the Cuban government in 2009 .
 Chavez aligned himself early on with Castro’s anti-U.S. stance . He announced a government overhaul of state oil giant PDVSA, the largest foreign supplier of oil to the United States at the time .
 In the following years, Venezuela boosts its oil exports to Cuba in return for more technical personnel from Cuba, including physicians, teachers, and other social-service workers . Venezuela boosted its oil export in exchange for more medical personnel .
 Fidel Castro hands over the presidency to his brother, Raul, who had served as second-in-command of the government and a general in the armed forces .
 Obama eases restrictions on travel and remittances, which had been tightened by his predecessor . The restrictions had tightened by Obama's predecessor . Obama signs off a potential thaw .
 The move allows Cuban-Americans to send unlimited funds to Cuba . It also allows United States citizens to travel there for religious and educational purposes .
 The step is widely considered the most notable move yet toward normalizing relations . The trade embargo remains in place, though the trade embargo is still in place .
 Alan Gross arrested in Cuba for working on democracy-promotion program . Arrested in 2009 .
 Gross was bringing technology to help Cuba’s Jewish community gain access to the internet, which is heavily restricted on the island . Gross was brought to Cuba to help Cuban Jews gain internet access . Gross: "The internet is a very important part of the Jewish community"
 Havana considers the U.S. agency’s activities subversive and illegal, and Gross is convicted of attempting to “undermine the integrity and independence” of Cuba . Gross is sentenced to fifteen years in prison .
 Cuban government approves slew of economic reforms in May 2011 . Citizens allowed to buy and sell residential real estate and automobiles, increasing bank lending, and expanding self-employment .
 Cuba hosts first time the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States summit . Cuba hosts for the first time since Cuba hosted the summit in 1992 .
 CELAC is considered an alternative to the U.S.-dominated Organization of American States . Cuba was ousted from the OAS in 1962 . The OAS ousted Cuba from the organization from Cuba .
 Obama and Raul Castro announce they will restore full diplomatic ties following the release of a jailed U.S. intelligence officer for the three remaining Cuban Five prisoners .
 The prisoner swap and release of Gross comes after nearly eighteen months of secret talks between U.S. and Cuban officials . Pope Francis brokered, in part, the prisoner swap, by Pope Francis .
 Obama says the U.S. plans to reopen the embassy in Havana, while members of the Republican-controlled Congress condemn the move . Members of Congress vow to uphold the economic embargo .
 U.S. State Department removes Cuba from list of state sponsors of terrorism . Cuba removed from terrorism list . Cuba was listed as a state sponsor of terrorism in 2009 .
 The designation, first imposed in 1982, had prevented Cuba from accessing international finance . The designation was a sticking point in U.S.-Cuba talks on normalizing relations .
 Obama had called for Cuba’s removal from the list in April . State Department found that Cuba had not sponsored terrorism in recent years and vowed not to do so in the future .
 Obama's announcement comes days after he met with Raul Castro on the sidelines of the Summit of the Americas . The first face-to-face discussion between U.S. and Cuban heads of state in more than half a century .
 U.S. and Cuban embassies had been closed since 1961 . Embassies were closed for more than 60 years .
 The U.S. trade embargo, which cannot be lifted without congressional approval, remains in place . Neither country names an ambassador, however, and neither country names a new ambassador .
 The top U.S. diplomat stationed in Havana is the charge d’affaires, Jeffrey DeLaurentis . Cuba’s foreign minister, Bruno Rodriguez, oversees the reopening of Havana's embassy in Washington . The top United States diplomat is Jeffrey De Laure
 President Obama becomes the first sitting U.S. president in nearly ninety years to visit the island nation . Obama is the first president to visit Cuba in nearly 90 years .
 Cuba and the U.S. signed an agreement to allow commercial flights between the two countries for the first time in more than fifty years . The two countries signed a deal last month allowing commercial flights to Cuba . Cuba is the only nation in the world that has allowed commercial flights in more
 The first passenger jet flight takes place in August . Several U.S. airlines begin service to Cuba in the weeks that follow .
 Fidel Castro dies at the age of ninety . The former Cuban leader is believed to be the Cuban leader of the Cuban revolution .
 Cubans gather at Havana’s Revolution Square to mark the first day of an official week of mourning . Hundreds of thousands of Cubans gathered at Revolution Square on the first anniversary of the Cuban Revolution .
 The country's most prominent dissident group, Ladies in White, calls off its regular weekend protest for the first time in 13 years . The country’s most prominent Dissident group is known for its anti-government protests .
 Thousands of Cuban exiles celebrate in Miami and other U.S. cities and call for political change in Cuba . Thousands of exiles, many of whom regarded Castro as a dictator, celebrated in Miami .
 President Donald Trump reinstates travel restrictions on Americans traveling to Cuba and U.S. business dealings with a military-run conglomerate . The restrictions will not break diplomatic relations .
 The Obama administration’s loosened restrictions “do not help the Cuban people—they only enrich the Cuban regime,” Trump says . U.S. sanctions will not be lifted until Cuba frees all of its political prisoners .
 Some U.S. business leaders and members of Congress criticize the move . They say it will further isolate Cuba and worsen the economic and political situation there .
 Cuban leaders say the changes “contradict the majority support” of Americans . Cuban leaders: The changes ‘contradicts’ majority support of Americans. The Cuban government says the changes are “a contradiction”
 The policy leaves in place new direct flights from the United States, cruise ship routes, and hotel ventures .
 State Department announces it will withdraw most staff from the United States Embassy Havana . Diplomats develop mysterious health problems, including hearing loss and dizziness .
 U.S. expels 15 Cuban diplomats from the United States for failing to protect Americans in Havana . Days later, it expels fifteen diplomats from Cuba .
 The illness, first reported in 2016, prompts speculation about a targeted attack by the Cuban government . The illness was first reported by Cuban officials in 2016 .
 Cuba denies harming U.S. personnel and denounces the State Department’s actions . Cuba, however, denies harming United States personnel . Cuba denounces State Department's actions .
 The country’s foreign minister later alleges the situation is a “pretext” for the U.S.-Cuba normalization . The situation is said to be a "pretext" for the Trump administration's backtracking on normalization, he says .
 Raul Castro steps down as president of Cuba . Miguel Diaz-Canel, first vice president and Castro’s hand-picked successor, elected as president . Diaz Canel was Castro's handpicked successor to Castro .
 The transition marks the first time in more than forty years that a Castro is not the island’s president . The transition is the first since Castro was not president of Cuba .
 National Security Advisor John Bolton labels Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela the ‘Troika of Tyranny’ He blames the trio for human rights abuses, causing regional instability, and embracing communism .
 Bolton’s speech marks a turning point in the U.S. policy toward Cuba . The administration announces a wave of sanctions designed to penalize Cuba and weaken ties to Venezuela .
 Trump permits certain lawsuits against companies that benefit from property confiscated by Cuba’s government . Most notably, Trump permits lawsuits against those who benefit from Cuba's property confiscation .
 He also further restricts travel to Cuba, prohibiting group educational trips, banning cruises, and curtailing direct flights .
 Despite U.S. pressure, Cuba remains one of Venezuela’s closest allies . Despite United States pressure, Venezuela remains its closest allies in Venezuela . Cuba is one of the world's most isolated countries .
 The U.S. State Department returns Cuba to its list of state sponsors of terrorism . The move reverses another Obama-era step toward normalization as Trump prepares to leave office .
 Secretary of State Mike Pompeo cites Cuba’s harboring of U.S. fugitives and Colombian rebels . Pompeo also cites its support for Venezuela's regime . Secretary of state Pompeo: Cuba harboring fugitives, Colombian rebels, as well as supporting Venezuela .
 Some experts question the designation as a reward for Trump’s supporters, particularly Cuban-Americans . But some experts say the designation is a political reward for the president's supporters .
 Cuban officials decry the move as “political opportunism” and accuse Washington of long-standing terrorism against Havana . Cuban officials say Washington has long been targeting Cuba for years .
 The redesignation carries sanctions, though existing U.S. restrictions on Cuba are expected to blunt their effects . Existing restrictions on the island nation are also expected to be expected to soften the effects .
 The transfer of power coincides with the sixtieth anniversary of Cuba defeating U.S.-backed forces in the Bay of Pigs invasion . The transfer takes place during a party congress .
 Diaz-Canel takes over amid steep economic challenges, growing calls for domestic reform . Diaz-Celita takes over as president of the Central American nation .
 The White House says shifting U.S. policy toward Cuba is not one of Biden’s highest foreign policy concerns . In response to Castro's resignation, the White House said it is not a priority for Biden .
 U.S.-Cuba Relations Timeline Timeline Timeline . Council on Foreign Relations is a partnership between the United States and Cuba .