 Saving Jackie K explores escalating tensions between the U.S. and Russia in the 'Cold War' timeframe before JFK's tragic assassination .
 Soviet Premier, Nikita Khrushchev, shown with increasing hostility toward the United States and our president . Soviet Premier Nikita showed increasing hostility to U.S. and U.K. President .
 Khrushchev emerged victorious during the power struggle following the death of Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin in 1953 . He was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 By late 1956, the new leader taunted the United States and its western allies with the threat, ""Whether you like it or not, not, history is on our side," he said . The new leader also threatened the U.S. and Western allies with a threat .
 In 1961, Khrushchev showcased his hothead temper in an exchange at a United Nations Plenary Meeting . Kennedy's first year in office, 1961, was JFK's first .
 The Soviet premier put forth a resolution decrying colonialism by Western Europe . The Philippine Ambassador challenged him on his hypocrisy . He countered that Russia was equally guilty of colonialism in Eastern Europe .
 Khrushchev responded in a rage, taking off his right shoe and pounding it repeatedly on the desk . The incident took place in the early 1960s .
 He then creatively called the Filipino a jerk, a stooge, and a lackey of imperialism . The Filipino was called a jerk and a looge .
 Khrushchev conspired with Cuban dictator Fidel Castro to plant missiles in Cuba . The missiles were capable of striking the U.S. in October 1962 .
 JFK ordered a Naval blockade of supplies and weapons from being shipped to Cuba from Russia . JFK ordered the blockade . The blockade was quickly followed by the Cuban government .
 Several weeks later, Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the bombs, and Kennedy subsequently lifted the quarantine . Kennedy was forced to lift the quarantine, but the quarantine was lifted several weeks later .
 By August of 1963, world leaders seemed to making overtures toward peace, at least symbolically . World leaders made overtures to peace at the end of August 1963 .
 Along with Great Britain, both the U.S. and USSR signed a joint Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The United States and Great Britain also signed the treaty .
 The accord was enacted to prohibit experimental detonations of atomic weapons in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water, effectively allowing only underground explosions . It was enacted in 1953 to prevent experiments in outer space and the atmosphere .
 The purported rationale was to slow the arms race and prevent excessive fallout . It was intended to prevent excessive amounts of arms race being used .
 The two super powers then began making plans for a second historic summit . The two countries then began planning a second summit .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev had previously met in Vienna, 1961, with harsh words being exchanged on both sides . The two leaders met in 1961, when they were in Vienna .
 JFK assassinated on November 22, 1963, when JFK was assassinated in 1963 . JFK and JFK had hoped for improved relations between the two countries .