 A prominent goal in the analysis of the crisis has been to identify the mistakes crucial players made prior to and during the crisis, with an eye toward drawing 'lessons' to help us avoid similar incidents in the future .
 Some of the more notable mistakes can be traced to faulty or inadequate intelligence, or to the misuse of intelligence by political leaders . Political leaders often misjudge their intelligence or use it to make political decisions .
 It is natural enough to seek to 'fix' the 'mistakes' made in 1962 for example, by changing the organizational structure of the intelligence community, or the processes of intelligence assessment and exploitation .
 In this essay, I argue that some of the mistakes made during the missile crisis may not have been avoidable, and are of a kind not easily corrected, because they were the direct result of perfectly normal psychological processes .
 Scholars have long been interested in the role of perception in international relations . Scholars say perception is key to understanding international relations in the world .
 Diplomatic historians, political scientists, and psychologists have all studied the way in which images and beliefs affect the conduct of international affairs .
 This body of literature demonstrates that the way in which leaders perceive themselves, their environment, and their adversaries has an important effect on the course of events . The world's most powerful leaders should be aware of their surroundings and their enemies, the author says .
 Relatively few scholars have applied psychological insights to the study of intelligence assessment specifically, though many have done so incidentally .
 The Cuban missile crisis is an appropriate vehicle for such a study because of the richness of the record upon which to draw . The Cuban crisis is a rich record of American history, the author says .
 The ideal of an analyst who is open to any and all information, able accurately to gauge its quality, is an ideal without an empirical referent . The ideal is an open to all information and capable of perceiving its true import, an analyst says .
 At every stage of the decision making process, biases are apt to introduce error . At the end of the process, bias is likely to introduce errors into the decisions made .
 Motivated and cognitive errors may be inconsequential when decision makers are dealing with mundane matters, but they can have far reaching consequences in international crises . Motivated or cognitive errors can have consequences in crises, such as the rise in Syria .
 Cuban missile crisis 'has roots in human nature' and is unlikely to be 'fixed' by tinkering with intelligence, author says . 'Human nature' is not to be fixed, he says .
 I begin by surveying psychological models of decision making and their implications for intelligence assessment . I begin with a survey of psychological models and implications of intelligence assessment.
 Psychological models can account for important differences in judgment, and for egregious errors . I then apply them to Soviet, American, and Cuban judgments about three critical issues in the missile crisis . I explain how psychological models account for differences in decision making .
 I conclude with some general observations about perception and intelligence errors during the Cuban missile crisis . Finally, I conclude that some of these errors were made by the Cuban military .
 Motivational models of decision making take as their starting point peoples' needs and emotions . Motivations are based on people's needs, emotions and their emotions .
 These models contend individuals have a strong need to maintain images of themselves and their environment that are conducive to their emotional well-being .
 At the same time, we seek to avoid feelings of anxiety, fear, shame and guilt . We also avoid feeling of anxiety and fear, fear and guilt, but avoid guilt .
 Motivational models explain how this need to maintain our sense of well-being can interfere with our ability to process information accurately . Motivations explain how the need for a sense of self-renewaryness can affect how we process information .
 Humans are emotional beings beset with doubts, who often seek incompatible goals . Humans are also beset by doubts, and often seeking incompatible goals. Humans are often besetered by doubts .
 "We naturally seek to avoid uncertainty and painful trade-offs," says President Obama . " Nevertheless, we naturally seek ... avoid uncertainty," says Obama .
 "We especially try to avoid these types of situations if the decisions we make will be irrevocable," she says . "The decisions we made will be irreversible," she adds .
 We employ a variety of coping mechanisms in an effort to maintain our peace of mind and reduce our anxiety . Consequently, we employ a number of coping methods in an attempt to keep our peace and reduce anxiety .
 We may pay selective attention to information, preferring that which suggests certainty or minimizes trade-offs . For example, we may prefer that information that suggests certainty . We may be selective about what we want to know .
 We exaggerate the positive consequences of our decision, minimize the negative ones . We go to some trouble to seek out comforting information with which to discredit disturbing information . We exaggerated the negative consequences of a decision to take action .
 'We may engage in 'wishful thinking', in which we persuade ourselves that our chosen course will succeed despite many indications to the contrary . Additionally, we may engage with wishful thinking, as well as 'wishingful thinking'
 motivational models of decision making focus on our emotional and psychological needs . Cognitive models focus on the decision rules, shortcuts and simplifications that we employ when processing information .
 Theory-driven information processing is a method of interpreting data on the basis of one's prior beliefs or prior knowledge . Theory-based data processing is based on prior beliefs .
 One begins with an assumption and interprets new information through the prism of that assumption . One of the world's greatest challenges is to find out more quickly and efficiently .
 One attends first to the data and then develops theories or conclusions on the basis of this raw information . One of the main theories is that the data is the source of conclusions .
 Theory-driven information processing is a deductive manner of reasoning . Data-driven processing is inductive, theory-driven data processing is deductive, inductive . Theory driven by data driven by inductive data processing .
 Cognitive psychologists contend that we engage in theory-driven thinking far more frequently than we engage data-based thinking . We engage in theories and data driven thinking more often than in data-driven analysis .
 Theory-driven processing requires less mental effort . This is because we prefer to conserve mental energy, and theory-driven processes require less effort .
 Data-driven processing typically requires us to attend to a vast amount of information and to weigh it all before we draw conclusions . We are happy to share our thoughts with the world .
 Most of the decisions in our daily lives concern mundane issues, and it makes sense to expend as little mental energy as possible when attending to them . Most of our lives are decided by mundane issues .
 Our tendency to engage in theory-driven thinking, and to use mental shortcuts, can lead to errors . However, our tendency to use a mental shortcut can lead us to make mistakes, experts say .
 We tend to pay attention only to information that conforms to our previously-held beliefs . For example, we tend to overlook information that challenges our expectations . We pay attention to people who challenge our expectations, such as those of us .
 If we do attend to discrepancies, we have a tendency to dismiss it, either by finding fault with the information itself or by questioning the credibility of its source . We often find fault with information, either with the source of it, or with questioning its credibility . We have to be more
 Ironically, encountering and dismissing such information frequently leads to even stronger beliefs that our preconceptions are correct . Ironically, we often have strong beliefs that we are right .
 We tend to pay greater attention to information that confirms our beliefs, we tend to actively seek out such information . Not only do we have a tendency to pay more attention to such information, we also actively seek it .
 In a classic study, subjects were divided into two groups and shown slides . Subjects were shown a series of slides to demonstrate priming effects . The study was a classic example of priming .
 Both groups were then shown pictures of people shooting rapids in a canoe . Both were then asked to assess the scenario .
 Subjects exposed to negative subliminal phrases were far more likely to assess the scenario in a negative manner, and to conclude that the canoeists were acting irresponsibly . The subjects that had been exposed to subliminals were far less likely to be critical of canoeists .
 Subjects exposed to positive subliminal phrases were more likely to assess the scenario positively . Subjects who had been exposed to subliminals were also likely to be positive . The study was carried out by the University of Cambridge .
 Theory-driven processing undermines our ability to generate alternative interpretations of the data . First, it undermines the ability to think about the data with alternative interpretations .
 When we reason in a theory-driven manner, we attend first to our preconceptions, and then to the data . When we think about a theory, it's important to look at the data, rather than at the preconceptions of our beliefs .
 "This inclines us to interpret information in such a way as to make it conform to what we already expect," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "We inadequately consider the possibility that the same information can support a variety of conclusions," he says .
 Second, because we seek out information that supports our beliefs and ignore information that challenges them, our beliefs resist change . Third, because of our beliefs, we resist change. Second, we seek to support our beliefs that support them. Third, we want to change our beliefs.
 The tendency to engage in theory-driven thinking means that two people can observe exactly the same behavior, yet interpret it in completely different ways . Two people can see the same thing, but interpret it completely differently .
 People with different beliefs might attach different meanings to the same information . We tend to interpret ambiguous information in such a way as to make it conform to our pre-existing expectations .
 Motivational and cognitive models of decision making derive from different premises . Decision-making is based on a person's decision to make a decision, rather than a decision .
 Motivational models take as their starting point the human desire to avoid the anxiety that accompanies uncertainty and painful trade-offs . The human desire is to avoid uncertainty and pain, rather than be anxious .
 Cognitive models are the rules for processing information that we employ in order to make sense of a complex environment . The starting point for cognitive models is the rules we employ for processing of information .
 Motivational models contend that we see what we want to see, rather cognitive models . Cognitive models contend we see as what we expect to see . Motivations are based on what we see and how we see it .
 Both models seek to explain the same outcomes errors in judgment and inference . Despite these different starting points, however, both models are similar .
 It is a much more daunting task to explain the way in which government officials made decisions 35 years ago, it is said .
 A great deal of information is needed in order to determine whether decision makers' perceptions were rooted in cognitive or motivational biases . We may never be able to draw such conclusions with certainty with certainty .
 It is useful to consider plausible psychological explanations for the way analysts and leaders interpreted data during the Cuban missile crisis . Nevertheless, there are psychological explanations to consider psychological explanations .
 Intelligence assessment and the effective exploitation of intelligence by national leaders are difficult, error-prone tasks . Such an exercise helps us understand why intelligence assessment is such difficult .
 Intelligence errors may be rooted not only in institutional and procedural flaws, but also in perfectly normal human traits, which cannot be fixed . Intelligence errors can be rooted in institutional flaws, which in principle can be fixed, but in principle, can't be fixed.
 In this section I consider the ways in which analysts and national leaders perceived these issues, and I offer plausible psychological explanations for their divergent assessments . I offer psychological explanations .
 In April 1961 the Kennedy administration backed an invasion of Cuba that failed miserably . The Likelihood of a U.S. Invasion of Cuba is uncertain .
 U.S. troops did not take part in the Bay of Pigs landing, but the affair was an embarrassment for Kennedy . Both the media and Congress pressured the President to try again .
 The United States military did draw up contingency plans for an invasion . White House officials were opposed to implementing it for a variety of moral and political reasons . The White House did not implement the plans .
 Operation 'Mongoose' is a program of sabotage designed to harass the Cuban government . The White House launched the operation in response to Cuba's anti-Cuban propaganda campaign . The Cuban government was targeted by the White House .
 After the Bay of Pigs, both the Cuban and the Soviet intelligence communities sought to assess the likelihood of a second invasion of Cuba . The Cuban and Soviet intelligence community wanted to assess a second, more serious invasion .
 Most information came through third parties in Europe and Latin America, rather than from sources close to the U.S. President . Most of the information came from third parties, not from close sources .
 The Soviets relied heavily upon reports from journalists, officials in France and Belgium, and members of the Washington diplomatic community . The Soviets rely heavily upon journalists and officials in Washington for information .
 These reports were based on open source material and gossip .
 Sigint provided no firm evidence of Kennedy's intentions toward Cuba . The Soviets also relied upon Sigint to look for signs of imminent military action .
 It is difficult to determine the Soviet intelligence community's assessment of the likelihood of a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 The KGB's official reports during the spring of 1962 were unable to draw firm conclusions regarding the likelihood of an attack . According to Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali, the KGB was unable to conclude that the attack was likely to have occurred .
 Such waffling was not unusual for the Soviet intelligence community, as its reports were notoriously short on analysis . The Soviet intelligence was notoriously short of analysis .
 It was politically expedient to provide Soviet leaders with raw data and let them draw their own conclusions, rather than to provide an assessment that might contradict these leaders' views . The Soviet Union did not want to provide the data to contradict their views .
 Soviet intelligence did suggest that an invasion was not imminent . However, Soviet intelligence suggested that it would not be imminent .
 Soviet intelligence officials in Washington believed that Kennedy was reluctant to attempt another invasion because such an attack might undermine some of his other foreign policy initiatives .
 Cuban testimony suggests that Soviet intelligence provided radically different assessments of US intentions to Havana . Cuban testimony, however, suggests that the Soviet intelligence had different assessments .
 According to Cuban intelligence officials, Soviet intelligence repeatedly reported to Castro that the Kennedy administration was planning a full-scale invasion of Cuba . Castro was Castro's first president in 1961 .
 Reports that Washington was also actively seeking to assassinate the Cuban leader . These unrelenting warnings were accompanied by reports of Washington being involved .
 The Soviet intelligence community offered different opinions to different audiences . It's difficult to determine the source of its assessments and to evaluate them, says historian .
 The conclusions of the Soviet intelligence community varied from audience to audience . Political pressures heavily influenced its findings, according to the report . However, the fact that the conclusions of Soviet intelligence .
 It is unclear whether the KGB told Soviet leaders it could not reach a conclusion about the likelihood of a U.S. attack . For example, it is unclear if the KGB said such a conclusion might be unacceptable to Soviet leaders .
 Khrushchev's attempt to use Soviet intelligence for political purposes may have been political . Conceivably, the discrepancy between KGB reports to Soviet leaders and reports to Cuban leaders may be the result of a political move .
 By most accounts, the Soviet leadership had firm views about the likelihood of a U.S. invasion . The Soviet leadership believed the United States would be invaded .
 Khrushchev was convinced that President Kennedy would attempt a second attack on Cuba at some point, unless adequate provision was made for deterrence . Khrushchevitch convinced that . adequate provision were made for deterrent .
 The Soviet leader believed the Americans would not tolerate the continued existence of a communist state 90 miles off the U.S. coast unless forced to do so .
 Khrushchev interpreted the Bay of Pigs and the harassment of Cuba that followed as precursors to an all-out confrontation with the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Khrushchev's theory-driven thinking may have led him to believe U.S. would invade Cuba, author says . Evidence does not allow for a conclusive judgment, but evidence is still unclear .
 Khrushchev may have begun with the assumption that a confrontation was inevitable, and interpreted the Bay of Pigs and Operation 'Mongoose' as evidence for his belief .
 There was no logical connection between Washington's harassment of Havana and the likelihood of a second invasion, the author says .
 'Mongoose' activities at least plausibly suggested that the Kennedy administration did not intend to invade Cuba . In fact, as Cuban intelligence duly noted, the activities .
 Cuban intelligence concluded that these activities demonstrated that Washington had given up plans for an invasion . Washington had instead resigned itself to simple harassment, Cuban intelligence said .
 Khrushchev could have reached the same conclusion if he had reasoned differently . Khrushiev could have made the same decision if he'd thought differently .
 Data-driven thinking could have led to the conclusion that the Kennedy administration was not planning an attack in 1962 . The Kennedy administration did not plan an attack on the U.S. in 1962, a source says .
 Cuban government devoted the bulk of its intelligence resources to determining the likelihood of another invasion . After the failed American attempt to invade Cuba in April 1961, Cuban government focused on intelligence . Cuban government spent most of its resources to determine likelihood of invasion .
 Intelligence priorities revolved around detecting U.S. plans to invade the island, as well as plans to assassinate Fidel Castro . Intelligence priorities were to detect plans to kill Fidel Castro, according to reports .
 Fidel Castro assumed the U.S. would never accept the Cuban Revolution . The Cuban leader assumed the United States would not accept the revolution . Fidel Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 Cuban leader convinced that confrontation with the Americans was inevitable . After the Bay of Pigs affair, the Cuban leader was convinced that a confrontation with U.S. was inevitable.
 He maintained that Washington sought revenge for the failed invasion, and to crush the Revolution .
 Castro: The main question is not whether an American invasion would occur, but when . Castro: For Castro, the main question was whether an invasion would happen, not whether it would happen .
 Cuban intelligence shared Castro's belief that a confrontation with the U.S. was inevitable . Castro believed a confrontation was inevitable, Cuban intelligence believed it was inevitable.
 As long as the Cuban Revolution survived, it would rub salt in U.S. wounds . The Cuban Revolution is a source of salt in American wounds .
 At some point, intelligence officials believed, the U.S. would seek to overthrow Castro . The Castro Castro regime was overthrown by the United States .
 Cuban intelligence maintained that an attack was not imminent between 1961 and 1962 . Between the spring and spring of 1961 and the spring of 1962, Cuban intelligence said it was not an imminent threat .
 Cuban intelligence concluded that these activities were not necessarily a precursor to invasion . Washington was most certainly engaged in a variety of activities meant to harass the Castro government, Cuban intelligence said .
 As Domingo Amuchastegui has noted, Cuban intelligence believed that a U.S. invasion was becoming increasingly unlikely . Washington was unable to rally the support of the Organization of American States, something that was crucial in order to make such an invasion politically acceptable .
 Cuban leaders did not agree with the Cuban intelligence community's conclusions . Cuban leaders disagreed with the conclusions, Cuban leaders said .
 Castro dismissed the intelligence community's judgment that a U.S. attack was not imminent . Castro pressured it to search for evidence of an impending conflict . Castro dismissed intelligence officials' judgment .
 Castro instead embraced the Soviet reports that such an invasion was looming . Castro embraced the reports that the Soviet invasion was imminent .
 Havana was divided on the likelihood of a U.S. invasion . The Cuban government was divided over the possibility of an invasion of Cuba . Havana was a key ally of the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 Both the political leaders and the intelligence community believed a confrontation was inevitable . Yet they differed in their estimation of its imminence . Both political and intelligence leaders thought a confrontation inevitable .
 The available evidence suggests that these discrepancies might have been rooted, at least in part, in different methods of processing information .
 Castro, like Khrushchev, engaged in theory-driven thinking . Castro's theory of Soviet-era thinking is plausible, says historian .
 He began with the assumption that an invasion was inevitable, and then sought out information to confirm this expectation . He then sought information that confirmed this expectation, he said .
 Castro embraced Soviet intelligence reports that confirmed his beliefs, and rejected information from Cuban intelligence that challenged his expectations . Castro embraced reports from the Soviet Union, but rejected them .
 Cuban leader paid attention only to information that confirmed his expectation that an invasion was imminent . Cuban leader avoided having to revise his expectations .
 Cuban intelligence partly resisted the tendency to engage in theory-driven information processing . On the other hand, Cuban intelligence has resisted the tendencies to engage with theory .
 Cuban intelligence concluded that an invasion was not likely in 1962 . Despite its own assumption that confrontation was inevitable, despite political pressure to seek out information confirming an invasion, the Cuban government concluded that it would not be likely .
 Cuban intelligence attended first to the raw information, and then developed conclusions on the basis of the data . In this respect, Cuban intelligence attends first to raw information .
 Different basic assumptions can lead to radically different interpretations of the same information . Thus different basic assumptions may lead to drastically different interpretations .
 It is now generally agreed that Khrushchev's motives were largely defensive . Although it is still unclear which of these motives carried the most weight .
 He sought to redress a strategic imbalance which strongly favored the United States, and to protect an important ally . President Obama sought to protect the U.S. from the situation in Afghanistan .
 As the first state in the Western Hemisphere to embrace communism, Cuba had important symbolic significance for the Kremlin . Cuba was the first country in the U.S. to embrace Communism .
 In the zero-sum world of the early 1960s, it would have been tragic for Moscow if Washington were able to depose Castro and replace him with someone more palatable to the U.S. The United States. Castro. Castro .
 It benefits from an exchange of information not available to intelligence analysts and political leaders at the time of the crisis .
 Several puzzling questions arise when one considers US estimates of Soviet motives during the early 1960s: 1. 1. U.S. estimates that Soviet motives were behind the rise of the Cold War .
 The Soviets were engaged in a major buildup of conventional arms on the island during the summer of 1962 . Some have charged that the CIA should have foreseen that strategic missiles would be included in this deployment .
 A Special National Intelligence Estimate issued on 19 September 1962 considered the possibility that the Kremlin would deploy medium-and intermediate-range missiles to Cuba . It noted that such a deployment 'would confer considerable military advantage' on the Soviet Union .
 This scenario was dismissed as unlikely because such risk-taking would not be congruent with past Soviet behavior . However, this scenario would be unlikely to be true, according to experts .
 There is not enough evidence to conclude that the Soviets had ruled out such an option, either . However, there was not enough . evidence that such a decision was made either way .
 Risk-taking was congruent with Khrushchev's past political behavior . Risk taking was not a typical Soviet trait, but it was a risk-taking trait . Risk-taken risk taking was a political risk, not typical Soviet traits .
 In retrospect, the intelligence community should have given greater weight to the possibility of a strategic deployment in Cuba . The U.S. intelligence community has been criticized for not giving more weight to Cuba .
 The United States had been monitoring the buildup of Soviet weapons in Cuba closely . The U.S. had been watching the build-up of the Soviet weapons .
 It is unclear how could it have missed the transshipment of missiles and supporting equipment, and the construction of weapons sites . The Soviets failed to mask construction work at the sites until after photo reconnaissance had discovered them .
 Cuban intelligence was streaming into the U.S. from Cuban intelligence, it's puzzling, he says . Such an oversight is especially puzzling when one considers evidence that information was streaming in from Cuba .
 Nearly 42,000 members of the Soviet military were deployed to Cuba in the fall of 1962 . US intelligence estimated that, at a maximum, there were 16,000 such personnel .
 Although these personnel wore civilian clothing, they all sport crew-cuts and traveled in military formations, and many were fair-complexioned . Many of the military personnel traveled with crew-cut haircuts and traveled with military formations .
 At the outset of the crisis intelligence reports noted the possibility that the Soviets might have deployed nuclear missiles to Cuba for defensive reasons .
 CIA memoranda on 16 and 17 October both discussed the possibility that the Kremlin decided to install the missiles so as to deter the U.S. from intervening in Cuba . CIA: The possibility is that the missiles were installed to deter U.N. intervention into Cuba .
 The Soviets might have deployed nuclear missiles in an attempt to offset their strategic inferiority vis-a-vis the United States . Special National Estimates prepared on 19 and 20 October failed to consider the deterrence motivations for the deployment .
 These defensive considerations were largely ignored in subsequent assessments . However, these defensive considerations have been ignored by subsequent assessments.
 McCone failed to note that the U.S. military balance strongly favored the United States . McCone: "The military balance in the world is strongly against the United Kingdom"
 ExComm failed to mention that the Soviets might have deployed missiles to defend Cuba against an American attack . CIA assessments did not mention that Soviet missiles might have been deployed to defend against U.S.
 The Kremlin failed to note the symbolic significance of the island country to the Kremlin . The island country is also symbolic to Russia .
 The President and his advisers assumed that the deployment was offensive in nature, believing the action was meant to test American credibility and fortitude . The President believed the action would test American credibility .
 It is plausible that these oversights were all rooted in the intelligence community's image of the Soviet Union and attendant information processing errors . It is possible that the oversights may have been due to an image of Russia .
 Available evidence suggests that American officials began with the assumption that the Soviet Union was an aggressor seeking to expand its influence throughout the globe . U.S. officials believed that the Soviets were trying to expand their influence .
 Such an assumption would have led U.S. officials to be more attentive to information that confirmed their expectations and relatively insensitive to information challenged them .
 The American image of the Soviet Union as an expansionist and opportunistic aggressor may have blinded U.S. officials to the feelings of vulnerability that the strategic nuclear imbalance generated in Moscow .
 Early CIA analyses mentioned the possibility that Khrushchev might have decided to deploy the missiles for partly defensive reasons . This line of thought was neither fully explored nor consistently pursued in American assessments .
 It may have dropped out because defensive motives did not fit with American preconceptions of an expansionist Soviet Union .
 The assessments did not fit with Americans' preconceptions about the U.S. Moreover, such assessments do not fit in with preconceptions, the author says .
 If U.S. officials had acknowledged that the Kremlin had deployed nuclear missiles for defensive reasons they would have been conceding that the United States could be perceived as an aggressor . The United States has been perceived as a perceived aggressor in Russia .
 The dominant American image of the Soviet Union was not merely that of an opportunistic expansionist aggressor; it was of a riskaverse opportunistic aggressor . Moreover, the dominant U.S. image of Soviet Russia was that of risk-averse, aggressive, expansionist
 The Soviets constantly sought to expand their influence, U.S. officials believed . They avoided taking great risks in pursuit of that goal, they believed .
 U.S. analysts failed to consider Khrushchev's attitude toward risk in these analyses . United States analysts didn't consider risk in their analyses of risk . The United States did not .
 Khrushchev had demonstrated a tendency to engage in risk-taking behavior, most notably in his decision to expose Stalin's crimes, in his bluster over Berlin .
 The failure to integrate Khrushchev's past behavior into U.S. estimates is puzzling, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The failure of integration into Khrush' past behavior is puzzling .
 The American failure to anticipate the Soviet deployment may well have stemmed at least in part from a misjudgment about Soviet risk-taking . The U.S. failed to anticipate a Soviet deployment, therefore, may have stemmed from misjudgement .
 Khrushchev did not deploy the missiles to Cuba to gain advantage over the U.S. He says he didn't want to give the United States an advantage . But he says the missiles were not deployed to Cuba in order to gain the advantage .
 Psychological research on decision making under conditions of risk suggests that this is an important distinction . Psychological research suggests this is important distinction between risk and risk .
 People tend to be risk-acceptant in the domain of loss, and risk-averse in the domains of gains . People are riskaverse on gains, but risk averse on losses .
 People will take greater risks when trying to redress or avoid a perceived loss than they will when they are trying to realize a gain . That is, according to the study, in contrast, with people taking risks to realize gains . The study shows that people will take more risks in trying to
 U.S. officials could not have been expected to be aware of developments in the field of behavioral decision theory .
 Had the Kennedy administration understood that Khrushchev was attempting to shore up a position of vulnerability, they might then have evaluated the possibility of a missile deployment differently . Nevertheless, it is intuitive to expect desperate action from desperate people, writes Peter Bergen .
 U.S. analysts assumed that a Soviet deployment would not occur, may have been relatively insensitive to the vast amount of human intelligence such as refugee reports and sightings by operatives in Cuba that suggested such a deployment was underway .
 CIA may have failed to detect the missiles earlier in part because they did not expect the missiles to be there at all . The CIA may not have seen the missiles in the U.S. before .
 The hypothesis-confirming bias predicts CIA analysts would seek information that supported their expectations, rather than information that would disconfirm them . CIA analysts seek out information that supports their expectations rather than disconfirms them .
 U.S. officials dismissed many of their sources as not credible . United States officials not only discounted human intelligence but also dismissed many sources .
 Motivational errors might also have contributed to the failure to detect the deployment earlier, although this explanation is less satisfactory . The deployment might also be due to a lack of motivation .
 After the Bay of Pigs incident the CIA suffered a loss of status and influence within the Kennedy administration . After the incident, the CIA was able to influence the CIA in the United States .
 It is possible that the CIA sought to avoid further blame for inaccuracies and therefore required unequivocal proof of a missile installation before notifying the administration . The CIA may have been trying to protect itself from further criticism .
 If the CIA was motivated to be as accurate as possible, it might have exercised undue caution in its estimates . The CIA may have exercised too much caution .
 The problem with such an explanation is that if the CIA had been motivated to be as accurate as possible in order to avoid further erosion of its bureaucratic position, it could equally plausibly have redoubled its monitoring efforts, leading it to discover the missiles earlier .
 A motivational explanation leads to no precise prediction about the CIA's performance in this case, it is less satisfactory than cognitive explanations . Since a motivational explanation can't predict how the CIA will perform in the future, it's less satisfactory .
 Theory-driven thinking contributed to the U.S. inability to detect the missiles at an earlier point in time . It is plausible, then, that theory-based thinking contributed .
 If American intelligence had concluded before the onset of the crisis that a Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles was not as unlikely as they thought, then analysts would have been more receptive to evidence that suggested such a deployment was, in fact, taking place .
 The same reasoning might help to explain why U.S. intelligence so underestimated the number of Soviet military personnel in Cuba .
 The extent of the Soviet presence was obvious to many Cubans, but it may not have been obvious to those less familiar with the daily rhythms of the island . Those neither expecting nor looking for a massive deployment of a complete combat-capable Soviet force .
 U.S. analysts began with the image of Moscow as an expansionist aggressor . This image may well have blinded them to Moscow's feelings of vulnerability caused by its position of inferiority .
 U.S. analysts underestimated the probability that Khrushchev would risk deploying strategic missiles to Cuba . The United States did not expect Khrushchevitch to risk deploying such a weapon .
 The belief that Khrushchev would not make such a deployment may then have caused U.S. analysts to be insensitive to information about it, it says .
 When Khrushchev first broached the idea of a nuclear deployment in Cuba with Castro, the Soviet leader maintained that the purpose of the deployment was to deter an American attack on the island . The deployment of nuclear weapons in Cuba was a response to an American threat .
 Cuban leader considered Moscow's geostrategic concerns irrelevant . However, the Cuban leader said that Moscow's concerns were irrelevant .
 He feared that an American invasion was imminent, and was convinced that the Cuban military alone could not deter Washington . The Cuban president feared that the U.S. would invade Cuba .
 Castro accepted the missiles readily . Castro needed an effective deterrent, and accepted them readily . The missiles were launched in 1961 .
 Castro either failed to recognize this trade-off, or chose to ignore it . Castro either chose not to recognize it, or not to ignore the trade-offs .
 Castro may have engaged in defensive avoidance in Cuba . Castro was convinced the Cuban military could not protect the island, and facing Soviet pressure to deploy strategic missiles .
 Castro avoided information that would produce anxiety about the trade-offs involved in his decision to accept the deployment . Evidence suggests that Castro avoided giving details about his decision . Castro avoided the information about the impact of the deployment in Cuba .
 Information from Cuban intelligence suggests that Castro was not open to the suggestion that a deployment could raise the probability of a U.S. attack . For example, the Cuban leader did not agree to the idea of a deployment .
 In mid-September 1962 Cuban intelligence prepared a report on the dangers of being seen as a Soviet proxy and the possibility that such perceptions could drag Havana into a superpower war .
 These estimates were not forwarded to Castro because of an institutional reluctance to contradict the leader's views . However, these estimates did not forward because of a lack of confidence .
 Castro might have engaged in wishful thinking, thus persuading himself that the nuclear deployment was the best option for the defense of Cuba . Castro might also have been trying to convince himself that such a move was best option .
 Intelligence analysts in Havana doubted that Cuban security was the Soviets' primary motive for deploying strategic missiles to Cuba . Analysts in Havana doubt that the Soviets wanted Cuban security .
 Cuban intelligence had grown suspicious of recurring Soviet reports that a U.S. invasion was imminent . Long before learning of the missile installation, Cuban intelligence grew suspicious .
 Cuban intelligence concluded that the Soviets had deliberately skewed their intelligence reports so as to make Castro more amenable to it . The Soviets had skewed their reports so that Castro Castro would be amenable, Cuban intelligence said .
 The Soviets needed to convince Castro that an American invasion was imminent so that they could deploy their nuclear missiles 90 miles off the U.S. coast . The Soviets had to convince the Castro regime that an imminent invasion would be imminent to deploy their missiles .
 Khrushchev deployed the missiles to Cuba primarily for offensive reasons, says U.S. intelligence . Cuban intelligence and American intelligence concurred that Khruschev deployed missiles for offensive purposes .
 A variety of defensive considerations drove Khrushchev to deploy missiles in Cuba . The missile system was deployed in Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 The Cubans acknowledged defensive considerations to a greater extent than did the Americans, but ultimately considered them secondary . Cubans acknowledge defensive considerations but ultimately consider them secondary to the game .
 Cuban and U.S. intelligence reached the same conclusion about Soviet motives . They appear to have done so via different methods of information processing .
 American analysts concluded that the purpose of the deployment was to give the Soviets a strategic advantage over the U.S. once the deployment became evident .
 This finding suggests that there is no necessary relationship between one method of information processing and the accuracy of inferences . This finding was based on the fact that one method is not necessary to make inferences more accurate .
 Data-driven and theory-driven information processing can both lead to inaccurate assessments, experts say . "Data-driven" and "thoroughly" data processing can lead to incorrect conclusions, expert says .
 The likely U.S. response to the Soviet installation of ballistic missiles in Cuba was crucial because of the possibility that Washington would escalate the conflict . The American response was crucial to avoid escalating the conflict with the Soviets .
 ExComm considered a variety of options, including air strikes and an invasion . The ExComm. considered air strikes, including a . invasion . Air strikes and invasion were considered .
 In order to be able to respond effectively to Washington's reaction to the deployment, Cuba and the Soviet Union needed to try to predict it . Cuba and Soviet Union tried to predict the reaction of Washington's response .
 Nikita Khrushchev maintained that the Kennedy administration would accept the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles to Cuba . The Kennedy administration said the move would be accepted by the Soviet Union .
 Some scholars have argued that Khrushchev questioned Kennedy's resolve, and believed he would not force a confrontation over the missiles .
 More recent studies have argued convincingly that the Soviet leader engaged in wishful thinking .
 A successful nuclear deployment would alleviate many of these difficulties, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Evidence suggests Khrushchev failed to recognize important trade-offs . Evidence suggests, however, he failed to realize important tradeoffs . The Soviet-era Soviet Union was founded in 1961 .
 Needing the deployment to succeed, he persuaded himself that it would succeed . He ignored evidence that his plan would fail, and underestimating the risks involved . Needing to succeed he convinced himself that the deployment would succeed, and underestimated the risks .
 Given the seriousness of the situation, the KGB was not specifically instructed to estimate the likely U.S. response .
 The reason for this is unclear, although several explanations are possible . It is unclear why this is happening .
 This information was so crucial that it strains credulity to believe that Khrushchev simply forgot to ask for it . The information is so crucial, it strains credibilityulity that it is impossible to believe it was a mistake .
 The Kremlin may have believed that Soviet intelligence would have been unable to predict the U.S. response accurately . More plausibly, the Kremlin may be thinking that the United States response would be too unpredictable .
 Both agencies were more proficient at data collection than data analysis . Both agencies are more proficient with data collection and analysis .
 The failure to task Soviet intelligence with determining the probable US response to the deployment might also have reflected the secondary status of the intelligence agencies in the policy making process .
 IChrushchev largely distrusted the KGB and the GRU, and frequently acted as his own intelligence analyst . He often acted as an independent analyst, often acting as an analyst .
 Perhaps the Soviet leader simply did not value the opinion of the intelligence agencies on this matter . Perhaps he did not want to value the opinions of intelligence agencies .
 Khrushchev feared that if he tasked Soviet intelligence with assessing the likely U.S. response, the instructions would leak . Another possibility is that he feared that he would lose the element of surprise if he did .
 Khrushchev did not want to know what the U.S. response would be . It is also possible that he didn't want to see what the United States would do .
 He may have been so wedded to the idea of deployment that he did not wish to hear that it might provoke a deadly military confrontation with the U.S.
 Cuban intelligence was sensitive to the fact that Washington perceived Cuba to be a Soviet proxy . Washington believed Cuba was a proxy for the Soviet Union .
 Intelligence analysts in Havana say it would be dangerous for Cuba to ally itself too closely with Moscow . The island could then become a pawn in the growing hostilities between the superpowers .
 Cuban analysts assumed that Washington would refuse to accept the deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. was close to discovering the missiles, Cuban analysts say .
 The Americans would perceive the deployment not only as a threat to United States security, but -just as importantly as a challenge to American dominance in the Western Hemisphere . The U.S. would see the deployment as a . threat to American security, as well as as an . opportunity to
 In the zero-sum world of the Cold War, Washington would not and could not allow the Soviets to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. would not want to allow the Soviet Union to deploy such a weapon in Cuba.
 Cuban intelligence was correct in its prediction that the Americans would not accept the deployment . But it erred when it assumed that Washington would respond with a military attack .
 It is not entirely clear why Cuban intelligence would make such an assumption, especially since an invasion could have unleashed a confrontation of catastrophic proportions . An invasion of Cuba in the 1980s could have been catastrophic .
 Lack of information may have contributed to the failure of Cuban intelligence to consider the range of policy responses open to the Kennedy administration . Cuba evidently had no sources close to the President .
 Cuban analysts monitored U.S. military bases at Guantanamo Bay and in the southeastern United States . Analysts also monitored United States military bases in the southeast United States, the Caribbean .
 Castro may have been driven by his need to believe that Kennedy would accept the missile deployment . Like Khrushchev, Castro may be driven by the need to think Kennedy would back the move .
 Castro: Deployment was necessary to deter a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Castro: "From Castro's perspective, the deployment was necessary" The deployment was needed to deter an invasion, Castro says .
 Castro would not have permitted the deployment if he had believed it would provoke a U.S. attack, he says . Castro would have not allowed it to be deployed if he believed it was likely to provoke an attack .
 Castro accepted the deployment suggests that he persuaded himself that the Americans would accept it . The fact that Castro accepted it suggests that the U.S. would ultimately accept it, he says .
 Evidence suggests that Cuban leader took comfort in Khrushchev's confidence that Washington would accept the missiles . Evidence also suggests that the Cuban leader also took comfort that the missiles would be accepted .
 The Kremlin had far more experience in such matters, and had greater intelligence-gathering capabilities, the Kremlin says . The Kremlin has more experience than any other nation in the world, it says .
 There was disagreement regarding the likely U.S. response to the missile deployment . Thus, there was disagreement .
 Khrushchev believed that Washington would accept the missiles, while Cuban intelligence demurred . Khrushchen believed that the missiles would be accepted by the U.S. but Cuban intelligence declined .
 These divergent assessments may have stemmed from the way in which the two groups approached the assessment process . The assessment process may have been the result of the way they approached it .
 Khrushchev believed the Americans would accept the missiles because he wanted and needed to believe that this would be the case . The missiles were launched in the 1960s and 1961 .
 He needed the deployment to succeed, because he needed it to solve a variety of acute political problems, he says . He says . "He needed to succeed" to succeed .
 The fact that he failed to instruct Soviet intelligence agencies to look into the matter is consistent with his not wanting to hear that his plan might not work. He didn't want to know that he might not have worked, he says .
 Cuban intelligence, on the other hand, began by considering Washington's perception of Soviet-Cuban relations, and larger geostrategic issues . Cuban intelligence began to look at Washington's perceptions of Soviet and Cuban relations .
 They based their predictions of U.S. behavior on the fact that Washington would oppose any expansion of Soviet power into the Western hemisphere .
 Many of the scholars and government agencies that have investigated the Cuban missile crisis have sought to uncover the mistakes that were made in October 1962 . Many scholars have concluded that the mistakes were made during the crisis .
 The aim is to discover 'what went wrong' and to 'fix' organizational and procedural flaws so that such a crisis will not recur . The aim of finding out what went wrong is to find out what it went wrong .
 This chapter has examined these intelligence errors from a psychological perspective . This chapter examines these errors from an intelligence expert's perspective .
 Many mistakes may well have been rooted in perfectly normal decision-making processes . In this view, many of these mistakes may have been caused by normal decisions .
 The cognitive shortcuts that are so useful in allowing us to cope with the vast amounts of information that we encounter each day may have led to intelligence oversights . Likewise, the cognitive shortcuts we use may have been used in our intelligence .
 As a 'soft science', the study of international relations is not as amenable to scientific experimentation as some other fields of inquiry, such as physics .
 It is difficult to identify and control for important variables in international affairs, says author . It's difficult to assess the relative importance of psychological, bureaucratic, domestic political, political, societal, or systemic factors in determining how events unfold .
 The essays in this volume by Garthoff, Fursenko and Naftali, and Amuchastegui enable us to conduct an unusually well-controlled thought experiment . Collectively, this volume of essays is published by the University of Cambridge, MA, on October 26,
 Intelligence analysts and national leaders simultaneously assessed precisely the same events . Here we have information about how intelligence analysts and leaders simultaneously assess the same event .
 If each government had agreed on the meaning, purpose, and significance of each event then one could conclude that perceptions did not matter during the Cuban missile crisis . The Cuban crisis was a major event in the United States' history of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 If each government had agreed on the likelihood of a US invasion of Cuba, or the motives for the Soviet nuclear deployment in Cuba, then information-processing could not have been a significant variable .
 There were divergent perceptions not only between capitals, but within them as well, as well . Divergent perceptions frequently had profound consequences for the actors, says the author .
 "No amount of organizational or procedural tinkering will eliminate errors associated with normal human psychology," says John Sutter . Sutter: No amount of organization tinkering can eliminate errors in human psychology .
 It would certainly be enlightening, and may even be useful, to ask whether there are patterns in the errors . Yet, it would be useful to ask if there were patterns in errors .
 Political leaders were more likely than intelligence analysts to commit motivated errors in Cuban missile crisis . It's clear that political leaders are more likely to make motivated errors than intelligence experts .
 Khrushchev and Castro engaged in defensive avoidance and wishful thinking . Little evidence of these tendencies within the three countries' professional intelligence communities .
 This makes sense when one considers that political leaders confront a variety of needs and aims, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Political leaders face a range of challenges and aims .
 They may face domestic political pressures, pressures from allies as well as adversaries . They may also have a need to maintain their own political positions . They face domestic and foreign political pressures .
 Anxiety and uncertainty, in turn, lead to motivated errors in decision making, say experts . anxiety and uncertainty can lead to decisions being made, experts say . Anxiety is a problem in the U.S. economy .
 Professional intelligence analysts have more limited, better defined, and less anxiety-producing needs and goals . Intelligence analysts have fewer goals and goals than those of intelligence analysts, experts say . Professional analysts have 'limited' needs and 'less anxiety producing goals .
 Professional intelligence analysts are not confronted by the range of conflicting goals and needs that a political leader must face . This can be a daunting task, but professional intelligence analysts don't have to deal with it all .
 Political leaders must make irrevocable decisions in the face of uncertainty, says Julian Zelizer . Politicians must make irreversible decisions, he says, and these decisions usually made public .
 In making these decisions they often confront painful trade-offs, and must chose among them . In making such decisions, they must choose among them, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Intelligence officials, on the other hand, do not confront such tradeoffs, and do not have to make binding public decisions . Intelligence officials don't have to deal with the tradeoffs .
 Their responsibility is to pass on their assessments to those who make policy decisions . Their responsibility should be to pass them on to the people who make decisions, says the author .
 Intelligence analysts should be less likely to experience the anxiety that accompanies making painful trade-offs under conditions of uncertainty . Intelligence analysts shouldn't be anxious about making painful choices under uncertainty .
 Intelligence analysts are operating in a politicized environment, in which certain interpretations of data are politically unacceptable . Intelligence analysts might also be inclined to commit motivated errors, he says .
 "The trade-off between intellectual honesty and keeping one's job can certainly induce anxiety," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There is little evidence of this dynamic in the case of the Cuban missile crisis . But there was little evidence that this dynamic existed in the Cuban crisis .
 A final reason why political leaders might be more inclined to commit motivated errors is that they are responsible for policy outcomes . Leaders are primarily responsible for policies, so they might be motivated to make motivated errors .
 The public will hold political leaders primarily accountable for policy failures, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the public will be held accountable for policies that fail to meet expectations .
 If political leaders act on the basis of faulty intelligence, then intelligence officers might suffer some of the consequences of failed policy . Political leaders might suffer consequences of failing policy, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Intelligence officers even in a relatively open society are typically spared some degree of public scrutiny and accountability . But even then, intelligence officers in the U.S. are typically shielded from public scrutiny . Intelligence officers in relatively open societies such as the United States are rarely held accountable for their actions .
 Several bodies investigated the performance of U.S. intelligence after the missile crisis . Such scrutiny is rare and far more diffuse than the sort of scrutiny a political leader must face .
 This study underscores the critical role that political leaders play in intelligence analysis . This study also underscores the importance of political leaders playing a critical role .
 Political leaders can influence the process of intelligence analysis, either by establishing intelligence priorities, or by including or excluding intelligence officials from foreign policy making . Political leaders are able to influence the intelligence process by setting intelligence priorities .
 The lesson is that even if an intelligence agency performs well, its assessments may be ignored . Political leaders may not be receptive to discrepancies in intelligence agencies' assessments, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Study has found that misperceptions can have a variety of sources . Misperceptions may have a number of sources, such as the Internet .
 In some instances assessments were strongly shaped by methods of processing information . In some cases, the assessment was influenced by the way of processing data .
 Castro may have believed that a US invasion was imminent because he engaged in theory-driven thinking . He failed to consider evidence that such an attack was not forthcoming . Castro believed that such a US attack was imminent .
 Castro and Cuban intelligence reached different conclusions because of the different ways in which they processed information . Castro and Cuba intelligence reach different conclusions due to different ways of processing information .
 Other errors reflect, or were made possible by, limitations on information .
 CIA had no inside view on Kremlin decision making of Kremlin decision-making . Analysts had no chance to modify strongly-held beliefs about Soviet motives and dispositions . CIA had little inside view that would have made it easier for analysts to modify beliefs .
 Soviet officials had little hard information on the basis of which to pin a reliable estimate of the likelihood of a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Fearful of being punished for advancing views that were at odds with the Kremlin's, Soviet intelligence engaged in self-censorship . Soviet intelligence was afraid to advance views that had opposing views that clashed with Kremlin views .
 Intelligence officials presented Khrushchev with raw data, and allowed him to draw his own conclusions . The Soviet leader drew conclusions from the raw data .
 Khrushchev remained wedded to his previously-developed views . Such practices allowed him to keep his views of the past .
 Castro sought to impose his views on the Cuban intelligence community . Similarly, Castro sought the same view on the intelligence community.
 Castro dismisses officials' assessments when Cuban intelligence challenges him . Castro has been known to dismiss intelligence from his government officials .
 In short, operational and technical limitations, organizational and bureaucratic dynamics, and political pressures can all combine to increase the likelihood of cognitive or motivated errors . Operational limitations, . organizational and . bureaucratic dynamics and . organizational dynamics, organizational . dynamics, . and political . pressures can also increase the
 The accuracy and usefulness of intelligence can be improved through organizational and procedural changes that reduce political pressures on analysts, author says . Such changes can be made to reduce political pressure on analysts .
 The accuracy and usefulness of intelligence can only be improved so far, so far . But the accuracy of intelligence is only limited to the extent of the intelligence available .
 Cognitive and motivational psychology helps us see that there is a performance limit to intelligence assessment . There are also performance limits in intelligence assessment, says psychologist .
 Misperceptions that result from perfectly normal cognitive processes and psychological needs are, for analysts and policy makers alike, are a professional hazard . The risk of misperceptions is to be taken seriously by analysts and policymakers alike .
 In their conclusion to the volume, the editors reflect upon various ways of coping with them . I hope to have shown that they can never be eliminated, however, that they cannot be eliminated . The editors reflect on various ways to cope with them.
 Three psychological models of decision making can illuminate psychological insights into decision making . These are, arguably, the most important .
 There are two critical steps in intelligence analysis . Broadly speaking, there are two . critical steps to intelligence analysis, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The first step is the collection and analysis of raw data obtained by technical means, human sources, and open and covert sources . The second is the sifting and interpretation of data to determine its meaning .
 In this essay I discuss the psychological processes that can lead intelligence analysts and political leaders to misinterpret correct data . While in this essay, I discuss most of these sources of error .
 Cognitive and motivated biases can influence the amount and quality of information intelligence agencies collect, as well as the particular sources upon which they rely . However, cognitive and motivated bias can influence intelligence agencies' decisions .
 American officials may have misjudged Soviet motivations because of their tendency to interpret Soviet behavior in terms of dispositional factors rather than situational constraints . American officials had a tendency to misjudge Soviet behavior because of dispositions, not situational factors .
 It is natural to assume that others are free to choose how they act, and that their behavior reflects basic personality characteristics . It is not always easy to assume others will be free to act freely, says author .
 We discount or ignore the role that political pressures, social norms, financial limitations, and other constraints may play in determining their actions . We discount the role of political pressures and social norms in determining our actions .
 Reagan administration concluded that the Soviet Union shot down a Korean airliner in Sept.83 . Reagan administration said it reflected the Soviets' 'barbarism' and disregard for human life .
 U.S. officials attributed the disaster to their understanding of the Soviets' disposition . The disaster was attributed to the understanding of Soviet intentions .
 The shoot-down reflected more poorly on Soviet organizational and technical capacities than on Soviet behavioral proclivities, the authors say . The Soviets were unable to make contact with and correctly identify an aircraft that had invaded their airspace .
 People tend to have a positive self-image, and to process and recall positive information about themselves most easily, experts say . They say people tend to remember positive information most easily .
 There is a tendency to resist acknowledging or recalling negative information about oneself, says author . It is often difficult to remember negative information that challenges one's positive self-image .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric gave a speech in Hot Springs, VA, revealing that the U.S. knew that the Soviet Union had far less strategic nuclear capability than the Kremlin had claimed . The United States also knew that Russia had less nuclear capability .
 Raymond Garthoff's report that CIA operatives correctly gauged the size of the deployment, only to have their estimate dismissed by analysts, lends credence to this view . The CIA operatives' estimate was dismissed, he says, by analysts .
 The tendency to engage in theory-driven thinking may have been bolstered by the fact that the U.S. had little information on decision-making within the Kremlin .
 Intelligence information came primarily from technical sources rather than from human sources . Intelligence information was based on technical sources, not human sources, sources .
 U.S. analysts knew far more about Soviet capabilities than Soviet intentions . Consequently, the United States knew more about the Soviet intentions than its own capabilities .
 Castro, The Missile Crisis, and the Soviet Collapse ; and Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War 75 . Castro, Castro, and Stein are the authors of the book .
 Some testimony suggests that Castro must have been aware of the danger that a nuclear deployment might precipitate an American attack . Khrushchev, much more than Castro, avoided confronting this possibility .
 Such doubts about Soviet intelligence capabilities would not have been entirely unfounded, according to the report .
 Soviet signals intelligence suggested that the U.S. was preparing for some sort of initiative during the third week in October . Intelligence agencies were unable to determine the nature of the response .
 The GRU suggested that Washington might be planning some sort of military action . Yet political reports from the United States suggested that Kennedy would accept the missile deployment .
 Intelligence officers were unable to warn the Presidium in advance that Kennedy planned to impose a blockade . Moreover, intelligence officers were not able to warn of Kennedy's plans .
 Castro stepped up his warnings about a possible U.S. invasion after the deployment began . On the other hand, he warned of a possible invasion of the United States .
 On 26 Oct. the Cuban leader informed intelligence officials that a confrontation with the Americans was imminent . The Cuban leader told officials that the Americans were coming to a confrontation .
 Cuban intelligence had no independent information to verify this warning, but was obliged to treat it as a fact . Cuban intelligence was forced to treat the warning as fact .
 A Cuban delegation led by Ernesto 'Che' Guevara and Emilio Aragones proposed to Khrushchev that the two countries make the deployment public, stressing its legality, so as to forestall a hostile U.S. response . The two countries made the deployment