 This timeline explores the broken world left by the Great Nuclear War October 28, 1962 . This timeline was created by the ASB Wars .
 On October 27th, a B-52 bomber crashes shortly after take off causing its nuclear payload to detonate eviscerating a small U.S. Air Force Base in the rural town of Damascus, Arkansas .
 The United States are swift to respond launching a ‘Retaliatory Strike’ against the USSR in response to what they believe to be a Soviet First Strike . The U.S. believe the strike was a first strike by the USSR .
 Soviet and American missiles are making landfall severely crippling both nations . Less than ten minutes later Soviet and U.S. missiles make landfall .
 France refuses to launch their missiles against the USSR . After a short but intense series of reprisals, lasting approximately six hours, the world is razed to the ground by nuclear arm fire .
 Early morning hours of October 28th mark the end of a chapter of human history . While the war is never officially declared over, the war never formally declared over .
 This is also a collaborative timeline, produced by a team of contributors . We are happy to feature some of the world's most famous people .
 If you want to join us in developing this world, we welcome your additions . We hope to see more of the world in the coming weeks .
 Before making major edits to the articles in this ATL, please take some time to read the Editorial Guidelines .
 A takeoff accident on a B-52 Bomber caused a Nuclear Detonation . This invasion didn't lead to the Nuclear War everyone feared .
 "It was not an end; but rather the preface to a new volume of human history," he said . "But it was not the end; rather the beginning of a new chapter of human History"
 It should be noted that in this timeline the Soviet strategic nuclear forces are on par with the United States strategic missile forces due to a nuclear incident in 1958 which sent the Soviets into a frenzy when it came to expanding their nuclear forces .
 In this timeline both the U.S. and the USSR would be obliterated . The number of Soviet ICBMs is larger than the United States ICBM force than by about 20 missiles . So in this timeline 10 IRBM sites are built in Cuba .
 CIA memorandum indicates all of the 10 IRBM sites in Cuba appear to be operational . CIA memorandum: All of Cuba's IRBM facilities appear to have operational .
 Cuban mobilization continues at a high rate, but Cuban forces have strict orders not to fire unless fired upon . Cuban forces are ordered to stay out of Cuba unless fired on .
 After realizing the error, the pilot radios for backup as he flies back to Alaska . The pilot radioed for backup after he realized the error .
 Two nuclear-armed F-102s respond, although the flight is shadowed by Soviet aircraft, no shots are fired . No shots were fired during the flight, but no shot was fired .
 The ExComm believes the order to fire on the U-2 was given by the Kremlin . The order is intended to escalate the conflict, the ExComm says .
 The order was given by a Soviet Colonel named Antipov Svyatoslav who was in command of the SAMM Battery in Cuba which shot down the U-2 . When in reality, the Kremlin was unaware of the situation and did not know the order .
 One aircraft is hit by a 37mm anti-aircraft shell but is able to return to base . They take heavy fire, and one aircraft takes heavy fire . One aircraft was hit by 37mm but returned to base after being hit .
 He decides not to order a reprisal raid on the SAM sites that shot down the aircraft, angering many in the Pentagon . But he indicates that if another aircraft is shot down, he will authorize retaliation .
 The Beale begins pinging with active sonar and drops practice depth charges on the submarine . In an attempt to ""communicate" the Beale pings with active . sonar .
 In Washington, Kennedy and ExComm agree to a response to Khrushchev's trade letter, and agree to the deal as long as the American missile withdrawal will be kept secret . Sevastopol is severly damaged 4:28 PM .
 In exchange for that concession, the United States will agree to a guarantee of non-invasion of Cuba . The U.S. will also agree to an agreement on non-infiltration of the Cuban Islands .
 Soviet submariners believe they are under attack by the U.S. Navy . Though aware that American tactics involved the use of practice depth charges, the Soviet submarine is aware of the threat .
 Two out of three 15 kiloton nuclear torpedoes launched at USS Cony and Beale . Another one launched at the American aircraft carrier the USS Randolph .
 At 40 knots, it closes the distance between the submarine and the USS Cony and USS Randolph quickly . The USS Randolph is the fastest submarine submarine in the world at 40 knots .
 The nearby aircraft carrier USS Randolph is destroyed, and several of its accompanying destroyers are wrecked as well . Several of the destroyers were also destroyed . USS Randolph was destroyed .
 The B-59, meanwhile, managed to surface just in time to avoid getting hit by a massive underwater shock wave which would have buckled its hull .
 Water floods various compartments of the submarine, sending it on a mad dash for land . The submarine was sent on a run for land in the early hours of the morning .
 Soviet submarines west of 60W are to be killed on sight, but no action is to be taken outside of the western Atlantic Ocean . No nuclear weapons are authorized to be used, but Soviet submarines will be killed .
 The Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, is to be notified of this fact immediately . The Soviet ambassador is also to be informed of the fact .
 The USS Essex is heading a task force hunting a submarine at the time of the message . All ships arm weapons and alert aircraft, and all ships arm arms .
 The freighter Pella had seen 3 large mushroom clouds to the north as it approached the quarantine line . The report comes from a freighter that was heading into quarantine .
 Khrushchev demands an immediate verification and orders that a message be sent to the embassy in Washington . Khrrushchev orders that the embassy be sent in Washington to verify the situation .
 As a precaution, he orders a heightened state of alert for Soviet strategic forces . The Soviet Union is on heightened alert for strategic forces in Russia .
 Dobrynin leaves the White House 15 minutes later, almost at a run . A heated exchange follows, and Dobrynins leaves at the end of the exchange .
 This fact is observed by reporters who have been watching the comings-and-goings at the building since the beginning of the crisis . This fact has been observed by . reporters who've been watching .
 The attack proves successful, and the submarine is driven to the surface where it is sunk by gunfire from the depth-charging destroyers . The submarine was driven from the surface to the bottom of the sea .
 Before being destroyed, it manages to transmit a distress call indicating that it is under attack by American ships and is sinking . The ship managed to transmit the distress call before being destroyed .
 The garbled call is picked up by nearby Soviet ships and relayed across the Atlantic to the Soviet Union . The call was picked up and relayed to nearby ships and then relayed to the USSR .
 Khrushchev orders immediate counter action, ordering the Soviet military to full readiness and also ordering that Soviet ships and submarines may attack American Military ships at sea . Khrushchchev orders that Soviet military may attack U.S. military ships and submarines .
 Nikolai Annenkov has the submarine first target an American Cruiser along the Quarantine Line . The submarine first targets an American cruiser .
 The cruiser is hit by two torpedoes and sinks, sending out a distress call as it goes to the bottom . The cruiser was hit by 2 torpedoes in the Battle of the Atlantic .
 The Soviet submarine's distress call was passed on by other ships . As with the Soviet submarine, other ships passed on the message . The message was sent by a Soviet submarine .
 It is only one of six to go across the radio within 15 minutes as other Soviet submarines begin to get to work . It is the only of six submarines to leave the base in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev questions the message, as the Americans now seem to be attacking Soviet submarines . Khrushchen: "Kirrushchev: The Americans seem to have attacked Soviet submarines"
 Dobrynin asks Kennedy to ask if a state of war exists between their two countries . He demands he ask Kennedy if a war exists . Kennedy says a state is not a war between the two nations .
 He orders that American ships prosecute any Soviet vessels in the Atlantic Ocean . He also orders that U.S. ships prosecute Soviet vessels .
 President Obama orders that a strike be readied for the missile sites in Cuba . After extensive negotiations with the Joint Chiefs and ExComm, he orders a strike . The strike is expected to take place in Cuba on Monday .
 If war is at hand, Kennedy thinks, missiles must not leave the ground . Kennedy: "If war is on hand, those missiles must stay on the ground" Kennedy says .
 Kennedy is furious over the nuclear attacks and the perceived Soviet sneak attack . The conversation is short and to the point, as Kennedy is angry over the attacks .
 The Soviets are equally outraged about the attack on their submarines and the use of a nuclear depth charge against one of their submarines . The B-59 even used it nuclear torpedos .
 Dobrynin relays the message to Moscow via radio via radio, and requests that Khrushchev come to the radio in person so that a direct channel can be set up between him and Kennedy . The first real stages of fear were setting in, and the message was relayed to Moscow
 Over the next twenty minutes, 9 Soviet vessels will be sunk around the world . 11 American ships will join them at the bottom of the sea . 9 Soviet ships will also be sunk .
 Air raid sirens are accidentally switched on in several cities, causing panic . Civil Defense measures begin to be put into place, and in some cities, air raids are accidentally turned on . Civil defense measures are put in place .
 A Soviet soldier, patrolling with a loaded rifle, trips, firing a single shot harmlessly into the air . A single shot was fired harmlessly in the air by a Soviet soldier .
 On the other side of the border, American soldiers fire on the Soviet soldiers that they believe are attacking . U.S. soldiers are tense with the news of the Soviet invasion .
 After ten minutes of firing, the Soviets throw a grenade over the wall kill 4 out of the 6 American Soldiers . The Soviets kill 4 of the six American soldiers in the attack .
 Each side retreats deeper into its sector of Berlin, having received pullback orders from their respective commanders . Each side wants to avoid conflict as long as possible, but then retreats further .
 Diplomats on both sides of the world work to arrange a voice-to-voice meeting between the two leaders . The situation at sea continues to deteriorate as diplomats try to arrange the meeting .
 Ships and submarines are fighting a war while most of the western world sleeps . Meanwhile, ships and submarines battle in the dark .
 Kennedy is bombarded by questions from political leaders across the country as news of the nuclear attack and subsequent sinkings trickles out . Kennedy is increasingly bombarded with questions from politicians across the U.S.
 Not many people in the U.S. have gone to sleep, and stay glued to their televisions and radios for the latest news bulletins .
 Premature air raid sirens have awoken many from bed . In some cities there are riots and bouts of looting, which are suppressed by local police .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev hang up their phones with a sense of finality, concluding a nearly 90 minute discussion . Both leaders believe the other has fired the first shots .
 President Kennedy believes that the best way to bring the crisis to an end is to destroy the missiles that are causing it . Kennedy is pressured by many members of the ExComm and by his military advisors .
 Kennedy in a deep malaise, and seeing no other option, authorizes the invasion . Kennedy, in a malaising, sees no other . option . Kennedy authorizes invasion of Iraq .
 He repeatedly reminds himself that the risk is worth it, that it could save millions of Americans . The risk is "worth the risk," he says .
 Even if the Soviets launch, the U.S. cannot win, Khrushchev says . Even if they launch, even if they do, they can't win, he says .
 A strike against NATO or Warsaw Pact countries, even if successful, would invite a massive nuclear attack against both sides, something that would utterly destroy both sides . A strike would be a disaster for both NATO and Warsaw Pact nations .
 He is aware, even if the United States is not, is aware that his nuclear capabilities are more numerous than the U.S. nuclear capabilities . "He is aware of his nuclear capability," he says .
 Putin realizes if he were to stand down he risked the possibility of a Military Coup by the KGB which would launch against the United States . But he realized if he stood down, he risked a possible Military Coup . Putin realized he could control the situation if he didn't stand down .
 President Eisenhower orders that if the U.S. invade Cuba that the Soviets will declare war . The Soviets declared war on Cuba if the Americans invaded Cuba .
 Kennedy refuses to discuss the attack on Cuba . Instead, he veers conversation toward the upcoming attack on the island .
 The door bursts open to admit 4 KGB officers, who bring news of the Americans begging an invasion of Cuba . As mid morning sunlight streams through the windows of his office, his office was filled with Soviet Union agents .
 Khrushchev almost dies of a heart attack but is saved by onsite soldiers with medical training . Onsite soldiers have medical training to help save the Soviet Union leader . The incident occurred in the early 1960s .
 The entire Cuban naval defense network and military is put at full alert along with half of the soviet troops on the island . Half of the Cuban military is on full alert . The Cuban navy and military are also on alert .
 MiG fighters launch from Cuba, but are vastly outnumbered by U.S. aircraft . Nearly 120 American aircraft, including nearly 120 MiGs, are seen in Cuba .
 The 60 MiGs are shot down in short order, with the loss of 50 American aircraft . Due to the odds stacked against them, the MiGs were shot down by the U.S.
 Cuban anti aircraft gunnery is fairly good due to Soviet training, and downs 10 aircraft . Though the American bombers take a few losses from SAM fire, Cuban anti-aircraft gunners are fairly good .
 Only one SAM site is destroyed, and a few additional bombers tasked with hitting Cuban airfields are chased off by a remming MiGs . Only one of the bombers is destroyed .
 MiG-17 fighters from bases further away arrive and chase off the now undefended American Bombers . However MiGs from bases closer away arrive to chase off American bombers .
 The bombing only destroys 50% of the known IRBM and MRBM sites . Which makes the bombing ineffective .
 About 75% of the Soviet IRBM and MRBM Force on the island of Cuba left . Left about 75% left .
 Cuban air defenses and aircraft were now swarming the area and sending more aircraft in would be a suicide mission . But the attack is aborted because Cuban air defense and aircraft now swarmed the area .
 All agree to an invasion of Western Europe, with the aim of eliminating western nuclear arms that might threaten the Soviet Union . It will be a great challenge, but all agree to a plan of action – an invasion .
 Khrushchev knew the real numbers on the ground – the U.S. with 27,000+ nuclear warheads, versus the Soviet Union’s 30,000+. Most of those on long-range launchers were in the United States .
 Khrushchev and his advisors set their plan into motion . Contacting the various commanders of armies along the frontier, Khrushchchev set their plans into motion.
 H-hour will be at dawn the next day, in order to achieve the greatest amount of surprise possible . The event will take place at dawn in order for the most surprise possible.
 The Red Army may not be fully ready, but neither will NATO… or so the thought goes . NATO says it is ready to take on the Red Army, but not fully ready .
 President Kennedy has called for a special meeting of the combined Congress in order to take a vote on a declaration of war . Kennedy calls for a meeting of combined Congress to vote on declaring war . President Kennedy is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 The question on everyone's mind is whether it will be only against Cuba, or also against the Soviet Union . The question is whether there will be a war against Cuba or against the USSR .
 In Cuba itself, Kennedy has authorized the use of everything short of nuclear weapons in order to ensure the safety of Guantanamo Bay . In Cuba, he has authorized use of weapons short of nukes to protect Guantanamo Bay from attack .
 Doubts about moving ahead with an invasion are quickly are squashed by the need to destroy the west’s nuclear capabilities . The west needs to destroy its nuclear capabilities to avoid a nuclear war .
 Over a third of the assembled chamber casts votes via telephone, due to the fear of a surprise Soviet attack . Over a quarter of the chamber votes via phone, as a result of fears of a Soviet invasion .
 This bending of the rules is allowed due to the extraordinary circumstances of the vote . The vote was carried out in extraordinary circumstances, according to the rules .
 Kennedy feels as in control of the situation as he’s been in the last 24 hours, and resists the pressure . Immense public pressure is being placed on Kennedy to retaliate in nuclear form .
 The Essex task force has been chasing the submarine for the last 12 hours . Several close depth charges have caused minor damage throughout the boat .
 Captain Nikolai Shumkov orders the submarine’s single nuclear torpedo readied . Because of the long range, the Essex is protected by five destroyers .
 The 15kt nuclear warhead will kill the carrier even if it detonates a ways off after running out the 4,000m programmed distance .
 After launch, the B-130 executes an emergency turn, and slips away undetected undetected . The mission was the first time the plane had ever been seen in the sky .
 It, along with three of its escorts, is vaporized in less than a second . It was vaporized within a second of the time .
 Only one destroyer, which had detected the noise of the B-130’s emergency turn and had gone to investigate, evades destruction . Only one of the destroyers evades the destruction .
 Unlike the first nuclear attack, reports are immediately picked up outside the White House, and the President is bombarded by calls for retaliation against Cuba .
 The city of Guantanamo, Cuba, will be targeted by a 50kt nuclear device, to be delivered by the U.S. Air Force . The device will be delivered to the United States Air Force in Cuba .
 This will relieve pressure on the embattled defenders of Guantanamo Naval Base . This will have the effect of responding to the Soviet move, as well as relieving pressure on Guantanamo . The U.S. has not responded to the move .
 Rioters storm the gates of the embassy, burning buildings, and lynching the few people still present in the building . Rioters burn buildings, lynch people who were still in the embassy . The embassy was attacked by rioters, who stormed the gates .
 Police, unwilling to stop the violence, stand by while the building burns before eventually breaking up the protest . Police stand by as the protesters burn the building before they break up .
 Ambassador Dobrynin was evacuated several hours earlier . He watched the events unfold on television as he was evacuated .
 He will leave for Mexico in less than an hour, en route to Moscow, having been quietly recalled by Khrushchev . The former Soviet Union leader will be flying to Mexico in the hour .
 Assistant ambassador will remain in Mexico to coordinate withdrawal from Europe the Soviets hope will take place following their predicted victory .
 Only one is scheduled to drop its weapon, but the other one is a backup . The primary bomber is the primary bomber, but it's a backup in the event of a shooting down .
 The mission will be to clear the airspace around Guantanamo and ensure the safe arrival of the B-52s . Their mission is to clear airspace around the Guantanamo area and ensure a safe arrival .
 MiG-17s scramble from Cuban airfields, but are shot down in rapid succession by F-4 Phantoms that maintain a constant presence over Cuban airfield . MiG 17s were shot down after being shot down by the Phantoms .
 Many sites uncovered during the first wave’s attack are destroyed in this wave of bombing . The first wave's attack destroyed many of the sites uncovered by the first .
 Only one makes an approach over the target, as the other aircraft stands off in reserve . Only one aircraft makes its approach to the target . The other aircraft is held back in reserve for the moment .
 A few American bombers make one final run through the remaining defenses to draw off whatever missiles or antiaircraft fire remains . The U.S. Air Force makes one last run through remaining defenses in the final stages of the battle .
 Only one SAM is launched at a B-52, and that at one of the reserves, which is damaged in the attack . As a result of the attack, only one SAM was launched, and only one was launched at the B-51 .
 The resulting explosion incinerates the town, killing an estimated 20,000 people instantly . The explosion is believed to have been caused by an explosion in the town .
 Along the perimeter of the Naval Base, firing comes almost to a complete halt as the enormous fireball rises into the sky a dozen miles to the north . The enormous fireball is seen in the sky as a result .
 He demands an immediate nuclear response from General Issa Pliyev, commander of Soviet forces in Cuba . He quickly launches into a tirade, demanding an immediate response . The Russian general then demands a response .
 Pliyev isn’t allowed to launch IRBMs or SRBMs . Castro knows that the general still has several short-ranged tactical nuclear missiles .
 The general demands that the general use these against Guantanamo Naval Base in retaliation for the American nuclear strike . He demands that these are used in retaliation against the American strike .
 President withdraws the 20,500 Warsaw Pact he sent to aid in the attack on Guantanamo . But, first he withdraws 20,000 Warsaw Pact troops he sent .
 NATO’s nuclear assets in Western Europe must be destroyed quickly, and at as low a price as possible . For most, this only hardens his resolve to destroy NATO's nuclear assets . The U.S. president is determined to destroy them quickly and at a low price .
 Air support for ground forces will be sacrificed to missions targeted at NATO missiles and air power . Air support of ground forces is sacrificed to NATO missiles, air power, says U.S. official .
 One missile overshoots the base entirely, landing in the Caribbean Sea . Another missile overshot the base and landed in the ocean .
 Another one impacts at the far eastern end of Guantanamo’s runway, blasting chunks of concrete into the air in an enormous fireball . Another one hits the far east end of the runway in a massive fireball . The explosion was the largest in the history of the U.S. Navy
 Two fall amidst the American buildings on the eastern side of the bay, killing hundreds of Americans in an instant . Hundreds of Americans were killed in the attack .
 The final two missiles impacts amid aircraft hangars and a control tower on the western side of the bay . Several hundred more Americans were killed when the missiles hit .
 Among those killed are the commanders of the Marine brigade currently battling along the perimeter of the isolated base . Among the dead are those of the brigade commanders .
 Though the marines fight on, they have largely lost contact with higher command . The marines are still fighting for their lives .
 Kennedy and the rest of the ExComm had previously believed Khrushchev's claim of tactical nuclear rockets to be a bluff . Kennedy is stunned to the core by the discovery of the Soviet nuclear weapons .
 The CIA and aerial reconnaissance had not revealed the presence of any FROG launchers on the island . The CIA had not found any of the launchers on island .
 Kennedy feels a brief instant of guilt, but quickly moves to what should be done . Kennedy: "I'm not sorry for what I've done, but I'm very sorry for my mistake" Kennedy says, "I don't think it's OK"
 Kennedy agrees that the Enterprise and Independence carrier groups to the west and south of Jamaica should prepare to assist the invasion rather than begin an evacuation . Reluctantly, Kennedy agrees to the plan .
 Kennedy agrees to the Joint Chiefs’ request for a nuclear strike on Havana both to retaliate for the destruction of Havana and to soften Cuban defenses for the invasion . The H-hour set for noon, 14 hours hence, was 14 hours later .
 Kennedy is under enormous pressure from Congress to “level Cuba” and end the threat once and for all . Kennedy under pressure to end Cuba’s threat .
 Ironically, this would probably have been the right move, as it would have irrevocably eliminated the nuclear threat from the island – at the cost of every human being living on it . Ironically, the move would have probably been the correct move, but would have killed all of the island
 In his heart, he knows that the invasion of Cuba will cost many lives, but those lives will mean a cost far less than that of the devastation of Cuba, he says . The invasion will cost a lot less than the devastation caused by the Cuban invasion .
 Due to the large number of SAMs and antiaircraft fire expected around Havana, the bomber is armed with a single AGM-28 Hound Dog standoff missile . The aircraft will be armed with the single AGm-28 missile .
 As more and more SAC bombers are called into service, armed, and sent to standoff positions near the Soviet Union, every bomber is valuable, and this one will not be risked . The bomber will be used in standoff positions with Soviet Union .
 The plane falls to an altitude of 5,000 feet before igniting its engine and rocketing toward Cuba . It falls to a height of 4,500 feet and then ignites its engine to rocket .
 Cuban radar detects its launch and the city along with Castro is evacuated . The city is evacuated along with the city of Castro . However, the city is not evacuated .
 The large size of the warhead renders any inaccuracy moot . Although it explodes over the south side of the city, rather than the downtown section, the large warhead is more accurate .
 Ramón Castro has been directing the ongoing fight from a bunker beneath the city . Among the nearly 500,000 people who die in the first five minutes after the detonation is Fidel Castro’s close advisor and older brother Ramón .
 General Pliyev, driving west in a chauffeured car, is rocked by the explosion . The explosion was 30 miles from the city, despite being 30 miles away from the capital . He was driving in his chauffeur car .
 He has to get to the remaining nukes in order to prevent the Cubans from seizing them . The Cubans will be utterly enraged, he realizes – he realizes that he has to . He realizes that .
 He has no desire to see a Cuban-launched nuclear missile start a war between the U.S. and the United States, he says . He says he loves the Soviet Union, but not the Americans, but the Soviets . "I love Soviet Union," he says.
 President Kennedy emerges from a conference with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other U.S. military advisers .
 Virtually every topic in relation to the growing war is discussed, ranging from the ongoing invasion of Cuba, the growing Soviet activity in Europe, and the growing number of flashpoints around the world, from the Korean border to the Persian/Soviet border .
 Kennedy has been awake for more than 40 consecutive hours . Before adjourning to bed for a short rest Kennedy says it's a dark day and that he hopes the world will still be there when he wakes up .
 Events in Cuba have made it abundantly clear to the Soviets that if things in Cuba are not handled quickly, they will not be handled at all . The Cuban government is under pressure to deal with the situation quickly .
 Khrushchev believed he could handle Kennedy – events in Cuba showed otherwise . Kennedy was president of Cuba in 1960s .
 The Soviets responded to the destruction of Havana, Santiago, and Guantanamo with the support of Castro give the order for 3 nuclear launches against South Korea in response for the attacks on Cuba .
 Five Million people die between the attacks on all three cities and then if to make matters worse North Korean, Chinese, and Soviet Troops surged across the border and into South Korea .
 South Korean defenders were more focused with setting up refugee camps for survivors of the attacks than stopping the North Koreans . Facing little to no resistance as the disorganized and scattered S. Korean defenders that were more . than stopping North Koreans.
 In the Soviet Union and many other Warsaw Pact countries bombers are already in the air, streaming from bases all over the Eastern Bloc Nations to targets in Western Europe, the Middle East, and Asia . Meanwhile, in the Soviet Russia, the U.S. and many of the Warsaw
 Only the bare reserves – nuclear-armed retaliatory bombers stand in reserve to finish things if the strikes do not succeed . The bare reserves are only the nuclear-armaged bombers .
 Word of Havana’s destruction be spread among the soldiers, in order to spur them to fight harder . He orders word of Havana's destruction to be spread .
 The Soviet and Warsaw Pact buildup is noticed with alarm by NATO aerial commanders . Electrons know no borders, and the Soviet-Polite build-up is noticed by NATO .
 With General Norstad out of communications, NATO sector commanders are left to order their horrifically outnumbered aircraft into the air . Norstad is forced to order his forces into the sky .
 Air defenses along the line are put into operation with varying degrees of quickness . Air defenses are put in place with varying levels of rapid reaction to the attack .
 A Soviet nuclear armed IRBM makes it through NATO lines and drops a one Megaton nuclear warhead on Brussels which destroys the city and kills the majority of NATO high command . General Norstad, Supreme Commander of NATO Forces in Europe, is killed .
 Bleary-eyed, he is ushered into the Situation Room and informed of events in Europe . The Situation Room is informed of the latest developments in the region .
 President Obama orders NORAD and Civil Defense to full readiness . He orders an Air Defense Emergency for NORAD . The president orders an air defense emergency .
 Air raid sirens begin to howl across U.S. and Canada, startling Americans and Canadians who have gone to sleep into wakefulness . The sirens sound across the United States and Canada . The first day of the Second World War begins at 6:30am .
 The instant a bomb falls on North America, he’ll order a strike on the Soviet Union, he says . ‘The instant a . bomb falls upon North America’s North America. He says. ‘I’m sure that he will strike on North
 Several of Kennedy’s military advisors are extremely agitated at this statement . Kennedy's military advisor is extremely agitated .
 By ignoring strikes against American forces outside North America, he is endangering the United States’ ability to strike back, they declare . By limiting America’s response to targets outside the Soviet Union, he would be inviting a counterstrike .
 Airfields across Europe and Nuclear launch silos in Turkey and Italy in Flames . Eventually, the aircraft turn back, but not before leaving Airfields and Nuclear silos burning in flames .
 Over 75% of NATO’s Air Forces had been destroyed or rendered combat ineffective . NATO air superiority was a moot point as 75% had been lost or rendered ineffective .
 Site holding the final remaining 5 SS-4 launchers and 20 missiles, that were not destroyed in American Airstrikes . Detoured several times due to American airstrikes, site held 5 launchers, 20 missiles and 5 missiles . Site held by the U.S. was not destroyed .
 Pliyev is confronted by an agitated Cuban officer, who says he has orders from Castro to secure the launch of the remaining nuclear weapons against American targets . The officer says Castro has ordered him to launch the attack .
 Pliyev, having seen the destruction of Havana in the rear-view mirror of his car, rebuffs the furious officer, and orders him to return to his post . The officer was furious at the sight of the destruction in his car .
 The sentiment festering among the Cubans guarding the missiles is a hostile one . Having heard of the destruction of Havana, they want revenge, particularly the soldiers who had families in the city .
 The nuclear weapons at hand are the perfect way for them to get that revenge . They cannot understand why “that damned Soviet general” won’t let them be fired off, he says .
 The Americans have already used nuclear weapons on Cuba – it is only right that they should have revenge . The Americans, after all, have already . already used . nuclear weapons .
 Pliyev warns the Red Army troops to be on high alert and orders a Soviet infantry battalion to come reinforce the missile base’s Garrison . Plieviev orders the battalion to be reinforced with Soviet troops . The Red Army is ordered to stay at the base .
 He doesn’t like being out of contact with higher authority, the broadcasts he’s picking up from the U.S. are making him nervous . Worst of all, the Cubans look mutinous, he says . He says, "I don't want to be
 If things are as bad as U.S. radio is making them sound, he wants to launch missiles on his authority, not those of some ragged militiaman .
 The U.S. has been in talks with the Cuban government for decades . But that won't matter a damn if the Cubans don’t go along, he thinks darkly, he says darkly .
 French, British, and American forces resist where possible, but retreat to pre-planned fortress lines . British, American, French, and U.S. forces retreat where possible .
 House-by-house fighting, point-blank armor fights, and brutal combat will be the hallmarks of the fight for the city . The first operation of the Soviet invasion of western Europe was the first operation .
 The first targets hit are secondary airfields, SAM sites, and suspected nuclear storage sites, the first targets . The first target is secondary air fields and SAM sites .
 NATO aircraft are met by a hail of ground fire as well as a few of the NATO air forces which weren't destroyed already . Ground fire is met by ground fire and a few air forces are destroyed .
 F-105s clash with MiG 21s over Germany as dawn breaks over Europe . The largest aerial battle in history unfolds as dawn dawns over the continent .
 The sky is streaked with missile and aircraft contrails and the dots of ejected pilots’ parachutes . The sky was streaked by missile and plane contrails . The dots of ejecting pilots' parachutes dot the sky .
 Anti-tank missiles, counter-artillery, and every rifle in Western Europe . They are then met by a storm of anti-tank missile missiles, anti-aircraft missiles and anti-gunners .
 Warsaw Pact forces advance extraordinarily fast, despite chemical bombardment by NATO Forces . NATO forces were forced to withdraw from Warsaw Pact territory after chemical bombardment . Warsaw Pact Forces advance extraordinarily quickly, despite the bombardment .
 Precision air strikes on NATO Hardpoints and Defensive Strongholds breaks any significant resistance . Precision air strike on NATO hardpoints and defensive strongholds breaks resistance . NATO Hardpoint and Defensive Stabilies are the key to success .
 Soviet air planners are at a loss with how successful the operation is going, says one of the country's top airmen . Soviet air plans are unsure if the operation will be successful .
 Their mission orders were specific – to target NATO special weapons depots wherever found – to which they had fulfilled to the letter . They had fulfilled their orders to carry out their mission orders to the target .
 NATO’s Air Forces and Air Defense Network were destroyed by the collapse of the NATO Air Force . So now they could focus on smashing what remained of NATO's air forces and air defense network .
 The standing order to keep 20 percent of nuclear-capable aircraft in reserve – just in case . However, adding to their troubles is the standing order that keeps 20 percent in reserve .
 NATO forces are in a even worse position than ever before . NATO forces were in a worse position in the early hours of the day .
 Plan Foxtrot Alpha India Lima or Plan Fail details a U.S. and NATO Forces to withdrawal to the Rhine River and then use tactical nuclear weapons against Soviet Forces as they tried to cross the river . The battle plan details a United States and NATO forces to withdraw to the
 Despite the chaos surrounding the destruction of Havana, most Cubans return fire on the American destroyers shelling the town and surrounding coast . Most Cubans returned fire on U.S. destroyers in Havana .
 Spontaneous artillery fire continues to fall around the ships . They are quickly silenced, but sporadic artillery fire is heard .
 In less than a half hour, La Boca, at the entrance to the harbor, is in flames, as is the airfield on the shores of the harbor . The airfield is also ablaze, and the harbor is on the shore .
 American aircraft are everywhere, strafing and launching rockets against anything that even looks like it might be hostile . The U.S. aircraft are constantly strafing, launching rockets and strafing at anything that looks hostile .
 The three nuclear torpedoes used against American ships and the six Tactical Nukes used against Guantanamo ensure that no one is in the mood to take prisoners . Guantanamo and the three nuclear . torpedoes . used against . American ships .
 Pliyev is again approached by the same Cuban officer, who demands that he use the Soviet nuclear weapons . The officer demands that the Soviet weapons be used in the Soviet Union .
 The Americans are attacking Mariel, he declares, and begs Pliyev to use his weapons to drive the Americans back . The Americans attack Mariel and the Russian president says he will use his guns to drive back .
 Pilaev orders the company guarding the missiles to be ready for anything, and orders the radiomen feverishly working to establish contact with anyone in Moscow – or barring that, the Soviet combat group in San Antonio de los banos -to work faster .
 The information is quickly helicoptered back to East Germany and passed up the chain of command . The information was then helicoptered into East Germany .
 101st and 82nd are assigned to the far eastern and western flanks of the invasion . The 101st lands near Abajo and its adjacent airfield, while the 82nd lands in and around Cabanas .
 Weather is bad, and with it raining and thundering & lightning . Unfortunately, the weather is bad. Unfortunately, it's bad. It's also bad.
 Even the Cubans seem quiet as the Screaming Eagles fall from the sky . Most of the militiamen who otherwise might have been defending have been rushed to fight fires in Havana .
 The 82nd is greeted by heavy small arms and ant-fire fire, and the Cubans there have no burning Havana to distract them . They are greeted by small arms, ant-aircraft fire, but they are greeted with heavy fire and heavy fire .
 The men of the “All-American’s division dig in under increasing fire, and await support . The men are facing increasing fire .
 The First Armored, better known as “Old Ironsides” lands to the west of the harbor, and scout elements strike quickly inland to capture the Mariel airfield, two miles from the beach . “The First Armored’s (First Armored) lands to
 Cuban militia in the area have largely been pulled back anticipating the incoming Tactical Nuclear Missiles . Resistance is light, as the Cuban militia has been pulled out of the area .
 The towns of Mariel and La Boca are scenes of burning, hellish urban warfare as the Marine regiment assigned their capture becomes drawn into close combat with a regular Cuban Army company . The towns were scenes of fighting on the harbor's eastern side .
 Refugees from the fighting began streaming south, only to be strafed by American aircraft under orders from higher authority to ensure that no guerrilla fighters manage to close with American lines . U.S. aircraft were ordered to strafe American aircraft in order to ensure the guerrilla fighters didn't manage to
 The fact that the columns are moving away, not toward the battlefront, is ignored . "The fact that . the columns . are moving . away from the battle front is ignored, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Pliyev gives orders to launch to launch the nuclear tipped FROG missiles . The missiles make impact with the make impact two minutes later . The Russian state news agency says the Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the attack .
 The fleet was hit by 2 Tactical Nuclear missiles and the fleet was also hit by another Tactical Nuclear missile which sunk one carrier and damaged another . But before they could do so they were hit by the missiles, they were able to launch the missiles .
 The few Cuban regulars in the area have the new Soviet RPG-7s, and knock out many American tanks conveniently . The new Soviet RPGs can also be used to knock out tanks .
 Many in the military have lost faith in the plan to eliminate NATO’s nuclear capability through conventional means . They call for the employment of several tactical nuclear weapons in order to ensure the destruction of known enemy weapons .
 Shelepin has no desire to see nuclear fire rain down on Europe . The Soviet Union can far better suffer nuclear attack than NATO forces, she says . NATO forces are far better equipped with nuclear weapons than the Soviet Union .
 Soviet aircraft are en route to destroy the NATO bunkers described in the documents, he says . Even now, he declares that even now, Soviet planes are en way to destroy bunkers . All the talk of nuclear action will become moot .
 There is an unspoken feeling that if this attack is not successful, a new approach may be needed . On that note, the military commanders disperse, but there is the unspoken feel that there may be a new strategy needed .
 Word comes in that large numbers of Soviet troops and a small amount of armor is assaulting the Marine beachhead east of Mariel .
 Air support is plentiful, but the Marines are hard-pressed, and orders go out for the First Armored to make every effort to relieve the pressure on the Marines . Air support for the Marines has been plentiful in recent months .
 Pliyev watches through binoculars as a stream of Cuban trucks and soldiers marches out of the Cuban camp . Pliyeva: "I don't think they're going to be able to go to the U.S. in the next few days"
 Pilaev orders one of the Cubans to get as close to the camp as possible in order to find out what happened . The Russian president orders one Cuban to go as close as possible .
 The column is leaving is to reinforce the Cuban forces starting to mop up the remaining United States Forces . His suspicions are verified when the man returns with news of the column's departure .
 American aircraft have been flying overhead for nearly two days now . Although his missiles are hidden in caves blasted from the mountainside – an abandoned coal mining operation – he still fears discovery .
 Soviet soldiers guard the missiles from Cubans who want to seize them . Cubans were captured by Soviet soldiers in the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 No one knows who fires first, but the situation devolves into a firefight . The firefight draws more and more men from both sides into the fighting . The incident is the first of its kind .
 They launch bombs and cruise missiles that hit nuclear weapon stockpiles in fields and bunkers . The U.S. launched the missiles in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Small amounts of American reserves – all that’s left after reinforcing embattled units all day – can only slow the Soviet breakthrough . U.S. reserves are all that's left after reinforced embattled units are only left .
 Soviet missiles wheeled from their caves and into position for launch . The Soviet missiles were wheeled out of their caves in order to launch .
 Tens of Thousands of U.S. soldiers are killed or injured in the first minute of war . Tens of thousands of American soldiers die or injured every day .
 Tanks and APCs of the First Armored division fare well, but the trucks and men supporting those tanks take heavy losses . The thick-skinned armor of the tanks, APCs fare well – those that were further away and buttoned up, at least – but the men supporting them take
 The 82nd Infantry division was engaged in heavy fighting south of its Cabanas drop zone . It was fighting in the area south of Cabanas, near its drop zone, and suffered heavy losses .
 Cuban forces close to the detonation points also take a few losses . Most injuries are from flash blindness as many more Cuban soldiers are facing north, into the American beachhead .
 The American attack is destroyed in a brutal and utterly destructive way . The U.S. attack on the U.N. mission is destroyed by the American attack .
 He orders a full civil defense alert and orders that Washington be evacuated . The president orders the evacuation of the nation's capital .
 Washington is still grappling with the launch from Cuba, and no orders from above . The launch was launched from Cuba on June 4 .
 The chaos of battle is such that his orders are not questioned as every available man rushes to try to beat back the approaching Soviet armor . The chaos is such a chaos that he orders not questioned .
 Kennedy is advised that it does take some time to reload the missile launchers, particularly if they are being crewed by inexperienced Cubans . No further missiles have been detected as incoming, but Kennedy advised that reloading the launchers takes time .
 The situation on the ground is bleak, as the eight nuclear blasts have grievously injured the invasion . The First Armored is in a fight for its life as the Cubans exploit the gaps in the line .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommends a full nuclear response to cover an evacuation of the island . A full response would be needed to cover a full evacuation .
 The situation is untenable, and the threat of further attacks demands a nuclear response . Clearly, the situation is ... untenable," says President Obama . "Clearly, the . situation is . untenable"
 He can see no other alternative, and he doesn’t want to see all of the American troops in Cuba die in nuclear fire, he says . He says he sees no other option .
 He okays nuclear attacks in order to shield the evacuation of the evacuation and on suspected missile sites . He also okays attacks on suspected sites .
 Curtis LeMay and the other military advisers, they have just been given a blank check for anything involving nuclear weapons in Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter . LeMay: "They have just given [LeMay] a blank . check" LeMay has just given a
 U.S. cannot afford more missiles launched from Cuba, says President Obama . Stunned by the news, he is tempted to call off the nuclear bombardment of Cuba for fear of escalating the conflict .
 The temporary no-man’s land created by the five nuclear detonations would have bought time for American forces to contain the Soviet breakthrough . But brave and enraged Soviet forces charge through the radiation determined to make sure their comrades did not die in vain .
 Between 10:30 and 11:30 PM, 10 nuclear devices will be deployed in Cuba . The devices range from 50kt to 2Mt . The U.S. nuclear devices are deployed between 10 and 11pm on Cuba .
 Most are dropped or launched to cover the evacuation of the invasion force . Most of the bombs are dropped to cover an invasion force being evacuated . Most are launched or launched in support of the evacuation .
 Two are deployed around Guantanamo as the survivors of the base are evacuated . The survivors are being evacuated from the naval base . But two of the survivors are still at Guantanamo .
 West of Havana, the evacuation proceeds at a strange quick but calm pace . Evacuation continues at strange quick and calm pace in Cuba .
 Repeated nuclear strikes have brought the fighting almost to a halt . American soldiers embark on the beaches at night in a surreal scene lit by the enormous fires that surround the beachhead .
 Those who have chemical and nuclear gear wear it, adding to the strangeness of the scene .
 Many evacueuees describe the scene as something beyond hell, as badly burned men are loaded onto evacuation ships . The scene is described as 'something beyond hell' and 'a nightmare'
 The armor of the Marines and First Armored holds back what little hostile action there is . The Marines and the First Armored hold back the most hostile action in the world .
 Great Britain is directly in the Soviet line of fire, and barring the sudden outbreak of common sense, the only way for Britain to survive is to strike first .
 President Kennedy authorized his forces on the ground to respond to nuclear attack with missiles of their own – even to strike first if it appears that the Soviets are using nuclear weapons .
 Britain is already undertaking full Civil Defense measures, Kennedy is informed . Kennedy is already informed that the UK is already conducting full civil defense measures .
 Soviet bombers, already at the ready, begin to take to the air . Submarines prepare their Nuclear Torpedos for launch and begin stalking United States Battle or Carrier Groups . ICBMs, IRBMs and SRBMs begin spinning up their gyroscopes and begin receiving
 British forces respond with their own nuclear weapons to stem the resulting Soviet breakthrough . British forces responded to the resulting nuclear weapons with own own own weapons .
 At least one detonation takes place in the city itself, causing enormous civilian casualties . Losses on both sides are massive, with many casualties in the conflict .
 The message calls for an immediate cease-fire and says that the government of West Germany will surrender unconditionally to the Soviet Union in exchange for a suspension of nuclear and chemical attacks in West German territory . The message says that West Germany would surrender to the Soviets unconditionally in return for a
 No official contact with the West German government has been made since the early hours of the Soviet attack . Chancellor Konrad Adenauer was presumed killed in a Red Army Faction assault on his armored limousine .
 NATO continues to fight against Warsaw Pact forces . The broadcast is not taken seriously by NATO and they continue to fight . NATO is not taking seriously by the broadcast of NATO .
 All front commanders order that nuclear and chemical weapons are not to be used unless NATO Forces use them first against Warsaw Pact Forces . NATO Forces broadcast this order across open channels and then confirm them via secure channels . Warsaw Pact forces take it seriously and all front commanders .
 NATO has many gaps in NATO which the Soviets exploit by rushing through with mechanized and tank brigades . This causes their to be many gaps between NATO and the Soviets . The Soviets exploit these gaps with mechanised and tank brigade brigades.
 NATO forces rush toward the Rhine in a mad dash to make it their before NATO forces contain their Breakthrough . They soon afterward encircle the NATO northern flank and rush .
 West German Forces turn over the locations of over Half NATO’s nuclear weapons stockpiles . West German forces turn over over half NATO's nuclear stockpiles to NATO . Also turn over locations of the weapons .
 Soviet commanders on the scene respond with 2 20 Kiloton FROG missiles launched at the position from which the rounds were originally launched . Soviet commanders in the area responded by launching two 20 kiloton FROG missiles .
 For the time being, the Soviet strategy will consist of reducing the southern, largely American half of West Berlin, while lighter forces hold the British and French brigades in place .
 Multiple armored columns attempt to move from the Zossen area into the central portion of the city . They are stopped near the Papester U-Bahn station by hastily-placed mines and ferocious anti-tank fire .
 Soviet forces manage to drive a wedge between British and French forces . However after mine sweepers are brought up and chemical weapons are deployed .
 Kennedy attempts to talk McMillan out of the approach, calling it “insanely dangerous” but is interrupted by a string of messages about the nuclear fighting in Germany .
 Large number of Soviet bombers detected by radar at Thule Air Force Base in Greenland and by radar stations in Alaska . No sooner than an officer enters, another officer enters .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff believe this to be a major Soviet attack . Though aircraft have not yet crossed into Canadian or American airspace, they continued on their headings for several minutes .
 Kennedy orders fighters to intercept any bombers that cross the border . After several moments, Kennedy orders fighter jets to intercept the bombers .
 SIOP-63 is the nuclear plan for action against the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe . Kennedy hesitates when asked if he is free to execute the plan . LeMay is the Commander in Chief of the Strategic Air Command .
 Kennedy fires back with harsh words of his own, saying that he will not risk nuclear war . LeMay responds heatedly, demanding that they not wait until the bombs are falling on the U.S. Kennedy says that he won't risk a nuclear war.
 He agrees to LeMay’s suggestion that should a nuclear attack take place anywhere in North America, he will be free to release the bombers to their missions . Quietly, he agrees to the suggestion that .
 With the issue settled, Kennedy hangs up the phone, and begins to address the next crisis in a long list of them . Kennedy: "I'm not going to let it go, I'm going to talk about it. It's just a matter of time"
 In Omaha, LeMay is handed an extensive list of bomber dispositions and fuel states . If he does not issue a go order in the next 15 minutes, nearly 20% of his bomber force will need to turn back for refueling . LeMay realizes that if he doesn't issue
 Many bombers have been holding at Fail-Safe for far longer than planned . Many are now on the edge of being able to perform their missions and return to North America .
 One-way missions are only to be expected, but 20 percent is a large proportion of the force in the air . A large number of bombers have already cycled back from Fail-Safe or are only now returning to it .
 Those bombers will be needed for follow-up strikes, and they cannot be thrown away, LeMay believes . LeMay: "Those bombers will need to be used in the future"
 Six Soviet nuclear weapons devastate the area, destroying a stockpile of Corporal missile reloads . The area was destroyed by the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 British, Belgian, and Dutch commanders demand immediate action against Soviet airfields and known fixed missile positions in Eastern Europe . Prime Minister McMillan chimed in from an underground bunker in Wales .
 The more nuclear weapons NATO destroys, the fewer that can be launched against Western Europe . The threat is clear, they declare to what's left of NATO High Command – the Soviet Union is clearly on course to escalate the conflict, they say .
 NATO Command counters that he does not have the freedom to launch nuclear weapons without the authorization of the President . McMillan replies that Kennedy’s orders of “forward defense” cover this situation . By not attacking, Norstad is violating Kennedy's orders, not following them
 NATO High Command attempts to find a compromise solution, but there is none . NATO's "No. 1" solution has been reached . NATO says it will be a "no-go" solution to the situation .
 McMillan announces his intention to use Britain’s nuclear capability, with or without America’�s assistance . But without the help of the U.S. help, the effectiveness of the attack will be greatly lessened .
 Kennedy’s instructions to them were to avoid widening the war whenever possible, but on the other, nuclear war has clearly broken out . The American high command is torn - on the one hand, Kennedy wanted to avoid wider the war .
 He agrees to McMillan’s plan, but requests some time to coordinate his forces . Reluctantly, he agrees to the plan, and requests time .
 Communications are growing more difficult, thanks to Soviet attacks, telephone lines being cut, and increased radio interference caused by the nuclear detonations .
 If he does not issue the go order immediately, his bomber force will lose a substantial portion of its strength for at least three hours . If he doesn't issue the order, he will have to wait three hours to get the go-ahead .
 If he does issue the go-order, it might trigger a full-scale nuclear war, not just the little one in Cuba and Germany . On the other hand, if he did issue the order, it could trigger a nuclear war .
 NORAD headquarters at Cheyenne Mountain issues the order . After a conference call to NORAD HQ, NORAD commander issues order . NORAD is headquartered in Denver, Colorado, and NORAD has headquarters in Colorado .
 The Soviet aircraft approaching Canada and Alaska have not turned back, so his decision is the obvious one . The decision is made by the President of the Soviet Union, Vladimir Putin .
 Unless a full recall is issued, his aircraft are to continue on to Russia and destroy their targets . Unless the full recall issued, the aircraft will continue to destroy targets there .
 The bombers on the edge should still have enough fuel in their tanks to hit their targets and crash-land somewhere in North America . Though they’ve used up all their loiter time, the bombers will still be able to hit targets .
 If the Soviet bombers turn back, they can always be recalled . And of course, if the Soviet bomber turns back, it can always been recalled .
 LeMay looks at the situation board, deep underground, that doesn't seem likely . But as LeMay says, it's not likely that it will happen again .
 Air-raid sirens blare across Britain as the four-minute warning is put into effect . Air raid sirens are blaring across Britain across the country as the warning goes in place .
 The name will be somewhat of a misnomer – it won’t take four minutes for the Soviet missiles to reach their targets . The name of the Soviet missile launch will be a bit of a misspelling .
 The precise coordination of the Strategic Rocket Force is fully executed among Red Army-controlled launch facilities in Eastern Europe . Red Army's precise coordination is closely monitored by the Red Army, the author says .
 All of the Red Army’s IRBM and MRBM facilities acknowledge the initial order and targets all across NATO Controlled Europe . The Red Army is targeting targets in NATO controlled Europe .
 All the MRBMs and IRBMs make it of the ground and hit their targets in Western Europe . All the missiles make it to the ground .
 Sixty concrete silos blow their rocket-propelled hatches clear and fire their missiles . Similarly, sixty concrete missile silos blew their . rockets clear and fired their missiles. Similarly, 60 concrete missile silos blow their rockets clear .
 Ten of the missiles will be SS-6 Sapwood missiles launched from Baikonur and Plesetsk . Ten will be launched from the Baik on and from Plesetsk, Russia .
 Another forty missiles launched will be SS-7 Saddler missiles, launched from soft positions . The missiles will be launched in soft positions and launched from a soft position .
 As they launch, they will proceed undetected, below the horizon, for nearly a third of their flight . They will continue their flight, curving northward from their launchers in Central Asia .
 At T+11 minutes, they will be picked up by the Ballistic Missile Early Warning radar station at Clear, Alaska, Alaska . The missile launch will take place at T-11 minutes .
 Several IRBMs are likely coming inbound to points in Alaska, possibly even at the station itself . That station will likely also be dealing with several IRBs .
 A full 80 IRBMs will launch from bases near Anadyr, in the Soviet Far East . The goal is to knock out Alaskan and Canadian air defenses and open a hole .
 Standing orders dictate that missiles higher above the horizon have priority . Despite that distraction, standing orders dictate they have priority to missiles .
 At T+12 minutes, they will be picked up by the third and final BMEWS at Thule, Greenland, which should detect the missiles as they cross the horizon and arc over the North Pole . The missiles will then arc over North Pole at T-12 minutes .
 NORAD will already be well aware of the situation, NORAD says . Further warnings will be issued, but NORAD is already well aware .
 IRBMs may easily miss ICBM tracks inbound to the United States and Canada . That station is monitoring several hundred IRBm in flight over Europe .
 President Kennedy, upon hearing the news, will want to issue a full-scale civil defense alert . The highest level of alert – that of a Civil Defense Air Emergency – has already been issued 24 hours earlier .
 The attacks from Cuba have already put Americans at a higher state of alert than any government warning could provide . The last-minute alert causes many in urban centers to begin fleeing in their automobiles at high speed .
 Most of congress is already safe inside the Congressional Fallout Shelter . Kennedy and his brother will evacuate to Mount Weather and the Pentagon is rushed into Raven Rock .
 At T+22, the missiles will disappear from the radar screens at the BMEWS facilities . At T-22, they'll disappear from radar screens .
 Their radars only point in one direction, and cannot track missiles to their ultimate targets . They do not have processing power to analyze where the missiles might hit .
 They only serve to warn, and with their jobs done, they wait to be annihilated themselves . They wait for them to be killed themselves .
 At T+29, the missiles may begin to become visible to Canadians and Americans looking skyward . The missiles may be visible to Canadian and American looking at them .
 The night sky will provide a brilliant backdrop to the fiery streaks of the reentry vehicles . The fiery streaks should shoot across the stars like meteors, NASA says .
 It is unlikely that any will be targeted on sites in Western Europe . These are well within the range of IRBM and MRBM launched from Eastern Europe and western Russia .
 Early Soviet missiles lack accuracy to reliably knock out hardened targets . Nor is it likely that the missiles will be fired at American missile silos, since these early Soviet missiles are less accurate .
 Exceptions will likely be made in the cases of Cheyenne Mountain and Offut AFB in Omaha, the headquarters of SAC . Exceptions are likely to be made, but they are likely only exceptions .
 The missiles will also not be targeted at early-warning radars or interceptor bases . No one in the world had the capability to shoot down an ICBM at the time, and the most the United States can do is watch as the missiles streak in .
 Theoretically, a nuclear-tipped BOMARC or Nike Zeus missile could destroy an incoming ICBM . That would require coordination with radar and computer-aided guidance not available in 1962 .
 Though he will likely survive from his bunker deep in the Welsh mountains, the vast majority of Britain – hell, Europe – will not . The vast majority will not survive from the bunker in Wales .
 Many pilots anxiously turn their eyes skyward, half expecting to see the contrails of incoming missiles . Many pilots are worried that they will be hit by incoming missiles.
 In peacetime, the pilots took pride in their ability to reach the Soviet Union before even the bombers of the Strategic Air Command . The pilots were able to do so even though they were behind the bombers .
 Now, in the face of an unknown number of Soviet fighters and SAMs, that fear turns to a growing fear . Now, Russia's pride turns to fear .
 In Lincolnshire, at five RAF bases, missile launchers are thrown upright by giant hydraulic rams . Toxic rocket fuel is pumped into 15 separate separate American-built Thor missiles .
 At the launch site, crewmen work in frenzied panic, one eye on their work, and another on the sky . The launch is scheduled to take place at the end of the day .
 By the book, it takes 15 minutes to fire the Thor from its horizontal storage position . The Thor is the world's most powerful weapon .
 It will only take six months for Britain to win back the White House . It is only the first time it has taken six years for the country to win .
 Many units have dispersed, particularly the nuclear and chemical units, but those in close contact have not . Many units are dispersed, but many close contact with each other have not.
 The sheer number of incoming warheads will negate much of both sides’ dispersal strategy . Moreover, it will negate both sides' dispersal strategies .
 In Italy, two squadrons of nuclear-armed Jupiter IRBMs are readied on the launchpad . The Italian government is preparing to launch the first of its nuclear missiles .
 From Taranto, they can reach deep into Eastern Europe . From their locations north of Taranto they can . reach deep . into Eastern . Europe .
 President Obama sends authorization for NATO command to use any means necessary to ensure the security of Europe . The order was more redundant than anything President had ever given . President Obama ordered NATO to use 'any means necessary' to protect Europe .
 He authorizes the execution of SIOP-63, Option B, – – targeting of Soviet and Warsaw Pact military and communications installations . In addition, he authorizes . the . targeting of . Soviet and . Warsaw Pact . installations .
 As with the Soviet strike, many of these targets are in or near major population centers is conveniently overlooked . Many of these strikes are conveniently overlooked, as is the Soviet attack .
 Thomas S Power is far too involved with the immediate actions of his SAC bombers to be worried about the targeting restrictions placed on him by Kennedy .
 With scarcely a word, he acknowledges Kennedy’s operations order, gives several targeting orders of his own . He orders SAC's nuclear missiles to launch against population centers, military bases, and economic centers .
 NORAD has ordered NORAD fighters to intercept bombers over the Arctic Ocean . NORAD says bombers will not be shot down by NORAD's fighters . The NORAD mission will take place over the weekend .
 In the air, every SAC bomber not previously en route to the Soviet Union begins to wing its way toward that country . The SAC mission was the first time the U.S. aircraft had been directed toward the USSR .
 Fuel to return to America is a luxury some of Power’s bombers cannot afford . Some of the bombers are returning to America .
 Over 1,300 U.S. bombers are now winging their way north, across Canada and the Arctic Ocean .
 Launched from far eastern Siberia, they are clearly inbound to targets in Alaska . The U.S. military says they were launched from Siberia and are targeting Alaska .
 NORAD and Washington can only stand by and wait . Word has been passed to NORAD, which is standing by by .
 The dispersal of fighters has already taken place, and those not already in the air probably never will . Those not already flying will probably never be able to get out of the air again .
 The only variable is how many missiles and bombers will reach their targets . The U.S. military says it is not sure how many of the missiles will reach targets .
 News of the incomings adds to the air of fatalism among the few people who remain in the White House which are only a few members of the secret service .
 In Lincolnshire, the first Thor missiles begin to take flight, soaring upward on a pillar of fire . Thor missiles were launched in the early hours of the morning .
 An enormous roar in the air signifies the arrival of several Soviet missiles . Before the last of them leave the launch rails, an enormous roar was heard .
 RAF Helmswell, Feltwell, and dozens of other airfields in Britain are annihilated in the Second World War . RAF Helmwell was one of the last few RAF airfields to be destroyed .
 The scene is repeated in Western Europe and North Africa, from Morocco to Italy and Turkey, to the unoccupied portions of Norway .
 The attacks devastate NATO airfields and naval bases, communications, command, and military centers . The attacks are believed to have been carried out in Afghanistan, Afghanistan .
 The Soviet missiles have a failure rate approaching 23 percent . The sheer number of missiles ensures that every major target, including every SAC base, is hit .
 BMEWS Fylingdales is hit by no fewer than five nuclear weapons, vaporizing the facility, and eliminating any chance to observe future attacks . The facility was destroyed by no more than five weapons .
 In West Germany, tactical nuclear weapons and chemical warheads fly with across the front lines . Both sides suffer equally equally from the same weapons .
 NATO and Warsaw Pact forces fight on as they die at the hands of each other's gunfire and chemical and nuclear weapons . NATO forces are still fighting in the wake of the collapse of the Cold War .
 In Berlin, fighting stops as the night sky is lit with dozens of mushroom-cloud explosions at all points of the compass . The explosions come from all over the world, including from inside Berlin .
 No weapons fall in Berlin itself – it appears no one was willing to risk hitting their own side . No weapons were dropped in Berlin, but no weapons fell in Berlin .
 North of Taranto, Soviet IRBMs destroy virtually all of the American and Italian Jupiter IRbMs on the launch rails . The Soviet Union destroyed virtually all the American, Italian and . Italian Jupiter .
 Only two of the 30 missiles manage to escape the first strike, and one will be driven off course by a detonation, landing harmlessly in Hungary . Only two missiles escape first strike .
 In Turkey, the third squadron of American Jupiters, the centerpiece of Kennedy’s missiles-for-missiles proposal, has long since been destroyed by conventional Soviet bombing . The proposal would have ended the Cuban crisis .
 Elmendorf, Eielson, and Clear Air Force Bases are among the first targets hit . Over a dozen other targets are hit as well, victims of the IRBM launched from Siberia .
 In the air, Soviet fighters and bombers clash with American fighters of the 343rd Fighter Wing . Fighting rages in the air .
 In the end, the simple realities of fuel, ammunition, and the lack of SAGE Facilites is what brings down the Delta Darts defending Alaska .
 For every bomber they bring down, there are two more, launched from bases in Siberia . With their bases destroyed by Soviet IRBMs, there is no way to refuel and rearm . For every plane brought down, two more launched from Siberia .
 The vast majority of the fighters launched from Elmendorf and other airfields eventually run out of fuel and have their pilots bail out . Most pilots bailed out of the planes after their fuel runs out .
 Juneau and Canadian airfields are eviscerated by 50 kiloton nuclear bombs dropped on the airfields by the very bombers they were trying to defend against . A handful manage to reach Juneau or a Canadian airfield, but almost none are refueled in time to defend again
 Soviet fighters clash with Alaska-based bombers over Bering Strait . Mirror of the Alaskan battle is being played out over Siberia .
 The Alaskan bombers find themselves engaging an alerted and able Soviet defense . Thanks to the virtue of being based a thousand miles closer to their targets, the bombers face an alerting Soviet defense.
 With no American IRBMs to soften the Soviet defenses, they go down in gruesome numbers . But not without landing a few hits of their own, they also land a few more .
 Few even make it to their targets and even fewer make it back to friendly bases . Few even get to targets or even get back to friends and allies . Few of the world's most dangerous bombs are made by terrorists .
 The reserve silos are destroyed by Soviet ICBMs and Bombers before the order ever comes to launch the reserve . But the order never comes to launching the reserve, and the silos were destroyed .
 It will take only 25 minutes for the first missiles to reach their targets, long before SAC bombers – which passed the fail-safe line over nearly 40 minutes previously – reach their target .
 Those that fall in East Germany are lost in the frenzy of tactical and short-range nuclear destruction . East Germany is known for its nuclear weapons, but not all of them have been destroyed .
 Outside of East Germany, the capitals of 2 Eastern European nations join the nuclear bonfire . East Germany is the only country in the region to join the bonfire.
 In Berlin, scattered fighting continues, but with fewer and fewer orders coming from higher authorities . No one seems willing to press home the attack, despite the obviousness of what has happened .
 In the space of five minutes, more Americans die than in every American war combined . More Americans die in five minutes than in all American wars combined .
 In Washington, Kennedy watches the meteor-like trails of incoming warheads from the roof of the White House . Kennedy watched the meteor trails of the incoming warheads . Kennedy: "In Washington, D.C. is a very special place to watch the incoming missiles"
 A few streaks rise to meet them – Nike-Zeus antiaircraft missiles – before the sky brightens with one final sunrise . A final sunrise is the final sunrise for the U.S. Air Force .
 Five hundred feet below the mountains of western Virginia President Kennedy and his Cabinet begin planning what comes next . President Kennedy's Cabinet begins planning the next step .
 A half a squadron of specially-equipped Tu-95K bombers are tasked with the destruction of the base and the adjoining BMEWS radar station, roughly 18 miles northwest . A half-a-half a squadron is tasked with destroying the base .
 The bombers are engaged several hundred miles north of the target, and two are shot down . Two of the bombers are killed in the attack .
 Four bombers continue onward, juking and weaving in the air . The defenders are eventually forced to surrender .
 A score of BOMARC missiles roar into the air from the darkened base, lancing forward at a closing speed well in excess of Mach 6 . The missiles are capable of striking at speeds of up to Mach 6.6 .
 Small multi-kiloton warheads explode in front of the cruise missiles, knocking them from the air or destroying them outright . The warheads can be detonated by a small, low-tech warheads .
 The 3 Megaton warhead explodes a bare 1,000 feet over the base’s runways, destroying the base instantly . The warhead exploded a bare . 1,00 feet above the runways .
 Radar operators at BMEWS radar station 18 miles away are spared immediate death from the nuclear detonation, only to suffer a prolonged death from starvation and freezing . The site is completely isolated from the United States with far greater problems on its hands .
 Homeless pilots bail out of fuel-starved aircraft . They will be joined by a few homeless pilots who bail out .
 For the Soviet Union it’s a costly, if successful operation and it can be repeated . The Soviet Union is one of the most successful countries in the world .
 The six specially-modified bombers represent almost half of the entire AS-2 capable force, barring two aircraft down for maintenance, two that survived the attack, and the 6 left in reserve . The six aircraft are almost half the entire force .
 The extraordinarily unwieldy missiles require over 20 hours to be attached, armed, fueled, and readied for launch . However, they can be launched within 20 hours .
 The next strike will be one consisting of 10 Su-59s armed with the Kangaroo Cruise missiles . Thus the next strike is expected to be one of 10 of the missiles .
 Hardest hit were airfields, communications systems, command and control systems, and military bases . Airfields and communications systems were hard hit .
 As with the Soviet attack, where possible, cities were avoided – where possible . Cities were avoided - where possible – and where possible - as possible .
 Cities like Moscow, Vladivostok, Murmansk, Archangel, that housed large military bases or command facilities, were hit regardless of their civilian population . Cities such as Moscow and Vladovostok were hit by the blast .
 The hardened Soviet anti-aircraft network is still very much intact and most SAC bombers will be shot down . However, most of the SACs bombers will still be shot downed by Soviet aircraft .
 Kennedy also sends orders, via radio, to the American ballistic missile submarine fleet, instructing it to engage the Soviet Union where possible . Kennedy also instructs the U.S. ballistic missile submarines to engage in Soviet Union's nuclear weapons .
 The submarines’ Polaris missiles lack the accuracy to hit military targets . The submarines' Polaris missiles are capable of hitting military targets without accuracy . The Polaris missiles were launched in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Radars of the Distant Early Warning Line have difficulty locating many of the Soviet aircraft . As the bombers come in at low level, the radars are unable to locate them .
 This is further compounded by the loss of the SAGE combat centers to Soviet ICBMs . The loss of these combat centers was also compounded by a loss of SAGE .
 Fighter fighters can't be guided to their targets and thus are grossly ineffective against Soviet Bombers . Due to that loss, fighters can’t be guided .
 For every Tu-95 that is intercepted, another breaks through to hit the DEW radars and continue south . For every one of the intercepts, another is likely to be intercepted .
 For every radar that is destroyed, more bombers remain undiscovered, hitting the line and winging their way south . More bombers are believed to have hit the line in the past .
 As the radars go down, one by one, enormous gaps are torn in the DEW line, allowing more and more bombers through . As the radar goes down, the gaps in the line are torn .
 Several bombers continue onward to strike targets in the Kola Peninsula, but many find that their targets are already burning, victims of American ICBMs . Several of the bombers continue to strike .
 All eventually find some target worthy of an atomic bomb, or are shot down . The planes eventually find targets worthy of a bomb . They are eventually shot down or destroyed .
 Survivors turn westward, with many bomber crews bailing out over Britain, unable to find a usable airstrip on which to land . Many bomber crews are forced to abandon their aircrafts over Britain .
 Several others land in neutral Sweden, which has not been hit in the fighting, and are interned . Several others are sent to neutral Sweden and interned in the country .
 Dark clouds of ash blot out the sky over Germany . Water vapor coalesces around ash from hundreds of nuclear detonations . Dark rain begins to fall as water vapor coalesce around ash .
 Survivors remember it as heavy, heavier than anything they can remember . Survivors say it was the heaviest they've ever seen in their lives . Survivors remember the moment they were attacked .
 NATO and Warsaw Pact bombers and fighters continue to clash . NATO, Warsaw Pact pilots and fighters clash in the wake of the storm . NATO says it has no plans to pull out of the Soviet Union .
 With an enormous gash ripped in the front line, the aircraft can engage in combat without fear of ground fire . The aircraft can penetrate deep into the opposition’s territory before facing enemy fire .
 The gap in defenses allows NATO bombers to hit Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia with ease . Warsaw Pact bombers can hit targets in the Netherlands, Belgium, France, and Britain . NATO bombers can also hit the Netherlands and Belgium .
 In many cases, communications have broken down between what remains of higher authority and the bases launching attacks . The U.S. government has been unable to control the situation .
 As more and more weapons fall, the situation continues to grow worse, with greater and greater civilian casualties . The situation has been described as a humanitarian humanitarian crisis .
 Only the accelerating rate of attrition and the destruction of the remaining stockpiles of weapons and operational aircraft might provide an end to the fighting . Only attrition and destruction of stockpiles could provide a end to fighting .
 American bombers based in Guam will avenge the hits by completely leveling the area around Vladivostok . The area has already been hit by two ICBMs, and the area has been leveled .
 After firing from a depth of 10m, the submarine slips away undetected as scattered Soviet aircraft respond to the radar contacts . The submarine slips undetected undetected .
 The scene will be repeated twenty more times over the next 48 hours, as various Polaris missile submarines contribute their missiles to the firestorm engulfing the Soviet Union .
 Of the 80 American missiles fired, 67 will successfully hit their targets . 67 of the 80 missiles fired by the U.S. are expected to hit targets .
 Two additional submarines will remain silent, destroyed by soviet submarines to complement the destroyed missiles sitting in SAC silos . The missiles were supposed to be a reserve but in the end were missiles waiting to be taken out .
 Two more commissioned ballistic missile submarines lack missiles, and one – the USS Thomas A Edison is destroyed in the destruction of Charleston . Two more – two more – lack missiles – and one is destroyed .
 Two uncommissioned submarines at sea survive the war, but three others still fitting out or under construction are destroyed .
 The USS Abraham Lincoln was lost with all hands in an encounter with a Soviet hunter-killer submarine before firing its missiles . The USS Lincoln is lost in the encounter with the Soviet hunter killer submarine .
 The Regulus Missile-carrying submarines fail to mirror the success of their Polaris counterparts . Additionally, the Regulus missiles are not capable of carrying out a nuclear missile .
 All are sunk before launching their targets, killing several hundred American sailors in the process . Several hundred Americans were killed in the attack .
 Crewmen forced to divert to remote airfields in Turkey, Greece, and Cyprus to avoid Soviet IRBM and bomber attacks .
 Coming in low over the empty forests, the scattered bombers manage to evade most contact with each other . The scattered bombers evaded most contact .
 Once in range of the radars of the two southernmost lines – which happen to overlap – interceptors can be efficiently vectored to incoming bombers . However, once in range, interceptors will be able to avoid detection .
 Most of the survivors manage to avoid the radars, either by using the Rocky Mountains to shield themselves, or by flying low across Baffin Bay to avoid contact .
 Only the sheer number of American bombers, ironically, prevent the Soviet defenses from having greater effect . Only a handful of U.S. bombers prevented the Soviet defense from having more effective .
 Soviet fighters must be guided by their onboard radar or the facilities from their basing airfields . Without a central system to coordinate interception, Soviet fighters have to rely on onboard radar .
 Strikes on air bases further reduce the effectiveness of Soviet defenses . Strikes on Soviet air bases also reduce effectiveness of the Soviet air defenses .
 The brand-new USS Arizona memorial, dedicated five months earlier, is completely destroyed . The airfield on Ford Island is also destroyed, as is the USS Arizona Memorial .
 The Hotel-class submarine that fired the missile would escape in the confusion . The hotel-class sub was the last submarine to fire a missile into the sky .
 Over half of the American Pacific fleet and all of its supply and logistics structure is destroyed . It should also be noted that over half the American . Pacific fleet was destroyed by the loss of all its supply .
 In total, almost 1000 American bombers have been shot down by Soviet fighters . Almost 1,000 American bombers were shot down in total .
 What little opposition remains is limited to SA-2 sites near primary targets, most of which have already been destroyed by ICBM warheads . Most of the SA2 sites have been destroyed .
 Seattle was the primary target for the bomber, but due to repeated momentary contacts with Canadian and American fighters, the crew spends more time evading than navigating toward its target . The attack is somewhat of an accident .
 Two separate attempts by Soviet bombers to penetrate Chicago’s defenses are defeated by nuclear-tipped BOMARC anti-bomber missiles . The missiles knock low-flying aircraft into Lake Michigan with their shock waves .
 One bomber finally makes it through and nukes Chicago less than a minute after another bomber dropped a nuke on Seattle . Another nuke drops a bomb on Seattle less than one minute later .
 By 4:00 PM, the last Soviet bomber and American bomber has been destroyed or has turned back to their respective bases or where they use to be . The last Soviet and American bombers are destroyed or turned back .
 By the end of the day, the bomber threat to the United States and the Soviet Union is over . The bomber threat is over, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The war is now over with over a Billion Dead and 20,000 nuclear devices detonated world wide . The war has now ended with over 1 billion dead and over a billion nukes detonated .
 The Northern Hemisphere lies in ruins and the Soviet Union and United States are obliterated . The Soviet Union is obliterated and the U.S. is wiped out of existence .
 What remains of the two nations militaries now turn their attention to rebuilding what they destroyed in less than 48 hours . The world. The world .
 The number of estimated nuclear detonations is 5,000 in the U.S. and 8,000 within the territory of both nations allies in Europe and Asia . 1,000 detonations in Canada, 5,00 in the Soviet Union, 1,200 in China, and 8
 The Great Nuclear War, World War III, the Final War, but no matter what you call it, targets worldwide were destroyed . The results of this total nuclear exchange are close to the frantic forecasts of the General Public .
 This results in more than a billion people killed initially, and another billion in the Winter of 1962 and the following famines and fallout . More than a million people died initially, followed by a billion more in the following years .
 Most of the Northern and parts of the Southern Hemisphere are in ruins . The estimated survivors in these areas desperately try to keep together what is left of their societies .
 They are facing challenges that we would consider third-world today, such as clean water, food, disease, disease . They are also facing challenges they would consider "third-world" today, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 After an horrifying first few years Post-War, a few regions, territories, and countries stabilize and master basic problems such as food, water, and defense . A few regions and territories have managed to survive .
 The fragile new world order emerges and it soon become obvious that initial hopes of some survivors for a united mankind are indeed naive . The fragile world order soon becomes evident .
 Famine, disease, and lack of resources provoke conflicts and wars in large parts of the world, potentially threatening all recovery . Famine and disease are a major factor in the development of famine and disease .