 He was seen as Stalin's 'best pupil' as he imprisoned 387,000 people and killed 2,000 to those opposed to the soviet rule . He was also seen as the Stalinist as he was seen to be seen as his best pupil .
 De-stalinisation: Relax the soviet system . Students and workers demonstrated in protests and even burnt statues of Stalin .
 He wanted to leave the Warsaw pact, no more communist government, free elections and UN protection from the USSR and to be a neutral country . He wanted no more Soviet-backed government and to leave Warsaw pact .
 He refused to grant Nagy's reforms . He feared that if one country left the Warsaw Pact; other countries would follow . Nagy feared other nations would follow him .
 Nagy seeked refuge in Yugoslav embassy but was found and trialled for treason then executed in 1958 . 200,000 soviet troops in Nov 1956 to remove Nagy's government . Nagy sought refuge in the Yugoslav embassy in Yugoslavia .
 America sent $20 million worth of food and medical aid and they praised Hungary's bravey . America sent food and medicine aid to Hungary .
 Some Eastern Germans didn't like the communist rule . There were better jobs with higher wages in the West . Many skilled workers left for the west East had a skills shortage .
 Khruschev re-states 6 month ultimatum in Vienna 1961 . Kennedy spends $3.3 billion on additional defence to prepare for potential war .
 The wall was built in August 1961 to divide soviet zone from western zone . It was built to divide Soviet Union's western zone from Soviet Union . Wall was built by August 1961 .
 Brezhnev Doctrine was imposed and it was the idea that if one Eastern European country threatens the stability of the rest then the USSR had the right to invade . The idea was that the USSR could invade if one country threatened stability in Europe .
 Dubček was forced to sign the 'Moscow Protocol' meaning that he betrayed socialism . Dubška was forced into the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia in 1968 . Dubčček is now a member of the Czech Republic .
 Gorbachev, Perestroika and Glasnost USA have a booming economy, excellent computer technology, lots of NATO allies and were seen as the 'leaders of the free world' USSR had a large amount of nuclear weapons but the Chernobyl Power plant explosion in 1986 in Ukraine
 They had a failing economy, old fashioned technology, expensive Afghanistan war, shortages and low living standards . They had to adapt to the Afghan war, and they had to deal with it, says CNN.com .
 People started leaving East Germany through Hungary so the Government accounced the greater freedom of travel for East Germany . People left the East German through Hungary in order to be able to enter the country .
 On the 9th November, they were allowed to cross the border from East to West .
 The Warsaw Pact ended in 1991 where Poland left first, followed by Hungary and then East Germany . Gorbachev's glasnost policies meant people could say what they thought and perestroika made the economy worse .
 A group tried to take control of the USSR by removing him from power . The August Coup 1991 was a failed coup attempt to take over the Soviet Union .
 The coup was defeated in a few days whilst Gorbachev returned to power but he looked weak . Yeltsin looked strong as he defended the coup . The coup looked like a victory for Yeltsins and Gorbias .
 History 1. / 5 based on 3 ratings . History surgery timeline 1845-1918 0.0.0 based on surgery history .