 "It’s about the hammer of Justice, the bell of freedom, and a song about love between the brothers and the sisters," says the singer . The song is about the "hammer of Justice"
 President John F Kennedy has a big hammer and he believes that it is the hammer of justice, he also has a bell of freedom that today he will ring loud and clear, and he will sing a song, but it’s not a song about love between brothers and sisters .
 On October 22, 1962, the White House is buzzing with activity . The White House was buzzing on this Monday morning, October 22 .
 "The entire United States administration and defense apparatus are working at high speed and with great intensity," says President Obama .
 The military preparations have been extended beyond the Atlantic and East Coast .
 Troops and supplies are being moved towards the Caribbean from all over the world, and bu now, it is not only the Soviets that have noticed . Troop and supplies have been moved to the Caribbean .
 Washington Post speculates that there is an international crisis pending, based on observations of these activities . This morning, the Washington Post runs a headline on the front page speculating .
 Kennedy will talk to the Congressional Leadership and key allies . Before that, Kennedy will meet with key allies in Washington, DC .
 He will convene cabinet members, and meet with military and civilian advisors throughout the day .
 White House contacts all major U.S. news outlets and asks them to hold back on any reports until the end of the day . The White House press secretary is responsible for the decision .
 There is also concern that the Soviets will make an announcement themselves, preempting the U.S. announcement . But there are also concerns that they will preempt the Americans .
 For a minute, the White House considers issuing a written statement, but decides to stick to the plan . The White House decides not to do so .
 U.S. Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson will deliver a speech to the United Nations . The speech is expected to be delivered by Stevenson at the U.N.
 Kennedy is taking steps to make sure that Stevenson is up for the job . Kennedy was the only one to openly voice strong opposition to the chosen path of action .
 John J McCloy, Chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations . McCloy is a member of the private think tank, the Council of Foreign Relations. McCloy says the U.S. needs to work with the world's most powerful state of power .
 McCloy will serve as Chairman of the Warren Commission that will investigate Kennedy’s assassination a little more than year from now . McCloy and Kennedy will stay connected beyond Kennedy's death .
 McCloy cancels everything and will take the first flight tomorrow . Uh, well, well I wanted… I think we need someone there to sort of sustain Adlai and stiffen him and support him .
 I'll check with my military, I’ll get my air aid on the thing. No. No . No . I'll, I'll get my military . No I'll . I”ll check with his military, he said . He'll get his air aid .
 "I'll just wait to hear a further call from you, or some representative," she says . And then we’ll be back… …and then we'll be back .
 Secretary of State Rusk makes last ditch attempt to persuade Kennedy to call off blockade . Rusk offers U.S. missiles in Turkey and Italy as a trade for Soviet missiles on Cuba . Secretary Rusk made last ditch effort to convince Kennedy to give up blockade .
 The President reportedly flat out rejects the proposal and berates Rusk for restarting the discussion . The proposal was reportedly rejected by the President .
 President Kennedy leaves no doubt as to the true intentions of the U.S. regarding an invasion of Cuba . Kennedy also calls his predecessor, President Eisenhower, to discuss plans to invade Cuba .
 "I would assume that this would uh, only be first in an increasing number of steps," he says . "This would be the first in a series of steps"
 "We’re not going to be in any position to carry out an invasion for some days," he said . "We have to move those troops around form form San Diego, but we're going to do all those things"
 I'll stay in touch with you this week as like I said, anticipate that it will get more intense. And I’ll stay in contact with you, anticipating that it’s getting more intense .
 I think you’re making the only move you can. Well I uh, I uh thank you for telling me and well I will uh, and personally I think it’s a good move,” she said . ‘I think you're making the best move
 It’s tough to, uh as I say we will uh, I don’t know… we may get into the invasion business before many days are out, but eh, but… But… Of course from a military standpoint that's the clean cut thing to do now
 ‘Because you've made up you mind, you’ve got to get rid of these things. That’s right,’ he said . ‘I’m right. Because of you, you have made up your mind,” he added .
 Khrushchev announced tomorrow, which I think he will, that if we attack Cuba that it’s going to be nuclear war. General, what about if the Soviet Union… Khrushche announced tomorrow? General, General, said .
 "You would take that risk in the situation same as ours. In other words, you would take the same risk," he says .
 They have concluded their discussions regarding how much freedom they will give commanders in the field to use their tactical nukes .
 An order now goes out to NOT use any nuclear weapons without prior consent from Moscow . The order is now out for Russia to not use nuclear weapons in any way .
 Moscow has to provide the launch codes anyhow, but there is no way of stopping the use of the tactical nuclear arms remotely . There's only two issues with that first of all, to launch the MRBMs and IRBMs . Moscow has only to provide launch codes, but
 commanders have already been given the order that if they should lose contact with the state, they can deploy tactical nukes as they see fit . Second of all, the commanders have been given an order that they can do so .
 As we will see in days, this is not a hypothetical situation, but a real, direct threat . This is not only a threat to the U.S. but a direct threat, it's a real threat to its citizens .
 The U.S. armed forces are taken to the third highest defense readiness, DEFCON 3 “Increase in force readiness above that required for normal readiness” in practice this means that the Air Force is now ready to mobilize within 15 minutes, and that all other service branches
 The mother of a school friend of mine contacted me on Facebook when we started this series . She contacted me via Facebook after the series was started .
 She and her US army husband were stationed in Wiesbaden, Germany, when she gave birth . She was about to give birth to her first child in a matter of days .
 She then got a message that in case of a nuclear exchange, she should make her way to Spain to be repatriated . She was then told she should head to Spain in case a nuclear war broke out .
 President Kennedy has moved from considering doing nothing at all only three days ago, to heading to war with determination today . Kennedy: "If you think about it, it's not really odd that President Kennedy is moving from considering nothing to war."
 Kennedy has personal doubts and fears that he might be starting World War III . Once he has committed himself to a course of action, he really has no choice but to follow through .
 For others in the administration, it’s different, like Attorney General Robert Kennedy . For others, it's different, and for others, like attorney general Robert Kennedy.
 RFK will later claim that he was the first one to oppose the hawks and that his line was always diplomacy . RFK's line was diplomacy, but he will later say he was always the first to oppose hawks .
 On the first day of the crisis he was a strong advocate for an immediate invasion, but six days later he’s changed his mind . On the other day, he was strongly supportive of the invasion .
 Undersecretary of State George Ball convinced RFK to reconsider during several discussions between the 17th and 19th of October . We also know that RFK was under the influence of George Ball .
 To what extent the Kennedy brothers discussed and planned this as a coordinated ‘good cop bad cop” effort we will never know as they will both fall victims to assassin’s bullets before they can reveal the truth .
 In order to understand what is about to happen, we have to consider for a moment the world of 1962, 1962 .
 Television is a relatively new phenomenon, and there’s not even landline telephones in many homes in the western world . Television is not the first time it has been shown to be broadcast .
 Outside of the West, the vast majority of the world’s population still doesn’t have electricity . The vast majority still doesn't have electricity outside the West .
 President Kennedy is the first President to make extensive use of TV to communicate . Nonetheless, he is not the first to use TV extensively to communicate with the public .
 A great many of his viewers will catch him on TV in neighbors' homes, or standing in front of a television shop window . Still, a great many viewers will see him on television in neighbors or in a shop window, he says .
 Over the next 24 hours, it will be replayed again and again on TV and radio all over the world . Over the world, the world will be watching it all over .
 The Cold War is on everybody’s minds even those of us who experienced only the end parts of the Cold War can assure you that we lived in constant fear of nuclear war . Moreover, the Cold . War was on everybody's mind even those who experienced the end .
 See you tomorrow on day 8, when the diplomatic dance makes new turns .