 Jerry McIlmoyle was near the end of a series of U-2 overflights of Cuba . The Soviets had installed medium-range ballistic missiles on the island .
 Advisor “Mac” Bundy showed President Kennedy his aircraft on October 16, 1962 .
 An experienced flier, McIlmoyle realized he photos of the missiles in Cuba, a secret he initially shared had a near-miss from Soviet surface-to-air only with members of the ExComm .
 All were agreed that missiles recently installed in Fidel Castro’s Cuba had to go and all options were on the table for As expected, he reported being fired on as soon as he . landed, only to be informed by a gruff Air Force lieutenant general freshly flown in from Washington
 The nation’s military forces were at DEFCON 3 and by 24 October would be at DEFON 2, Sherman and Michael Tougias that intertwines the U-2 program, the Cuban missile crisis and, especially, the president and man John F Kennedy .
 After chronicling the high-stakes tension of that that introduce readers to McIlmoyle and two other U-2 pilots, the authors Rudy Anderson and Rudy Anderson . The authors chronicle the high stakes tension in that period of that .
 Two disparate events revived the spectre of on Lockheed Martin engineer Kelley Johnson . Both involving U-2 flights, one piloted by a part of the Cuban missile crisis story .
 The authors shift SAM, killing him instantly . Chuck Maultsby, who became disoriented and was barely able to land in Alaska before being shot down and, more, was shot down in Alaska .
 Eisenhower’s $13M plan to oust Castro was just such “miscalculations, incorrect interpretations,” authors point out . CIA Deputy Richard Bissell was to accomplish by to war planning a “low-key” invasion .
 They chronicle the ‘immediate and spectacular failure” that was the 17 August . They discuss the two letters Khrushchev sent to 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, the dangerous and nerve-rackKennedy to stave off nuclear war .
 Nothing in this article should be construed as asserting or implying the United States government endorsement of its factual statements and interpretations .
 It was not until to the USSR in return for a promise of no U.S. invasion that Secretary of Defense McNamara learned about If the blockade failed and there was no or a negative this near-nuclear exchange .
 The short response to Kennedy’s counteroffer, the invasion would chapters in the book make for easily-digested chunks of proceed . Kennedy's counteroffer would be the short response .
 The White House, the White House and the U.S. were at the top of the charts at 10:00 a.m. ET Sunday morning . They also excel at capturing and relaying the tension of the ExComm meetings .
 In at least two instances, the authors reveal their lack of actors . The authors thankfully provide readers with “the rest of the story,” at least concerning some of the primary concerns .
 On 5 Nov 1962, the Cubans released the body of familiarity with DoD jargon, which has the potential of Rudy Anderson . Rudy Anderson was thereafter buried in his to either confuse or irritate readers .
 His wife Jane never forgave refer to “intercontinental-range ballistic missiles” Kennedy for getting her husband killed, as she expressed . The context makes clear that what the authors it, and died in 1981, at the young age of 46 .
 Maultsby retired from the Air Force in 1977 and died of which the standard acronym is ‘ICBM’—“IRBM” is genlung cancer in 1998, at age 72 . “I’m referring to is “intercontinental ballistic
 In terms of “how do we erally understood as ‘intermediate-range” vice “interconavoid this situation in the future?” The authors note that tinental-range ballistic missiles differ markedly from the U.S. in range and lethality
 Moscow-Washington “hot line” is an error that would not be made by the most junior intelliWhite House and at the Kennedy family compound on gence analyst . Although a minor criticism, it is an side, of a . side, the error is an . side
 A similar order-of-battle gaffe is a referCape Cod. ence to imagery shot by Navy F8U Crusader low-level recon flights over Cuba . In Above and Beyond, Sherman and Tougias provide “nuclear-tipped SAMs, or FR
 David A Foy is the Intelligence Community historian on the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence . Foy: Intelligence Community Historian David A. Foy was a member of Intelligence Community History Committee .