 In October 1962, when the Soviet Union deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba, the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War ensued, bringing the world close to the brink of nuclear war . Cuba, Mexico and the U.S. were at the center of the Mexican Revolution .
 Selections from twenty primary sources provide firsthand accounts of the frantic deliberations and realpolitik diplomacy between the U.S. and Fidel Castro's Cuban regime .
 Ebook examination copies are also available to qualified course instructors . Ebook exam copies are available for use by qualified instructors .
 In October 1962, when the Soviet Union deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba, the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War ensued, bringing the world close to the brink of nuclear war . The world was close to war when the Soviets deployed the Cuban missiles .
 Getchell begins with the origins of the Cold War, then narrows the focus onto Latin America, the Cuban Revolution, and the events immediately preceding the crisis . She places the crisis within the context of the events surrounding it .
 Her descriptions of the Cold War in Latin American and Cuban-Soviet relations are particularly useful and fill a gap in the literature for readable summaries on these topics .
 The author takes a fair-minded but critical view of U.S. policies toward Latin America . The author explores attitudes of the region’s governments and people .
 Soviet-Cuban relations emerge as one of the major themes of the book and the area in which it contributes original research .
 Getchell uncovers records from Soviet embassies in the U.S. and Mexico that highlight Cuba’s eagerness for relations with the Soviet Union early in the revolution . Soviet beliefs about American intentions toward Cuba .
 Her description of Fidel Castro’s efforts to court the Soviet government and gain economic and military support is illuminating . Her discussion of Nikita Khrushchev's reasons for moving Soviet missiles to Cuba is comprehensive . The discussion is comprehensive and detailed .
 Many of the documents in the appendix also focus on Soviet-Cuban relations . The appendix contains a list of documents that focus on relations between the two countries .
 She returns to these topics in discussing the aftermath of the crisis . She fills a gap in the literature for readable summaries on how the crisis influenced the Cold War in the Western Hemisphere .