 The Democratic People's Republic is backed by the newly created People’s Republic of China . The Democratic Republic of the Democratic Republic was backed by China .
 Christmas Island United Kingdom begins construction of airstrip, military encampment and Gilbert and Ellice scientific bunkers to prepare for Operation Grapple hydrogen bomb tests . December 1956 Christmas Island .
 Cold War tensions rise following 1956 United Kingdom, French and Israeli attack on Egypt during Suez crisis, and crushing of Hungarian uprising by Soviet troops . October–December Egypt and Hungary political tensions rise after 1956 U.K. and French attack .
 Failure to reach megaton range at Malden Island tests . UK Cabinet agrees to proceed with further hydrogen bomb tests, but relocated to Christmas Island . Christmas Island is relocated .
 Further atomic trigger tests to continue in Australia to support H-bomb program . Further atomic triggers to continue to be carried out in Australia .
 Christmas Island United Kingdom conducts Grapple Z , British atomic test codenamed ‘Burgee’ Gilbert and Ellice , with the bomb on a Islands Colony tethered balloon .
 United States, United Kingdom and 1958 USSR hold talks in Geneva to establish a moratorium for nuclear testing . U.S., UK and USSR discuss nuclear testing in Geneva, Switzerland .
 The world’s largest hydrogen bomb (RDS-220 code name ‘Vanya’ or ‘Tsar Bomba’) is the most powerful man-made explosion in human history .
 U.S. announces resumption of nuclear testing in the Pacific, to begin on Christmas Island in April . January 1962 Washington DC, USA United States announced resumption in Pacific .
 Five nuclear weapons are also dropped from aircraft for air bursts in the vicinity of Johnston Island .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev face off over nuclear missile deployments in Cuba and Turkey . Kennedy was in the midst of a nuclear war with the Soviet Union in Cuba . The two countries were involved in the Cold War .
 Western powers used the Pacific region as a laboratory for nuclear testing . Over 50 years, the region was used as a test site for nuclear weapons .
 Between 1946 and 1958, the United States conducted 67 atomic and hydrogen bomb tests at Bikini and Enewetak atolls in the Marshall Islands . The U.S. conducted 67 tests at the islands .
 In 1962, there were 24 further U.S. atmospheric nuclear tests at Christmas Island, as well as five atmospheric airbursts and nine high-altitude nuclear tests . warheads were launched on missiles from Johnston Atoll and submarines .
 Nine nuclear and atomic bomb tests in 1957–58 at Malden Island and Christmas Island in the British Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony —today the Republic of Kiribati . These were followed by nine hydrogen and atomic bombs tests .
 France conducted four atmospheric nuclear tests at Reggane and 13 underground tests at In Eker in the Sahara desert in Algeria between 1960 and 1966 . The tests took place in the 1960s and 1960s .
 There are quite a few mistakes in the files, from the days before electric typewriters and correcting fluid . There are also a lot of mistakes, including errors in the old typewriter's notes .
 Europeans have used different names for atolls than those used by indigenous communities . Penrhyn/Tongareva, Fanning/ Tabuaeran or Johnston/Kalama .
 For consistency throughout the book, I have retained the name ‘Christmas Island’, in spite of local usage . For consistency . I have kept the name 'Christmas Island'
 This book will not go into detailed analysis of the different prototypes for British atomic and hydrogen bombs, nor provide complete data on the types of radiation generated during the Grapple nuclear detonations . The footnotes provide a number of sources for readers interested in greater technical detail .
 Atomic weapons rely on nuclear fission, where the nucleus of uranium or plutonium splits into lighter elements, instantly releasing massive amounts of energy . Nuclear fission is a form of nuclear power that can be used in nuclear weapons .
 A nuclear detonation differs from conventional explosives due to the generated heat, blast and especially radiation . In contrast to atom bombs, thermonuclear or hydrogen weapons rely instead on nuclear fusion .
 Some early hydrogen bombs in the 1950s relied on atomic triggers to generate the massive heat and pressure required to start the fusion process . The bombs were made using a mixture of tritium and deuterium .
 The bomb that destroyed Hiroshima was only 12 kt, whereas larger thermonuclear or hydrogen bombs have an explosive power greater than 1 megaton . The Hiroshima bomb destroyed by the Hiroshima bomb was just 12 kts .
 Fallout is tiny particles of dirt, weapon debris, fission products or other substances contaminated with radioactivity . Fallout particles are tiny particles, dirt, weapons debris or other contaminated radioactivity.
 These particles are spread into the atmosphere following a nuclear explosion, then return to earth . They are spread through the atmosphere then returned to earth through rainfall .
 Fallout can be blown for some distance by atmospheric or stratospheric winds . Fallout can still be blown away by some distance .
 Some nuclear detonations are fired from a tower or low-level balloon and are defined as a ground burst . Some detonations generate extensive radioactive fallout . Others are defined 'ground burst'
 Other tests are air bursts, detonated at higher altitudes in an attempt to limit the amount of irradiated soil and debris . Air bursts are also detonated at high altitudes to limit amount of radiation .
 In order to reach a stable state, they release extra energy or mass in the form of radiation . The radiation is released in order to make it stable .
 Ionising radiation describes the particles and electromagnetic radiations that have sufficient energy to cause ionisation as they interact with matter . It is also known as ionising radiation .
 Alpha particles have little penetrating power, and can be blocked by a thin barrier as thin as a sheet of paper . Alpha particles can't penetrate through a thin layer of paper, scientists say .
 They can cause significant cell damage and potential health risks if ingested or inhaled . Because of the large amounts of energy deposited in short distances in tissues, they can cause cell damage .
 Beta particles have slightly more penetrating power, but can be stopped by shielding from metal such as aluminium . Beta particles can be more penetrating than beta particles, but have less penetrating power .
 First, activity of radioactive material is the rate at which radioactive decay takes place . The activity of a radioactive substance is measured by the rate of radioactive decay .
 Third, other units measure the relative biological damage in the human body . Other units measure how much biological damage is caused by the body .
 In the 1950s, many countries used the measurement rem , but today, the sievert is the standard unit to measure the health effect of low levels of ionising radiation on the human body .
 There is no accepted threshold below which there is no risk of cancer induction . No accepted threshold is below the threshold for cancer induction, experts say .
 Regulatory dose limits reflect upper permitted thresholds of exposures by workers and members of the public . Workers and the public are subject to higher permitted levels of exposure .
 Half-life is the time in which radioactivity will decline to half its initial value through decay . Radioactivity's half-life begins at radioactivity's lowest possible value .
 Some radioactive isotopes are long-lasting, such as plutonium-239 with a half-life of 24,400 years . Some isotopes such as plutonium-239 have a long-lived half life of around 24,000 years .
 Ionisation in the human body may cause cellular damage that leads to the death of a cell, or the cell may be damaged in such a way that it cannot reproduce or fulfil its original function .
 Where there is DNA damage in the nucleus of the cell, damaged cells may continue to reproduce and develop into cancer, after an interval (latent period) from a few years to many decades . Damage may occur after a period of years or decades .