 The Island of Cuba was named after CUBA in Portugal by Portuguese Christopher Columbus when he landed in October 1492 . Christopher Columbus landed in Cuba in 1492 and named the island after the CUBA .
 Argentine Constitution, adopted in 1853, is very similar to the U.S. Constitution . Argentina's constitution was adopted by the government of 1853 . Argentina is one of the world's most populous countries .
 The Argentine Vice President automatically succeeds upon the resignation or death of the President . Even though the United States Constitution calls for separate votes for President and Vice President , both candidates are on the same ballot .
 She was not content to be First Lady but was insanely ambitious for the top position in the government . She was ambitious for a top job in government and was ambitious .
 Eva voted for President and Vice President on November 11, 1951 . Eva suffered from a very ill illness during the election .
 By 1951, Argentina was ready to go ""thermonuclear"" and Eva Perón was pushing hard for the position of Vice President . Eva was pushed hard for a position of vice president .
 She had just secured the vote for women . That goal was within her reach because of the vote . She was able to reach her goal because she had already secured the election .
 Her husband Juan knew that nothing would stop her from replacing him as President so he begged the doctors to hasten her demise . Juan Juan knew she would replace him as president so begged doctors to kill her .
 Evita's last public appearance was June 4, 1952, at her husband's inaugural parade . Evita was the first woman to attend the inaugural parade in New York .
 Evita's last public appearance was at her husband's inaugural parade in June 1952 . Evita was the first lady to attend the inauguration of her husband .
 Too weak to stand on her own, she was propped up by wooden boards hidden underneath her fur coat . She is now being cared for by her family .
 The doctors complied with her husband's plea to hasten her demise . The ""spiritual leader"" of the nation was sent to meet her Maker on July 26, 1952 .
 Perón was overthrown by a pro-U.S. general named Eduardo Lonardi . Lonardi was a member of the United States' Revolutionary Party .
 Arturo Frondizi Ercoli was the 3rd President after the ouster of Juan Perón . He was the third President of Argentina after the overthrow of Perón and the death of Peronistas .
 After the ouster of President Juan Perón in 1955, all work ceased on Humuel Island . The top secret facility was moved to the mainland after the ousting of Perón .
 Work began immediately on producing thermonuclear weapons in quantity . Work commenced immediately on production of thermonetary weapons in a quantity .
 In 1955, after the overthrow of Juan Perón, the secret island was closed down, and all the equipment moved to the mainland . All the equipment was moved from the island to mainland .
 Beginning in '55, production of thermonuclear warheads began on the mainland . The U.S. mainland began production of nuclear warheads .
 Argentines have always claimed hegemony over the western hemisphere . They were resentful of the dominant position of the United States in the New World .
 In South America, they fought several wars with Brazil and the neighboring small republics . They fought against each other in South America . They also fought with Brazil, Brazil and neighboring small nations .
 Fidel Castro was on the run from the law in Cuba and he sought a refuge in Mexico . He sought refuge in the country after fleeing the country's borders .
 Guevara's real name was Ernesto Guerara Lynch, and the sobriquet ""Che"" means buddy or friend in Argentine Spanish . Guevera was born Ernesto Lynch, but his real name is Ernando Guevero G
 In 1953, Fidel Castro was arrested in Cuba and sentenced to 15 years in jail for plotting to overthrow the government . Castro was jailed for 15 years before his arrest in 1953 .
 Fidel Castro arrived in Mexico City by bus on July 8, 1955, via Veracruz, Havana, and the jail on Isla de Pinos in Cuba . Castro arrived by bus from Cuba in Mexico by bus to Mexico City, Mexico .
 Both men were arrested by the Mexican police and thrown into a common cell . Both men are now in a cell in Mexico's capital .
 Revolutionary beach bums in Veracruz, Che, far right, and Raúl Castro, center . Che, Castro, Che and Castro were both revolutionary .
 The first pictures of Fidel and Che together were taken in a jail cell . Che and Fidel were both jailed for life in prison .
 Normally the 2 criminals should have spent the rest of their lives in jail, or vanished into obscurity . Normally they should have been spent in jail or disappeared into obscurity, but now they have been found guilty .
 The Suez Canal Crisis intervened to rescue them from the oblivion they so richly deserved . The canal crisis saved them from oblivion .
 Che supposedly graduated from medical school but he used his medical knowledge to kill more effectively . Che's medical knowledge was used to kill better than anyone else . Che was not a medical student, but he was a killer .
 President Eisenhower was one of the most beloved Presidents in U.S. history . Eisenhower was the President of the United States from 1953 to 1961 . Eisenhower is one of America's most popular Presidents .
 He ended the Korean War and resisted pressure from the Pentagon to launch a first strike thermonuclear attack on the Soviet Union . He resisted the tremendous pressure from Pentagon to attack .
 Even though he was a general, he knew that the U.S. did not do Pearl Harbors like Hitler and Hirohito . The United States didn't do Pearl Harbor like those of Japan .
 Almost everybody ""liked Ike,"" particularly his handling of the 1956 Suez Canal Crisis . Almost everybody liked Ike's handling of Suez .
 By forcing the British lion to disgorge the Suez Canal, he let every nation know that the era of colonialism had ended forever . The canal was the first to be opened in 1877 .
 The last act of revenge by the retreating British was the blowing up of the statue of Ferdinand de Lesseps in December 1956 .
 Politically and militarily, so many profound changes happened in the wake of the Iraq War . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful institutions since it was formed .
 Since this expose is about Cuba we can only concentrate on that imprisoned island . This expose is only about Cuba, but it's about the imprisoned country .
 Fidel and Che left Mexico in December 1956 in a small boat and arrived in Cuba . Che and Fidel were both born in Mexico . Fidel was Fidel's wife, Fidel's mother, and Fidel was born in Havana .
 Ordinarily, that should have been the end of the rebels, but now they had rich, powerful, and dangerous backers . Ordinarily that would be the end, it would have meant the rebels had rich and powerful backers . But now they have rich, dangerous backers.
 After less than a year in the mountains, Fidel and Che had established a base in the Sierra Maestra valley . Che and Fidel were able to establish a base for less than one year . Che died at the end of the war .
 The British Secret Service, the Pentagon, the CIA, Nelson Rockefeller, etc., etc. etc., were all backing the Cuban Revolution . Nelson Rockefeller was all behind the revolution .
 The ""Communist" dictatorship of Castro and Che was modeled on Perón's brutal Fascist regime . The ""communist"" dictatorship of the Castro and . Che were modeled on the brutal Perón .
 Castro's rebel army drove through Santa Clara toward Havana, Cuba, in 1959 . Castro's army was driven by the rebels in Santa Clara, Cuba . Castro was captured by the Cuban government in 1959, Cuba's first war .
 Prior to October 1956, small time criminals like Fidel and Che had absolutely no chance of overthrowing the legitimate government of Cuba . Che and Fidel had no chance to overthrow the Cuban government .
 In January they marched in triumph to Havana and President Baptisa fled the country . In January, they marched to Havana, Havana and the country's president fled . The Cuban Revolution was overthrown in 2009 .
 Pequeña Argentina ""Little Argentina"" was founded by Fidel and Che in 1959 . It is the name of a group founded by Che and Fidel Castro .
 Anybody who opposed the new regime was just taken out and shot . . or disappeared . Or disappeared . Anybody opposed to the regime was shot or killed .
 During WWII, spymaster Herbert Marchant worked on the top secret Enigma decoding machine in Bletchley Park, England . Herbert Marchant is credited with decoding the Enigma .
 Marchant was in charge of the transfer of thermonuclear weapons from Argentina to Pegueña Argentina . Marchant transferred the weapons to Argentina from Argentina in 1953 .
 It is possible that Jorge Mario Bergoglio—the future Pope Francis—helped in the transfer of the thermonuclear weapons to Cuba . Pope Francis may have helped transfer the nuclear weapons .
 There was no way that the Russians would ship any kind of nuclear weapons to a bunch of hotheaded criminals in Cuba . "No way" Russia would ship nuclear arms to the island nation .
 The great Russian nation has never shared their nuclear weapons with their closest allies . Russia never shared its nuclear arms with its closest allies in the world .
 Russia had nuclear weapons in Russia strictly for defensive purposes . Nuclear weapons were strictly for defense purposes, according to experts .
 Beginning in early 1962, Argentine President Frondizi began shipping hydrogen bombs from Bariloche .
 He also shipped the latest state-of-the-art military equipment like radar and ground-to-air missiles .
 The Cuban rebels were clueless when it came to operating that equipment . Che Guevara supervised the day to day operations . The rebels were unaware of the equipment .
 San Cristobal ""nuclear weapons"" site constructed by the Argentine army . San Cristabal was the site of the first nuclear bomb site .
 All the nuclear weapons sites on the imprisoned island were constructed by the Argentina army—supervised by comandante Che Guevara .
 This was supposed to take place just before the B52's and Vulcan bombers were over Moscow . This was meant to be done before the bombers were flying over Moscow.
 Penkovsky was also a disinformation agent who told President Kennedy that the Russians were going to install nuclear missiles in Cuba . He also told him that President Kennedy was going to put nuclear missiles on Cuba .
 Penkovsky's job was to decapitate the Russian high command and render their Samson option ineffective . He was tasked with decapitating Russia's high command . The Samson option was ineffective, he says .
 On October 23, Penkovsky was arrested, and spymaster Dick White notified Macmillan immediately . On October 25, the arrest was made, and the arrests were made .
 The British Secret Service had only one spy assigned to that critical task . The Secret Service was only one of its agents .
 Macmillan gave a worried Cabinet a full update at their meeting on 23 October .
 At 5m. he saw Labour leader, Gaitskell, together with George Brown, and Harold Wilson, and gave them details on Privy Councillor terms . At 5.m. at 5m he saw the Labour leader and George Brown .
 He followed this meeting with a visit to Buckingham Palace for an audience with the Queen . He outlined the details of the growing threats to the UK, during which he outlined them .
 If Macmillan spoke with both queens, then Elizabeth would have been shocked at the prospect of all her horses and dogs dying from radiation poisoning .
 Bomber Command had been involved in a no-notice readiness and dispersal exercise, code named 'Mickey Finn' on 20 and 21 September . The exercise involved increased readiness on both the V-Force and Thor missile bases . Bomber Command was taking part in a 'no-notice'
 The exercise involved a simulated escalation through the various levels up to Alert two status . The exercise was part of a simulation of the military's 'alert two status'
 In London, Macmillan and his cabinet were in turmoil over the turn of events . The government met for nearly three hours late on October 23 .
 A statement expressing ""deep concern over the provocative action of the Soviet Union in placing offensive weapons in Cuba"" was later issued . A statement expressed the 'deep concern' over the move .
 President Kennedy and Harold Macmillan were so close that they presided over a White House Cabinet meeting . President Kennedy was so close to him that he presided over the Cabinet meeting. President Kennedy presided over Cabinet meeting with Machiavellian MacMillan .
 He could not tell Kennedy that the Russian Guy Fawkes was arrested . However, he could not go to Washington City and help diffuse the Crisis .
 Incredibley, Macmillan presided over a United States Cabinet Meeting in April 1962 . Incredibley he presided over the United States cabinet meeting .
 The main topic of discussion was the upcoming Cuban false flag operation . The Cuban flag operation was discussed .
 Without the knowledge of Penkovsky's arrest, the Crisis escalated, and it looked like Armageddon was only days away . The crisis escalated in the wake of his arrest .
 It seems that the mighty Russian nation was raised up specifically to save Christian civilization . The nation was brought to Russia specifically to protect Christianity .
 Russia saved us from Napoleon, the ""Dead Head"" Kaiser Bill, Hitler, and the Pentagon, says author . "Russia saved us" from Napoleon and Kaiser Bill .
 Prime minister Harold Macmillan was too proud to tell the warmongers in Washington City that Penkovsky was arrested and the Samson Option was still viable .
 Russian submarine Valentin Savitsky readied a nuclear torpedo to sink his tormentors . The Russian submarine was under fire from the U.S. Navy, and the captain readied the torpedo .
 Captain Savisky was hotheaded and he had absolutely no communications with Moscow . Savisky had 'absolutely no communications' with Moscow, according to the Russian ambassador .
 The Americans hit us with something stronger than a grenade, apparently some kind of practice depth charge . The Americans are apparently using a depth charge, the U.S. military says .
 In addition to everything else, he had been unable to establish communications with the General Staff . He said: "He had been able to ... not establish communications"
 He summoned the officer who was in charge of the nuclear torpedo, and ordered him to make it combat ready . The torpedo was the first to be made combat ready in the Soviet Union .
 "That hotheaded captain was going to use his own version of the Samson Option," says the captain . "That's going to be the Samson option. That's what I thought was going on," he says .
 The cool headed Vasili Arkhipov would not give him permission to fire and thus the world was saved . The cool-headed Vasili would not fire himself .
 Another Russian named ""Lee Harvey Oswald"" kept a cool head when he was surrounded in a Dallas, Texas, Texas theater . Lee Harvey Oswald was surrounded by a group of Russians .
 The following morning, Saturday, November 3, after the Executive Committee met in the White House, DCI John McCone met privately with Kennedy and Rusk to explain the developments in Moscow . The next day, the executive committee met privately to discuss the situation .
 McCone told the president that when a junior clerk in the embassy serviced the dead drop the clerk was apprehended and interrogated for three hours . McCone said he was interrogated by a senior embassy clerk for three hours during the operation .
 The CIA concluded that Jacob's seizure by the KGB had been compromised . In an effort to save himself he had exposed the prearranged plan for the transmission of information .
 HERO was the code name of Penkovsky, the man who was supposed to decapitate the Russian high command in Moscow . Hero was the man supposed to head Moscow's high command . HERO was a code name for the Russian military in the 1980s .
 The Crisis was over by Guy Fawkes Day in Britain so Harold Macmillan was greatly relieved . Harold MacMillan was very relieved by the end of the crisis .
 Fake missiles were loaded on fake ""Soviet"" ships and headed for Russiakaa.a. For the benefit of the CIA cameras, fake ""Russian"" missiles were strapped to fake Soviet ships . The fake missiles were then loaded onto fake ships .
 Fake ""Soviet"" missiles were loaded with fake missiles from a ship in November . The fake missiles were sent to the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Most people were glad to be alive instead of dying a horrible death from radiation . Most people in the U.S. were glad they weren't dying from radiation radiation .
 The next Crisis involving Cuba would be the assassination of President Kennedy . President Kennedy's assassination of JFK would be a major crisis involving Cuba .
 Sanity finally prevailed over madness and the world breathed a sigh of relief . Sanity prevailed in the end of the madness .
 We can thank our Great JEHOVAH that the world did not come to an end in 1962 . We can also thank him for his role in saving the world from an end .