 The United States uses atomic weapons to win the war, is the world superpower . The Cold War was a battle of ideas/ideologies . The democratic United States and the Communist USSR had different government, economy, and world views .
 Both sides wanted to win over the hearts and minds of the rest of the world, especially the former colonies / new countries in Africa and Asia . Both sides hoped to win the hearts of the others, especially former colonies .
 The ‘Iron Curtain’ – a line separating the democratic Western European countries from the Communist Eastern European countries – was the ‘iron Curtain .’ - a line between the democratic . Western . European countries .
 From Stettin in the Balkans, to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the Continent . The Iron Curtain has descended from the Balkans to Europe .
 The U S. should support free peoples throughout the world who were resisting takeovers by armed minorities or outside pressures . Behind that line lies the ancient capitals of Central and Eastern Europe .
 U.S. gave Greece & Turkey $400 million in aid to defeat communist groups . Truman Truman gave Greece and Turkey millions of dollars in aid in defeat of communist groups.
 "This move is not against any country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos," he said . "This is not about any country ... but against hungry, poverty and desperation," he added .
 America leads the Berlin airlift for over a year, flying in all the supplies needed to keep the city going . America led the airlift to Berlin for more than a year . America's airlift has been a major success in Berlin .
 The Cold War was an era of competition and conflict between the superpowers the U.S. and the USSR, along with their allies, when the threat of nuclear war created constant world tension .
 The United States and NATO decided to make Germany a powerful ally in the defense of Western Europe and not treat them as formers Nazis to be punished . The U.S. decided not to treat Germany as a former Nazis and not punish them as Nazis . Germany was made a powerful
 West Germany became a country in 1949 and joined NATO six years later . West Germany joined NATO just six years after becoming West Germany .
 The Nationalists in China were United States allies against Japan in WW2 . They were allies with the U.S. during World War II . China was a Communist state of China .
 The Nationalists were corrupt and had treated the people they ruled poorly. They were corrupt, they said. They had treated them poorly, they were corrupt . The Nationalist Party was corrupt .
 In comparison, the Communists under Mao Zedong won peasant support and then victory . In comparison to the Communist Party of China, it won support from the peasants .
 After WW2, the U.S. and USSR split the Korean peninsula into two regions . Kim Il-Sung Syngman Rhee “Domino Theory” The Korean War was the Korean War .
 The United Nations supported South Korea and many countries helped the U.S. defend South Korea . The U.N. helped the United States defend the Korean peninsula .
 U.S. commander General MacArthur launched a surprise invasion of North Korea . MacArthur quickly drove North Korean forces up to the border with China . The Korean War ended in a defeat .
 Mao’s China warned the U.S. not to approach the Chinese border and launched its own surprise attack in December, 1950 . Mao's China also launched a surprise attack on the United States .
 Fear of WW3 and nuclear weapons kept the U.S. from using all its might to win the war . It was called a “Police Action’s” because of fear of using nuclear weapons . The action took place during the Second World War II .
 The United States Army and Air Force made up the greatest part of the United Nations forces . The Chinese invasion appeared to be winning and General MacArthur called for the use of Atomic Bombs .
 He also criticized Truman for not trying to win the war aggressively enough . Truman was criticized for not doing enough to win a war .
 In the US, the President is the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces . In the U.S. President is President of the armed forces .
 Truman "fired" MacArthur for trying to determine how the war would be fought and what its goal would be . MacArthur was tremendously popular, but Truman fired him .
 Truman emphasized the fact that the President makes the decisions about waging war and not the military . Truman emphasized that the decision was made by the President, not military .
 In 1953, President Eisenhower compromised with North Korea and the fighting stopped . The fighting stopped in 1953, but the fighting never resumed .
 The war has never ended but the 38th parallel now divides the two countries . The war never ended, but the war has now never ended .
 The freedoms guaranteed under the Bill of Rights were considered less important than the threat of Communism . The freedoms of the American people were thought to be less important .
 In 1957 the USSR successfully launched the world’s first satellite, which orbited the globe . Sputnik – The Space Race - The USSR was the first satellite to orbit the globe.
 Americans feared that the satellite could direct nuclear missiles and that the USSR was significantly ahead of the U.S. in scientific research . The satellite was launched by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 The U.S. added great emphasis to scientific education and the development of satellites and missiles . Overnight, the United States added great . emphasis to . scientific education .
 Khrushchev Embraces Communist Cuba’s leader Fidel Castro, 1961 Bay of Pigs Disaster . The United States secretly helps Cubans try to overthrow Fidel Castro and end Communism .
 Castro will turn to the USSR for protection afterwards . Krushchev will secretly have nuclear missiles installed in Cuba . Castro turns to the Soviet Union for protection .