 The security and well-being of the American people and of all humanity are threatened by several global challenges that can only be successfully met through international cooperation . Goodby: The security of the U.S. and all humanity is threatened .
 The last of these challenges is almost entirely under the control of a small number of governments . Improving the performance of the U.S. federal government in this area would pay big dividends .
 Improving governance in the U.S. and elsewhere is not just a simple matter of a political choice, it's a matter of political choice . Improving governing in the United States and elsewhere isn't just a political issue, it says .
 Governance of complex military/technical /political public policy issues in these rapidly changing times requires a combination of relevant expertise and leadership at several levels . This is often missing in government institutions .
 The challenge is to create new institutions or reform existing ones so that they have the capacity to manage these complex issues . The challenge will be creating new institutions to manage complex issues such as climate change, experts say .
 In this essay, I will draw on the experience of negotiating the limited test ban treaty during the period from 1961 to 1963 to demonstrate the unique role that a small federal agency with a crosscutting mandate and direct access to the president could play .
 I was a staff member with special responsibilities for test ban negotiations from 1961 to 1963 . I refer to the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency .
 ACDA’s charter permitted it to acquire and maintain a mix of functional expertise rarely found at that time in government institutions charged with governance in the 2 area of interstate relations . ACDA's charter allowed it to maintain and . maintain a . mix of . functional expertise .
 The charter also made clear that the director of the agency was to advise the president . The charter made clear the director would advise the government .
 Creating ACDA was not an exercise in creating a “czar” to handle a single complex issue but an effort to restructure the federal government so as to concentrate critical human resources on an area critical to the welfare of the nation .
 By April 1961, President John F Kennedy had decided to continue the policies of the Eisenhower administration and seek to negotiate a total, or comprehensive, ban on nuclear test explosions .
 Eisenhower had proposed technical talks on verification of a test ban in 1958 . This had been one of President Dwight D Eisenhower’s goals since 1958 .
 The scientists involved in the study included Soviet scientists . The scientists had concurred in a verification system to monitor nuclear testing .
 Talks had come close to reaching an agreement in 1960, Eisenhower’s last year in office . The United States, United Kingdom, and Soviet Union were only three nations that had conducted test explosions by 1958 .
 On February 13, 1960, France conducted its first nuclear test explosion, which Moscow saw as a Western asset . Moscow saw it as an asset to the West . The explosion was the first of its kind .
 The Soviets downed an American U-2 surveillance overflight of the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960, killing any remaining chance that Eisenhower could reach an agreement . The downing was the downing by the Soviets of an American . U.S. U.2 surveillance aircraft was
 The idea of excluding underground explosions from a treaty ban on nuclear tests arose within a short time after the beginning of negotiations in 1958 .
 The reason was the difficulty in distinguishing between nuclear explosions and earthquakes with then-available sensors . The reason for the delay was because of the difficulty of detecting earthquakes and nuclear explosions using sensors .
 For small-yield explosions it appeared that seismographs might not record them at all if a nuclear explosion was decoupled from the surrounding rock by being detonated in a large cavern .
 For explosions in the atmosphere, underwater, and in space, a monitoring system was generally considered adequate for verification purposes . The monitoring system consisted of several types of sensors .
 The United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1961–63 3 declare a moratorium on underground tests . One proposed solution was to negotiate a three-environment treaty and James E. Goodby .
 Another solution was to declare a moratorium on nuclear tests in the atmosphere while negotiating a verification system for underground tests . Another solution, sometimes advanced by Western leaders, was a moratorium .
 The two sides were not able to converge on a common position on exempting underground tests . Moscow thought the U.S. and Britain would have a technical advantage in testing in that environment . Russia and Britain thought the United States and Britain had an advantage .
 Other nations could acquire nuclear weapons by testing underground . Nuclear testing underground could also be used to get nuclear weapons .
 Both sides recognize this problem, which would weaken the antiproliferation effects of a test ban treaty . Both sides recognized this .
 Both sides attached importance to the effort to negotiate a comprehensive, or total, ban on tests . For that reason, among others, both sides attach importance to negotiations .
 Congress established a new federal agency called the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1961 . ACDA was created at the request of the Kennedy administration .
 John J McCloy, an elder statesman with credentials in both Republican and Democratic parties, had been advising the president on arms control . This was eight months into the Kennedy administration, during which time he was advising .
 1961 was a terrible year for the Kennedy administration and for East-West relations generally . The year 1961 was one of the worst years in the history of American relations .
 American-sponsored invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro Cubans at the Bay of Pigs ended in disaster in 1961 . American-backed invasion ended in a disaster .
 Nikita Khrushchev and Kennedy were at the height of their tensions in the 1960s . The two leaders were at a summit in Vienna, Vienna, Austria, in 1960s and 1961s .
 In the late summer of 1961, Khrushchev ended a moratorium on all explosive nuclear testing that had been in effect since 1958 by initiating a test series that included a fifty-plus megaton test explosion . The largest nuclear explosion ever was the largest ever .
 Khrushchev approved a proposal of the East German government to build a wall between East and West Berlin . The East Berlin wall was built in the 1960s and 1961 .
 Khrushchev's moves to sever the West’s connections with Berlin as a whole were in violation of agreements with the Western Allies . The move was a violation of an agreement with the West .
 This and the failure of the Vienna summit encouraged Kennedy to build up conventional forces, as well as nuclear forces, he says . Kennedy's decision to build conventional forces encouraged him to do so . The U.S. went on to develop nuclear weapons and conventional forces .
 These events brought the United States and the Soviet Union to a point where war between them seemed to be a serious possibility, with the likely use of nuclear weapons . These events were a point of contention between the two countries .
 The Cuban missile crisis erupted in October 1962 when Soviet missiles were detected in Cuba . The crisis was triggered by the discovery of Soviet missiles in the country .
 War was narrowly averted, and luck played a big part in saving the world from a global catastrophe . The world was saved by luck and luck, and the war was saved .
 In 1963, the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union entered into a treaty that banned all nuclear test explosions except for those conducted underground . Despite these ominous developments, the U.S. and Britain entered into the treaty just two years later .
 The 1963 treaty was the first fruit of US-USSR negotiated attempts to control nuclear weapons . It was signed by the U.S. and the Soviet Union in 1963 .
 One of the reasons was the creation of ACDA and its intense support for the negotiation of a nuclear test ban treaty . Kennedy’s growing interest in a test ban ban treaty was also growing interest .
 Another reason was persistent pressure on Kennedy from British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan . Another reason is persistent pressure from the British PM .
 ACDA was closely engaged with the British both in Washington and at the negotiations in Geneva . ACDA worked closely with British officials in Washington, Geneva and Washington .
 The British embassy in Washington enjoyed a very close and confiding relationship with the Kennedy administration . The embassy in D.C. enjoyed a close relationship .
 The British had been the negotiating partners of the United States in the test ban talks from their beginning . Information about the talks routinely passed back and forth between the two nations at several levels .
 The British ambassador, Sir David Ormsby-Gore, was a personal friend and confidant of Kennedy from well before Kennedy became president . He was the British ambassador to Kennedy .
 Ormsby-Gore also had participated in the test ban talks in Geneva before becoming ambassador .
 He enjoyed a close relationship with Macmillan, who was a strong advocate of a total ban on tests . He was a close ally with the former British Prime Minister .
 Prime Minister was very much against the acquisition of a nuclear arsenal by Germany . Indeed, the prime minister was very opposed to the acquisition .
 He saw great benefit in a test ban and thought a nondissemination agreement would prevent that . He said the agreement would be a good thing for the sport's future .
 State Department’s interest in NATO Multilateral Force had essentially the same motivation . The State Department's interest in the NATO force had essentially a similar motivation, the State Department said .
 American presidents have primary and almost unquestioned authority within the U.S. government for the formulation and execution of policy in the realm of nuclear weaponry . ACDA Was There When It Was Needed, says President Obama .
 Every U.S. president has had to rely on federal departments to work his will . The United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1961–63 .
 Not infrequently, presidents broker positions between contending factions within their own administrations . President Obama has a history of brokering positions in the White House .
 It is usually said that a president “negotiated” this or that agreement when what is meant is that he caused an agreement to be negotiated and concluded during his term of office . A president can negotiate and conclude an agreement during his time in office .
 President Kennedy personally caused the limited test ban treaty to be concluded in 1963, shortly before his assassination in November of that year . Without his personal intervention and his sense of where his priorities lay, the treaty would not have been concluded, he says .
 The president brokered the policy decisions that led to the treaty, he says . It's also correct to say that he brokered policy decisions with the British prime minister and Congress .
 The Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and Under Water is a case study on how American democracy works . It is the final Treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water .
 ACDA consistently supported Kennedy’s instinct that a nuclear test ban treaty of some sort would substantially benefit the United States . ACDA supported Kennedy's instinct that such a treaty would benefit the U.S. But ACDA continued to support Kennedy's instincts that a test ban ban treaty
 Kennedy often mentioned the effect of a test ban on limiting the spread of nuclear weapons to other nations . Kennedy usually mentioned the effects of a ban on nuclear weapons .
 Sometimes he mentioned the harmful effects of radioactive fallout and how a test ban would prevent more of it from being released into the human environment . He also mentioned the dangers of nuclear testing .
 Other national interests competed with the nuclear test ban for attention and for priority . But, inevitably, other national interests were competing with the ban .
 State and Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the CIA each had their own advocates for policies and tactics that would have at least postponed the test ban negotiations during the decisive years of 1962 and 1963 .
 Without ACDA, the key decisions that made the limited test ban treaty possible in 1963 would have been postponed to Kennedy’s presumed second term .
 Without that external pressure, the agendas of other senior figures in the Kennedy administration might have been given priority in 1963 . Kennedy's agenda may have been prioritized by the pressure of external pressure .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk strongly favored a four-party declaration committing the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union not to disseminate nuclear materials or technology to any other nation . Rusk: Four-party agreement would commit the U.S., UK, France
 In 1963, Rusk was personally and directly engaged in pursuing a nonproliferation declaration . He hoped to deter or slow China’s acquisition of a nuclear weapon . Rusk: "I hope to slow or slow" China's acquisition of nuclear weapons .
 By 1963, he seemed convinced that a comprehensive test ban treaty was nonnegotiable with Moscow and that China would not accept it . China was convinced that the treaty would not be accepted by Moscow .
 Macmillan pushed for both a test ban treaty and a nondissemination agreement . He pushed for the treaty to be ratified .
 Kennedy was convinced that two agreements would be more than the traffic would bear . Kennedy gave priority to the test ban until April 1963, 1963 .
 On March 28, 1963, he wrote to Macmillan, “As a general principle, I dislike the thought of tying one difficult problem to another lest neither one be solved.”
 In 1963, Thompson was State Department’s chief adviser on Soviet affairs . Thompson was one of the heroes of the 13 days of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 . He was convinced that broad-based, high-level consultations with the Soviet leadership were essential .
 He doubted, with good reason, that the CTBT could be negotiated with the Soviet Union . The CTBT was negotiated between the two countries .
 Thompson argued Khrushchev was too preoccupied with the growing split between China and the Soviet Union to take seriously a renewed effort to revive nuclear test ban negotiations . Thompson argued in 1963 that the Soviets were not serious enough to revive the talks .
 Other parts of the State Department were preoccupied with the Multilateral Force, a proposal for a multilateral sea-based NATO nuclear weapons force . The proposal for the force was proposed by the Policy Planning Council .
 In 1960, the State Department’s proponents of a nuclear test ban treaty had been consolidated within the United States Disarmament Administration . Thompson strongly supported the MLF . The United States Arms Control and Disarmarmament Agency in 1961–63 was effectively a bureau .
 This unit became the negotiating component of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency when that was created in 1961 . Most of the test ban advocates were removed from the State Department . This unit is now the negotiating arm of the arms control and disarmament agency .
 ACDA Director William Foster and his deputy, Adrian “Butch” Fisher, lead the new advocacy team . The group of experienced diplomats then received the strong support of a newly created high-level advocacy team, Foster and Fisher .
 Each was committed to achieving arms control results and the latter was highly skilled at congressional relations . The former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was a strong advocate for arms control .
 State Department lacked a first-class team of scientists, something the State Dept. lacked . Another source of strength was the recruiting of a first class team of experts .
 Other agencies were not heavily invested in the success of the test ban negotiations .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara supported a comprehensive test ban treaty . McNamara believed that it would be helpful in blocking the spread of nuclear weapons capabilities .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff supported a comprehensive test ban treaty when the new Kennedy administration decided to introduce a slightly modified new version into the negotiations in Geneva in 1961 .
 Joint Chiefs were lukewarm about another modified CTBT that was introduced into the negotiations by America and the United Kingdom on August 27, 1962 . The Joint Chiefs did not object to it, but did not oppose it .
 They supported the limited test ban treaty also introduced at that time . They supported a limited test test ban also introduced in that time.
 The United States Atomic Energy Commission, charged with developing nuclear bombs and warheads, had never liked a comprehensive test ban . The U.S. leadership generally had supported a limited treaty .
 CIA Director John McCone believed that Moscow would not accept a limited test ban treaty, a reasonable estimate at that time . CIA Director McCone: "Based on many negative statements from Soviet officials, [Moscow] wouldn't accept a treaty"
 Kennedy’s willingness to suspend tests in the atmosphere as an act of national policy, publicly stated in his speech of June 10, 1963, was one of the principal factors . Kennedy's willingness to suspended tests in atmosphere as a national policy was a factor .
 Substantial congressional support for a ban on testing in the atmosphere was another . Substantial Congressional support for the ban was another. Substantial .
 In Moscow, the support of influential Soviet scientists for a test ban made it easier for Khrushchev to endorse the LTBT . The decisive split between the Soviet Union and China in 1963 was probably not seen as a disincentive by Khrushche .
 The Cuban missile crisis is generally thought to be the main reason for Khrushchev’s renewed interest in some version of a test ban .
 At the level of diplomatic maneuvering, Kennedy’s interest in negotiating a treaty to end testing paved the way to the agreement . Kennedy sent special emissaries to Moscow in 1963 empowered to negotiate at the highest level .
 The test ban negotiations effectively began in 1958 . The President’s Supporting Staff is the president's deputy secretary .
 Not until August 27, 1962, was a three-environment treaty actually introduced into the negotiations . The treaty was signed in 1962 .
 The tactics of selling that treaty to the Soviet Union were devised by ACDA in consultation with the British . The treaty was initiated and drafted by the ACDA .
 The United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1961–63 were ready to negotiate the monitoring machinery necessary for its verification . The central theme of the argument was that the U.S. and the United Kingdom favored a James E Goodby .
 Western powers would accept a limited test ban treaty as a first step toward a comprehensive test ban . If that should prove to be impossible because of Soviet refusal to accept inspection procedures, Western powers will accept limited test bans .
 The British argued that the LTBT could not become a practical object of negotiation unless the CTBT was seen by the public and by the Soviets as a feasible and widely endorsed goal .
 Foster was determined that the new agency should take charge of the test ban negotiations . Foster, supported by Fisher, was determined to lead the negotiations .
 He saw the tactical advantages in having a viable alternative if a total ban could not be negotiated with the Soviet Union . He was less interested in a limited ban initially, but saw the advantages of having an alternative . The ban was first introduced in the 1970s, with the first being introduced
 The military and the AEC were more inclined toward a limited ban than a total ban, as was the Congress, but hardly anyone thought it could be negotiated . The Congress was more inclined to a limited, limited ban, but the Congress was less likely to agree .
 For several years, Moscow had vehemently turned down the idea whenever it came up . Moscow has vehemently rejected the idea for the first time .
 ACDA’s International Relations Bureau, headed by Ambassador Jacob Beam, crafted the first draft of the limited treaty . The treaty was cleared with an interagency group .
 ACDA is drafting both a new comprehensive test ban treaty and a limited ban treaty . Ormsby-Gore told Foster he hoped the British would be kept informed of the progress of the drafting .
 Foster assured Ormsby-Gore that the British would be kept informed . Foster set up a channel between staff members of ACDA and the British embassy .
 I was one of the few brought into the compartmentalized KennedyMacmillan-Khrushchev exchanges . My contact at the British embassy in Washington was First Secretary Peter Wilkinson, Peter Wilkinson .
 Neidle did most of the actual drafting of the LTBT, while consulting with me and others in ACDA about the contents of the treaty, says Peter Bergen .
 On July 4, 1962, I passed a preliminary draft of the LTBT to Peter Wilkinson . Peter Wilkinson forwarded the text to the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London on the same day .
 The draft CTBT was also given to the British at various stages for their comment . Draft CTBT has been given to British officials at various levels .
 The British believed that the Soviets would only accept an LTBT if it was very simple . The British thought that the Soviet Union would accept a simple LTBT .
 As the interagency bargaining proceeded in Washington, that was generally the way the thinking evolved . The thinking evolved in Washington .
 A limited test ban treaty text was introduced by the American and British delegations in the Geneva talks on August 27, 1962, in parallel with the comprehensive test ban ban treaty . The treaty was introduced in parallel to the comprehensive treaty .
 ACDA drafted the CTBT and steered it through the interagency Committee of Principals during the summer of 1962 . ACDA had drafted CTBT .
 The details of inspection procedures had occupied most of the time of the Committee of Principals . The LTBT sailed through without much discussion . The text of the LTBT was quite complex and the details were quite complex .
 The two treaties were introduced into the Geneva talks accompanied by a declaration by Kennedy and Macmillan that they could accept either text, although their preference was for the comprehensive treaty .
 The effect of that was to defer any discussion of the language of the LTBT until July 1963, when special emissaries Averell Harriman and Lord Hailsham began to focus on it in talks with the Soviets .
 The proposal to send emissaries to Moscow was fiercely debated in connection with the proposals . Each of these questions were fiercely debated, especially how to order U.S. priorities .
 The United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1961–63 11 attitude toward the test ban had vacillated considerably . Khrushchev’s attitude toward a test ban was vacillating considerably .
 These developments naturally introduced new factors into the calculus of both nations . The U.S. and Russia's relationship has been strained by tensions in the past decade .
 Khrushchev appeared to have felt that the revelation of the military weakness of the Soviet Union relative to the United States required some reaction by him . Nuclear weapons development became a key part of his policies after the U-2 incident .
 During Eisenhower’s term, Berlin had been a major source of tension between the Soviet Union and the United States, Britain, and France . This remained the case during the Kennedy administration . Berlin was a major factor in tension between U.S., Britain, France, and the Soviet
 Khrushchev was facing a two-front crisis, one with China, in the East and one with America and its allies in the West .
 Khrushchev appeared to have lost interest in the test ban negotiations after the 1960 U-2 incident . But the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 changed his attitude .
 Khrushchev said as a gesture to President Kennedy, the Soviet government would accept a verification system that included a provision for two or three on-site inspections . The Soviet government agreed to the system, which included provision for inspections .
 Kennedy believed, rightly, that the Senate would never approve a comprehensive treaty with so few on-site inspections after having asked for twenty in the recent past . Kennedy believed—rightly, I think—that he thought, "that the Senate wouldn't approve"
 Kennedy replied positively to Khrushchev about the idea of a US-Soviet meeting, while demurring on the number of inspections . Kennedy also demurred on inspections of Soviet Union-sanctioned countries .
 Russia and the U.S. have been at odds for years over the past month . Russia's relations with the United States has been strained in recent months . Russia and Washington's relations have been strained by a series of miscommunication .
 The Soviet representatives had orders, apparently, to discuss only the number of on-site inspections, and only the two or three that Khrushchev had endorsed . The Soviets had orders to discuss the inspections, apparently to only discuss the two- or three they had approved .
 Talks broke up at the end of January 1963 . Talks were meant to broaden the substantive agenda by including more elements .
 Khrushchev was deeply offended that what he probably thought was his good-faith offer had been rejected . Khruschev was offended that his offer was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 His scientists had been urging him to engage with the West on a test ban and he had done that, at the risk of his standing with the military and the Politburo .
 He made his anger and sense of disillusionment clear to Kennedy and Macmillan, then and later . He said: "He was angry and disillusioned. He was very angry and very disillusioned"
 The test ban in 1963 marked the beginning of the endgame in the nuclear arms race . The tests were the lowest level since the Soviet Union's fifty-megaton test in 1961 .
 To revive the negotiations, on March 16, 1963, Macmillan initiated a new round of correspondence with Kennedy .
 This began a crucial month in the history of the negotiations to ban nuclear tests . It began a month that began in despair but concluded with a victory for proponents of giving priority to the ban .
 The debates and maneuvering that took place during that crucial month are worth describing in detail for what the events reveal about governance during the Kennedy administration . The debates, maneuvering and debates in that period of Kennedy administration were worth describing .
 In March 1963, Macmillan asked the president to consider that negotiations in Geneva had become deadlocked and that a new high-level intervention was needed . In March 1964, the British prime minister wrote to the president asking him to consider the situation .
 He also raised the issue of trying to negotiate an agreement not to transfer nuclear weapons technology to countries not then possessing such technology .
 The letter hinted at a summit meeting and raised the possibility of sending special emissaries to talk with Khrushchev . Averell Harriman specifically mentioned a possible meeting with the Soviet leader .
 As a practiced politician, Macmillan calculated the political benefits for himself in the electorate that favored a test ban . As a practice politician, he had calculated the benefits of the test ban for himself . The test ban was introduced in 1945 .
 In published excerpts from his diary and in published excerpts, his sincerity was very clear . He pushed colleagues in London and Kennedy toward a resumption of the effort to ban tests, he said .
 The U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1961–63 . Winston Churchill and Ronald Reagan saw nuclear deterrence as an evil that should be ended .
 He recorded in his diary that he wept for joy on hearing that the LTBT had been initialed in Moscow . The LTBT was the first time it had been approved by the Russian government .
 The prime minister’s March 16 letter was received with considerable skepticism in the State Department . The State Department is skeptical about the letter .
 Ambassador Thompson wrote to Secretary Rusk that he was “suspicious” of this initiative . Ambassador Thompson said he was "suspicious" of the initiative .
 Khrushchev advised the secretary to recommend a reply that would reject the idea of a summit meeting . His memorandum, dated March 21, 1963, suggested that the Soviet leader would be too preoccupied with the growing split with China to think seriously about negotiations .
 Ormsby-Gore had met with Kennedy privately about Macmillan's letter on March 21 . Kennedy and Rusk followed Thompson’s advice, following Thompson's advice .
 On March 28, 1963, a letter was dispatched to Macmillan that essentially adopted Thompson’s views . The letter was essentially adopted by the British government .
 He suggested Macmillan send Kennedy his own draft of a letter to Khrushchev . He suggested that the prime minister telephone the president about it .
 Macmillan saw the Department of State as harboring ‘hostility’ toward him but sought to put the best face he could on Kennedy’s reply . Kennedy included a draft letter for the two men to send to Khrushchev .
 Macmillan sent a second letter to Kennedy on April 3, 1963, in which he enclosed a revised draft of the proposed letter to Khrushchev . Ormsby-Gore wrote to Kennedy urging him to send the letter .
 On April 10, 1963, ACDA Director Foster sent to McGeorge Bundy, the president’s assistant for national security affairs, a draft letter . Foster sent the draft letter to Macmillan that enclosed a proposed letter to Khrushchev . Foster: The letter was intended to
 I was the author of the memo to Macmillan and the draft letter to Khrushchev . I was also author of a memo to the British Prime Minister to write to him .
 These were the issues that were discussed and negotiated in subsequent exchanges between London and Washington . The issues were discussed in subsequent negotiations between Washington and London .
 Kennedy and Macmillan essentially took over drafting process until their letter was dispatched to Khrushchev . The letter was sent in the evening hours in Washington on April 15, 1963 .
 Bundy sent the ACDA letter for Macmillan, with its attached letter to Khrushchev, to Philip de Zulueta, the prime minister’s private secretary for foreign affairs . Bundy's letter was sent April 10, when Bundy sent it to the PM's private secretary
 Bundy advised the prime minister’s office that the president would telephone Macmillan to discuss the letter to Khrushchev . Bundy advised that the letter would be discussed by the president .
 Bundy explained that the president had not had time to read either document . Bundy said he had not been able to read the documents . Bundy: "I'm not sure what's going on for the president to do"
 The record of that telephone call in Britain’s National Archives is dated April 11, and it took place in the morning in Washington .
 It is available, verbatim, in the National Archives in Britain, but not in any U.S. archives, so far as far as I can discover .
 Kennedy focused on a change he wanted to make in the draft letter to Khrushchev that Macmillan had sent to him on April 3, essentially to water down the mention of a summit meeting . Kennedy wanted to change the wording in his draft letter .
 He drew on the ACDA draft and, on the same day, April 11, followed up with a written communication proposing an additional change .
 The resulting letter was then shown to Secretary Rusk, who had just returned from Europe on April 11 . Rusk was shown the resulting letter to Rusk .
 Rusk and Thompson had favored sending an emissary, preferably Rusk, to Moscow to discuss outstanding US-Soviet issues . Thompson and Rusk wanted to send a U.S. envoy to Moscow .
 Rusk was in Paris from April 7–11 and there discussed a draft nondissemination declaration with Lord Home and Maurice Couve de Murville .
 He met with Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to the U.S. in Washington, D.C. on April 12 .
 The discussions left Rusk sensing that a nondissemination declaration might be possible, while a four-party test ban treaty was not possible . Rusk: "The discussions left us feeling that a nontested test ban could be possible"
 Kennedy eventually agreed to language in the test ban letter to Khrushchev that gave such a declaration equal footing with a test ban treaty in terms of their desirability . Kennedy proposed that emissaries visit Moscow to discuss a treaty . Kennedy agreed to the language of the letter but still
 The final language on summitry and nondissemination was worked out in telephone conversations between Bundy and Rusk . Macmillan acquiesced in the compromise language on April 15 .
 The letter regarding broad US-Soviet discussions was sent to Khrushchev by Kennedy by Kennedy on April 11, 1962 . Thompson handed the letter to Dobrynin the same day .
 Khrushchev replied positively to that letter on April 30 and his letter was handed to Thompson by Dobrynin on April 29 . By that time, the joint Kennedy-Macmillan letter had been delivered in Moscow .
 U.S. Ambassador to the USSR Foy Kohler’s report of the conversation was fairly pessimistic and that was certainly justified by the tenor of Khrushchev's remarks . United States ambassador to the Soviet Union was pessimistic, Kohler said .
 Khrushchev agreed to have test ban talks first, followed by general issue talks . As it turned out, the test ban ban talks had to be followed by the general issue . The ban talks were first to be held in Moscow .
 Kennedy and Macmillan and Khrushchev confirmed that the test ban mission would begin on July 15 . Subsequent letter exchanges between Kennedy and the MacMillan administration confirmed the mission was to test the missile system .
 The National Security Council met for half an hour on July 9 to consider the instructions for the Harriman mission to Moscow .
 It was clear that everyone thought the LTBT was the only realistic outcome . The LTBT is the most realistic outcome in the world, and it was clear everyone wanted it .
 AEC Chairman Glenn Seaborg confirmed that the definition in the LTBT text would permit US underground testing . General Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, reported that the chiefs individually had taken the position that an LTBT was not in the national interest .
 He asked for a review of the treaty in order to take account of developments during the past year .
 Rusk said that the U.S. must take the position that an atmospheric test ban is in the national interest . McNamara opposed this . Rusk: "The time to review that is past is past"
 Kennedy continued the discussion with Rusk, McNamara, and Taylor in his office after the NSC meeting . Kennedy continued that discussion with McNamara and Rusk after the meeting .
 Khrushchev was deeply moved by that speech, in which Kennedy said that the United States would refrain from testing in the atmosphere . Kennedy said in that speech that the U.S. would not use such a weapon in the space .
 Foster favored a moratorium on atmospheric testing to curb radioactive contamination of the environment . Foster had favored an atmospheric testing moratorium to curb the radioactive contamination . Foster: "It's a good thing that you can't be bombarded with radioactive waste"
 Carl Kaysen, Bundy’s deputy, was sympathetic to the idea . He recommended this to the president twice, once in a letter in September 1962 and again in December .
 In December 1962, he thought that a moratorium limited to calendar year 1963 might be feasible . He explored that idea with the AEC and other agencies, who endorsed it with conditions . The moratorium was lifted in December 1962 .
 Kennedy also announced in that speech that Khrushchev had accepted the British-American proposal to send special emissaries to Moscow to discuss the test ban issue . ACDA had strongly backed the priority goal .
 Khrushchev said Moscow could accept a ban on tests in the atmosphere, underwater, and in outer space . Khrrushchev did not link that to a moratorium on underground tests in 1963 .
 Moscow talks began on July 15 and ended successfully on July 25 . And so the stage was set for the Moscow talks, which began July 15 .
 Lord Hailsham led the British delegation and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko led the Soviet delegation . The Soviet delegation was led by Lord Hailam .
 It was clear even before they went that the limited test ban treaty would be the most likely outcome and that is what happened . It is clear that even before the treaty was likely to be ratified, it was clear that it was likely that it would happen .
 The text is based on the LTBT text introduced at the Geneva talks on August 27, 1962 . The text was based on an earlier version of the text .
 Two related incidents deserve mention here parenthetically, mainly because they could have derailed the Moscow talks .
 The first incident occurred in June 1963, when US sensors picked up signals from what might have been an atmospheric nuclear test in the Soviet Union . The first time the U.S. picked up signs of a nuclear test may have been detected was in 1963 .
 The State Department and the British disagreed about what to do about it . The State Dept. and the UK disagreed about the situation . The U.S. State Department says it's not clear what will happen .
 Thompson suggested a public statement from the White House and a message to Soviet foreign minister Gromyko . Macmillan counseled silence, while Thompson suggested public statement and message .
 The second incident took place during the Moscow meeting in July . The U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1961–63 .
 Kennedy was worried that if the French continued to conduct atmospheric nuclear tests, the limited test ban treaty might never come to pass or, if successfully negotiated, might be undermined . Kennedy was also worried that the treaty might not be able to pass .
 Khrushchev already had threatened a Soviet reaction if the French continued testing . The Soviet Union had already threatened a response if the tests continued .
 Kennedy wrote to President Charles de Gaulle, essentially offering technical support to the French testing program if the French suspended atmospheric testing . Kennedy offered technical support for the French program if it was suspended .
 If the Soviets had learned of U.S. support for a French nuclear weapons program, they would have concluded that France was acting as a surrogate for the United States testing program .
 The United States reportedly did provide support for the French weapons program . The U.S. reportedly provided support, secretly .
 Priority in negotiations with Moscow would be given to the test ban, a nondissemination declaration, and a review of outstanding US-Soviet issues .
 Prime Minister Macmillan’s views on test ban issues would be given very considerable weight, to the extent that Kennedy often deferred to his views . Kennedy often held out the hope of a summit meeting as an imminent possibility .
 Kennedy accepted the British view that it was better to send emissaries to Moscow than to assume that London and Washington knew what was in Khrushchev’s mind . The growing Sino-Soviet split was a factor in the decision-making, Kennedy said .
 By July 1963, the world had passed through the Cuban missile crisis and the split between Moscow and Beijing was reaching its peak . The split between Beijing and Moscow was reaching their peak .
 Khrushchev timed the meeting on the test ban to take place after he had talked with a Chinese delegation in Moscow . In fact, the meeting was timed after he'd met with the Chinese delegation .
 Scientists in the Soviet Union had also been pressuring Khrushchev to accept a limited test ban treaty . The treaty was signed in 1961, signed by Soviet Union President Vladimir Putin .
 World conditions are always critical to progress in cooperative security between rivals . World conditions must be critical for progress in cooperation between nations, says U.S. State Department .
 When the time was ripe, the text was ready and could be concluded in just a few days . The text could be completed in a few hours .
 The point to underscore here is that a policy priority that the president favored was supported strongly with ideas and actions by an agency that had been set up by the president . The agency was set up for the specific purpose of giving a higher priority to nuclear arms control .
 A test ban treaty would have been concluded in 1963 . Without that support, policy priorities and tactics favored by the traditional departments would have carried out the day .
 The White House almost always referred to papers from ACDA as being “State Department” papers . Ironically, the White House often referred to ACDA papers as ‘State Department papers .
 The two agencies got along well, but there were sharp differences between ACDA and State from time to time . ACDA is a federal agency that deals with the Department of Justice .
 The lesson is that governance is very often a matter of being prepared for a future time when conditions are ripe for decisive action and of taking steps in the near term to build the foundation .
 Without a future-oriented mind-set in the system that foresees the need to set up the pieces necessary to solve a strategic problem, successful governance in responding to foreseeable challenges is almost impossible .
 Preoccupation with the present that ignores threats looming ahead can only lead to catastrophe . A preoccupation of the present will lead to a catastrophe, says David Cameron .
 The LTBT was the first of a series of nuclear restraint agreements between the USSR/ Russia and the U.S. It was signed in the 1960s and 1980s .
 New START required reductions in nuclear forces monitored by an on-site verification system . The system was set up by a verification system that permitted confirmation of its obligations .
 Russia and the U.S. are building new nuclear delivery systems . The nuclear competition continues unabated, taking the form of building new systems .
 There is no immediate prospect of negotiating deeper reductions in the U.S. and Russia nuclear forces .
 Other nations are testing and deploying missile systems that both Russia and the U.S. are prohibited from building . The situation calls into question the viability of the US-Russia INF Treaty .
 Ballistic missile defense also remains a controversial and divisive issue for the United States, Russia, and China . The U.S., Russia and China, in both Europe and Asia, are divided on missile defense .
 In the Middle East, the U.S. successfully negotiated an agreement with Iran that should block that nation from building a nuclear weapon for many years . The deal should block Iran from building nuclear weapons for years, experts say .
 The Iranians, however, continue to develop missiles, in violation of UN resolutions, and face new sanctions because of this . The Iranians are still developing missiles, despite UN resolutions .
 Political change in the Middle East has mostly been in a negative direction, including confrontation between Sunni-led nations and Shiite-led Iran . Much of it related to Syria, much of it relates to Syria .
 Russian military intervention in Syria has posed new dangers of armed conflict . Russia's intervention in the country's civil war has been a source of tension in Syria for years .
 Turkey has moved in the direction of authoritarian government and closer to Russia . Turkey has become closer to the Kremlin in recent years . The country has seen a rise in authoritarian government .
 In South Asia, political and economic relations between India and Pakistan have improved somewhat under the leadership of prime ministers Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan and Narendra Modi of India .
 Pakistan remains unstable in the face of attacks by domestic extremists . Many in Pakistan's military leadership still see India as the country’s primary threat . Pakistan is still unstable, however, and many in the military leadership see it as a primary threat to India .
 Pakistan’s nuclear weapons building program continues to add nuclear weapons to an already substantial stockpile . Pakistan has already built a large stockpile of nuclear weapons .
 Nuclear conflict has to be seen as a realistic possibility between the two countries . Nuclear conflict is a real possibility between North Korea and South Korea .
 The Obama administration followed a policy of “strategic patience” in dealing with North Korea . North Korea has been a source of tension in the past .
 The result was that no negotiation or other type of engagement that might prevent North Korea’s continued production of nuclear weapons was in place throughout most of the two terms of the Obama administration . The result is that no negotiations or other types of engagement .
 North Korea’s fifth explosive nuclear test was conducted in September 2016; it launched a satellite on a three-stage ballistic missile in February 2016 . North Korea also conducted a fifth nuclear test in September .
 A ballistic missile with a range that would permit an attack on all of Alaska was tested on July 3, 2017 . The missile was tested in Alaska on July 4, 2017.
 Japan and South Korea seem content to rely on the American nuclear deterrent . Pressure is being placed on both governments by domestic critics in those countries who favor acquiring nuclear arms .
 President Trump has called for a policy of pressure and engagement with North Korea . President Trump hopes China will apply maximum pressure on Pyongyang . North Korea has been a source of tension with the North Korean regime .
 The Obama administration introduced the concept of Nuclear Security Summits, of which four were held as of April 2016 . Four of the four nuclear security summits were held in April 2016.
 President Obama’s efforts to thwart terrorists from acquiring fissile materials are the most consequential of his legacies in the nuclear arena . New START and the Iran agreement are among the most significant legacies of Obama's nuclear policy .
 The threat of the use of nuclear weapons in combat is probably higher than during the Cold War, experts say . The threat is likely to be higher than in the past, they say .
 The threat comes from sources that the United States cannot very well control . The U.S. cannot control the situation in Syria .
 The Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, one of the strongest bulwarks against nuclear proliferation, remains unratified by the U.S. The United States has not ratified the treaty .
 ACDA was abolished as an independent agency and its personnel and functions were absorbed into the State Department . The agency was abolished in 1999 .
 I chaired the task force that designed the initial blueprint for accomplishing this. I chaired a task force designed to accomplish this. It was the first blueprint for achieving this, and I chaired it .
 During the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, ACDA enjoyed unique advantages . ACDA enjoys unique advantages during those of those presidents .
 Its staff included talented and experienced professionals from several areas of expertise . The organisation is based in New York City, New York .
 Its leadership was focused on issues with which presidents were closely engaged . President Barack Obama's administration has been criticized for its policies .
 Secretary of State James Baker told me in 1992 that he favored merging the agency with State . Baker: "I'm glad to have the agency merged with State. It's a good time for the agency to be merged," he says .
 He added that he did not think his judgment was influenced by bureaucratic rivalry . The judge said he does not think he did think his judgement was influenced .
 President Trump has asked for advice about restructuring the executive branch . The president has also asked for help from the White House on restructuring .
 The United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1961–63 21 . It is obviously not an open-and-shut case that a small agency can provide advice and negotiating assets to the president .
 It certainly was worthwhile during much of ACDA’s existence, but the president will need to weigh the pros and cons . The president will have to weigh his decision on whether to keep ACDA .
 There is a possibility of muddying lines of authority and undercutting the ability of cabinet officers to carry out a coherent international security strategy . There is also a possibility that this could muddle lines of power and undermine international security efforts .
 Career development is a problem in a small agency with a limited mandate . Career development has been a problem for the agency in the past . The agency has a very limited mandate to develop careers .
 A small agency also can be captured by interests bent on subverting the original intent of the president and Congress, says author . ACDA is a small agency, but it can also be captured, he says .
 Congress would have to be consulted, of course, and decisions made about the scope of the agency’s mandate . The Congress would also have to consider the scope .
 If a new agency ever is considered, my own version of a very broad mandate is described below . The agency's broad mandate would be described in this article .
 A cabinet-level agency should be established whose director would be a statutory member of the National Security Council . The agency would assist the national leadership in anticipating and dealing with the nuclear threat .
 The director would be supported by a staff of scientific, technical, military, and foreign affairs experts . The director of the National Institute of Science and Technology would be in charge .
 The nominee for this position would be subject to confirmation through the advice and consent of the Senate . The nominee is subject to Senate approval .
 The agency would be responsible for identifying external nuclear-related threats to the U.S. and its people . It would be tasked with formulating recommendations for the president and the National Security Council to deal with such threats .
 At the direction of the president, the agency may be charged with consulting and negotiating with other national governments and international agencies regarding cooperative security measures . The agency may also consult with other governments to prevent or mitigate the effects of nuclear threats .
 Two existing entities of the federal government could serve as the core of a National Nuclear Threat Reduction Agency . Two existing government entities could be core of the agency .
 The National Nuclear Security Administration, or parts of it, could be removed from the Department of Energy and adapted to this purpose .
 Its current functions include maintaining the nuclear weapons stockpile, responding to nuclear emergencies and working to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons .
 The other entity is the Defense Threat Reduction Agency in the Defense Department . It also has responsibility for preventing proliferation .
 Other agencies established their own offices to handle arms control, partly to compete with ACDA’s influence .
 I am very mindful that my writing may be seen as “a study in bureaucratic maneuvering” rather than a study in governance . To return to the title of this essay, I'm very mindful of the title .
 In truth, I have tried to lay the groundwork for a scholarly study of governance, using the case of ACDA in 1961–63 as the basis . The case was the basis for the study, which is based on ACDA's experience .
 Simon argued that “principles of administration” were useless in the absence of an understanding of the conditions under which the �inciples’ were being applied . Simon argued in an article published in the Public Administration Review in Winter 1946 issue .
 Scholars conducted studies of the underlying conditions with which personnel in organizations were dealing in order to understand how they really worked . That thinking caught on and other scholars subsequently conducted studies .
 One of the most influential of these studies was conducted by Herbert Kaufman, professor of political science at Yale . Kaufman was later a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution . Kaufman's work was published by the Brookings Institute .
 A Study in Administrative Behavior, was published in 1960 . It was based on interviews with individual forest rangers who explained what they did .
 Kaufman was able to project a picture of how the U.S. Forest Service actually works . Kaufman: "The Forest Service is a very important part of the United States Forest Service"
 "My essay on what people were doing in ACDA on one specific issue at one point in time obviously is not the end of a study of ACDA but, rather, a beginning" "ACDA" is not an end of the study, but a beginning .
 Kaufman's work exemplifies the type of research that Simon advocated and carried out and which Kaufman’s work exemplified . I hope it may stimulate further research of the type that Simon advocates and carried on .
 There are still gaps that need to be filled in our understanding of nuclear weapons, says James E Goodby . Goodby: There is still a way to deal with new threats like cyberattacks and old threats .
 No government is working very hard at trying to beat these swords into plowshares . No single agency of government is likely to change public attitudes. No single government agency likely to work hard to change attitudes .
 Kennedy was right to think that being prepared when the time is ripe for action is a useful function of government . But Kennedy was wrong to think being prepared is a good thing for government .
 The National Archives, Tel. no.11 from Foreign Office to Washington.11, is published in the National Archives . See also, The National Archive, Tel No.11 .
 This telegram proposes the language on a summit and on nuclear proliferation . Telegram proposes language on the language of a summit .
 The editors’s notes following the text describe the Rusk-Bundy drafting activities . The editors' notes follow the text of this article .
 Testing: General, 1962: August–December; Kaysen memo to Bundy, December 26, 1962, 1962; Seaborg memo to Bundy, December 22, 1962 . Seaberg memo: General testing: August-December; August-September testing: General 1962:
 Kennedy administration, 1961–63, ended practice of detonating atomic bombs in atmosphere . Kennedy administration labored to end practice, and begin the process of cleaning the environment .
 A few of them are identified by name by name in this paper, including my colleagues at ACDA, in particular .
 There were many civil servants and members of the armed forces in other agencies of government who were strong supporters of the limited test ban treaty . ACDA staff and leadership single-handedly made progress on the test ban possible .
 One of the key architects of the Obama administration is a former Pentagon staffer . He was indispensable in gaining the support of the Defense Department and Joint Chiefs of Staff, he says .
 Edward Kline, USN, is a Navy veteran who served in the Kennedy era . Kline and I have exchanged many reminiscences in recent years about the Kennedy years .
 If this paper measures up as a contribution to history, it is because of their advice and insights, it's because of them . The paper is based on the advice and insight of the authors .
 I realized that memory alone cannot be the basis for serious studies of historical events, so I consulted relevant archives in the U.S. and in the United Kingdom . Although I was deeply involved in the activities described in this paper, I realized .
 Cadet Austin Bajc is now 2nd Lt., Armor, United States Army . He is the son of Dr. Bradley Coleman, PhD, and Cadet Bradley Coleman . Coleman is the father of two Cadets .
 I enjoyed my association with these scholars and know that the world will hear much more from them in the future . I know that I enjoyed their association with them, and I hope they will continue to speak out .
 Hoover Institution's Hoover Press showed its interest in this project from the start, Andrew Clark provided major assistance .
 Susan Southworth was essential at critical moments in producing several drafts of the paper and keeping the project on track to its conclusion . Susan was essential in producing drafts of several drafts, keeping the paper on track .
 Chris Dauer, Associate Director of Marketing and Strategic Communications, and Barbara Arellano, Senior Publications Manager, Hoover Press, supplied the confidence and encouragement that I needed from time to time .
 I am grateful for all that Hoover has done to bring this vessel into port . I am also grateful for the efforts of Hoover to bring it to port .
 James E Goodby Annenberg Distinguished Visiting Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution 2017 . James E. Goodby is a Harvard University professor .
 This paper is a case study of how such an institution operated during the Kennedy administration to deal with the growing threat of radioactive debris in the environment . It also put US-Soviet relations on a new trajectory .
 The 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty might not have been concluded during the Kennedy administration had the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency not been established in 1961 . The treaty was concluded in 1963 .
 James E Goodby participated in some of the first international security negotiations with the Soviet Union . Goodby helped create the international order in the Euroatlantic Community at the end of the Cold War .