 Leo Smith II was a young Air Force officer working in a new Minuteman missile silo when the U.S. faced down the Soviet Union during the Cuban missile crisis .
 On Monday, Smith is retiring a lieutenant general and SAC vice commander . Smith spent three decades spent around the nuclear trigger at the Strategic Air Command .
 That's also the day SAC ends, and without ever firing a missile or other nuclear arms . The U.S. has no nuclear arms in the world's most powerful nuclear arsenal .
 SAC is the big nuclear shield the nation's defenders have held up to the world for 46 years . Close to the geographic center of the continental United States, it is the SAC . The U.S. has a nuclear shield that protects the nation from nuclear war .
 Once consuming nearly half the Pentagon budget, SAC is going the way of the Cold War and the Soviet Union . SAC consumes nearly half of the Pentagon's budget .
 Defense spending cuts and Air Force restructuring are paring down the huge and costly sentry at Offutt Air Force Base . The base base has been home to the Air Force since 1983 .
 Strategic Command will coordinate nuclear plans for the Air Force and Navy . Other parts of the Air force will take care of the missiles and bombers .
 The Air Mobility Command and Air Combat Command will train the pilots and maintain the planes for strategic or tactical wars . The Air Force will train pilots, maintain planes and maintain them for strategic, tactical wars.
 The SAC flag, with its shield bearing an armor-covered fist clenching lightning bolts and an olive branch, will be taken down and packed away . The flag will be removed from the SAC's base .
 Sen. Jim Exon, D-Neb., chairman of the Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Strategic Forces and Nuclear Deterrence, said last week . Exon is chairman of a subcommittee on strategic forces and nuclear Deterrence .
 From Feb., 1961, to July 24, 1990, SAC kept at least one ""Looking Glass"" plane in the air every minute of every day . SAC's "Looking Glass" plane was used to keep watch for possible nuclear attacks .
 The SAC could also assume command if the earthbound SAC center was destroyed . The U.S. military could also take command if it were destroyed .
 President Bush ordered the nation's bombers, tankers and missiles off alert for the first time since 1957 . Then on Sept., 1991, President Bush also ordered the country's bombers off alert .
 SAC took 47 percent of the U.S. defense budget in the 1950s, professor says . SAC was responsible for nearly half of the United States' defense budget .
 At SAC headquarters lately, more Navy uniforms are turning up . Many former staff members have already gone to new jobs at other air bases .
 Monitoring continues in reinforced-concrete command center 40 feet underground . Monitoring continues, however, in the reinforced concrete command center below ground .
 Eight big video screens can still display satellite images, weather forecasts, battle video and other information military top brass need to direct a war .
 The line to the National Military Command Center in Washington still provides prompt contact with the president . The line is still available to the president and the military .
 SAC was created to contend with nuclear weapons, preventing any accidental firing as well as planning their use . SAC aims to prevent accidental firing of nuclear weapons .
 The intention was to be so threatening that no enemy would dare attack the U.S. or its allies with nuclear arms . The order was meant to be a threat to the United States and its allies .
 James Stewart and Rock Hudson starred in 'The Strategic Air Command' in 1955 and '63 . Rock Hudson's "A Gathering of Eagles" in 1963 .
 The only nuclear weapons the U.S. ever used were the bombs dropped in World War II, before SAC was born on March 21, 1946 . Ironically, the only nuclear weapon the United States ever used was the bomb dropped in WWII .
 SAC headquarters move from Andrews Air Force Base near Washington, D.C., to Offutt Air Force base near Omaha . SAC HQs will be moved to Omaha, Nebraska, near Omaha, with headquarters at Offutt base .
 SAC begins operating continuous airborne command-post in ''Looking Glass"" flights . SAC began to operate continuous airborne commands in 'Looking Glass' flights .
 A SAC U-2 reconnaissance plane spots Soviet missiles unloaded in Cuba, setting off the Cuban missile crisis . A U.2 plane spotted Soviet missiles in Cuba set off the crisis .
 SAC creates Strategic Projection Force for fast deployment and support of conventional operations worldwide . SAC created the force to support conventional forces worldwide .
 Continuous airborne command post ceases, though flight crews remain on ground alert . Flight crews remain alert, but remain on alert .
 Bombers, tankers and Minutemen II missiles come off constant alert begun in 1957 . Minuteman II missiles were deployed in the U.S. during the Cold War .
 "It was a great American intelligence success because the missiles were discovered before they were operational,"" said Allison . Allison: It was a "great American success"
 President John F Kennedy convened a small group of experts to decide what course of action to take . Kennedy then convened a group to discuss the options .
 Initially, experts favored air strikes followed by an invasion, but they felt that would inevitably lead to nuclear war . Initially, the experts favored a strike followed by a invasion, they felt it would lead to war .
 Allison said they knew that Soviet-leader Nikita Khrushchev would respond in some forceful way . Allison: "We knew that Nikita [Krushchev] would respond to us" Allison said the Soviets knew they were going to respond strongly .
 "We would obviously have to respond against the Soviet Union," he said . And then when they attacked the missiles in Turkey, which were nuclear-warhead armed missiles designed to fire against the . Soviet Union, he said. "Then when they . attacked the . missiles in . Turkey
 President Kennedy made the announcement during a televised speech to the nation on October 22nd, 1962 . Kennedy opted for a naval blockade of the Strait of Georgia .
 Soviet ships approached the quarantine line and stopped . Two days later, Soviet ships stopped at quarantine line .
 Khrushchev: "He thought that one of the most important things was not allow to make the first shot" Khrushchev said. "He didn't want to make a first shot," he said. He thought that .
 Khrushchev said his father and President Kennedy were adversaries, but they negotiated with each other . He said they were adversaries but they worked together .
 Moscow continues to make operational the missiles already in Cuba . The naval quarantine of Cuba worked, but tensions rose as Moscow continued to make it operational .
 Khrushchev offered to withdraw missiles from Cuba in exchange for assurances that Washington would not invade that country nor overthrow Fidel Castro . Kennedy received a message from Khrushchchev, offering to withdraw the missiles in Cuba .
 President Kennedy received the next day another letter from Khrushchev . Before replying, he received a letter from the Soviet leader .
 Kennedy and his staff decided to ignore the second letter and agreed to incorporate the contents of the first letter in a new proposal . Graham Allison said Kennedy and staff decided instead of ignoring the letter . Allison: Kennedy's staff will ignore the letter and agree to incorporate it in a proposal .
 One is a public deal and the public deal is basically what the first letter proposed, which is you withdraw the missiles and I will guarantee that we will not invade Cuba or attack Cuba . The other is a deal to withdraw missiles from Cuba and the U.S. will not attack Cuba
 Allison: "There is a private ultimatum, and it says we need a response within the next 24 hours or else we are going to act" Allison said . Allison said, "We need to respond to the threat of violence within 24 hours"
 On October 28, Nikita Khrushchev announced on Radio Moscow the Soviet Union had accepted the American offer and would withdraw its missiles from Cuba . The Soviet Union accepted the offer .
 Khrushchev said some people saw this as a blow to Moscow's prestige . Sergei Khrushchevitch said people saw it as a 'blow to Russia's prestige' The Soviet Union broke up with the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The Chinese hated surrendering to the U.S. They told us you are scared, you surrendered to the Americans, you have to start the war . Especially on our side, there were the Chinese who just hated this feeling, said the Chinese .
 By next April as per their secret deal all U.S. missiles in Turkey were removed . And by next April all United States missiles were removed from Turkey .
 It existed in the United States in October 1962 during the Cuban missile crisis . The U.S. used it during the crisis .
 President Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev met in 1960s and '60s . Nikita was the first Russian premier to meet with President Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1961 in Moscow, Russia .
 One grew up wealthy and privileged, and the other was raised in near-poverty in the Soviet Union . The two grew up rich and poor, but were raised in poverty in Russia .
 A big part of their differences was a result of a summit meeting in 1961 in Vienna in Vienna when Khrushchev ""roughed up" the new American president .
 He got a rude awakening when the two were perilously close to nuclear war in 1962 . The two countries were at risk of nuclear war .
 In a decisive moment, Kennedy called his bluff, and Khrushchev blinked . In a crucial moment, the Soviet Union president blinked . Kennedy called a bluff .
 During the crisis, armed nuclear missiles were pointed at each country from land, air and the sea . During the critical 13 days of the crisis the missiles were fired at each nation from land and air .
 The United States had several hundred manned bombers ready to launch . 60 Strategic Air Command bombers were airborne and on station at all times . The U.S. had a total of 60 bombers on station .
 The Soviets had long-range bombers loaded with nuclear bombs prepared to fly toward U.S. cities . The Soviets were preparing to fly into the United States in the 1980s .
 Both nations had nuclear submarines prowling the seas, ready to strike . Both nations have nuclear submarines ready to attack .
 Kennedy ordered a blockade of ships bound for Cuba containing cargoes of offensive weapons . Kennedy ordered the blockade in response to a request for weapons to be sent to Cuba .
 People in the U.S. reacted to this nuclear confrontation with fear, including panic buying at supermarkets . People reacted to the threat of a nuclear war with fear .
 Federal agencies had bunker complexes in the mountains of Virginia, West Virginia, Pennsylvania and Maryland . For continuity of government, federal agencies had bunks in the states .
 To Khrushchev's credit, he proposed a compromise that would end the crisis . The crisis ended in a compromise, Khrushchevitch said .
 He offered to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the U.S. would remove its missiles from Turkey . The United States would also remove its missile range from Turkey, the president says .
 He realized if there was direct conflict with the United States, the Soviet homeland would be destroyed by the superior U.S. forces .
 In the Soviet Union, Khrushchev's withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba was seen as a humiliating defeat . In the United States, the withdrawal of missiles from the Cuban Islands was seen a defeat .
 This decision, along with domestic problems, cost him his political career, he says . The decision to run for president was a major mistake .
 Ousted in a bloodless coup, he was allowed to retire without being incarcerated or killed . He was forced to step down as a result of the coup, but not imprisoned .
 During the 40-plus years of the Cold War between the two superpowers, no crisis brought them as near to nuclear war as that in October 1962 . In October 1962, the U.S. and the Soviet Union went to war .
 A force of several thousand Soviet troops remained in Cuba until the end of the Cold War .
 Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez organized a similar conference last year dealing with the Bay of Pigs invasion . Fernandez provided no details about documents in announcing the conference on Thursday .
 Most Russians associated with the 1962 crisis have died, but several of the late President Kennedy's advisers are still living . Most of the people involved in the crisis are now dead .
 Conference organizers are studying the possibility of taking participants to sites related to the crisis in the Havana area . Fernandez said conference organizers are looking at the possibility to take participants to those affected areas . Fernandez: Participants will be able to visit sites in the area related to Havana crisis .
 The crisis peaked when the U.S. learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba - just 90 miles from the United States . The conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis .
 U.S. officials vow a vigorous response to the destruction over international waters of two unarmed aircraft from South Florida . Two unarmed aircraft were seen entering Cuban airspace . The planes were part of a plane that United States radar observed entering Cuba airspace .
 Day of high-level meetings ends without apparent consensus on how to punish Cuban President Fidel Castro . No consensus on what to punish Castro . Cuban President Castro is Cuba's most powerful figure in the world .
 The options ranged from a military blockade to punitive sanctions like the severing of U.S. phone service and charter flights to Cuba . The options range from military or punitive sanctions .
 After some initial saber rattling, officials said military action seemed unlikely . Officials said it was unlikely military action was likely to take place .
 The Clinton administration convened an emergency meeting late Sunday of the U.N. Security Council . Clinton administration convenes emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
 Secretary of State Warren Christopher emphasized that the United States would mount its own response . At the same time, Secretary of state Warren Christopher said the U.S. would mount a response .
 Many leaders of the Cuban-American community -and some Republican presidential candidates -called for harsh action . Many leaders in the Cuban American community have called for harsh actions .
 Candidate Pat Buchanan said U.S. fighters should patrol skies near Cuban airspace . Buchanan said United States fighter jets should patrol airspace near Cuban borders .
 Coast Guard continues search for four missing members of Brothers to the Rescue . Three U.S. citizens and one recent Cuban rafter, all passionately opposed to Castro, are missing .
 Their apparent deaths over or in the Straits of Florida ignited an international crisis . The deaths aroused widespread revulsion . Their deaths over the or in or in Florida ignited international outrage .
 The shootdown clearly ended a period of relative calm during which the U.S. and Cuba cooperated on refugee and other matters . The shooting down of the Cuban airbase ends a period that had been relatively calm .
 More than 1,500 people flocked Sunday to the Brothers' hangar at Opa-locka Airport . The brothers' hangar is located in a hangar at the airport .
 3,000 people gathered at La Ermita de la Caridad Catholic Church in Coconut Grove to hear Auxiliary Bishop Agustin Roman's words of consolation . The ceremony was held in honor of the victims .
 Carnaval Miami is a two-week celebration of Latin culture that climaxes with the Calle Ocho festival . Organizers canceled next weekend's event in a dramatic gesture of mourning .
 On front after front, developments unfolded Sunday in ways solemn, tragic and ominous . On front of front, events unfold Sunday in a way solemn and tragic way .
 Armando Alejandre Jr. Jr., Carlos Costa, Pablo Morales and Mario de la Pena are among the players in the race for the title . Armando is the son of Carlos Costa Jr. and Carlos Costa .
 The two doomed planes were flying over international waters when they were destroyed by Cuban MiGs . A third plane -carryinging Brothers founder Jose Basulto - was three miles inside Cuban airspace during the attack .
 Basulto, whose plane landed safely in South Florida, angrily denied the report . He angrily denied it .
 The apparent incursion ""in no way excuses"" Cuba's response, a senior U.S. official says . Cuba's government has been criticized for its response to the incursion . The U.N. says the incident "does not excuse" Cuba .
 International law forbids a government from shooting down a civilian plane unless it represents a military threat . Legal experts say international law forbids such a shooting down of a civilian aircraft .
 Brothers to the Rescue, at most, posed a political threat to Castro, not a military one, officials say . American officials and many others said the group posed most of the threat to the Castro regime .
 Brothers pilots dropped leaflets over Havana last July and again in January . They urged peaceful protest to Castro's communist regime . Brothers pilots have dropped leaflets urging peaceful protest .
 Castro warned that he would employ force to defend Cuban airspace . Castro said he would use force to protect Cuban airspace after flyover .
 The encounter was captured on a dramatic tape of radio communications between pilots and flight controllers . Brothers pilots and controllers were flying together at the time of the incident .
 The unarmed, single-engine Cessnas were easy prey for Castro's jet-powered MiGs, bristling with firepower . The unarmed Cessna was easy prey to the MiGs . Castro's MiGs were armed with heavy firepower .
 A passenger aboard a cruise ship passing nearby showed a plume of black smoke rising from the sea . A videotape made by a passenger aboard the cruise ship showed the plume .
 Never once in the 1,000-word account did Cuba assert that its warplanes attempted any deterrent -as required by international law -other than blasting the planes out of the sky .
 Cuban government claims downed planes were well inside the 12-mile limit . Cuban government says two downed planes reached points five and eight miles off the Cuban coast .
 Cuba spared the only plane that apparently veered into its airspace - the plane flown by Basulto . But no one could explain why the plane was spared .
 Basulto conceded that his plane ""was the closest to Cuba,"" but he said cockpit instruments showed that he never entered Cuba's airspace .
 He said he doubted the plane could have crossed the limit unintentionally . The plane was traveling at the time of the accident, he said .
 Brothers says Cuban air traffic controllers have made mistakes in previous flights . Pilots say they were told they were inside Cuban airspace when they were not .
 Administration officials are tight-lipped over which options will be presented to Clinton .
 For more than a year, the administration has authorized U.S. long-distance carriers to serve the island . The administration has been authorized to do so for a year .
 An end to that would isolate Cubans in exile and on the island but would deprive Cuba of a cash bonanza . An end would isolate Cuban citizens in exile, but also deprive them of the cash they would get from Cuba .
 A halt would also isolate exiles from island Cubans and halt a steady illegal flow of U.S. goods and cash to family members . It would also halt the flow of illegal goods to the island nation .
 Such a move would amount to a rollback of recent liberalizing measures but would also deprive Havana of hard currency . Cuba has been hit hard by a wave of anti-Cuban sentiment in recent years .
 Several interim steps could demonstrate U.S. resolve and authority . The United States has all but ruled out a military blockade .
 In Miami, relatives and friends and brethren of men lost in the fight for freedom in Cuba lit candles and murmured prayers and asked God to ease their grief .
 Herald staff writers Ana Acle, Henri Cauvin, Alfonso Chardy, Elaine de Valle, Jennifer Gonzalez, John Lantigua, David Lyons, Jack Rejtman, Frances Robles, Michael E Ruane .
 He says the planes came to within 15 miles of the coast off Havana, but never entered Cuban airspace . The mission was a routine search-and-rescue mission, he says .
 A U.S. official says radar records show Basulto was three miles inside Cuban airspace when the other two planes were shot down . The other planes were also shot down in Cuban airspace, the official says .
 The official says the other two planes did not enter Cuba's 12-mile limit . The Cuban government says the planes entered Cuba's airspace on Sunday .
 The foreign ministry contends that three planes entered Cuban airspace Saturday morning . But Basulto says the planes didn't leave Opa-locka until 1:10m. Saturday .
 Cuba says two planes entered Cuban airspace again Saturday afternoon, but Basulto's plane remained outside the limit . Cuba says the planes entered Cuba airspace again on Saturday afternoon .
 Brothers to the Rescue pilot Armando Alejandre Jr. Jr. died Sunday at the age of 25 .
 Juana Perez sits reflectively as others demonstrate Sunday morning at the Brothers to the Rescue hangar at Opa-locka airport . Perez: "I don't want to see any more of this kind of nonsense. I want to know more of it."
 Brothers to the Rescue founder Jose Basulto denies a report that he flew inside Cuban air space . He says he flew into Cuban airspace on Sunday .
 The 1962 Cuban missile crisis took the world to the brink of nuclear war . A remarkable conference in Moscow in Moscow on the 1962 Cuban crisis was held in 1962 .
 Former top U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials attended the conference . Robert McNamara and Andrei Gromyko were among those directly involved in the event .
 Nikita Khrushchev brazenly risked nuclear war by deploying missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy's aides asked why Nikita would brazenly risk nuclear war with Cuba .
 Khrushchev was desperate to redress Soviet nuclear inferiority . Some Soviets noted that he was desperate for Soviet nuclear superiority . Some said he was trying to redress that .
 Deploying 40 short-range missiles to Cuba would serve as a stopgap measure . Deploying the missiles would be a short-term solution to the crisis .
 The primary cause appears to be Soviet and Cuban concerns in April 1962 that America was set to invade the island in October . The missiles were meant to deter the attack, according to reports .
 McNamara conceded that extensive U.S. covert operations against Cuba could well have been misinterpreted as pre-invasion activity . United States officials strongly denied any invasion plans, but McNamara admitted that extensive covert operations may have led to the invasion .
 Both governments seriously misinterpreted the motives and the likely responses of the other side . Both governments are wrong to blame each other for their actions .
 Each feared the worst from the other side, while downplaying the provocative nature of its own actions . The two sides feared each other's worst, but downplayed the provocations .
 Fear and ignorance overcome during the Cuban crisis by common sense but just barely . Unlike the crisis leading to World War I, fear and ignorance were overcome during this crisis .
 This meeting clearly shows just how close the world was to nuclear war . This meeting shows how close it was to war .
 Susan Carol McCarthy was 11 years old and living in Florida in 1962 when the Cuban missile crisis happened . She was 11 when the crisis occurred in 1962 .
 Her memories helped form the backdrop for her new novel, ""A Place We Knew Well,"" about a family struggling with a few crises of its own . The novel is about a young family struggling to cope with a family crisis .
 "The idea of this book came to me because I started having nightmares after 9/11," says author . The idea of the book was inspired by the terror attacks in the U.S.
 "In my nightmares, I was 10 or 11 years old, back in my parents' home in Florida," she says . "I was a mother with children, but in my nightmares ... I was ... a mother," she writes .
 It took a while to put together that my subconscious had connected the Cuban missile crisis and 9/11 . It took me a while, but I realized it was a coincidence .
 I really resented the loss of innocence, that the world was neither as safe nor as sane as I had led them to believe it was. I resented that I was losing my innocence, and I was not as safe as I thought it was .
 I Googled Cuban missile crisis and Floridians, and I couldn't find another book that was written from the perspective of average Floridian being in the cross hairs . I'm looking for a book that tells the story of average Floridaians .
 When you have a story to tell and no one else has told it, this is worth exploring . This is a story worth exploring, and it's worth exploring.
 "It just feels correct to me to look at an event and then see how it affected ordinary people," she says . "I just feel like it's right to see how ordinary people are affected"
 "The challenge is to make it intriguing reading and add surprises that perhaps the readers didn't know," says the author .
 The new book is about moral courage, the struggle to do the right thing even in terrifying circumstances . The book is set to be published by Simon Tisdall at the end of the year .
 "We all have these points in our lives where there's a fork in the road, and you have a choice. We all have choices. We're not going to go to the same places where we're going to be in the same place."
 "I'm curious, I'm inspired by people who, when they're backed into a moral corner, they make the right choice," she says . She says she's inspired by those who "make the right decision" when backed into moral corner .
 "I was also struck by the portrait of Sarah, a wife and a mom, who is unraveling as the world around her appears to be unraveling," she says .
 "When I started thinking about her, I began thinking about the women in our community," she said . "I started thinking of her," she added .
 "It wasn't an easy time, and so I thought it would be interesting to explore that," she says . "I'm not going to be able to go back to that time," she adds .
 I have a good friend whose aunt was one of five sisters, but she was the only one who was unable to conceive and have a child . Her aunt was also the only sister to be unable to have children .
 "It was very difficult, because this was the '50s and '60s and people were having kids left and right, and if you weren't, there was always that question as to why," she says . "If you were having children, there would be a question as
 I myself had miscarriages, and I think it's an aspect of the female experience that's more common than most people realize . I think this is a more common aspect than most women realize .
 Travis, our older son, went off to Long Beach State, and he was one semester from graduating . Travis, Travis, is one of our oldest sons to go to college . Travis was one of the oldest to graduate from Long Beach University .
 He and his roommate had purchased a barbecue grill at a garage sale and put it on their deck, and there was a terrible fire . The man and roommate put the barbecue grill on the deck of their deck .
 "Everything was going wonderfully, and then I come back and there's a phone message from the sheriff's department," he says . "When I called the number I learned soon enough I was talking to the coroner's office," he adds . "I learned soon after I learned I was
 It was always my worst nightmare and it came true, and it was one of the reasons this book took so long . "It was always My worst nightmare," she said .
 "There was quite a while there where I was just emotionally flat-lined and couldn't do anything," he says . "I was just emotional flat-lining," he adds. "I'm not going to be able to do anything"
 "When you lose a child, you not only lose that amazing person in your life, you also lose their college graduation and their wedding and their children and on and on. What I realized over time is that when you lose that person, you . You also lose a college graduation,
 Avery learns from his mother's education as a lost child, she says . "Those lessons that Avery learns came straight out of my education as the mother of lost child," she said .
 One year to the day after we lost him, I got the results from a mammogram saying, oh, by the way, you have breast cancer, she says . The crazy thing was one year after he lost his life, his wife says .
 No editor in the world would allow in a book such a coincidence to happen. No editor would allow it to happen, he says .
 "I was maybe halfway done, but then life intervened for a couple of years, and I was able to get back in and finish," he says . "It was maybe half done, and then life . Then life intervened," he adds .
 President Kennedy, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro are the three central figures in the crisis . The three men go to war during the crisis in Cuba in 1963 .
 President John F Kennedy informed the world that the Soviet Union was building secret missile bases on the island of Cuba, 90 miles off the shores of Florida . The bases were 90 miles from Florida .
 CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS -THREE MEN GO TO WAR - premiering Tuesday, October 23, 8:00-9:00 p.m. ET . The series premieres October 23 .
 The three iconic leaders played during some of the most dangerous moments in history, set against the human stories of ordinary men in the field such as the Soviet man who shot down the U2 piloted by United States Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson .
 The film features interviews with key witnesses and experts, including Sergei Khrushchev, son of the former Soviet premier . Captain Jerry Coffee made a split second decision to veer off course in Cuba and reveal a new type of nuclear weapon that could have annihilated invading forces .
 An edge-of-your seat tale of espionage and intrigue at the highest level, CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS offers a fascinating perspective on one of the most harrowing times in modern history .
 From Crossing the Line Productions, the film is produced by John Murray, and co-directed by Murray and Emer Reynolds . The film is from Crossing the Lines Productions .
 "The Man Who Saved the World" premieres Tuesday, October 23, 9:00-10:00m.m. ET .
 The film explores the dramatic events that unfolded inside a Soviet B-59 submarine in the waters off the coast of Florida . The film is an intimate and intense film exploring the dramatic and little-known events .
 Politicians desperately sought a solution to the standoff between Russia, the U.S. and Cuba . But no one was aware of what was happening beneath the waves .
 The story of Vasili Arkhipov, the man who refused to fire the nuclear missile, was hidden for decades, only emerging in Russia in recent years . The story has been hidden in Russia for decades .
 Most of the action is set in a claustrophobic submarine running out of air . The film combines eyewitness accounts and expert testimony about some of the most critical events in the Cold War .
 THIRTEEN in association with WNET . Thirteen is produced by Bedlam Productions and Thirteen Productions .
 BAFTA and Academy Award-winning Bedlam Productions' key areas of activity are feature film and documentary production . Bedlam is based in London and based in the UK .
 Both founder members have worked extensively for major national and international broadcast networks and film production companies, gaining critical acclaim .
 Crossing the Line is a multi-award winning production company that has made films for many of the world's leading broadcasters . The company has won numerous awards for its work on television .
 Broken Tail, co-produced with PBS' NATURE series, recently won the top awards at the world's leading wildlife film festivals in the United States . Broken Tail has just received two Emmy Nominations .
 The Cuban missile crisis cries out for a Hollywood-size retelling of the Cuban crisis .
 The crisis had it all great characters, a compelling narrative, nail-biting suspense and a happy ending . It was a great story that had a great ending . The crisis was a compelling story that was compelling .
 "Thirteen Days" is a new film chronicling a tense chapter in American history . Kevin Costner says the production of the film was anything but a slam dunk .
 Sometimes a film in which the world is spared nuclear Armageddon isn't enough to pry financing from a studio's parsimonious power brokers . The film is set to be released in May 2015 .
 Mr Costner's career has endured more peaks and valleys than a plastic surgeon's waiting room . The actor understands that his career has been in a tough place .
 "That doesn't read very well for people,"" Mr Costner says during a round-table interview to promote the film .
 The $80 million movie languished for more than four years and cycled through several directors before financing could be cemented . The movie is set to be released in October .
 The film fleshes out the bitter, behind-the-scenes skirmishes in a talky, yet straightforward narrative . Bruce Greenwood as John F Kennedy, Steven Culp as Bobby Kennedy and Bruce Greenwood in the roles .
 Mr Costner has the less flashy role of Kenneth O'Donnell, the presidential aide and confidant who had both men's ear during the crisis . The actor will play the president's confidant in the role of a confidant .
 Mr Costner recalls his visceral reaction to the project . The actor stars in the film, directed by Robert De Niro, in London .
 Screenwriter David Self relies on memoirs, White House tapes and CIA documents for inspiration . Self: U-2 spy photos revealed a missile buildup in Cuba .
 In the tremulous 13 days that followed, the president's decisions were based on conscience, not on getting re-elected or on poll figures, Mr Costner says . The president's decision to take action was not based on polls or polls figures, he says .
 The plainspoken actor plays his part with a jarring Massachusetts accent . The film is set in Boston, Massachusetts .
 "Prince of Thieves,"" he gave a halfhearted British lilt to his performance, earning universal rebuke . He gave the performance in a half-hearted British accent .
 The Kennedys and the late Mr O'Donnell sounded different from anyone else in Washington, he says . He says they were different from any other Washingtonians .
 "The film had to depict to be true. That made their presence all the more grating inside the Beltway," the director says . The film is based on the film's portrayal of the White House .
 "I want you to hear the inflections,"" Mr Costner says of his own intonations still flavored by the accent .
 Mr O'Donnell's blue-collar speech patterns mirrored his hardscrabble bearing, he says . Besides, he adds, Mr O’Donnell’s speech patterns mirror that of his hard-working bearing .
 CBS anchorman Dan Rather once described Mr O'Donnell as ""prison tough" Mr Costner recalls him as a prison tough man .
 Viewers will latch onto the story through Mr Costner's character, Mr Donaldson says . The film is set to be released in October .
 He kept a diary at the time and went back to read passages for inspiration . He kept it at the beginning of his career . He went back and read passages of his diary for inspiration in his work .
 His journals recall how unimportant homework seemed given the gravity of the situation . He wrote that he had no idea how important homework was given to him in the wake of the attack .
 The film's key players all talk with passion of the period and spliced their own research into their performances .
 Mr Greenwood pored through stacks of material to make sure his Kennedy would measure up to task .
 The research gave the Canadian-born actor fresh insight into the period that has been called Camelot .
 Greenwood defends the often besmirched president as intensely as he rips away the leader's charismatic veneer . Greenwood defends Mr Greenwood as intensely .
 Mr Costner sounds equally defiant defending the film and the source material . The actor says he is proud of his work on the film .
 CIA documents also being released half a century after the Cold War drama shine a light on the tense two weeks in which the two superpowers came close to nuclear war . The Cold War ended in a two-week stand-off .
 In late 1962, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered a secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba that were soon detected by U.S. spy planes . The missiles were soon spotted by United States .
 President Kennedy was briefed on photographic proof of missile sites being developed on October 16, 1962 . The missile sites were being developed in the United States .
 US officials determined that the medium-range missiles would be able to reach key sites within 1600km of Cuba in minutes . US officials said the missiles could reach key Cuban sites within minutes .
 Mikoyan was so concerned at Castro's erratic behaviour that he wrote back to Moscow that they must urgently take back the remaining bombs . He wrote back that the bombs must be urgently taken back .
 Mikoyan was driven to cite a non-existent Soviet law banning the transfer of tactical nuclear weapons to other countries . The law was cited by Mikoyans as a reason for refusing to hand over tactical nuclear arms .
 Dobbs said that both Kennedy and Khrushchev had made mistakes leading up to the crisis . Dobbs also said that Kennedy made mistakes before the crisis in 1960s and '60s .
 Khrushchev gambled by deploying nuclear weapons so far from the Soviet Union on the United States doorstep . U.S. had been at risk of being hit by nuclear weapons on its doorstep .
 Kennedy fumbled his first major foreign policy crisis at the Bay of Pigs with the failed effort to topple Castro . The failed effort was the first major failure to topple the Castro Castro .
 The Kennedy administration's campaign to overthrow Castro, called Operation Mongoose, triggered a dramatic Soviet reaction . Furthermore, the Kennedy administration’s campaign to overthrain Castro triggered the Soviet reaction.
 A CIA document outlines plans to assassinate Castro, including a 1964 plot with mafia connections . The document was published by the CIA in 1964 .
 The mob and 'patriotic Cuban exiles' settled on a payment of $US100,000 for assassinating Castro and $US2500 for expenses . Che Guevara was also paid $US20,000 to kill his brother Raul and Che Guesgar .
 Mark Leibovit, a veteran analyst and Internet commentator on events that could affect the financial markets, took note of the missile speculation . Such an action would surely represent an additional threat to a market already saddled with a slew of worries .
 The Washington Post reported last month that Russian bombers capable of carrying nuclear bombs could be deployed in Cuba in response to American plans to install a missile defense system in Europe .
 Russian missiles last appeared in Cuba in 1962, during the Cuban missile crisis, in what was the closest the world ever came to nuclear war . Russian missiles were last seen in the Cuban Islands in 1962 .
 The installation of missiles in Cuba could lead to a significant market shellacking . Mr Leibovit, head of VRTrader.com, said he thought the installation of such missiles would be disastrous .
 Dow Jones is vulnerable to falling back to 10,800, and possibly even to the low reached in 2003 of around 7,000 . Dow Jones Industrial Average could fall back to 8,000, says analyst .
 Mr Leibovit was negative on the market a few months ago, but recently switched to a more positive view in the wake of the falling price of oil . He was negative about the market in the past, but now has a positive view .
 Russia's invasion of Georgia and speculation about the return of Russian missiles in Cuba is getting a lot more concerned . Russia invaded Georgia in 2008, and now Russia is thought to be moving to Cuba .
 A top Russian general said Friday that the Kremlin was prepared to launch a nuclear attack against Poland if it persisted in participating in a deal with the U.S. The deal would see Poland receive Patriot missiles in exchange for locating a missile interceptor base there .
 The Cuban missile crisis arose in April 1962 when the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba .
 He theorized deployment in Cuba would double the Soviets' strategic arsenal and provide a real deterrent to a potential U.S. attack against the Soviet Union .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro was looking for a way to defend his island from an American attack following the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 . At the time, the Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, was looking to protect the island from a US attack .
 Khrushchev's plan secretly went into effect in the summer of 1962 . The plan was approved by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 In mid-October, reconnaissance photographs disclosed the Soviet missiles . The missiles are believed to have been Soviet-made missiles .
 On October 22, President Kennedy announced the discovery of the missile installations to the public and his decision to quarantine the island . President Kennedy also announced the quarantine of the island in October .
 Any missile attack launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack on America by the Soviet Union . President Reagan demanded that the Soviets remove all their offensive weapons from Cuba .
 Negotiations ensued and on October 28 an agreement was reached whereby the Soviets removed their missiles and light bombers in return for assurances America would not invade Cuba . The Soviets removed the missiles and bombers in exchange for assurances the U.S. would not attack Cuba .
 Ex-Merrill Lynch strategist Bill Rhodes says the agreement would be scrapped if Russia were to place missiles there again . Rhodes: The agreement is in theory still in effect, but it could be scrapped .
 The chief investment strategist of Standard & Poor's, Sam Stovall, figures the market would react negatively to a reinstallation of the missiles . But he thinks, unlike Mr Leibovit, that the decline would be minimal, no more than a couple of percentage points .
 Because he believes cooler heads would prevail and such an action would be reversed quickly, he believes it would happen quickly . Because he thinks cooler heads will prevail .
 An obvious question is why investors are taking the prospect of missile installations so close to America so lightly so lightly .
 He builds a ""missile"" for Kelly Ripa and Michael Strahan in their ""Live's Search for America's New Grill Star" contest . The contest begins Friday right after he builds a "missile" for the show .
 Each contestant gets a segment on a Friday show to whip up his or her creation for the TV hosts .
 For ""Live,"" he said, he ""wanted something unique rather than your basic ribs"
 The assembly is ""no small process,"" said his wife, Kelly, who has been through it countless times . But the assembly is no small process, Kelly says .
 The sandwich contains smoked mojo pork, ground rib-eye, picnic ham, Swiss cheese, grilled pickles and his special 4-5-5 sauce .
 Chef uses piston as a sandwich press at the end of the build . There are countless bowls and measuring spoons, and countless bowls for measuring .
 "Every night he cooks ... if he comes home at 10 he cooks, he's got a grill in his office and cooks for his staff," he says .
 Juarez: It's not unusual for Juarez to call a neighbor late at night to say, "Hey, I've got a sockeye salmon or something" Juarez says it's not uncommon to call neighbors to say he's got a fish .
 Juarez has five grills and smokers — four at home and one in the kitchen he built into his office . Juarez routinely cooks for staff birthdays and other special events .
 Born in 1963 in Havana, Juarez came to the United States with his parents in 1968 . Juarez was born in Havana in 1963 and moved to the U.S. in 1968 with his family .
 The new film 13 Days opens today in Central Florida . The film is revisited in the new film .
 The world never came closer to nuclear war than during those 13 days of escalating threats and military posturing . The world's greatest threat of nuclear war was during the 13 days .
 Florida might have been a staging area for an invasion of Cuba or the first American soil to be hit by Soviet missiles . Nowhere was that tension felt more keenly than Florida .
 The U.S. learned in October that the Soviet Union was installing intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . The world held its breath as the world feared for its lives in Cuba in October .
 Anti-aircraft missile batteries are rushed in from across the country . Anti-missile missile batteries were rushed in .
 Strategic Air Command bases in Orlando, Satellite Beach and Tampa went on high alert . Strategic Air command bases in Florida, Florida and Florida were on alert .
 U-2s flew out of McCoy Air Force Base in Orlando - now the site of Orlando International Airport - and RF-101 low-level reconnaissance aircraft zipped in and out of MacDill AFB in Tampa .
 The film's primary focus is on Washington intrigue, but Air Force and Navy bases in Florida play a secondary role in scenes that accurately re-create the Cuban missile crisis . The film is based on the massive buildup of force that occurred in Cuba during the 1960s .
 It took capitalism to bring the danger of capitalism home to a lot of people, says CNN.com's John Sutter . It took the world to see the dangers of capitalism, he says .
 The state's newspapers and TV stations were days behind the story because of military secrecy . Military secrecy meant state media was days behind in advance of military action .
 Sentinel reporter arrested for trying to find out what was going on at McCoy . A Sentinel reporter was arrested for asking about McCoy .
 Key West was ground zero during the crisis, an island village turned into an armed camp . The island village was turned into a military camp . Key West is now a tourist destination in the United States .
 Other batteries of high-altitude Nikes were taken to other locations, including the outskirts of Everglades National Park .
 The Cuban missile crisis led to a permanent air-defense missile presence in Florida . The Cuban Missile Crisis led to the presence of Cuban missiles in the state .
 Hawk, whose stepfather was a missile specialist with SAC at the time, has worked as a military historian and history teacher in the years since 1962 . Hawk's stepfather is a former SAC missile specialist .
 World relieved that war was averted, but Florida residents were let down . Florida was let down by the end of the war .
 Cubans who had only recently fled their homeland were bitterly disappointed . Cubans were disappointed by the decision to leave the country .
 Cuban-Americans still look at the missile crisis as 'Kennedy won in the short term, but Castro won in long run,' says Cuban-American .
 The tapes, released for the first time, cover nearly three hours of meetings by President John Kennedy and his advisers . They include his brother Robert, then U.S. attorney general, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy and Defense Secretary Robert McNamara .
 Kennedy considered several possible U.S. responses - including a direct air strike against Cuba . Kennedy and his team considered a direct strike on Cuba .
 Kennedy was also concerned that inaction might cause the collapse of the NATO alliance . Kennedy was concerned inaction might lead to collapse of NATO .
 The quality is mostly poor, depending on background noise and the proximity of the speakers to hidden microphones in the Oval Office . The quality of the recordings is mostly low, depending upon the location of the microphones .
 In the first recording, many of Kennedy's advisers appear to lean toward military action . The first recording was recorded in the first half of the Kennedy administration .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro could attack U.S. naval base at Guantanomo Bay in Cuba . Cuban President Castro has threatened to attack the base . The Cuban government is considering a response to any attack .
 Photographs apparently show a rapid buildup of bases for medium-range ballistic missiles . The photographs apparently showed a rapid build-up of bases .
 At one point, Kennedy and his advisers debate launching a surprise attack on Cuba . Kennedy and advisers debated launching an attack against Cuba .
 Several advisers warned the president that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had to be ""given some way out"" of the impasse . But several advisers warned him that a surprise attack would block this option .
 Kennedy can be heard asking Defense Secretary McNamara what the casualties would be in an airstrike against the bases in Cuba . Kennedy can also be heard discussing the casualties of an airstrike on Cuba .
 McNamara tells McNamara: "We must assume it will kill several hundred Soviet citizens" McNamara replies: "I'm not sure what will happen." McNamara says . McNamara then says: "It's not a surprise that it's going to kill a Soviet citizen"
 Some of those at the meeting warn that any military action against the missile sites in Cuba could spark a Soviet reaction in other parts of the world, including a direct strike against the United States .
 The tapes, released for the first time, cover nearly three hours of meetings by President Kennedy and his advisers . They include his brother Robert, who was attorney general, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and defense secretary Robert McNamara .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro could attack U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay . Cuban forces review possible response to any attack by Castro on the base .
 "It is not conduct that one would expect from the United States,"" says George Ball, an undersecretary of state . Ball: "It's not conduct ... that one of the U.S. would expect"
 Kennedy can be heard asking McNamara what the casualties would be in an air strike against the bases in Cuba . Kennedy can also be heard talking to McNamara about the casualties of the attack .