 Both were perceived attempts of Soviet aggression against U.S. interests against American interests . Both were seen as perceived attempts by the Soviet Union .
 The United States government was heavily involved in anti-Castro efforts before, during, and after the Cuban revolution . The U.S. government was involved in efforts to defeat the Castro regime .
 In 1962, Khrushchev responded to the presence of American nuclear weapons in Turkey by secretly installing Soviet nuclear arms in Cuba . The U.S. secretly installed the weapons in Cuba in response to the threat of Turkey .
 The primary benefit for Cuba was America's promise not to launch an invasion . Cuba's primary benefit was the promise not launching an invasion, Cuban president says .
 To the extent there is any such thing as a Kennedy doctrine, it is generally described as a commitment to containing communism and preventing its spread . The Kennedy doctrine is generally a commitment .
 It was a tense standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union that almost led to nuclear war . The U.S. and Soviet Union almost went to war .
 Intercontinantal Ballistic Missiles were not yet fully developed . At this time in the Cold War, IWC Missiles had not yet developed .
 The goal of the Soviet Union was to be more of a threat to the security of the U.S. The Soviet Union wanted to be a bigger threat than the United States, CNN's John Sutter says .
 One might suggest that the U.S. did exaggerate the danger in order to justify their rather elaborate and extensive reaction to the threat the missiles posed . The United States may have exaggerated the danger to justify its rather elaborate reaction .
 A superpower is a country that is simply much more powerful than the average country, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 It seems to be that one of the most pressing debates that the Executive Committee seemed to wrestle with was whether or not to authorize an air strike on Cuba . "It seems to me that ... [the] Executive Committee [was] wrestling with ... whether ... to authorize [an air strike
 Latest answer posted May 21, 2013, 7:24 pm 1 educator answer . Use this information to help students understand reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Let us know your assignment type and we'll make sure to get you exactly the kind of answer you need . Send us your assignments to CNN.com/Impact .
 Submit Question eNotes.com will help you with any book or any question . Submit your questions to eNotes@dailymailonline.com .
 Our summaries and analyses are written by experts, and your questions are answered by real teachers . We are happy to answer all of your questions about reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 eNotes.com, Inc. is an educator and writer . Join us on Facebook and Twitter . Use this information to help students understand each other's work .