 A spy photo of a medium range ballistic missile base in San Cristobal, Cuba, with labels detailing various parts of the base . Ralph Crane/Life Magazine/The LIFE Picture Collection: Cuba .
 President Kennedy signs the proclamation formally putting the blockade around Cuba into effect . President Kennedy signed the proclamation in 1961 .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson challenges Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin to deny that his country placed nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Cuban soldiers stand by anti-aircraft artillery at the Havana waterfront, ready for an American invasion . October 1962. October 1962 .
 Six U.S. Army anti-aircraft missile launchers set up on George Smathers Beach, Cuba, were set up .
 President Kennedy meets with Air Force pilots who have been flying reconnaissance missions over Cuba . President Kennedy met with pilots who had flown reconnaissance missions .
 The U.S. has been involved in a blockade of Cuba for more than a decade . The blockade was part of a U.N. effort to block Cuba from going to Cuba .
 Protesters and police break out into a brawl at a rally in New York City .
 A placard calling for peace falls to the floor as protester outside the U.S. embassy is knocked over . The incident happened outside the United States embassy .
 Citizens of the Soviet Union demonstrate outside the United States Embassy in Moscow in protest of the U.S. blockade of Cuba .
 A Soviet freighter refused to let the U.S. inspect their cargo . It was photographed with what appears to be nuclear missiles on board .
 Bar patrons watch President Kennedy's address to the nation on the television . 22 of 33 bar patrons watched the speech .
 Protesters and police officers clash outside the U.S. Embassy in London .
 A Soviet freighter believed to be carrying nuclear missiles is escorted away by a Navy plane and destroyer .
 U.S. Navy Picket Ship intercepts a Soviet freighter, believed to be carrying missiles .
 The U-2 plane was shot down by the Cubans during the 1962 missile crisis .
 Today, 13 days are a part of history that the world has never forgotten . Today, those 13 days have never been forgotten, but they're not necessarily a part that has ever fully understood . The 13 days were the 13th anniversary of the first World War II .
 Here in the West, we've learned the story through the American perspective . CNN's John Sutter says the story has been told through the eyes of the U.S.
 Inside the Soviet Union and inside of Cuba, a wildly different version of the story was being told, with details that would be kept out of the official version . In Cuba, the story would be different from that of the United States .
 Jupiter Missiles deployed in Turkey by the United States military by the U.S. military .
 JFK painted Khrushchev as nothing short of a cartoon supervillain . JFK painted Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchchev as an evil Soviet Chairman . JFK said the Soviet Union was building missile sites in Cuba .
 If Khrushchev was recklessly threatening world peace, Kennedy was guilty of that very same crime . Kennedy was also guilty of the same crime, says historian John Avlon .
 In 1961, the United States installed a series of intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Italy and Turkey . The missiles would be in range to strike virtually all of the western U.S.R. – including Moscow . The United States had installed the missiles .
 The United States already had ballistic missiles in Britain aimed at the Soviets . Plus, the U.S. already had missiles in the UK aimed at Russia .
 This, from the Soviet perspective, was the real beginning of the crisis. This was the Soviet view of the Soviet crisis, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "This is the real start of the [Russian] crisis"
 Khrushchev moved nuclear missiles into Cuba in order to keep the U.S. in check . In order to protect his socialist ally in the Caribbean in the 1960s, he moved the missiles into the island .
 He believed the missiles would help balance the power between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, which was becoming dangerously one-sided, he said . He believed, in part, that the missiles helped balance the United States' power .
 By some estimates, the United States had more than 5,000 nuclear missiles capable of hitting Soviet targets, while the Soviets only had 300 . Some estimates say the U.S. had over 5,500 nuclear missiles .
 He was convinced that an American invasion of Cuba was inevitable – despite its failed attempt at one in the April 1961 Bay of Pigs debacle . The only way to stop it was with nuclear missiles, he said .
 Khrushchev convinced Cuban President Fidel Castro to let him move missiles into his country . He convinced Castro to allow him to move missiles to Cuba . Castro died in 1962 .
 Kennedy left every one of those details out of his address to the nation . The omission frustrated Khrushchev to no end . Kennedy left out of the details of his speech .
 Cuban naval blockade resumes, a news report announces . Cuban naval blockades resumes . Cuban navy blockade resumes .
 For the first time, they had proof that the Soviets were transporting nuclear weapons into Cuba . The Soviets had been transporting nuclear arms into Cuba, the Cuban government said .
 Evidence would come through showing that four Cuban missile sites that were already fully operational . Over the next few days, the news would only get worse .
 Americans and civilians in nations around the world would be convinced that this was a sign that nuclear war was inevitable . Americans would believe this was the result of a nuclear war that was inevitable, the author says .
 Few believed that America was really under any type of nuclear threat . But in the War Room, few believed that the U.S. was under any kind of threat . The War Room was closed to the public during the day .
 The U.S. didn't believe that the Soviets had any intention of firing the missiles . Kennedy, likewise, didn't expect the Soviets to fire missiles . The United States strengthen their missile power .
 The news, he believed, would make people think the balance of power had changed, even if it really hadn't, he said . The news was intended to make people believe the power of the government had changed .
 America couldn't be seen allowing the Soviets to send nuclear weapons to own the U.S.'s greatest sworn enemies . America wouldn't want to be seen letting the Soviets send nuclear arms to own its sworn enemies.
 Kennedy had recently campaigned against Richard Nixon on the basis that the Eisenhower administration's policies had sprung a communist regime in the Caribbean .
 The Soviets, they believed, wouldn't do anything to stop it; they would fear retaliation from America's more powerful arsenal too much to raise a finger in Castro's defense . The Soviets believed, they thought, that they would do nothing .
 Kennedy refused, fearing that the Soviets would retaliate in Berlin . Kennedy ultimately refused to give up the offer .
 He took McNamara's suggestion to set up a blockade around the country to keep Soviet materials out of the country . Instead of a blockade, he took up the idea of setting up an international blockade .
 The blockade was technically an act of war; Cuba was accepting the Soviets' missiles . What the Soviets were doing was abided by international law, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the blockade was a violation of international law .
 Fidel Castro gave a speech criticizing the U.S. during the naval blockade of Cuba . Fidel Castro was prime minister of Cuba in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev believed everything was going more or less according to plan . Everything was going according to the plan, he said . The Soviet Union was overthrown in 1953 .
 He had fully bought into Khrushchev's claims that the U.S. was getting ready to invade, and he was ready to take the whole world down with him . "He was fully prepared to take it down," he said .
 Castro wrote up a letter to Khrushchev begging him to launch a full-scale nuclear assault on the U.S. The second American soldier set foot on Cuban soil, Castro said . Castro wrote the letter .
 Castro's second-in-command, Che Guevara, shared every bit of his president's fervor . Castro's son, Fidel Castro, was born in 1961 in Cuba .
 He didn't care if the ensuing nuclear war would have wiped Cuba off the map, he said . "I'm not going to let it go," he said. "I don't care what's going to happen to Cuba," he added .
 Khrushchev was quickly learning that hotter blood ran through the Cubans' veins than his own . The Cuban leader learned quickly that the country's blood was hotter than his .
 Khrushchev's own men were every bit as willing to fire if provoked . Desperate to keep things from getting out of control, he urged Castro to stay calm .
 American, Soviet, and Cuban leaders may have talked a big game, but that didn't comfort their people . The U.S. and Cuba have been a hemisphere in terror for decades .
 Existential dread swept over the U.S. and Cuba, as people outside of the annals of government prepared for potential nuclear annihilation .
 My sisters remember him praying on his knees at his bedside that we would not have a nuclear war . "He prayed on my knees at my bedside," he says of his father .
 The situation was similar in Cuba, which was still fresh off its 1959 socialist revolution . The situation in Cuba was similarly frightening in 1959 .
 Maria Salgado later recalled her "family members from out of town coming in and everyone being in our same hometown because...you know the world was going to end," she said . Salgado: "You know the end. You know, the world is about to end"
 The U.S. military prepares for the possibility of an invasion of Cuba . Up In Flames: The United States military is preparing for the invasion . Up in Flames: Cuba is on the verge of war .
 For more than an hour now, he and his men had been watching an American U-2 spy plane fly over Cuban land . The U.2 plane was flying over Cuban territory .
 In the White House, news of Anderson's death brought the crisis to a whole new pitch . In the past, Anderson was a key figure in the Obama administration .
 The Soviets had drawn first blood; by the plan Kennedy had laid out, it was time for a full-on war . The Soviets drew first blood, and by that plan Kennedy planned to go to war .
 Kennedy alone, however, stopped the American Army from storming Cuban soil .
 ExComm ordered his men to stand by and wait until they'd spoken to the Soviets . Against the advice of almost every member of ExComm, he ordered his troops to stand back .
 Castro was intent on firing every nuclear missile he had if an American soldier invaded . Castro was determined to use every weapon he had to defend himself if he invaded .
 Castro was ready to keep shooting down any planes he saw, no matter what the consequences . Castro was in Havana, Cuba, when he shot down planes in Cuba .
 The day before the U-2 plane shot down, Kennedy had caved to his ExComm team and admitted that their advice was right . Kennedy admitted that the day before he was shot down that day .
 The U-2 pilot's death cemented this decision in his advisors' eyes, but Kennedy changed course . Kennedy made the decision after the pilot died .
 Some say Vasili Arkhipov saved the world from the brink of nuclear war . He was one of Russia's top nuclear weapons expert .
 On the very same day, ships in the naval blockade around Cuba detected a Soviet submarine moving beneath them . The Soviet submarine was detected beneath the Cuban coast .
 They dropped ""signaling depth charges"" on it, beckoning it to come to the surface . They dropped the 'signal depth charges' on it .
 Valentin Savitsky's submarine was carrying a tactical nuclear torpedo on board . The commander of the vessel wasn't afraid to use it, and he was known for his use .
 When the depth charges exploded, the crew of the submarine became convinced that their lives were in jeopardy . The crew was convinced their lives would be in jeopardy after the explosion .
 Savitsky ordered his men to retaliate by firing the nuclear torpedo up to destroy the Navy ships attacking them . Savitski's men fired the torpedo up, firing the torpedo to destroy them .
 Had the crew launched the missile, it is very likely that the U.S. Army would have retaliated in kind and a nuclear war would have begun . The crew of the missile launched a missile, but it was not launched by the crew .
 By Soviet rule, Savitsky wasn't allowed to fire at the missile unless he got consent from the two other senior officers on board . The incident took place in the Soviet Union during the Second World War II . Savitski was the first officer to fire a missile at a Soviet
 One agreed – but the other, Arkhipov, stood his ground and refused to approve the launch . The launch was the first of its kind in Russia and the second in the world .
 Arkhipov argued that the depth charges weren't proof that a war had begun . He said the Americans might just be trying to get them to surface . The depth charges aren't proof of a war, he said .
 He stayed firm in his refusal, and convinced the crew to head back to Russia peacefully . The crew was forced to return to Russia .
 The Kennedys, Robert said, were doing everything they could to keep a war from happening . But in a democracy, he warned, the President's power was limited . Robert: In a democracy the President is limited .
 The Soviets would take their missiles out of Cuba and, in exchange, the Americans would take theirs out of Turkey . The deal would see the Soviets take out their missiles from Cuba and the Americans remove them from Turkey .
 No one was allowed to know that the missiles in Turkey were part of the bargain . The missiles were in Turkey as part of a deal with the U.S.
 Publicly, Kennedy was allowed to tell the world that all he'd given the Soviets was a promise not to invade Cuba – but privately, the Soviets had gotten what they'd wanted . The Soviets got what they wanted .
 In the public view, he'd been humiliated, and the blow was so horrible that it ended his career . The blow was "horrible" and "horrific," he says .
 Today, he's remembered by many as one of the greatest American presidents . Experts credit, in large part, to his handling of the crisis . Today, experts credit him with a title that many credit for handling the crisis.
 See how life was behind the iron curtain with these incredible photos of East Germany . Then, see how life unfolded behind the Iron Curtain in East Germany.