 Acclaimed as one of the most important spies of the century . Role in Cuban missile crisis has been portrayed as of pre-eminent importance to the outcome .
 Penkovsky was an instrument of Soviet strategic deception, according to some historians . Other historians have challenged this interpretation, while others have challenged it .
 These were critical years of the Cold War, culminating in the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . The Cuban crisis was almost certainly the most dangerous confrontation of the 1950s and 1960s .
 The story of Oleg Penkovsky is an extraordinary story of Cold War espionage . The story is a Cold War spy story of his life in Russia .
 It is also of great value in exploring various issues in the history and historiography of intelligence, and in assessing problems in evaluating the broader significance of intelligence in policy-making .
 Penkovsky is a case study for evaluating the role and significance of intelligence in Cold War policymaking, and in specific Cold War crises . Perhaps most importantly is the case study of espionage in the Cold War .
 Authoritative studies of U.S. and British intelligence in the Cold War have emphasised the importance of Penkovsky's espionage . Western intelligence services in facilitating his role .
 Other critical works have questioned whether Penkovsky was working for the west or against it . Other critical, more critical, works drawing on disaffected insiders, have been critical of his work .
 Various claims and counter-claims about the value of Penkovsky's espionage have been made, particularly in relation to the Cuban missile crisis .
 This article examines key claims made about Colonel Penkovsky's espionage concerning the Cuban missile crisis . It explains where much of the literature presents a distorted impression of his role and value to the West .
 In addition it attempts to indicate where future research might profitably focus . In addition to the research, it also attempts to identify where research might be profitable .
 A key element in reviewing the history and historiography of Penkovsky's role is the material released by the CIA both as a result of the Freedom of Information Act and through its own declassification programme .
 Peter Deriabin's 1992 book, The Spy Who Saved the World, draws upon this material . It presents an absorbing, though contested, interpretation of Penkovsky's significance .
 These detail various stages and various aspects of the Penkovsky case, from his initial efforts to contact the CIA, to his activities as a 'defector PENKOVSKY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS 25 in place' to attempts by CIA
 Documents include transcripts of meetings in Britain and France with his SIS and CIA case handlers . CIA station chief in Moscow to CIA headquarters to CIA HQ .
 As such they provide unprecedented documentary insights into CIA tradecraft . Documentary insights into the CIA's tradecraft provide unprecedented insights .
 Documents cover how Penkovsky's material was assessed, evaluated and integrated into the US intelligence analytical and policy processes . More importantly, the documents cover how it was integrated into US intelligence analysis and policy .
 Schecter and Deriabin used CIA records to construct their account . In the early 1990s the government did, however, co-operate and assist in the process of declassifying records .
 CIA records contain various details involving senior SIS officers, including Maurice Oldfield, Harry Shergold, and Sir Dick White, head of the service .
 CIA and SIS officers and other officials, including the former British Ambassador to the USSR, Sir Frank Roberts, have written or spoken on the record about the operation .
 SIS's role meant Britain made an important contribution in the Cuban missile crisis . It has been claimed that Britain made a significant contribution to the crisis .
 Oleg Penkovsky's espionage was one of two important British contributions during the crisis . According to Alistair Home, Harold Macmillan's official biographer, the espionage was a British contribution during the Cold War .
 Much of the testimony reflects on the success involved in a joint operation run for 17 months . The operation was run from the heart of the Soviet defence and security establishment . The testimony reflects the success of the operation .
 The circumstances of how Penkovsky was uncovered remain unclear, though the former KGB Chairman, Vladimir Semichastny, has suggested that it followed contact between SIS and the CIA that was not disclosed to the CIA .
 Soviet penetration of U.S. security in the USSR is a possible explanation for what went wrong . Soviet penetration may be a further possible explanation .
 Oleg Penkovsky first attempted to contact Western intelligence and offer his services in August 1960 . He first attempted contact with Western intelligence in August 1961 .
 Concern that his own career was blighted by the KGB's growing awareness of his father's Russian Civil War role in the White Army, fuelled his animus against the Soviet system . Various motives for his espionage can be identified but concern that his . own career had been blighted .
 Between August 1960 and August 1962, Penkovsky supplied the West with some 8,000-10,000 pages of testimony and classified material from General Staff files .
 Penkovsky was a confidant and protege of the Chief Marshal of Soviet Artillery, Marshal Sergei Varentsov, responsible for Soviet tactical missile forces, and had cultivated a relationship with the head of the GRU, General Ivan Serov . In addition, he was also a
 The possibility was indeed raised by the Head of the CIA's Soviet Division, Jack Maury, with the Deputy Director for Plans, Richard Helms . The possibility of a Soviet invasion was raised by Jack . Maury .
 CIA unsuccessfully attempted to contact Penkovsky in Moscow between October 1960 and February 1961 . Helms was clear 'that at this point in the Agency's history, we cannot afford but to follow up such a lead'
 Penkovsky made several other attempts to establish contact with the West through Canadian visitors and officials, and then through a British businessman .
 Penkovsky finally made contact with Western intelligence through Wynne, Wynne . The Russian-born Russian spy was working with the U.S. for years .
 Penkovsky communicated via Wynne and then through SIS channels using Ann Chisholm, the wife of the SIS Head of Station, Rauri Chishom . Penkovski was in Moscow at the time of the attack .
 The espionage of Oleg Penkovsky occurred during a critical period in the Cold War . The espionage took place during the 1950s and '60s . The spy agency was involved in the creation of the KGB .
 Khrushchev's desire for a detente that could transfer resources from military to productive expenditure . Recent and more considered analysis has emphasised his desire for detente .
 At the time, the lack of effective Western intelligence concerning Soviet military capabilities and intentions exacerbated Western fears and increased the risk of inadvertent confrontation . Yet at the same time, there was no effective intelligence on Soviet intentions .
 In 1958 Khruschev had first threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with the East Germans . By 1961 the Soviet leader was determined to force the issue of West Berlin .
 At the Vienna summit between Khrushchev and Kennedy in June 1961 the two leaders spoke of war that winter . The two leaders also spoke of the possibility of war in the winter .
 Christopher Andrew argues that Penkovsky's intelligence exerted a direct influence on Kennedy's attitude and rhetoric . He argues that it reinforced his determination to stand up to the Soviets over Berlin . Christopher Andrew writes that the intelligence subsequently influenced Kennedy .
 Penkovsky told his handlers Khrushchev was strengthening his armies in East Germany and could use force if he sensed his objectives could be attained . On the one hand Khruschev's threats were founded on nuclear bluff, the other on the other hand was a bluff .
 Penkovsky's representations of Khrushchev's views, while reflecting what senior military officers believed and debated, almost certainly misrepresented the intentions of the former Soviet leader . Penkovski's representations were probably seriously misrepresented .
 The extent and significance of Penkovsky's influence on Kennedy is potentially important, though adjudication awaits systematic study of American decision-making during crisis .
 The view that Penkovsky's espionage was of crucial importance in the missile crisis has received wide circulation . The view is that the spy was crucial to Russia's success in the 1980s .
 Penkovsky is the only recorded time in post-war history that human intelligence, supplied directly to the enemy, helped to tilt the course of world events .
 Some historians dispute the significance of Penkovsky's espionage for Western policy-making . Some historians doubt the significance for the Russian spy .
 McGeorge Bundy, then JFK's special assistant for national security, argues 28 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY that, 'Penkovsky had no discernible relation to the real assessments and actions of the U.S. government in the missile crisis',28 .
 CIA analyst Raymond Garthoff describes the 'tremendous amount of important military information' but argues that this was merely 'useful background information during the crisis'
 Various accounts, including two by Greville Wynne, describe aspects of SIS's involvement . Senior British officials have commented on the importance of the case . Various accounts have described aspects of the SIS involvement .
 Sir Frank Roberts believed that Penkovsky's information 'was almost more important than any other intelligence either way' Sir Nicholas Henderson, erstwhile secretary of the JIC, has stated 'that the intelligence he provided was of crucial importance to us in assessing the state of Soviet preparedness
 Some senior British and Soviet officials have spoken publicly of Penkovsky's role . Yet, evidence of how material was used in British assessments and policy-making is negligible .
 British officials believed that Britain made a significant contribution through the joint operation . Whatever the actual importance of Penkovsky's material, British officials clearly believed that .
 Similar statements have been made by senior U.S. intelligence officials . Penkovsky's espionage has been described as a major success for Russia .
 It is clear, both from U.S. officials and recently declassified US documents, that Penkovsky's intelligence was accepted and used by the West .
 CIA has published various documents containing information provided by Penkovsky . The CIA has, for example, published various .
 The significance of such material for western policy-making is a more contentious issue . It is not clear what significance it has to be considered by western policy makers .
 However accurate the material Penkovsky supplied, its importance depended on how it was integrated into the intelligence analytical process, and then how such assessments were used by decision makers .
 It is now possible to trace what Penkovsky passed to the West through this analytical and political process in the U.S. in the US .
 The suggestion that Penkovsky warned the West about the missiles in Cuba is repeated in Peter Wright's Spycatcher™ and is wholly misleading . There is no doubt that information provided President Kennedy with advance information about the Cuban missiles .
 He will rant and rave and even send arms here and there just as he did to Cuba and possibly even send small-caliber rockets there, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In fact there was talk about this with Castro and possibly a few rockets are already there, says Castro . "There were talk about it with Castro," Castro says .
 In July 1960, Khrushchev had publicly warned that Soviet intercontinental missiles would protect the Cuban people . Che Guevara 'probed' the idea of deploying nuclear missiles on the island .
 Penkovsky did warn his CIA and SIS case officers about Soviet tactical nuclear missiles in East Germany . He did warn them about the threat .
 At his first debriefing in London in April 1961, he explained that with the exception of Albania, all 'People's Democracies were being provided with ballistic missiles, including the R11 missile' He stated that, 'in the DDR we now have four 30 INTELLIG
 This challenged the existing belief that the Soviets had never deployed nuclear warheads outside Soviet territory . Aside from the military significance to NATO, this challenge was significant to NATO . It challenged the idea that the Soviet Union did not deploy nuclear warheads .
 The American intelligence community believed that the Soviets had never deployed 'offensive' nuclear weapons outside their own territory . The U.S. believed that they would not do so in Cuba .
 It is clear that Penkovsky's information on Soviet nuclear deployments outside the USSR did not materially affect CIA or British estimates of the likelihood of Soviet 'strategic' deployments in Cuba .
 During the 1950s the American intelligence community exaggerated and distorted the potential threat posed by Soviet strategic nuclear forces . The U.S. intelligence community overstated the threat posed .
 The 'missile gap' arose because of the paucity of Western intelligence, and the analytical failures of the American intelligence community . The 'bomber gap' and then the "missile gaps" arose due to the lack of intelligence in Western intelligence .
 The advent of aerial photography afforded by the U-2 high altitude aircraft played a critical role in dispelling the bomber gap . U-1 was the first aircraft to use aerial photography in the U.2 era .
 By 1960, when Eisenhower PENKOVSKy and the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 31 suspended U-2 overflights of the USSR, there were also growing divisions among the various intelligence bureaucracies over the scale of Soviet ICBM deployment and production .
 Satellite photography portended a transformation in assessing Soviet strategic forces . Satellite photography was used to take pictures of Soviet military operations .
 The first successful photoreconnaissance mission did not take place until August I960.52 .
 Growing scepticism about the missile gap at the highest levels in Washington preceded Penkovsky's espionage . The issue was not until autumn 1961 that the issue was resolved within the U.S. government .
 Penkovsky's intelligence was critical in dispelling 'the missile gap', and in guiding Kennedy's handling of the crisis from a position of strength . Various writers contend that his intelligence was . critical .
 Recently declassified American documents show how and when Penkovsky's information was used in the American National Intelligence Estimating process .
 Of greatest potential interest was information about Soviet ICBM capabilities . Penkovsky's information was about what NATO termed the SS-6 the missile at the heart of the missile gap .
 The information indicated that the SS-6 was in considerable difficulty, and that Soviet ICBM capabilities were well below American estimates . The information he supplied indicated that . the information he . supplied indicated . that Soviet . ICBM capability was well below U.S. estimates, he said .
 Penkovsky recounted remarks by Marshal Varentsov indicating that Soviet ICBMs were numbered in tens, and were still at the testing rather than operational stage . He said that Soviet IBM missiles were still in the testing phase of their development .
 These remarks do not appear to have been corroborated by documentary material . These remarks were not corroborated with documentary material, however .
 As noted below, Penkovsky supplied extremely valuable copies of a top-secret General Staff journal . He did not have access to articles on strategic missiles, which were retained in an exclusive bulletin . He supplied copies of the journal but he did not know what articles were retained .
 Penkovsky's information did not affect the June NIE, but it was nevertheless clear that disagreements between USAF intelligence and the other organisations, including CIA, were intensifying .
 There is no indication that Penkovsky supplied relevant documentary materials during this period . No indication that he supplied relevant material during that period .
 CIA has now published details of the Corona programme including the NIE of September 1961 that finally buried the missile gap . The Corona programme was published by the CIA .
 Satellite photography enabled a more realistic assessment of the Soviet strategic arsenal . NIE 11-8/1-61 shows that by September 1961 Penkovsky's information was accepted .
 By the autumn of 1961, the debate within the U.S. intelligence community had been effectively resolved . President Kennedy decided to make public known that his government was now aware of America's nuclear superiority .
 Christopher Andrew contends that Penkovsky's advice to stand up to Khrushchev played a part in the President's decision to go public on U.S. superiority . Christopher Andrew says the advice played a role in President Nixon's decision .
 This raises fundamental questions about the nature of nuclear deterrence and the role of nuclear weapons in the missile crisis, which are beyond the scope of this article .
 The argument that Kennedy's recognition of American nuclear superiority was crucial is challenged by those studies that say it was of secondary importance to fear of nuclear war in Kennedy's management of the crisis .
 Whatever Kennedy's perceptions, those of Nikita Khrushchev's are also potentially significant . Whatever their perceptions, they are potentially significant, it's important to remember .
 SIS believed the KGB's discovery of Penkovsky's espionage alerted Khrushchev to the fact that Kennedy now knew he was bluffing, and that this influenced his climb down .
 Penkovsky's information ensured that Khrushchev could not indulge in diplomatic nuclear blackmail...' according to a CIA source, with presumably unintended irony, when he had told an audience in Kiev in December 1962 that Penkovski had 'done some good simply on the grounds that now the
 Long before the missile crisis, the U.S. government made clear its recognition of American nuclear superiority . What is still clear is that, long before that, the United States made clear .
 In October 1961, Roswell Gilpatric, McNamara's deputy, delivered a speech declaring that 'we have a second strike capability which is at least as extensive as what the Soviets can deliver by striking first', demonstrating that the United States was ahead in the 'arms race'
 The U.S. government provided classified briefings on the military balance to allies believed to have been penetrated by Soviet intelligence .
 If the Soviet leadership understood and believed Gilpatrick's message, the discovery of Penkovsky's treachery ought not to have made any difference . Gilpatrick: "If the Soviet leaders believed and believed, it would not have mattered"
 Penkovsky's intelligence focuses on U.S. assessments of missiles in Cuba . A third claim focuses on United States assessments of the missiles in Cuban missiles .
 Penkovsky did not alert the West to the deployment of missiles . But he did supply technical information, including the manual for the SS-4 . The information was published by the Russian government .
 General Marshall Carter told President and his advisers, on 16 October . This information was helpful to analysts at the National Photographic Intelligence Centre in identifying missiles .
 Photographs taken by military attaches at Red Army parades were important sources of information . Other sources were also important .
 The CIA knew that the missiles were MRBMs because of their length . As the head of the NPIC, Arthur Lundahl, told the President, the CIA knew . The CIA also knew the length of the missiles, Lundahl said .
 Initially, there was some doubt over whether the MRBMs were SS-3s or SS-4s . The U.S. Navy launched the first of the Russian-built missiles in 2009 .
 Penkovsky's data enabled accurate assessments of the readiness state of the missiles, he says . More significant was that the data was used to assess missile readiness, he added .
 Some believed that the operational status of the missiles would determine when a decision to destroy them had to be taken . This became a critical issue for Amercian decision-makers .
 Some U.S. officials behaved (and communicated with their allies) as though the operational condition of the missiles was an indicator of Soviet intent, and therefore of importance to the decision whether to attack .
 There was disagreement over the implications of the operational condition of the missiles . Within the White House on 16 October, there was disagreement about the implications .
 McNamara argued that if an air strike was to be launched it had to take place 'prior to the time these missile sites become operational'79 This assumption was challenged by Secretary of State Dean Rusk who questioned whether the Soviets would automatically retaliate with their surviving missiles in Cuba against the
 McNamara remained concerned whether the decision to launch would be taken in Moscow or Cuba . McNamara was concerned whether decision would be made in either Moscow or Havana . The decision was made on whether to launch in either Cuba or Moscow .
 Soviet command and control arrangements, and associated technical aspects of launch procedure, were therefore of great importance to senior US officials . The launch of the Soviet Union's first rocket was scheduled to take place on December 25, 1962 .
 McCone told McNamara on 17 October that Penkovsky's oral reports 'indicated considerable autonomy in hands of field commanders',81 .
 Penkovsky's information on the technical details of the SS-4 missile system was his vital contribution . Schecter and Deriabin argue that his information was vital to the Soviet Union .
 Richard Helms believed that Penkovsky's material on the SS-4 enabled American decision-makers to know exactly when the missiles would become operational, which in Helms' view gave Kennedy three extra days . Helms said that the material gave Kennedy extra days to prepare for the launch
 "I don't know of any single instance where intelligence was more immediately valuable than this time," says President Obama . "Intelligence was more immediate valuable than at this time"
 Penkovsky's material had a direct application because it came right into the middle of the decision-making, he says . The material had an impact on the decision making process, he said .
 Helms' claim raises interesting and still controversial issues, including whether Kennedy would have attacked PENKOVSKY and the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 35 Cuba .
 The President's initial reaction to the discovery of the missiles was certainly belligerent, though this quickly gave way to a more sober and pragmatic disposition .
 The CIA's technical intelligence on the SS-4 may have informed his understanding of when a decision was necessary . The CIA may have helped him make the decision .
 Whether he would have opted to destroy the missiles in the absence of such material is a separate matter . Whether the missiles would have been destroyed would be different matters .
 The CIA told the President on 19 October that two MRBM sites were operational, though they could not confirm whether the warheads were present . By 27 October, all six sites were reported to be operational . The CIA said in October that all six of the sites were operating .
 Helms' claim that Penkovsky's information was vital in dissuading Kennedy from taking precipitous military action is far from demonstrated, and based on contested and unsubstantiated reading of Kennedy's attitude .
 On balance, it seems that while certainly helpful, Penkovsky's material was unlikely to have been decisive . The Russian president's material is certainly helpful .
 For CIA and SIS, Penkovsky's espionage provided unprecedented insights into Soviet capabilities . For CIA, it was the prospect of warning about an imminent Soviet nuclear attack . CIA: 'For the CIA, SIS'
 He was able to learn of secret highlevel decisions most notably Khrushchev's decision to close the frontier in Berlin in 1961 .
 The construction of the Berlin Wall took Western intelligence and Western leaders by surprise, though Penkovsky had managed to learn of plans to build the wall four days before open construction began . The wall was built in the early 1950s .
 Penkovsky90 was unable to forewarn his handlers because he had been unable to contact them . Various proposals had previously been canvassed by SIS and the CIA to provide secure methods of communication with him . The proposals had been previously suggested by the CIA and the SIS .
 After this experience procedures were established to enable contact to be made with Western intelligence in an emergency .
 In October 1961 Penkovsky was briefed on the procedure, conceived by British intelligence, to enable him to provide emergency warning of a Soviet attack .
 Penkovsky was given two phone numbers of American Embassy personnel, either of which he could ring . He was given the phone numbers, which he was able to ring .
 When a man answered the phone, Penkovsky was to blow into the mouthpiece three times . The phone was answered by a man who answered it three times before he could speak .
 Americans would then go to a telephone pole 35 on Kutuzovsky Prospekt and look for a freshly marked letter X on the pole . The Americans would go to the pole 35 in Moscow to look for the letter X . The letter X would be found on the telephone pole on Kut
 This signal meant that Penkovsky would leave a detailed message in the dead drop . This signal was used to send a message to the Kremlin . The signal was meant to leave a message in a dead drop drop .
 If it is not possible for him to promptly service the dead drop, the phone signal would be sufficient for an immediate early warning . If it was not possible, he would be able to send an early warning, he said .
 The signalling system, code-named DISTANT, was to be used 'only if he had learned for a fact that the Soviet Union had decided to attack' The British were to be informed of this warning through the CIA Station .
 The warning was to be passed to the JIC whose discussion would be attended by the CIA Station Chief . The CIA station chief is expected to attend the meeting .
 It was made clear to Penkovsky that the telephonic warning alone would be sufficient to 'result in prompt action at a high level in the United States and Great Britain' Reliance on such a procedure raised considerable difficulties .
 British officials were concerned that such a system could lead to miscalculation and war . British officials in particular were concerned about miscalculations .
 In Britain any such warning would be evaluated by the JIC before military or political commands were informed . In Britain, such a warning would not be made before military, political commands informed .
 Maurice Oldfield explained to Jack Maury that 'a DISTANT report will not be treated by the UK as an indicator unless the JIC accept it as such' This approach differed from that of the United States, where the CIA would pass the raw 'data' on to its
 CIA was not aware of the potential hazards of relying on a source that could potentially be used for the purpose of deception . Such an attitude reflected differences in the structure and function of the respective intelligence communities, the CIA said .
 Oleg Penkovsky was arrested on 22 October 1962 . According to the KGB, he was arrested in Moscow in 1962 .
 Raymond Garthoff suggests that Penkovsky could have deliberately tried to provoke a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union . He suggests that he may have been trying to provoke an attack on Russia .
 Penkovsky was in fact a Soviet-controlled agent of disinformation . He was the West's prize Cold War spy, despite claims he was a spy in the West .
 The initial source of this claim was the KGB defector, Anatoly Golitsyn, who persuaded some senior Western intelligence officials that Penkovsky was working for the Soviets . The initial claim was made by an alleged Soviet defector .
 James Angleton, the CIA's Head of Counter-intelligence, initially endorsed Penkovsky's bona fides . Angleton later came to believe that he had been a double agent .
 These doubts were shared by some British officials, whose views became public . These doubts became public in the wake of the crisis in Syria .
 Penkovsky could have been an 'unwitting medium in a Soviet intelligence operation', designed by 'Soviet doves' to communicate that Khrushchev was bluffing . A variation on this theme was the suggestion that Penkovski could be a 'unsuccessful medium'
 The question of whether Penkovsky was genuine was a concern for the U.S. and British intelligence communities . Edward Jay Epstein publicly expounded Angleton's doubts and suspicions about Soviet success in penetrating and deceiving Western intelligence .
 In July 1962 there were fears within CIA that Penkovsky was 'under suspicion, 38 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY possible surveillance, and even might have been compromised to the point where he could be acting as a counter-agent'110 .
 "We had checked his bona fides extremely carefully, and held up dissemination of reports in order to ensure their validity," says CNN.com.com .
 CIA records indicate that the British were convinced of Penkovsky's genuineness . The fear that their agent might be turned was an inevitable concern .
 It is difficult to equate Penkovsky's warnings that his meetings were under KGB surveillance in 1962 with a disinformation operation . It is not easy to equate the warnings with the disinformation operation in 1962 .
 It is difficult to explain why, if Penkovsky was a conduit of disinformation, he would have been discontinued at the precise moment in October 1962 when communication channels between the leaderships were so crucial .
 The available evidence overwhelmingly suggests that Penkovsky was genuine . The evidence overwhelmingly supports that he was genuine, the BBC says .
 Conspiracy Theory contains means by which evidence that challenges the premises or conclusions can be dismissed . Like most conspiracy theories, it contains the means by way of dismissing the premises and conclusions .
 The history of deception and Soviet disinformation meant that such hypotheses could not simply be dismissed . Moreover, the history of . deception and . Soviet disinformation means that such . ideas could not be dismissed, the historian said .
 Without access to Soviet records the adjudication of historical evidence is inherently problematic . Without access of Soviet records, it is difficult to adjudicate historical evidence .
 The claims of Golitsyn that the Sino-Soviet split and the Prague spring of 1968 were KGB calibrated acts of disinformation, for example, fundamentally discredit his ideas of a global conspiracy in which Penkovsky played a part . The claims are fundamentally discredited .
 The claim that Kennedy's promise not to invade Cuba in return for the withdrawal of the missiles was a triumph for the Soviets was shared by Americans like USAF Chief of Staff General Curtis Le May who still wanted to invade .
 Key to this are the various claims and fears about Soviet deep penetration agents or 'moles' Key is the allegation that MI5 was penetrated at a very senior level . MI5 is alleged to have been infiltrated at a senior level by Soviet agents .
 Several candidates emerged in both the internal 'molehunts' and the public accusations, most notably the Director-General, Sir Roger Hollis, and the Deputy Director, Graham Mitchell . Several candidates have been implicated in the scandal .
 Penkovsky is important to these claims because if MI5 were penetrated at the highest levels, then the Soviet authorities would have learned of his activities . If MI5 had been penetrated, it would have been able to find out about his activities in the Soviet Union .
 Penkovsky provided a very considerable amount of documentary material on Soviet thinking and capabilities, and at a time when Western sources were nugatory .
 The advent of satellite photography may have been more important than information about Soviet ICBM capabilities . Satellite photography could not shed light on the debates within the Soviet General Staff about the impact of the nuclear revolution on Soviet military doctrine .
 Documents from the Top Secret Special Collection of the Journal of Military Thought could illuminate debates within the Soviet military on existing policy .
 The Special Collection was a forum for 'sharp, controversial, and forcefully argued formulation of the most vital theoretical problems' created in 1960 to enable senior military officers to debate the revolution in military affairs occasioned by ballistic missiles and weapons of mass destruction . Key CIA and Defense Intelligence Agency assessments of
 IRONBARK documents covered a period when the Soviets were preparing for a major revision in... three key areas: doctrine, organization, and weaponry .
 Kennedy's and McNamara's attempts to change NATO nuclear strategy in the 1960s attempts culminated in the adoption of Flexible Response in 1967 . These reassessments were at the heart of Kennedy's attempts .
 Hitherto, these have been attributed to analytical innovation within the Pentagon, and specifically in relation to deconstructing the Soviet order of battle . The Pentagon has been criticized for its lack of analytical innovation .
 Penkovsky's documentary material corroborated and may well have facilitated the reassessment of Soviet combat readiness, which underpined this exercise . Penkovsksky's film material corroborates and may . well have helped .
 Penkovsky provided materials and insights into Soviet chemical and bacteriological warfare capabilities . There are also indicators that he provided various materials to the Soviets .
 Penkovsky's documentary material on the impact of weapons of mass destruction on the Soviet armed forces provided the West a window on its adversary .
 The significance of Penkovsky's intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis has been sensationalised and distorted . The significance has been distorted in this article .
 There are still aspects of Penkovsky's role in the missile crisis, most importantly the discovery of his treachery in Moscow, which may compel further reflection .
 The exaggeration and distortion in much of the literature reflects upon some of the writers involved in the popular and influential genre of espionage history . The exaggeration of the espionage history reflects upon those involved in it .
 Peter Wright may be transparent but other agendas, more opaque and more subtle, are at work . While the motives of Peter Wright are transparent, other agendas may be at work, he says .
 Those who wish to present espionage as an important element of state activity have an interest in emphasising the importance of the case . The case has been described as 'significant' by the British authorities .
 British officials seek to demonstrate the value of the 'special relationship' in this sphere . So too do British officials seeking to demonstrate that they have a strong relationship .
 One clear lesson of the Penkovsky case is that writing on espionage is both difficult and problematic . The case requires a circumspect approach to the accumulation of evidence and the use of evidence .
 This conclusion is not to 'debunk' Penkovsky's espionage or to denigrate his espionage . It's not to "debunk" his espionage, it's to "deny his espionage," it says .
 It is to emphasise that the Cuban missile crisis is not a useful way of adjudicating on the importance of Penkovsky's espionage . It is also not a fruitful way of examining the Russian spy agency's role in Cuba's crisis .
 I am grateful to Guto Thomas, Peter Jackson and Stephen Twigge for their comments on an earlier draft of this article . The article was presented to the BISA International History Group conference at Leicester in September 1998 .
 Correspondence, John Grant, Principal Private Secretary to the Foreign Secretary, 11 Sept. 2011 . John Grant was John Grant's principal Private Secretary for Foreign Secretary .
 The other contribution was the British ambassador to Washington, Sir David Ormsby-Gore's suggestion to move the quarantine line . Sir David's suggestion was that quarantine line should be moved .
 The first materials Penkovsky passed to the West, in Aug.60, were to establish his bona fides .
 The CNN Cold War programme deals with espionage in the Cold War . Max Hastings describes Penkovsky as 'perhaps the greatest spy of Cold War' whose espionage was 'critical' to the United States during missile crisis .
 The accuracy of the quotation is questioned by Andrew, Secret Service 786n. Verrier 193; the accuracy of this quote is questioned . Verrier is a French national .
 Details of SIS and CIA operations are provided in Schecter and Deriabin passim . Details of the CIA and SIS operations can be found in the Passim .
 Interviews with Peter Hennessy, 1994, quoted in Grant Smith, 'Britain and the Cuban missile crisis' 6.6.5.5 . Interviews are published by Grant Smith at the end of this week .
 Sir Nicholas Henderson, telephone conversation with author, 29 Nov.94; Sir Frank Roberts, 6 Dec.94.94, interview with author .
 Material from Penkovsky's briefings was circulated through a 'special information handling channel', codenamed CHICKADEE . Documentary material was circulated under IRONBARK, ibid. xiii, xiv. Material from the briefings was also circulated under 'IRONB
 SS-1 (SS-1) became known as the SCUD, David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy 1939-56 324. 324. The SCUD was the Soviet Union's first atomic bomb .
 Soviet Estimate, Doc.288; Mtg 12, London, 1 May 1961, paras., 25, 62 Doc.287; Mt.12, London 1 May 1960, paras.288 .
 Peter Wright makes the erroneous assertion that when Gary Powers' U-2 was shot down in May 1960, the West lacked any photo-reconnaissance capabilities 'until the launch of the first satellite toward the end of 1962', Wright 210 . Wright 210. The West had no photo-
 CIA did not obtain detailed technical data on the SS-6 from Penkovsky . When the space booster version of the missile was shown at the Paris air show in 1967 the U.S. intelligence community were surprised by crucial technical features, which indicated their earlier calculations were in error .
 Wonus, 'The Case of the SS-6', Studies in Intelligence , Vol. , National Archives, National Archives . Wonus: The case was the result of a successful CIA operation .
 In NIE 11-8-61, 7 June 1961, Doc. Ed Proctor and Jack Smith Re Use of CHICKADEE Material in NIE . Jack Smith: "Use of CHILLADEE material in the NIE is a violation of the law"
 NIE 11-8/1-61: Strength and Deployment of Soviet Long Range Ballistic Missile Forces, 21 Sept.61, in Ruffner 133.61 .
 NIE 11-8/1-61 drew upon electronic intelligence, ibid.3. In addition to satellite photography and human intelligence, the NIE drew upon .
 The CIA knew, presumably assisted by Penkovsky's material, that the SS-3 was a liquid-fuelled missile, requiring radar guidance . The absence of fuel tankers and radar equipment was an indicator that SS-4 was being deployed, see May and Zelikow
 CIA Memo, Probable MRBM Sites in Cuba, 16 Oct. 2014, CIA Memos. Strategic Considerations, CIA memo. CIA: "Probable" sites in Cuba .
 Memo of Meeting attended in Secretary Ball's Conference Room, 17 Oct.62, McAuliffe l60.62 . Memo was attended by Secretary Ball, Secretary Ball of Meeting .
 Helms: Report on Large-Scale Soviet Military Preparations, 26 Sept.61, Doc.61 . Helms says report on large-scale Soviet military preparations was a result of Soviet invasion .
 Golitsyn on Penkovsky: New Lies for Old The Communist Strategy of Deception and Disinformation 54. For Golitsy, see Anatoliy Golitsly, see Anatoliy . For more information, see the book "New Lies for the Old"
 Schecter's contacts were with anonymous officials . Bower conducted interviews with Nikolai Chistyakov, head of the KGB's investigation department, as well as KGB Chairman Semichastny . Schecters' contacts were anonymous .
 West himself does not appear to subscribe to Wright's views on Penkovsky .
 It is conceivable that Soviet intelligence might have learned of Penkovsky's activities from a mole . But it is conceivable they calculated that moving against him would risk their source .
 See also Joseph C Evans, 'Berlin Tunnel Intelligence: A Bumbling KGB', Int. Yale UP 1997; see also 'Berlins Tunnel Intelligence' by Joseph Evans .
 Richard Helms to Director, DIA: Establishment of Top Secret Special Collection of Articles of the Journal 'Military Thought', 8 Nov.61, Doc.61 .
 I am grateful to William Burr of the U.S. National Archive for this information . I am also grateful for the information provided by Burr .