 JFK endured two harrowing nuclear showdowns with the USSR, increased the U.S. presence in Vietnam, and tried to establish a more innovative approach to America’s larger foreign policy . Though only in office for a relatively short period, JFK endured a more harrowing nuclear showdown with the
 He was president during some of the most intense moments of the Cold War . President George W. Bush was president of the U.S. from 1961-1989 .
 This article explores the historiography of Kennedy’s foreign policies . It explores the history of JFK's foreign policy . Kennedy's foreign policies are the subject of a new book .
 The modern historiography of U.S. foreign policy typically goes through three stages . The modern history of foreign policy goes through a series of stages .
 The second, ‘revisionist’ stage tends to occur once proper documentation begins to appear . ‘Revisionists’ tend to occur when proper documentation is provided .
 Almost always it involves a righteous debunking of the received orthodox wisdom . articles or entire books crafted around new, if sometimes limited, evidence that undermines the conventional view .
 It certainly does with the history of John F Kennedy’s diplomacy, says Campbell Craig . Campbell Craig: Kennedy's diplomacy has a long history of diplomacy .
 The assassination of the young President in November 1963 all but guaranteed an uncritical, indeed hagiographic, early literature . Early literature was written, largely by people closely associated with the administration .
 Kennedy and his assistants saw the crisis through to a peaceful resolution, forcing the USSR to dismantle its missiles in Cuba and send them home . The U.S. was forced to dismantle the missiles and send the missiles home .
 Eisenhower, and his successor, Lyndon Baines Johnson, just then getting bogged down in Vietnam, was not difficult to discern . Eisenhower and Johnson got bogged up in Vietnam .
 It began to emerge in the 1980s and 1990s, from various perspectives . But it was not the first time it emerged that it emerged as a phenomenon .
 Historians began to question the myth of Kennedy as peacemaker . Also, as early documents began to be declassified, a few historians questioned the myth .
 Key line of attack was on his record in Latin America, a region of interest to the new administration . Latin America is a key part of the Obama administration .
 A companion to John F Kennedy, a major work on the historiography of the Kennedy administration edited by Marc Selverstone, will be published by Wiley in 2014 .
 Kennedy was as fervent an anti-communist when it came to western hemispheric relations as any president for the duration of the Cold War . Kennedy, as Rabe stresses, was a fervent anti-Communist when he was in office .
 A far more resonant attack zeroed in on Kennedy's expansion of America’s role in Vietnam . Of course, the attack focused on the expansion of U.S. role in the Vietnam War .
 Kennedy’s alleged culpability for the war that was not a formal military operation until after LBJ took office rests upon two pillars . Kennedy's alleged guilt rests on two pillars: The war was a war that took place in the early 1950s and the early 1960s .
 When Johnson took the oath of office in November, the U.S. had a substantially greater presence in Vietnam than it had had in 1960 . The United States had a long-time client in Saigon, but its long-term client was gone .
 Kennedy brought in a group of young foreign policy advisers, the ‘best and the brightest’, as David Halberstam called them . They were determined to solve difficult Cold War problems by means of modern social science .
 Many advisers, including Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, stayed on with Johnson . They developed a modern counter-­ insurgency strategy that sold a losing war to Johnson and ended up transforming operations on the ground .
 Scholars have become interested in Kennedy’s  fearmongering campaign of 1960 . He grossly exaggerated Soviet military capabilities and made accusations, which he knew to be false, that Eisenhower had let American defences slip .
 JFK echoed the absurd claims of defence intellectuals such as Henry Kissinger that the USSR was on the verge of achieving decisive nuclear superiority . Central to this strategy was the so-called ‘missile gap’ charge .
 JFK’s wildly irresponsible personal behaviour. On top of this, as many popular biographers of JFK were at pains to point out, was his reckless personal behaviour .
 He was involved in several extramarital affairs during his time in office, opening himself up to potentially devastating possibilities of blackmail . He blithely associated with people close to organized crime .
 He relied on bizarre and risky medical treatments to ease his chronically bad back, putting himself in physically precarious situations in order not to appear infirm .
 The revisionist response to the Camelot school unquestionably advanced our understanding of the history of U.S. foreign relations under John F Kennedy . The Camelot School of Diplomacy was founded in 1963 .
 Over the past decade, a new appreciation of Kennedy’s foreign policies has emerged, and it is this that will be discussed in greater detail in the rest of this article .
 We will focus here upon new arguments about JFK and Vietnam, his approach to the unique danger of nuclear war, and his apparent turn towards a policy of detente during the year 1963, a topic somewhat understudied .
 The U.S. policy to contend with the expansion of communism everywhere, codified in the famous strategy paper of 1950, NSC-68, had been fitfully pursued by the Eisenhower administration . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the United States since Vietnam .
 U.S. fought communism in the so-called Third World by means of political and economic warfare, much of it quite ruthless, rather than by sustained military intervention . Eisenhower himself was determined to wage the Cold War cheaply, and his Secretary of State was primarily concerned with Europe .
 Eisenhower liked to point out that there was not a single American combat death during his entire term of office . While this was true, it meant that in many parts of the world United States anti-communist policies rested upon the political fates of pro-western leaders .
 Kennedy’s international legacy, fifty years on, 50 years on . This was surely the case in Vietnam . Kennedy's legacy will be remembered for his role in the Vietnam War .
 Following the departure of the French in 1954, the country had been divided into a pro-socialist north, led by Ho Chi Minh . The pro-western south was led by the devoutly Catholic Ngo Dinh Diem . The country was divided between pro-left and
 By the time Kennedy took office, the Diem regime had become dangerously fragile . Despite increasing levels of U.S. economic and military support, the regime was fragile . Kennedy took over from Diem in 1968 .
 The Kennedy administration regarded South-East Asia as a key component in its larger policy of waging a more vigorous and effective Cold War in the Third World . Laos, as well as Vietnam, was key component of the larger policy .
 President McNamara believed that a systematic policy of building durable pro-western regimes, rather than just throwing some money and guns at any available rightist leader, represented a more durable and enlightened means of stemming the expansion of communism .
 Such a policy made for a snug fit with the administration’s optimistic, scientific ethos . The policy was a fit for the administration's optimistic ethos .
 JFK authorized an intensification of military, economic and social assistance to the Diem regime . The aim was to build a modern society that could withstand communist interventions over the long term . So during the years 1961–3 JFK authorized increased assistance to Vietnam .
 The new policy combined faith that all peoples desired a modern order with a determination that such an order could be imposed from the top down . Not at all unlike the reasoning behind current U.S. ‘nation-building’ projects in the Middle East .
 By the middle of 1963, it was clear that the South Vietnamese government was collapsing . By the end of the year, the Vietnamese government had collapsed .
 This was why Kennedy accepted the coup against Diem, which took place not long before the President was assassinated in Dallas . The coup took place shortly before Kennedy was assassinated .
 At this point, the history of Kennedy's involvement in Vietnam ends and that of Johnson’s begins . At this time, of course, the . history of the . Vietnam War begins .
 Preston’s chapter in the forthcoming Companion to John F Kennedy, ‘Whose war was it?’, provides a complete historiographical overview and advances a powerful interpretation in its own right . He sees Kennedy as more likely to have committed to war than most recent work
 It is reasonable to ask whether Kennedy, had he lived, might have decided to cut his losses there rather than commit to a full-scale invasion as Johnson did .
 Historians have suggested that JFK committed to war remains open . As several historians have suggested, the question of whether JFK was committed .
 He did expand the effort in Vietnam, as we have seen, and did go along with Diem’s removal . He expanded the effort, but did not expand it .
 The easiest course was to continue the US policy of commitment to the preservation of South Vietnam, one that had been in place for a decade . The US policy was to keep the South Vietnam policy of support for the country's South Vietnam .
 He rejected talk of negotiation, and reiterated frequently that South-East Asia remained an important theatre in America's Cold War .
 There are hints that Kennedy was beginning to have doubts about the wisdom of banking on the South Vietnamese . Kennedy was worried about getting dragged into a serious military operation .
 He resisted demands that he send proper military forces there, and—as we shall see, was clearly rethinking the militarized nature of U.S. foreign policy .
 We can fairly conclude that at least the President was not determined to wage major war in Vietnam before November 1963 . A second means of answering this question is to examine Johnson’s reasons for committing to a full-scale ground war in 1964 and 1965 .
 This is more of a counterfactual experiment—asking a ‘what if ’ question—than the foregoing discussion . This is a more of an experiment, asking a 'what if’ question, rather than a discussion .
 It is, in my view, a more powerful challenge to the thesis that Kennedy was predetermined to commit to war in Vietnam . Nevertheless, it is, I think, a better challenge to that theory that Kennedy committed to war .
 This is because Johnson’s decision can be convincingly attributed to factors particular to him, such as factors which would have almost certainly been much less important to Kennedy . Kennedy's decision to leave the White House can be easily attributed to his own reasons .
 LBJ made two overarching decisions which transformed U.S. involvement in Vietnam from a largely political nation-building exercise to a full-scale military operation to defeat Viet Cong forces in South Vietnam .
 Johnson responded to reported attacks on U.S. warships in the Gulf of Tonkin in August 1964 . Johnson demanded from Congress authorization to wage war against forces hostile to the United States in Vietnam in Vietnam .
 For an effective critique of both their argument and their methodology, see Andrew Preston’s review of Virtual JFK in the Michigan War Studies Review, 24 May 2011 .
 With these two actions Johnson turned the American presence there into a massive and brutal war of counterinsurgency . Johnson's actions turned the U.S. presence in the Middle East into a brutal war against insurgency .
 He and his advisers chose to exaggerate and perhaps invent the dangers of the Tonkin attacks in order to intensify the U.S. struggle in Vietnam . He recognized that these moves would deprive his Republican opponent in the November campaign of a major electoral issue, he says .
 Goldwater had long regarded Cold War hawkishness as the most effective weapon to use against Democrats . Goldwater, like many on the Republican right, had long considered Cold War hawkkishness .
 Johnson’s moves in the late summer of 1964 were perfectly timed to pre-empt any such Republican strategy . They showed that he was tough on Vietnam, while allowing him to claim that he would not send any American boys there, as he did throughout the campaign .
 The same reasoning can explain Johnson’s decision to escalate U.S. involvement in Vietnam in 1965, he says .
 The president had to decide whether to intensify the war or abandon it in Vietnam . He had won the presidency the previous November, in one of the biggest landslides in U.S. history .
 Claims made by both orthodox and revisionist scholars that the White House simply did not foresee that intervention could turn into a quagmire are no longer sustainable . The White House has been accused of being naive about intervention in Syria .
 Johnson believed that U.S. credibility had long depended upon preventing a South Vietnamese collapse . But he believed that United States credibility—and indeed his own personal credibility — depended upon .
 To abandon Saigon now would be to acknowledge failure, and the limits of US power, Johnson was incapable of doing . Johnson was unable to do so, and this would be a failure, he says .
 It is quite plausible to argue that Kennedy, had he lived, would have been much less driven by such concerns . It's quite plausible that Kennedy would have lived in a much different way .
 In 1964 he would have been running for re-election, and with the great 'victory' over the Soviets in the missile crisis he would not have had to worry as much about being painted as a doveish Democrat .
 Kennedy possessed a self-confidence that Johnson lacked, Kennedy lacked . Kennedy also had a strong sense of humor, unlike Johnson .
 The advent of megatonne thermonuclear bombs and intercontinental missiles in the 1950s meant that such a conflagration was, for the first time, conceivable . It was then possible that a nuclear war would be possible in the future .
 Kennedy campaigned in 1960 on the idea that there had to be a third alternative to 'holocaust or humiliation' He and his advisers sought to develop new military strategies that would allow the U.S. to wage a limited war against the Soviet Union .
 President Eisenhower sought to distinguish himself from his predecessor, Eisenhower . The notion that the United States had to accept a condition of mutual assured destruction flew in the face of the ‘Camelot’ mentality, he said .
 It is one thing to talk about imaginative nuclear strategies and compelling the USSR to bend to America’s will in the abstract; quite another to follow through on such ideas when one's finger is on the proverbial button . Yet it is one of the things it is not to believe in
 Recent historical writing has demonstrated clearly that Kennedy realized this quite quickly . Kennedy realized quickly that this was not a good idea . Kennedy's actions in the 1960s and '60s were a mistake .
 JFK and his advisers discarded their ideas about winnable nuclear war and came to recognize that it was necessary to play a very different game . JFK and advisers discarded ideas about winning nuclear war .
 Eisenhower and Khrushchev took a public stance of toughness and firmness while, behind the scenes, finding a way, any way, to avoid military conflict . This game, as Eisenhower had already discerned, necessitated taking a tougher stance . This is the case, but it's
 Kennedy’s international legacy, fifty years on symbolize an earlier era of overwhelming U.S. superiority, when the West stayed in Berlin simply because the USSR could do nothing about it . It was also becoming an acute problem on the ground, as East Germans and others from the
 At a conference in Vienna in the summer of 1961 he told Kennedy that the West had to leave . At the end of the 1960s he said the West must leave the West .
 It had been 16 years since the end of the war; there was no justification for keeping occupation forces in a city well within East Germany . It was 16 years after the end, 16 years ago, when occupation forces were still in the city .
 Almost immediately after taking office, Kennedy was faced with a classic nuclear dilemma . Kennedy was confronted with a nuclear dilemma almost immediately after becoming president .
 The United States had long regarded the maintenance of the western presence in Berlin as a basic Cold War stake, one worth waging general war over . The U.S. had long viewed the presence of western forces in Germany as a key Cold War stakes .
 President Barack Obama's administration has a chance to wage war over the issue of immigration reform . The White House has been criticized for its stance on the issue .
 He managed this by signalling to the Soviets that the West would now insist only upon a presence in its western sectors in Berlin, thus abandoning the pretence that it ought to have access to the entirety of the old German capital .
 Khrushchev and East German leader Walter Ulbricht built the wall, which allowed them to solve the problem of massive defections to the West without having to try to physically expel the western powers from their parts of Berlin .
 Newly available documentation shows that Kennedy and aides were relieved by the wall . They shut down attempts by subordinate military advisers to challenge it . Publicly, of course, Kennedy voiced outrage .
 President Eisenhower authorized a naval blockade around Cuba and publicly demanded that the missiles be removed . He also initiated secret negotiations with the Soviets whereby the U.S. promised to dismantle the Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Once it was apparent that Khrushchev was receptive to such a deal, the President and his advisers moved decisively to seal it with Moscow . Others in the White House and Washington were demanding military action .
 Kennedy administration agreed to concessions in exchange only for a return to the status quo ante . It's hardly evident that the U.S. won the Cuban crisis at all, since the Kennedy administration .
 If the Camelot historians were right to claim that it was JFK’s finest hour, it was not exactly for the reasons that they highlighted . The Camelot historian says JFK's finest hour was not his finest hour . It was not for reasons that historians highlighted, but for reasons
 International Relations 26: 3, Sept. 12.12.08: A special issue on the crisis, edited by Len Scott, is published in International Relations magazine International Relations .
 Historians and other scholars can seek to answer the question of how the two superpowers were able to avoid a Third World War . Few observers of recent international history would ever have thought possible at its outset .
 Had Kennedy decided to act upon his hawkish campaign ideas in 1961 or 1962, as many academics and generals were urging him to do, we might well not be here to wonder why .
 Kennedy’s final year in office lacked the overt drama of his first two (until his trip to Dallas, Texas, and it is the subject of much less scholarly analysis . Nineteen sixty-three Kennedy's final year lacked overt drama, but his final year was much less dramatic
 There were no great superpower crises in 1963, and on the other most resonant question about his foreign policy, what to do in Vietnam, did not make any kind of smoking gun decision .
 Students of U.S. foreign relations would do well to take a closer look at this period . Students of United States foreign relations should look at the history of American relations .
 It is clear that Kennedy’s experiences over Berlin and Cuba had shaken him deeply, and that he may have begun to question the foundations of American Cold War policy . For it is clear, Kennedy‘s experiences .
 Historians say JFK did not act to alter U.S. foreign policy in any serious way . JFK's views may have changed rhetorically, but he didn't act to change foreign policy, they say .
 His assassination in 1963 meant that he had little opportunity to do so . But this assessment must be considered alongside the fact that his assassination in November 1963 meant he had no opportunity to .
 It was presented as a major presidential statement, as such addresses occasionally are, and its main points, if taken as serious indications of a policy change, represented a profound shift in his attitude towards the Cold War . The address, delivered in 1945, was presented by President George W. Bush
 Kennedy’s recognition that nuclear weapons had changed everything . Underlying the speech was Kennedy's recognition of the power of nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy had argued so in the 1960 campaign, but the trials of 1961 and 1962 had changed his mind . Kennedy had said so in 1960 campaign; but the trial of 1961- 1962 changed him mind .
 Great Powers would not surrender when each had invulnerable powerful forces that could destroy the other, making a winable nuclear war short of general holocaust impossible . In other words, Great Powers .
 Kennedy’s international legacy, fifty years on, 50 years on . Because total nuclear war would destroy humanity, it was necessary to pursue a durable peace with the Soviet Union . Any war between the two sides would escalate to that .
 It would require seeking a ‘relaxation of tensions’ with the USSR, one based upon ‘mutual tolerance’ and a reduction of ideological sabre-rattling . More immediately, and realistically, it would need seeking a 'relaxed relaxation'
 Americans needed to recognize that war was not inevitable, that the Soviets were not inhuman monsters, that it would be possible to wage the Cold War in a different manner . Americans need to realize that war wasn't inevitable, and that it was not impossible to wage Cold War with Soviets .
 JFK took two concrete steps during the last months of his life to reduce Cold War tensions, both in the arena of nuclear weaponry . JFK also took steps to reduce the threat of nuclear weapons in the Cold War .
 The treaty would ban all nuclear testing apart from that conducted underground . It also obviated the need for intrusive inspections and would stop the emission of radioactivity .
 In a larger sense, the treaty could signify a small, but productive, form of cooperation among the major powers . This was clearly an important benefit to Kennedy as he expressed it in his commencement address .
 The nuclear age demanded such cooperation, and here was a first step towards it, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 A second step was to stop the proliferation of weapons to more countries, he said . A third step was stopping weapons being sold to other nations, he added . A second was stopping the proliferation to more nations .
 Kennedy feared that possession of the bomb by more and more nations would inevitably increase the risks of nuclear war . By 1963 several nations were suspected of having programmes to build nuclear weaponry . Kennedy feared possession of nuclear weapons would increase the risk of war .
 Warren Bass and Avner Cohen discuss the case of Israel in the first half of 1963 . They say the case was central to this policy in the early '60s .
 JFK focused upon this country because the proliferation of nuclear weaponry in the Middle East seemed particularly hazardous, but also, as both Bass and Cohen stress, because he believed that Israel was a nation he could coerce .
 Kennedy developed a classic carrot-and-stick policy, promising political and military support but also warning that the support would disappear if Israel followed through on its nuclear project . Kennedy developed the classic carrot and stick policy .
 The test ban treaty did put a halt to atmospheric testing, but it did not lead to an easing of the arms race, as Kennedy had hoped it would . The treaty did not stop atmospheric testing but led to an arms race in the 1960s .
 During the 1960s and 1970s, the two superpowers built thousands and thousands of new nuclear weapons . During the 60s and 70s the two . superpowers . built thousands of thousands of . new . weapons .
 Johnson maintained political and military support for the Jewish state, but looked the other way when it developed a nuclear arsenal . Johnson maintained support for Israel, but did not give Israel a nuclear weapon .
 By the end of the 1960s, Israel had the bomb, and so did France and China . Israel and China did not have the bomb in the early 1960s . The bomb was Israel's first bomb .
 Talk of relaxing tensions and stopping arms races was not just intellectually debatable, it was positively threatening . In such a political climate, talk of relaxing tension is not just intellectual debatable; it is threatening .
 In his June 1963 speech Kennedy suggested that the ‘new face of war’ had made this kind of politics intolerably dangerous . Kennedy, like Eisenhower, and also like the veteran Cold Warrior George Kennan, was suggesting that the 'new face' of war had made it intoler
 JFK's main problem was not abroad, it was at home, JFK's address says . JFK's "main problem, or at least the main problem he could do anything about, was home," he says .
 Playing politics by constantly calling for belligerent foreign policies was one thing in the 1890s, or 1920s; in the 1960s, the stakes were too high . The stakes were high in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Had Kennedy lived, his attempt to deal with this problem would have become a dominant feature of his presidency, he says . Had he succeeded in dealing with it, the Cold War might well have ended sooner than it did .