 It looks like you’re using an outdated or unsupported browser that may not render correctly . Use the outdated or outdated browser to view this article article .
 An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders is an icon . Log in Account icon is a head-and-shoulder icon .
 It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options . Chevron icon indicates expandable sections or menu options .
 Castro made a covert agreement in July 1962 with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to host Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro made the deal in September 1960 . Castro signed a covert deal with the Soviet Premier in September 1962 .
 The move was partly an effort to deter the U.S. from attempting another Cuban invasion, and partly a way to maximize the Soviet Union’s nuclear strike capability .
 U.S. intelligence soon picked up evidence of a Soviet arms build-up on Cuba, including anti-aircraft defense missiles . President John F Kennedy opens at a Washington news conference on the Cuban situation .
 Spy plane took photos that clearly showed construction sites for nuclear-armed medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles . The standoff officially began when President John F Kennedy was briefed on the photos in October .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff urged Kennedy to launch an air strike followed by a full-on invasion of Cuba, but others called for a naval quarantine . Kennedy kept up his official schedule but met frequently with advisors to strategize .
 Kennedy attended a church service, ate lunch with the Crown Prince of Libya, and traveled to Connecticut to campaign for congressional candidates .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko visited Kennedy in the White House in October 1962 . He claimed that the Soviet aid to Cuba did not pose a threat to the U.S. and was merely defensive .
 Without revealing that he knew the extent of the nuclear arms build-up in Cuba, Kennedy repeated the warning he issued on Sept. 9 . Kennedy said the ""gravest issues would arise" if offensive nuclear weapons were found on Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration used the term ""quarantine"" rather than ""blockade,"" as the latter would have legally implied a state of war . The term "quarantine" would have been used to refer to a quarantine .
 A quarantine allowed the United States to continue receiving the support of the Organization of American States, the 35-member continental organization . A quarantine, however, allowed the U.S. to continue to receive the support .
 President Kennedy also sent a letter to Khrushchev urging his government not to take action that would ""widen or deepen this already grave crisis"" Kennedy also wrote to his government urging not to act .
 President Kennedy signs Proclamation 3504, authorizing the naval quarantine of Cuba . President Kennedy signed the proclamation in 1961 .
 Kennedy requested that Khrushchev halt any Soviet ships en route to Cuba, out of fear the U.S. would be forced to exchange fire and launch a war between the two nations . Kennedy then requested that any ships from the Soviet Union were halted .
 On Oct. 24, Khrushchev issued an angry rebuttal to Kennedy’s letter . Dept. of State translation of letter was translation of Chairman Khrushchchev's letter to President Kennedy of October 24 .
 All but one of the Soviet vessels heading towards Cuba turned back . Soviet ships heading to Cuba were turned back by Soviet vessels .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson lambasted the Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin over the evidence of missiles . One freighter containing only petroleum products was allowed through the quarantine .
 Castro sent Khrushchev a private letter urging him to annihilate the U.S. with nuclear weapons . New photographs emerged on Oct. 31, showing further missile site construction .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy another letter demanding stronger terms, such as the removal of the US's Jupiter missiles from Turkey . An American U-2 plane was also shot down over Cuba by a Soviet-supplied missile .
 Kennedy ultimately ignored the latest letter from Khrushchev, responding only to the warmer letter he had sent the previous day . Major Rudolf Anderson, the pilot of the doomed plane, was killed .
 The United States would vow not to invade Cuba and remove its missiles from Turkey . In turn, the U.S. would vow to remove the missiles and remove them from Cuba .
 The Soviets announced they would remove their missiles from Cuba on Oct., ending the standoff . In this Oct., 1962, President John F Kennedy leaves St. Louis, Missouri, for a visit .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet rocket bases in Cuba dismantled and rockets returned to Russia . The Soviet Union rocket bases were dismantled in Cuba and returned to the U.S. following the fall of communism .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the day to CNN iReport.com .