 World events reflected the familiar mixture of hope, tension, and watchful wariness . The implications of the United States and Russia continually overshadowed the individual happenings which made up the pattern of local, national, and international affairs .
 Events in this period altered the situations of several states and territories . The events of this period affected the situation in several states .
 In Africa, Rwanda and Burundi were no longer Belgian trust territories after 1 July . Two days later France officially acknowledged the independence of Algeria .
 Jamaica on 6 August, Trinidad and Tobago on 31 August, Uganda on 9 October, and Tanganyika on 9 December . New members joined the British Commonwealth in August .
 A 13-nation declaration on 23 July supported a theoretical neutrality for Laos . On 7 October American military advisers there completed their withdrawal from the country .
 The Netherlands and Indonesia signed an agreement which might settle their dispute over possession of West New Guinea . The United Nations established a temporary executive authority on 1 October .
 Ethiopia absorbed Eritrea, making it a province, on 14 November . The move was probably not the last word on the matter, though this is probably not last word .
 On 3 September the recalcitrant government of Katanga accepts ; United Nations plan for Congo reunification . Khrumah of Ghana and on Charles de Gaulle of France accepted the plan .
 One William Vassall received an 18-year prison sentence in the UK for a violation of the British Official Secrets Act . Juan Bosch was elected president of the Dominican Republic on 20 December .
 The international competition in space continued, with impressive achievements on both sides .
 Starting 11 August, the Russians put up separately two cosmonauts, who were reportedly returned on 15 August after flights of 64 and 48 orbits .
 Schirra, made a more modest, six-orbit flight on 3 October, but his voyage was conducted in the full spotlight of public coverage . The mission was conducted from launch to recovery .
 U.S. President Barack Obama's election to the White House is under way in Washington, D.C. and beyond . The White House will host a White House-sanctioned event in New York on Monday .
 Launched by an Atlas-Agena booster on 27 August, the Mariner II vehicle set out for the planet Venus . The mission was launched by a booster on August 27, 1962 .
 Probe established contact with its target on 14 December, sending back Earth's first t snsory measurements of the atmosphere and environment of Venus . After a space voyage of over three months, this probe established contact .
 Certain nations and peoples had other special preoccupations which enlisted the concern, the energies, or the resources of others around the world . Some of the world's most important nations and people had special interests .
 Voters endorsed de Gaulle in a referendum on the selection of future French presidents . Not too surprisingly, the French were wrapped up in an internal political discussion which was partly settled .
 The 1 September earthquake in Iran killed more than 11,000 people . More immediately disastrous was the 1 September quake in Iran which killed 11,500 people .
 30 September rioting in Oxford, Mississippi, highlighted a major internal concern for the U.S. The 30 September riots in Mississippi highlighted a national concern .
 West Germany was both bemused and aroused by the uproar over items published in Per Spiegel . The tKfs affair was still causing governmental repercussions in Bonn a month and more later .
 The Second Ecumenical Council was convened in Rome by Pope John XXIII on 1 1 October . The first session of this Vatican assembly adjourned on 8 December .
 Major events in the period leading up to October 1962 were tangentialiy related to the Cold War . Some of these major events in that period were tangentially related to that war .
 The Laotian compromise was certainly a tactical victory for Communism, and the West German bickering had overtones of espionage . It was a victory for the Communist Party in Vietnam .
 More potentially critical were the space race and the actual conflict on India's borders . The former had military implications largely sensed but still imperfectly defined . The latter might embroil the friends of both participants .
 The Communist reputation for sensitive political timing acquired considerable tarnish on 30 October, when the perennial proposal to admit Red China came up for a United Nations vote and was defeated . The Communist Party of China was defeated in the vote .
 Russia conducted a new atmospheric test series which ran from 5 August to 20 November . Featuring a 30-megaton blast in the Arctic, the Russians conducted the series of atmospheric tests .
 The Americans were also testing in the atmosphere, and on 4 November President John F Kennedy announced completion of a test series, just ahead of a United Nations resolution against nuclear testing .
 Cold WarTenSidfts raft-consistently above normal, fluctuating with Communist pushes and relaxations at a score of known trouble spots around the world .
 As the principal antagonists carefully watched for each other's next move, only a slight increase in intensity and a focus of action at one geographical point sufficed to create a burning ""hot spot""
 Cuba was an especially sensitive point because of its geographic proximity to the continental U.S. The island nation was a key point of tension in 1962 .
 Known since 1947 or earlier as the entry port for Communist infiltration into Latin America . Known as 'Port of Entry' or 'Entrance to Communist infiltration' since 1947 .
 Cuba by mid-1962 was firmly in the hands of Fidel Castro, who had publicly announced and demonstrated his Communist sympathies, dedication, and objectives . Fidel Castro was the Cuban President of Cuba in 1962 .
 Cuban crisis appeared to many to take shape almost overnight, though this was not quite true . The Cuban crisis appears to have taken shape overnight, but it was not entirely true .
 There actually were a fair number of indications and warnings, especially in August, September, and early October . "There actually were ... warnings and warnings," says CNN's Jeff Jarrett .
 There are even more solidly founded reasons for suspicion for suspicion of the CIA .
 The key element, perhaps, was evidence that the Russian effort went beyond the activities historically necessary to shore up a new Communist satellite, no matter how feeble . The key elements of the effort were that it went beyond what is historically necessary .
 The Soviet-Cuban threat included a strong potential for offensive action against the United States . Ultimately, it became clear that the threat included the potential for attacking the U.S.
 American relations with Castro's Cuba were irritating and frustrating, especially after the abortive 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion . Indirect and spasmodic, U.S. relations with Cuba were frustrating and frustrating .
 In mid-1962 the tempo of events quickened at least as early as 24 August, with the revelation that Russia was sending as many as 5,000 ""technicians"" mostly military men, to Cuba .
 On 30 August Cuban boats fired on an American plane, and the following day President Kennedy warned that the fire would be returned if the offense were repeated . President Kennedy said that the Cuban boats would return fire .
 The U.S. warned Cuba against using its Soviet-origin weapons for aggressive purposes . Cuba had conventional Russian weapons .
 President Kennedy asked Congress for standby powers to recall up to 150,000 American Reservists . Three days later he asked the Congress for the recall . The request with greatest significance was a public indication that the Cuban situation might shortly become critical .
 The trend toward crisis received additional impetus from news that Russia was to build a $12-million Cuban base for Soviet fishing boats . Other possible uses for such a base were readily apparent to American observers .
 For four weeks in late September and early October, hurricane winds and persistent cloud cover combined to make aerial reconnaissance over Cuba a spotty affair .
 By 14 October, the high-flying U-2 aircraft were abls to' bring back good photographs of unusual construction work on the island . U.2 aircraft returned to the island in October .
 The scars in the earth are believed to be missile sites in varying stages of completion . Careful interpretation of these prints confirmed rumors and suspicions, identifying the scars as missile sites .
 The word to the President on 16 October was that these emplacements were probably for ballistic weapons which could drop nuclear warheads onto U.S. soil with very little warning . The word was that the emplacement was probably for missile missiles .
 Andrei Gromyko gave President Kennedy assurances that missiles were not offensive weapons . This solid identification was, of course, at variance with the assurances he gave . The Russian diplomat blandly insisted that the missiles in question were not weapons .
 The American quarantine went into effect on 24 October . The quarantine was imposed after a number of Cuban ships refused to heed the warning .
 Two days later the United States Navy for the first time halted and searched one of these inbound vessels . When its cargo revealed no offensive military materials, the chartered ship was allowed to proceed .
 At least as early as 26 October, Khrushchev initiated some significant correspondence with President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 In a 27 October note, the Soviet leader offered a trade-withdrawal of his offensive weapons from Cuba for withdrawal of American intermediate range ballistic missiles from Turkey . In the deal, he offered to withdraw offensive weapons for withdrawal from Cuba .
 President Kennedy rejected the Turkish portion of the bargain as having nothing to do with the Cuban issue . Kennedy suggested that the remainder of the Russian proposal could serve as an acceptable quid pro quo for ending the American naval quarantine of Cuba .
 Khrushchev offered withdrawal from Cuba for American promise not to invade the island . The following day he offered withdrawal for a U.S. promise to not invade Cuba .
 The swift marshaling of American striking power certainly had some t!. to do with the cooling of Cuban emotions . This continuing Kennedy-Khrushchev contact and the apparent Russian willingness to negotiate a settlement comprised probably the strongest single factor in alleviating the Cuban crisis .
 President Kennedy announced reconnaissance evidence that dismantling of the offensive sites had begun in November . This was true even on 2 November, when he announced that the dismantling had begun .
 The arrival of Anastas Mikoyan in Havana on 3 November had the effect of placing a Russian hand on the Cuban helm for the next 23 days .
 On 20 November Khrushchev announced he would withdraw the controversial Russian jet bombers from Cuba, and President Kennedy responded that this would end the need for the American naval quarantine .
 Russia signed a new three-year treaty for economic aid to Cuba . That same day, Russia signed an economic treaty for Cuba . The treaty was signed by Russia and Cuba on July 1 .
 It was mid-December before the U.S. was satisfied with the removal of offensive Russian missiles and jet bombers from Cuba .
 Regular reconnaissance showed no sign of the offensive weapons, but there was no real firsthand proof of their removal . The U.S. military says the weapons were removed from the area .
 American surveillance continued, accompanied by a gradual, partial relaxation of the special military buildup in the U.S. The U.N. continues to expand its surveillance operations .
 Fidel Castro's 24 December agreement to release the 1,113 prisoners captured at the Bay of Pigs . Castro's terms made it obvious even to the most optimistic that this was no thoroughgoing ""thaw"" in the Cold War .
 This background sketch of international events during the ""Cuban crisis" serves two main purposes . It is a sketch of events in the Cuban crisis during the 1950s .
 People* and nations did not set aside their other preoccupations, though they did hold their breath for a momentary focus on the dangers inherent in the Cuban situation .
 Neither the crisis nor its outcome effected any great change in the course of other events- the Berlin situation, for example, remained essentially the same . Moreover, neither the crisis or outcome of the outcome effected no great change .
 The U.S. response to the Cuba-based threat must have been instructive to Communist leaders everywhere . On the other hand, the American political and military reaction to the threat was instructive . The American response to Cuba's threat to Cuba was an instructive lesson for Communist leaders
 Almost overnight the United States assumed a ""ready"" posture, publicly called a halt to specific Russian activities, and prepared for either a full showdown with Communism or the chastisement of Cuba . The U.S. assumed a 'ready' posture .
 In the potential Cuban ""theater,"" the United States Navy conducted 'the physical quarantine of the island and performed aerial Surveillance of missile sites and Cuban shipping' The U.S. Navy also performed aerial surveillance of missile and Cuban ships .
 The Army swiftly moved appropriate offensive and defensive forces into position . The Army moved into position.
 Air Force combat units flew critical reconnaissance missions and stood ready to deliver either pinpoint attacks on missile sites or massive blows against major targets, in Cuba or Russia .
 Three major considerations-geography, strategy, and technology-combined to give the Air Force Systems Command a vital role in Air Force operations during this crisis .
 Cuba lay just off the main track of the Atlantic Missile Range and within reach of the installations at Eglin Air Force Base and at Cape Canaveral . Both these became staging areas and, in effect, forward tactical airfields .
 The broad strategic implications of the crisis also made it imperative to have the maximum number of intercontinental ballistic missiles ready for launch; to augment those already operational, training complexes and several sites still under construction were quickly brought to emergency operational status .
 The Systems Command was an active partner in the operation . Modern warfare made the technological aspects of modern warfare an important part of the effort .
 The total Air Force Systems Command performance went far beyond routine combat support . Research and development came to an almost complete halt during actual operations, the Air Force said .
 Systems Command personnel participated actively in the tactical and strategic military effort . They also pushed forward the scheduled Air Force systems acquisition program and accelerated certain high-priority projects .
 One critical element is the operational and logistical control of forces and resources in military emergencies, says the U.S. military .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the firs* of these practice projects; called called called . The effort included realistic practice runs on combat and support actions .
 High Heels II. which began on 8 September 1962. postulated an attack on the United States, the impact thereof, and the Air Force reaction to this blow. The Air Force response to the attack .
 The subsequent exercise-identified as SPADE FORK-began on 15 September . While this chain of events was being played out, the exercise began .
 SPADE FORK posed for agencies throughout the Department of Defense the logistical problems connected with operations in the wake of an attack . Special emphasis on the ability to reconstitute effective logistical support .
 Air Force Systems Command had in operation 19 command posts, 40 local offices of its Contract Management Regions; too. the Command logged and played a total of 79 incidents .
 The simulated emergency also gave participants a firsthand appreciation of command and control difficulties stemming from am* munications disrupted by a nuclear attack* Some mistakes were made and numerous lessons learned . Several changes were suggested .
 The Cuban crisis tuned so soon after the 28 September end of HIGH HEELS II/SPADC FOftf^ however, that there was no time to translate the indicated improve* ments into formal revisions of existing plans snd di recti***B*B*1 .
 SCEH activated the Commander's Alert Staff on 22 October . The alert system automatically activated the commander's alert staff . The system was activated in accordance with prescribed procedures .
 The Director' of Operations briefed the Commander and key staff officers on the Command's war plans and on specific support requirements already imposed on Patrick and Eglin Air Force Bases .
 The Deputy Chief of Staff/Foreign Technology presented a Top Secret intelligence briefing . The deputy chief of staff/foreign technology presented the briefing .
 General Schriever had all field commanders contacted to confirm their actions in increasing the local alert posture and in realigning their research and development missions in the face of the international crisis . Later that night he had all the field commanders .
 The following morning, General Schriever met again with his senior staff and canvassed actions under way . The Systems Command's full resources were marshal in appropriate response to the crisis, he said .
 The security program encompassed protection of key personnel, aircraft, missiles, and facilities, including a double check of contractor security, measures .
 The vulnerability of communications to sabotage, the availability of emergency power and the alerting phone network for key officials were among the checklist items . The vulnerability to sabotage was also a priority .
 All elements of the Command should gear themselves to extended maintenance of the 24-hour alert staff . In addition, all elements of . the command should gear . themselves to . extended maintenance .
 Assessment of impact on personnel raised such questions as which reservists or 20-year retirees might be recalled as need arose . System Command pilots might be drafted for flying jobs, and which civilian employees might also be recalled .
 Command also prepared its plans for»pancelling all leaves . While reducing temporary duty to a minimum, the Command has also prepared plans for the future .
 Legal advice went out reminding all commanders of their prerogatives and responsibilities . The situation might degenerate into declaration of national emergency .
 A general operational survey covered the ability of Systems Command installations to support combat forces . The survey included the presence of competent crews to fire missiles, if necessary, from the Atlantic and Pacific Missile Ranges .
 Another consideration was designation of an alternate headquarters for the Systems Command . The plan was already embodied in the Command's continuity-of-operations plan .
 Among the items was quick identification of those test aircraft whose current configuration permitted their immediate release to operating commands . The test aircraft were also identified as those with current configuration .
 In addition, individual programs and projects appeared more or less relevant and urgent when viewed in the light of the international crisis .
 Systems Command Headquarters relayed to its field organizations the Department of Defense guidelines on the handling of public information . The Air Force directive called for a thorough documentation of the response to the Cuban crisis- the latter for both information and historical purposes .
 In addition, necessary communications facilities were installed and administrative procedures set in motion to insure effective operation of the 12 Commander's Alert Staff . In addition to the installation of these facilities, the 12 commander's alert staff were also installed .
 Patrick and Eglin Air Force Bases felt the impact of the operational reac • tion . Other Systems Command installations also feel the impact .
 The Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards undertook' support of this strategic ""task force"" 13 without any impairment of its other major functions . The test center is located in Edwards Air Force Base .
 Systems Command units brought 20 missiles to the desired s*ate of readiness . The Strategic Air Command acquired temporary control over all 20 missiles . This supplement added--at the peak of the crisis--71 megatons to available nuclear striking force .
 General Schriever's Assistant for Bioastronautics outlined for operational units . The measures are intended to protect aircrews against flashblindness caused by nuclear explosions .
 He recommended several protective expedients, the results of a continuing project designed to define and perfect a guaranteed protection against this sort of emergency .
 Systems Command reaffirmed a portion of its earlier continuity -of-ope rations plan and confirmed the Space Systems Division as its alternate headquarters . In the event the Andrews command post became inoperative or untenable, the Space System Division will be the alternate headquarters in the event .
 Among the immediate operational impacts of the Cuban crisis was a scramble for air-craft of all types . Air-craft was scrambled for all types of aircraft .
 Systems Command's air supP or, of the stations strung through the Caribbean and into the South Atlantic along the Atlantic Missile Eange . Another feature of this scramble was a levy for tr anspor, aircraft, a demand which hit the Systems Command .
 The Missile Tes, Center assessed how effectively it could supply range stations with lts own limited transport fleet . If me regular Military Air Transport Service airlifts of cargo and personnel were no longer available, it would be possible to supply range station with its own .
 Air Force levy of 25 October took three T-33's from Systems Command and one U-3 each from Headquarters and Logistics Commands, as well as three C-47's from the Strategic , ir Command .
 The FUght Test Center reported 10 of its aircraft were not immediately available, because of modifications, maintenance, or other mechanial conditions . All other test and test support aircraft under Edwards control were in commission that day .
 40-man Air Police unit was ordered to 17 Homestead Air Force Base, Florida . There were also levies for trained personnel .
 Also on 25 October, General Schriever sent his field commanders a significant message . Also on that day, he sent a message to the world's top brass .
 First, he called for a specific assurance that each element had achieved the required alert posture . He called for an assurance that all elements in the aircraft were in the right position .
 The Systems Command's mission — as compared with that of a combat command-did not put the same premium on alerting procedures and war plans exercises . The General called for a special local review of ""war emergency and disaster plans,"" of the local alert staff's status, and of
 Local commanders were also to report on their capacity to furnish support demanded by or on behalf of operating commands . Local commanders will be able to provide support to operating commands, local commanders will report on support .
 Local commanders were enjoined to inform General Schriever of any problems or recommendations affecting an adequate Systems Command response to the crisis . Second, local commanders were also told to inform general Schriev of any issues affecting adequate systems Command response .
 The message outlined some detail specific considerations for local commanders . The message amplifies many of the criteria defined in the 2 3 October meeting .
 Among the requirements for local alerting procedures was the ability to recall all personnel during off-duty hours, if necessary . If necessary, all personnel could be recalled during off duty hours .
 Systems Command policy was to retain all test and test support aircraft . A reduction of proficiency flying was under consideration, officials said .
 The installations at Patrick and Eglin had two special tasks— to protect their tests against ""unfriendly ECM activity'^and to plan against the possibility of moving their test operations to nearby civilian fields . The installations were also tasked with protecting their tests from "unfriendly activity"
 Local program reviews should identify projects for accelerated completion, advanced ideas directly applicable to crisis needs, and low-priority efforts whose cancellation would provide resources for the more urgent expedited actions . Low-priority projects should be identified as projects that could be accelerated .
 Special personnel considerations included the application of ""human reliability" standards to civilians with access to nuclear devices . There were plans for curtailing leaves if the situation became more serious .
 Cargo should go by surface means wherever possible, and only critical, outsized items would be considered for airlift .
 Such exercises as High Heels II and SPADE FORK had provided valuable practice in crisis control of the Systems Command and its important resources . High HEELS II and Spade FORK exercises were valuable practice for crisis control .
 By 26 October the first urgent days of the emergency were past and such new lessons as a proper separation of crisis and routine messages could be applied to the system .
 Staff agencies in Command Headquarters reviewed their actions and procedures, with an eye on efficient functioning in a continuing emergency .
 At least two more Minutemen and another ' 20 Titan I' were on the verge of Emergency War Operation status .
 The scramble for available aircraft continued to impinge upon the Systems Command's resources . The scramble to available aircraft continues to continue .
 Air Force Headquarters said on 26 October that it contemplated no blanket withdrawal of all B-52 and B-58 aircraft . But it did authorize the immediate transfer of five of the aircraft to Strategic Air Command . The move was approved by the Air Force .
 Eglin asked that they be withdrawn from the test program in the order listed . Eglin: If any were to be taken, they should be withdrawn in order listed.
 Pertinent information continued to flow in from Systems Command field organizations . The U.S. military continues to work with systems command .
 Missile Development Center assessed Holloman Air Force Base's ability to support combat units . Holloman could accommodate one tactical fighter wing or a troop carrier wing equipped with C-123 or C-130 aircraft .
 The Flight Test Center performed a series of tests to determine whether the sonic boom of low-flying aircraft would affect ballistic missile checkout equipment . The tests were carried out on 26 October to determine if sonic boom would affect missile checkers .
 A Defense Intelligence Agency summary on 27 October added useful perspective to the situation and its origins . It concluded that the Russian strategic buildup ""probably"" started in the fall of 1961, that the offensive portion ""was put in the motion"" as early as the late spring of 1962 . The rate
 The entire Air Force Systems Command felt the impact of the crisis . Four of the field agencies we-affected most sharply .
 The centers at Patrick and Eglin were physically on the firing line and thus became bases and stagir areas for the combat forces . Of these, the centers were located on the fire line .
 Commander of the Air Force Missile Test Center answered General Schriever's important message of the previous day . Air Force missile test center commander responds to Schriev's message .
 He had been host to two Air Defense Command squadro'ns since 19 October . Some Army troops had arrived and were being supported, he said . He expected at least 1,200 more Air Force personnel to be added .
 Cape St. Patrick was closed to the public, a shore patrol policed Cape Canaveral, a ship search radar was in 24-hour operation, and special liaison with the Navy was in effect .
 The Ballistic Systems Division response, also on 27 October, was equally reassuring . The Ballistic System Division responded to the incident .
 10 Minuteman missiles were turned over to the Strategic Air Command . 7 AtlasF weapons were raised to Emergency Combat Capability status .
 One Minuteman was withdrawn from the operational list and returned to 26 Systems Command control to continue this vital testing . A balance of priorities suggested that certain tests in support of the operational program were critically important; accordingly, one of the tests was withdrawn .
 Command's support machinery was in high gear and-given the uncertainties of the crisis-functioning smoothly-functioned smoothly . Command was in 'high gear' and 'support machinery' was on high alert .
 Aeronautical Systems Division established a team to provide research and engineering assistance to the Tactical Air Command . The Aeronautics Division provides research, engineering assistance .
 A team of six aerial reconnaissance experts were dispatched to MacDill Air Force Base, Florida, to improve photographic quality of data acquired with RF-101 aircraft . Some of the experts departed for Florida within 30 minutes after receiving the order .
 The group completed its task and returned to WrightPatterson Air Force Base by 3 November .
 Systems Command had identified five B-52H and one B-58A aircraft which could be transferred to Strategic Air Command . The Systems Command responded at once to the 26 October directive .
 By 28 October a review of the proffered bombers had determined that none were suitable for immediate use; accordingly, the Strategic 27 Air Command withdrew its request .
 At Patrick there are also additional plans for emergency use of Cape Canaveral facilities, including the transformation of the Cape's skid strip into an operational runway .
 The Russian missiles in Cuba were still in place, a across the Straits of Florida the American forces remained pois' for whatever action might be needed .
 By 10 November the Systems Command again owned all the missiles 30 upgraded for the emergency . The systems command now owns all 30 upgraded missiles .
 A significant element in the Systems Command performance was the ability of these centers and other units to support a semicombat condition and carry on their primary missions in research, development, testing, and evaluation .
 An operational problem identified early was the danger of overruns bv F-106 aircraft on Runway 20 at Patrick Airport . The problem was identified early and was a problem early in the 1970s .
 The installation of a similar barrier on the Cape Canaveral 31 skid strip was under consideration . A similar barrier was also under consideration at the time of the proposal .
 General LeMay added his compliments to President Kennedy and Secretary Zuckert on the response of Air Force units to the crisis . Another indication that at least the first wave of critical tension had passed was the 31 October message .
 This response, the General added, "reaffirms my confidence that AFSC personnel can perform our vital mission now and in the future" The General added that he is confident that the AFSC can perform its vital mission .
 With no guarantee that the crisis was over, there could be no relaxation, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Systems Command elements remained on the alert, supporting the operational units as required and pursuing their functiona. missions . The U.S. Air Force remains at the top of the Air Force Reserve Force .
 The Center arranged to notify the North American Air Defense Command of any planned Cap. Warning network covering Cuba . To avoid misleading warning network, the Center also arranged .
 Opera; ing under similar pressure, Eglin received the first 3 of 10 refuel refuel refuelers . Eglin is the first of 10 to augment the local capacity for servicing transient aircraft .
 The Hawaii-based 6594th Recovery Control Group was an experienced unit and a critical element in the Air Force space effort . The group was part of the Systems Command's Space Systems Division .
 Its status again became an issue during the Cuban crisis, even though policy discussions during the spring and summer of 1962 had seemingly affirmed the overriding importance of its mission .
 As early as 23 October the Pacific Air Forces had used the Cuban crisis to justify the imposition of its presumed authority over the fi594th--starting with the recovery unit's equipment .
 Systems Command presented to Air Force Headquarters its contention that the 6594th should remain under Systems Command authority . In response to a Pacific Air Forces requirement for two C-130 aircraft, the Systems Command wants to keep them under the authority of Air Force .
 This Air Force position permitted termination of an agreement already forced upon the 6594th. Relayed to the Space Systems Division, this Air Force . The position was allowed to terminate the agreement .
 When the Russians began to dismantle their offensive weapon sites in Cuba, watchful wariness became the U.S. password . The Russians began dismantling their weapons in Cuba .
 Russian withdrawal made it more imperative for the U.S. to maintain its combat strength poised and ready, to keep pressure on the Caribbean interlopers .
 The posture assumed, then, was a combination of surveillance and readiness which could be maintained comfortably for an unpredictably long time .
 Other actions reflect the possibility of an extended alert period . Other actions reflected the slight relaxation of tension .
 Systems Command Headquarters reduced the actual ""on^hand Commander's Alert Staff" to four individuals during the midnight-to-0800 hours shift . The other staff members checked in and remained avail35 able on 10 minutes' notice .
 The next day the Strategic Air Command directed the immediate return to the Ballistic Systems Division of the 14 ballistic missile sites . A schedule to be worked out with site activation forces is being worked out .
 The object of this return was continuation of the ballistic missile test program and completion of the installation and checkout tasks . The object was to complete the installation, checkout and installation tasks .
 The move did not represent any noteworthy reduction in strategic strength for it had already been demonstrated that these weapons 36 could become available for operational use in a very short time .
 One year's 24-hour-a-day operation could require as much as $129,500 . Round-flguS calculations sagged that reactivation and one year's year-long operation could cost as much .
 Space Systems Division responded in detaf to General Schriever-s 25 October message and reported the accomplishment of al. necessary steps to secure its Los Angeles installation . Other potential problems mcluded the vulnerability of iand-line communications into the Los Angeles complex, a complete dependency upon municipal
 These would be critical items only i, th e situation deteriorated considerably, says President Obama . The situation has deteriorated considerably in recent weeks .
 Prolongation of the Cuban crisis would enhance the feasibility of bringing several electronic developments to bear . Prolonged crisis would also enhance the possibility of bringing electronic devices to bear, experts say .
 These possibilities included a ""quick reaction capability"" countermeasures item effective against radio-guided missiles launched from Cuba, and the use of Rome-instrumented aircraft to augment surveillance over the island .
 Systems Command personnel proceeded to ""un-cock"" the ballistic missile complexes released from the firing line . In the aftermath of the incident, Systems Command proceeded to "uncock" the missiles .
 Strategic Air Command added seven more missiles (two at Walker and five at Plattsburgh), to be returned on the request of site activation teams 41 for resumption of installation and checkout process .
 27 Air Force medical personnel were brought in for temporary augmentation of the Patrick hospital . They returned to their home station on 5 November . On 5 November a total of 27 medical personnel returned .
 In the days which followed, the Systems Command followed the pattern established after these first 15 days of the Cuban crisiscontinued support of the alert forces and, insofar as resources permitted, an aggressive assault upon its own systems acquisition program .
 On 16 November, there were identified four sites each holding equipment for a small Russian armored regimental combat team .
 Exercises designed to maintain the proficiency of troops in the field added new tasks to the Systems Command support load .
 Operation Sunshade I,"" starting 19 November, saw the arrival at Eglin of 24 C-124 aircraft carrying 1,680 Army men .
 Successful support of this part of the planned operation tested and validated Proving Ground Center plans specifically designed for just such an emergency movement . The operation was part of a planned operation to test and validate plans for the military .
 Eglin housed the transient force through ""saturation billeting,"" in which closed buildings and even, the base gymnasium were pressed into service .
 The Proving Ground Center also refueled all participating aircraft, provided extra rations, 44 * ' ' ' and issued 1,000 blankets .
 The gradual, official downgrading of the Cuban alert began at about this time, though it was a piecemeal, extended process . The Cuban alert has been downgraded in recent months .
 The long alert period caused other operational concerns with research and development overtones . The alert period has been dubbed the longest in history .
 On 23 November, for example, Air Force Headquarters directed the Tactical Air Command to enlist Eglin help in a range test of napalm bombs . The bombs were loaded for days or weeks on alerted aircraft in southern Florida .
 The rapid check was to prooftest six firebombs and validate an effective service life for napalm mixed and stored in containers or bombs for relatively long periods of time .
 Although the danger to peace has been lessened in the Cuban crisis, it has not been eliminated . The danger of peace in Cuba is still not fully eliminated, says CNN.com .
 Throughout the Air Force we must continue to meet our many commitments and to maintain our constant vigilance . The Air Force must meet their many commitments, says Air Force Secretary General .
 By early December the Systems Command was in a position to cast a critical eye back over its performance during the Cuban crisis . The assessment was reassuring .
 A prolongea or intensified emergency would have reduced the degree of accomplishment in the latter category . Even the two -week crisis and the relatively sUght slippage in somprograms imposed measurable additional costs on the Systems Command effort .
 There were benefits and lessons to be learned even from ih situations where the crisis revealed flaws or deficiencies in con. There were lessons and lessons learned from the crisis, says CNN.com .
 Minor misunderstandings, for example, made imperative a close coordination of the major commands' war plans to insure a clear agreement, in advance, on support requirements . Major Commanders' plans were made to ensure that the U.S. was prepared for war .
 The fact that the Cuban situation was the ""real thing"" also made a difference, for reality on occasion dashed cold water upon procedures which had seemed satisfactory in theory or in simulated exercises .
 In this light, the need for a firmly' designated alternate command post headquarters was much more important than previously conceived . The need for such a headquarters is much more urgent than originally conceived .
 The emergency instigated a highly profitable review of the entire Air Force limited-war/counterinsurgency effort . The emergency also instigated an Air Force review of its limited war effort .
 One result was an appreciation of the damage done to tactical reconnaissance by earlier funding limitations, giving rise to a drive to upgrade reconnaissance equipment and techniques, especially the means for getting intelligence data from reconnaissance units to decision makers .
 The actual experience with strategic weapons suggested that ballistic missiles in the research and development program might remain in that status somewhat longer in future graduated emergencies . Ballistic missiles might be upgraded into the operational arsenal at a later point prior to actual hostilities .
 The High Heels II /SPADE FORK exercise and the subsequent Cuban crisis pinpointed defects and desirable alterations in the Systems Command's contingency plans . The Cuban crisis highlighted defects in the plans .
 Systems Command's contribution to American efforts during the Cuban crisis . Much more positive and impressive were the achievements which studded the story of the Systems Command .
 In addition to the specific events outlined in this narrative, the sum total of accomplishments underscored the broad scope of the Command's participation .
 One operational draft of specialists took all qualified ""loadmasters"" from the Command's Parachute Test Wing for duty in Florida .
 Protests were unavailing, though the Pentagon did acknowledge the special qualifications of these men . Protests against the decision were unvailing, but the Pentagon acknowledged the qualifications .
 Four bases carried the main burden of Systems Command support for deployed combat forces . Four bases were used to provide support for combat forces deployed to the U.S.
 Patrick endeavor encompassed a maximum of 1,255 military personnel, representing 5 Air Force units and an Army contingent . The Patrick endeavor included 5 Air force units and a contingent of Army personnel .
 Eglin took care of as many a1,141 people from tactical, strategic, and transport units . Edwards accommodated-as noted-a deployed B-47 task force, while Eglin accommodated as many as 1,141 .
 Hanscom Field outside Boston-supported some 1,474 people and 39 aircraft of a troop carrier wing called to duty from the Reserves and released from active duty on 28 November .
 The Division furnished security and refueling services for B-47 aircraft deployed to Boston's Logan International Airport . In addition, the Division provided services for refueling and security for the B-48 aircraft deployed .
 Special technical problems attacked and solved by the Systems Command included several special technical problems . The Systems Command was responsible for many of the problems .
 The Pentagon has modified an AN/FPS-35 frequency diversity radar at Thomasville, Alabama . The radar is part of the Semi-Automatic Ground Environment system .
 Radar was in 24 -hour operation under Air Defense Command control from 27 October to 25 November . Quickly altered, the radar was put in 24-hour operation .
 A modification kit allowed conversion of AN/MPS-14 height finder radars to a surveillance function . A contribution to the ""Falling Leaves"" missile defense warning network wds the creation of a modification kit which allowed conversion .
 Systems Command had a modification kit ready for shipment on 2 November . The modification kit was ordered from 24 October and shipped in November .
 Not all the efforts were so successful, though negative results did add to the store of technical information . Not all of the efforts are so successful .
 By 27 October, it was clear that it was not feasible to add the Eglin Gulf Test Range's AN/FPS-16 radars to the surveillance network . The radars had not performed at all well on test runs against Atlantic Missile Range launches .
 The actions noted in these pages, then, were only an illustrative few of the many constructive accomplishments which featured the Systems Command's response . The actions are only an example of many constructive actions which featured in this article .
 Command's response went well beyond bare, minimal fulfillment of the Command's mission requirements . As these pages indicate, this response went-effectively and commendably — well .& beyond the mission's mission .
 The factual data summarized in the following pages derive from standard reference works . The facts are based on the facts of the events in the United States and Canada .
 The Washington Post features a commemorative silver calendar for Oct 62 . See the feature story in the magazine section of The Washington Washington Post .
 The Post on 28 Oct. 63 also carried a wire story asserting that the KennedyKhrushchev exchange during the Cuban crisis encompassed ""at least 40" secret letters and messages .
 Exercise Spade Fork, 10 Oct 62; interview by Dr. Dr. John Defterios, of Dr. Defterio .
 There exists ample raw material for a major monograph on the AFSC and its response to the Cuban crisis . The AFSC responded to the crisis in Cuba .
 This abbreviated discussion of the event is dictated by limited resources in time and personnel . The event is scheduled to take place in New York City, New Jersey .
 Staff Actions Resulted from Staff Meeting 23 October 1962, 23 Oct 62, Doc 24; SCMO Log, 20 Nov 62; Welsh interview, 6 Feb 64. Staff actions resulted from Staff Actions .
 History of the Air Force Flight Test Center , Jul-Dec 62, I, 168, is 168 .
 DCS/Systems Alert Activities, [20-21 Nov 62hmsg, SSQOC-24-10-4, Hq SSD to Hq AFS0, 24 Oct. 62; ltr, Gen Estes to . Hq USAF, subj:
 AFMTC: "History of the%ac""e Systems Division" AFSC: "P-24-a|Hq AFMtc to Hq AFSC, 24 Oct 62; History of the%.ac" system division .
 This document indicates that, with SAC concurrence, Operational Suitability Test Facility 1 at Vandenberg continued to follow its test schedule . This document indicated that with . SAC . concurrence , Operational . Suitability . Test Facility . 1 at the Vandenberg . continued to
 Status of 'AFSC Sensors in Support of Cuban Crisis, 29 Nov 62; msg, ADOOP-ES 2942, Hq ADC to CofS USAF, 30 Oct 62 . Message: "Sensitive Sensors"
 Edwards report says there was a note of complacency in the report . It stemmed from possession of a ""borax mine fallout shelter" 18 miles away .
 Msg, AFSC CP-SCMO-63-172, Hq AFSC to CofS USAF, 30 Oct 62; ltr, Lt Col Lutz to Comd Hist, [20-21 Nov 62J; SCMO Log, 20 Nov 62.J
 Manning of the CAS 2400 hours 0800 hour shift, 2 Nov 62; SCMO Log, 20 Nov 62. Manning was the first person to report to the SCMO . Manning worked for the CAS at the time of the day .
 APGC officials say it would cost as much as $5,000 just to reactivate Site D-8 . 24-hour operation for one year would require another $72,000, utilities during that year $2,500 .
 Msg, APEX SITREP 22, Hq APGC to Hq AFSC, 20 Nov 62; Msg. APGC, APGA, AFSC: 20 Nov. 62; msg, AP EXITREP 23. Msg is the leader of the AP
 Command Response to Cuban Crisis, 4 Dec 62; ltr, Gen Estes to Hq USAF, 5 Dec 62 . Command Response . to Cuban crisis, 4 December 62; . Gen. Estes: "The U.S. will respond to the Cuban Crisis"
 Estimates made during the crisis illustrated the extra cost connected with even a slight disarrangement of program schedules . Estimates were made in the aftermath of the crisis .
 Return of a modified radar site to its original configuration would require $35,000 if done in two months . If accelerated to a one-month rehabilitation, the cost would be $70,000 . Return of the radar site would cost more than $40,000 to repair .
 Acceleration of Titan I deliveries during a 30-day period would have added $5,000,000 to the ballistic missile program cost . Similarly, acceleration of Titan II deliveries would have forced a slippage of over 90 days on the Titan II program .