 The president and his advisors were actually dealing with the crisis, CNN's John Sutter reports . The White House was in the midst of a crisis in Washington, D.C. President Barack Obama's administration .
 In the spring of 1962 Khrushchev decided to deploy a nuclear strike force in Cuba 90 miles away from the U.S. The Cuban missile strike force was 90 miles from the United States .
 Planes with cameras flying over Cuba found evidence of missile site construction . The missile site is believed to be under construction .
 For the next 13 days they tried to find a way to get those missiles out . For the first 13 days, they found a way of getting them out of the system .
 President Kennedy secretly recorded in cabinet room during meeting with advisors . Kennedy recorded tapes of his meetings with advisors during his presidency .
 There’s really nothing to reveal why the president made, created those tapes, White House aide says . White House says there's 'nothing to reveal' about the tapes .
 Some historians say it’s because he wanted them as he prepared his memoirs . But there's really, we just don’t know why they were there .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Khrushchev met in Vienna in 1961 . The only time they met was in Vienna, Austria, in 1961, in which they sat together . The two men met for the first time in their first meeting .
 There’s a document in the exhibit in which the president is announcing an air strike on the missile sites in Cuba . The document is shown in a new exhibit .
 It was prepared at a time when the president was trying to decide which course of action to pursue . It was never delivered but it was prepared to be prepared .
 Kennedy’s own hand where he marked where the missile site installations were. We have a map that was used during the briefings and we have in his own hand . We have in Kennedy's own hand, he marked .
 "It just gives you an extra dose of reality about the humanity of these people," she says . "And it just . gives you a dose of . reality," she adds .
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine, reckless and provocative threat to world peace . I call on Chairman to halt this clandestine and reckless threat to the world peace.
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from the Soviet Union . Ultimately it was resolved when Khrushvic agreed to agree to remove missiles .
 The United States pledged not to invade Cuba and secretly promised that missiles that they had in Turkey would also be removed . The U.S. also promised to remove missiles from Turkey also removed .
 The last piece of the exhibit is the original signed Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The exhibit includes a signed signed nuclear test ban treaty .
 Both nations started working toward agreement on limiting nuclear weapons . Both nations are working to limit their nuclear weapons arsenals .
 The two powers did sign the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . And the two nations did sign a limited nuclear test ban treaty . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and Japan .