 The mixed messages of the Obama administration’s first year regarding civil liberties, foreign policy, healthcare, immigration, and the environment . Obama administration's first year is marked by mixed messages .
 The reemergence of authoritarianism in the developing world and Russia . The re-emergences of authoritarianisms in the world and in Russia. Russia .
 China’s continuing economic miracle, while maintaining a firm grip on the political system, is also suffering serious social, environmental, and health problems . The country is suffering from serious social and environmental problems .
 The West’s declining interest in feminism but its growing strength in the developing world is growing strength . The West is losing interest in women's rights, but it is growing in the world's developing countries .
 The growing jeopardy of the global environment with global warming coming more clearly into focus as the culprit . Global warming is the main concern for the world's future . The world is at risk from climate change .
 Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with permission, in this textbook appear on the appropriate page within text or on page 530 .
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data . Viotti, Paul R. Viotti and Mark V Kauppi. — 5th ed. cm. — World Politics and World Politics .
 The authors have had (and continue to have) experiences in both worlds in university and government positions . They have held positions both at home and abroad . The authors say they have had both experiences in the university and abroad.
 In their careers, one of them served in the diplomatic world as a political adviser . The other has sought to make the world a safer place by working on ways to counter terrorist threats .
 We are committed to helping current and future generations of policy practitioners enhance their understandings and develop their practical skills . We are also educators both in government and university campuses .
 What motivates us to write this book is to bring a real-world policy perspective to the study of international relations and world politics . We hope to bring real-life policy perspectives to our book .
 We build bridges in this volume in an effort to connect the academic and policy worlds, filling the gap between theory and practice . We demonstrate how we can apply IR theory to the making and implementation of policy . We build a bridge between theory theory and policy theory .
 Readers planning careers as practitioners will find that there is nothing more practical than good theory . Good theory is practical and practical for practitioners, says author .
 We live in an age of globalization made possible by technological advances, particularly in transportation and telecommunications . Technology advances bring us not only the benefits but also the downsides of coming closer together, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Aspects of globalization have transformed the way individuals relate to one another and how firms and other organizations conduct their business from the local and the national to the global .
 There are many challenges, and you may be a player in many of these efforts, large or small . You may be playing a key role in some of the world's largest challenges .
 To play that role well requires an understanding of how we got to the current state of international relations and world politics and what that might mean for the future . To play a role well, the U.S. needs to understand the current world politics, and how it got to be .
 International Relations and World Politics is a book that will help you prepare for a new generation of leaders, practitioners, and participants in governments, international and nongovernmental organizations, multinational corporations .
 The fifth edition was significantly updated, rewritten, and reorganized to support all of the goals described above .
 International Relations and World Politics has been redesigned to be more reader friendly and policy relevant . The new edition of the book was designed to be a 'high level of intellectual content'
 Equipped with these tools, one can use them to develop a fuller understanding of the security, economy, and identity issues that are subsequently covered . Equipped to these tools can help one understand the security and economy issues that will be covered .
 We hope this makes the fifth edition easier to use in the course of a semester . The fifth edition of the book is available now .
 Learning objectives are listed in the beginning, tracked throughout the narrative, and a chapter review at the end organizes key terms and suggested readings by learning objectives .
 A short multiple-choice test provides an opportunity for self-testing . In addition, a short multiple choice test provides a chance to self-test yourself .
 A chapter-opening anecdote and photo tells a story of an international relations practitioner at work . The author of the book tells the story of international relations in the United States .
 Four images are assembled into a visual narrative that illustrates an important conceptual or empirical issue from the chapter . Later, a slideshow of four images is assembled into an image that illustrates the issue from chapter .
 Eigures and tables now include detailed captions to help one interpret the data that is displayed . Tablets and eigures now include captions .
 World and regional maps are included as a reference for readers . And last, world and regional . maps .
 Among the security challenges we take up are the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism and terrorism, terrorism, intercommunal strife, and global crime, including human and drug trafficking across national borders . The U.N. Security Council takes up a range of security challenges .
 A focus on economy brings us to global trade and investment imbalances, development challenges faced by capital-poor countries, and uneven distribution of ‘sovereign’ debt obligations owed by states . The ongoing effort to maintain international liquidity and thus sustain currency exchange essential to global commerce
 We address national and ethnic identity crises that result in genocide and other human rights violations . Finally, we address popular uprisings by people in the Arab world and elsewhere against authoritarian regimes .
 This textbook includes coverage that surveys the entire field of international relations . It includes coverage of the world's most important international relations issues .
 As noted above, the first five chapters constitute the reader’s toolbox . The book is available in the U.S. and Canada .
 Chapter 1, “Engaging International Relations and World Politics,” begins with an overview of the field and the book’s goals, which provides context for the entire volume . Chapter 1 begins with a discussion of international relations and world politics .
 Chapter 2, “Theory,” presents the alternative images offered by realism, liberalism, economic structuralism, and the English School as well as interpretive understandings drawn from constructivist, feminist, postmodern, and postmodern theory . Chapter 2 presents alternative images of realism
 Chapter 3, “Elistory,” assesses the past’s relevance to understanding presentday globalization . Chapter 3: “The past is relevant to understanding today's globalization.” Chapter 4: The past is an important part of the world's history.
 Chapter 4, “Geography,’s ‘Geography’ identifies the physical, human, and cultural factors that influence how different actors relate in this globalized era . Chapter 4: “ Geography” identifies factors that affect how different people relate .
 Chapter 5, “Globalization,” addresses political, economic, and social dimensions of globalization . Chapter 5: ‘Globalization’ addresses political and economic dimensions of globalization . Chapter 4: "Globalization" addresses the political, social, economic and political dimensions of
 The balance of the chapters encourages students to apply their toolkit to analyze—and propose solutions to—current and future world issues . Students will be able to use the tools to analyze and propose solutions .
 Chapter 6, “Power,” focuses on national interests and objectives as well as the use of national capabilities or power to secure opportunities and counter threats . Chapter 6: "Power" focuses on using national powers to secure national interests, objectives .
 Chapter 7, “Diplomacy and Foreign Policy,” represents the state as principal actor in efforts to maintain security and achieve other objectives . Chapter 7 represents state's relations with its counterparts in other states .
 Chapter 8, “International Law and International Organization,” examines the global institutions and the complex processes by which states as members and nongovernmental organizations as ‘outside” participants engage in collective-security and collective-defense matters . Chapter 8 of the book, "
 Chapter 9, “Interstate Conflict,” proceeds with a strategic discussion on the use of force by states in warfighting, deterrence, and coercive diplomacy . It also includes consideration of both moral limits in just-war doctrine and the pursuit of arms control as a means to reduce
 Chapter 10, “Asymmetric Conflict,” covers two key concerns: terrorism and crime . Terrorism and crime are some of the various forms of political and criminal violence .
 The term asymmetry captures the uneven dimensions of seemingly very powerful states confronting socially grounded insurgencies, movements, and criminal groups . The term "asymmetry" is used to describe uneven dimensions faced by states confronting social grounded insurgents and movements .
 Chapter 12, “Development,” focuses on the marshaling of land, labor, and capital to increase economic production and level of living . Chapter 12: Land, labor and capital marshaling to increase production and living .
 Chapter 13, “Human Rights,” takes up an issue linked to our identity as human beings . Chapter 13 takes up the right to life, human dignity, and justice as fairness as fairness .
 We examine the current state of international and regional efforts with regard to human rights and refugees . We also examine the state of the world's efforts to protect refugees and human rights .
 Chapter 14, “The Environment,” addresses various environmental challenges and trends that are related to international security issues such as the potential for resource wars . Chapter 13, "The Environment," addresses various issues related to global security issues .
 We also look at the roles of international and nongovernmental organizations in addressing this complex transnational issue . We also examine the role of international organizations .
 The Moment You Know is the moment educators know . Educators know it. Educators say it's the moment you know .
 It’s that inspired moment when something that was difficult to understand suddenly makes perfect sense . It's the moment when things that were difficult to explain suddenly makes sense .
 MyLab products have been designed and refined with a single purpose in mind . They help educators create that moment of understanding with their students .
 MyPoliSciLab deHvers proven results in helping individual students succeed . Students can use the lab's proven proven results to help them succeed .
 It provides engaging experiences that personalize, stimulate, and measure learning for each student . The program is designed to personalize and stimulate learning for every student .
 It comes from a trusted partner with educational expertise and a deep commitment to helping students achieve their goals .
 MyPoliSciLab can be used by itself or linked to any learning management system . It can be linked to a learning system or used by any other system .
 MyPoliSciLab combines proven learning applications with powerful assessment . To learn more, visit www.mypoliscilab.com .
 Pearson's MyPoliSciLab Delivers Proven Results in Helping Individual Students Succeed . Pearson MyLabs are currently in use by millions of students each year across a variety of disciplines .
 Visit www.pearsonhighered.com/eleaming to read white papers, case studies, and testimonials from instructors and students that consistently demonstrate the success of our MyLabs .
 MyPoliSciLab Provides Engaging Experiences That Personalize, Stimulate, and Measure Learning for Each Student ■ Assessment Assessment .
 Track progress and get instant feedback on every chapter, video, and multimedia activity . Track progress in every chapter and video of every chapter .
 Assessment program identifies learning challenges early and suggests the best resources to help students . Results feed into a powerful gradebook, with results feeding into the gradebook .
 Follow a flexible learning path created by the assessment program and tailored to each student’s unique needs . Use the Assessment Program to learn how to learn in a flexible manner .
 Study plan offers follow-up reading, video, and multimedia activities for further learning and practice .
 Highlights and add notes to eText online or download it to a tablet . Use the eText to highlight, add notes and add them to the printed text . EText is free to download and use on a tablet or phone .
 Analyze current events by watching streaming video from major news providers . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Watch CNN Living .
 Explore interactive maps that test basic geography, examine key events in world history, and analyze the state of the world . Explore the world in these interactive maps . Use these maps to test your knowledge of basic geography .
 Engage world politics by experiencing how political actors make decisions . Visit CNN.com/Heroes for the latest in a series of stories from around the world .
 Join the political conversation by following headlines in Financial Times newsfeeds and reading analysis in the blog . Join the Financial Times' weekly current events quizzes and polls, and more .
 Online presentation resources are collected in one convenient online destination . Engage students with class presentation resources collected in the form of a presentation resource .
 Pearson is pleased to offer several resources to qualified adopters of International Relations and World Politics and their students that will make teaching and learning from this book even more effective and enjoyable . Supplements Pearson offers several resources that will help teachers and students .
 Please visit the IRC welcome page at www.pearsonhighered.com/irc to register for access to the site . The IRC welcome welcome page is at the bottom of the page .
 MyPoliSciLab resources are available for students to use in their course management system . Choose the resources you want to use from the site . Put links to them into your course management systems .
 Financial Times newsfeeds, current events quizzes, politics blog, and much more . Use this week's weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 XVI Preface Instructor’s Manual/Test Bank includes lecture outlines, multiple-choice questions, true/false questions, and essay questions for each chapter . This resource includes learning objectives, lecture outlines and multiple choice questions .
 This resource provides suggestions for assigning content from this book and MyPoliSciLab . Use this resource to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary . At the bottom of the page, please share your knowledge of this resource .
 First published by Rand McNally in 1923, Goode's World Atlas has set the standard for college reference atlases . Goooe’s World Atlas was published in 1923 .
 The guide offers the step-by-step guidance and the essential resources needed to compose political science papers . The guide includes current and detailed coverage on how to start research in the discipline’s major subfields .
 This text focuses on areas where students often need help: finding a topic, developing a question, reviewing the literature, designing research, and writing the paper .
 Authors: We are educators who have had the privilege to teach thousands of students . They say they are educators and have taught thousands of people over many years .
 We thank them for their insights that they, our colleagues, and our editors kindly have shared with us . The insights are duly reflected in the pages of this volume .
 We're grateful spouses and family members have given us precious time, and shared their comments for which we are, as always, most grateful .
 This page intentionally left blank . The emerging international system is likely to be quite different from those that have preceded it . At the politico-military level, we remain in a singlesuperpower world .
 The distribution of power is shifting, moving away from American dominance . But in every other dimension, it's shifting, says President Obama .
 Define and provide examples of the key actors in international relations and world politics . State, international organizations, nongovernmental organizations, and individual practitioners are examples .
 B Explain the difference between the terms international relations and world politics . Define security, economy, and identity in the terms of international relations .
 The town of Sidi Bouzid is approximately one hundred fifty miles from Tunis, capital of the North African country of Tunisia . Read and Listen to Chapter 1 at mypoliscilab.com .
 Mohamed Bouazizi set a fire in an act of self-immolation outside the local government building in December 2010 . The fruit seller set himself alight in front of a building outside the government building .
 His extreme action was a protest against police abuse and a bureaucratic decision to deny him the right to sell his fruit as he did not have a proper license . The fruit was sold in protest against the decision to stop him selling fruit .
 As a relatively tight-knit rural community, demonstrators gathered outside the mayor’s office . Demonstrators gathered that afternoon to protest the decision .
 Tunisians across the country were galvanized as his private suffering turned into shared outrage . Bouazizi died two weeks later on January 4, two weeks after his death . Tunisia was galvanized by his death as Tunisians rallied around him .
 Tunis is well wired for the internet age compared to the rural areas of the country . These actions drew young bloggers and amateur cell phone videographers from Tunis, which was well-wired .
 The government only tried to shut down the Facebook Web pages of well-known activists . Fearful of alienating moderates, the government only shut down some of the pages of activists .
 By early January, labor unions joined with political activists to stage massive protests in Tunis and other cities . The Tunisian protests were led by labor unions and political activists .
 Social media continued to encourage civil and political protest and became a way to tell the world what was going on in Tunisia . Social media was a way of telling the world about what was happening in Tunisia.
 The Tunisian army made the decision not to fire on the protestors calling for the end of the Ben Ali regime . As pressure mounted on the regime, the army decided not to shoot the protesters .
 We live in an era of increasing globalization, and people have ambivalent feelings about it . Engaging International Relations and World Politics 3: Engaging international relations and world politics .
 Globalization advocates point to the great gains for human welfare, interaction among ourselves, and liberties many of us enjoy . Globalization is a form of democracy in the United States .
 The purpose of this textbook is to help our readers gain a better understanding of the shape of the current and emerging world order .
 It is specifically geared toward students who aspire to be practitioners of international relations . Students will study international relations and world politics at the university .
 They include those interested in working in their country’s foreign ministry and diplomatic corps . The U.S. State Department and its foreign service as well as any number of governmental organizations .
 International organizations such as the United Nations and its affiliated agencies would also count . Doctors Without Borders, Amnesty International, Oxfam, and the Canadian Council for International Cooperation would also be counted .
 Some of you may find your way to positions in multinational corporations, banks, and other commercial enterprises that do business abroad . You may play substantial roles in an increasingly globalized world .
 Like the co-authors of this book, some of you may become college or university professors who conduct research and teach classes in international relations and world politics .
 Others may become educators in elementary or high schools, teaching history or social studies classes that convey important understandings about the world outside the country’s borders .
 Some may pursue careers in journalism, others in journalism . The field will take forms quite different from traditional newspaper, radio, television, and internet .
 There also may be other opportunities not mentioned here that come to mind . There may be more opportunities to make a difference to your life .
 The authors will lay out as clearly as we can what we think useful for you to know were you to pursue any of these opportunities . Whatever course you choose to pursue, the authors will advise you to stay away from the opportunities .
 Even those who wind up in positions dealing primarily with domestic matters at national, state, or local levels will find value in grasping how the world “out there” matters .
 In this chapter we begin our discussion of globalization and then turn to an overview of key actors who will reappear throughout the text . We begin with a discussion of the role of globalization .
 International Relations and World Politics: Security, Economy, and Identity . Illustrate specific aspects of globalization in the economic, social, and cultural realm and the role of technology .
 For many social scientists the concept of globalization suffers from a myriad of definitions . It is fraught with emotional if not ideological connotations, and is so general and all-encompassing that it lacks utility as an analytical concept . For many, globalization is not an analytical term, it is
 From our perspective, it is important as useful shorthand for a number of interrelated and important developments in the modern world . We hope to use it as a shorthand for many of the world's most important developments .
 In this book the term globalization refers to the continual increase in worldwide economic, social, and cultural interactions that transcend the boundaries of states and which have significant political implications . The term globalization is used to refer to the constant increase in global economic and social interactions .
 This definition does not presume globalization has a uniform impact on any one particular society, group, or class . This definition is based on the fact that globalization does not have a uniform effect on society .
 It does not assume its political impact is necessarily a force for peace or conflict . Nor does it assume it's political impact will necessarily be a force of peace or war .
 Globalization is exemplified in the economic realm by the formation and accelerated growth of a global capitalist economy that increasingly disregards state boundaries . Globalization makes economic self-sufficiency virtually impossible, says the author .
 International trade moves across the globe at historically unprecedented volumes . International trade is moving in unprecedentedly unprecedented fashion .
 Containerized shipping has resulted in the rapid movement of goods from ships to trucks and on to inland cities and towns . The containerized shipping industry has seen a dramatic increase in containerization in recent years .
 Every convenience shop in North America undoubtedly has items for sale that were manufactured in Asia . The items are often sold in convenience stores across the U.S.
 Global finance continues to accelerate with the formation and integration of financial markets around the world . Global finance will continue to accelerate in the coming years, according to the IMF .
 Millions of dollars in trades occur each day in the world each day .
 Teleconferencing is standard operating procedures for banks, investment houses, and companies whether they are making cars or MP3 players . Teleconference is a standard operating procedure for banks and investment houses .
 Due to acquisitions and mergers, it is difficult to identify what is an American, British, or Canadian company . Due to mergers and acquisitions, many companies have been merged .
 In the car industry even well-known national firms such as General Motors and Ford are as much foreign focused as they are domestically . General Motors is one of the world's most successful car makers .
 70 percent of GM’s sales are made overseas with China the number one market . China is the world's top market for GM .
 Cable News Network, British Broadcasting Company Globalization 5, Al-Jazeera, and other worldwide network coverage of day-to-day news from around the globe . Satellites facilitate virtually instantaneous virtually instantaneous . coverage of Cable News . Network .
 Such events may include famines, civil wars, and terrorist bombings from heretofore seemingly remote spots on the globe . These events may alter our perception of time and space .
 Whether easy access to news coverage of such events has an impact on one’s conception of self and place in the world is subject to speculation .
 Facebook, Skype, and smartphone applications like FaceTime allow long-distance friendships to be sustained on a daily basis . On the more personal level, Skype and smartphone apps like Facebook and Skype are also popular .
 It is no longer necessary to rely on snail mail letters sent by air or costly overseas phone calls . It is now easier to send letters by air and send them by phone instead of snail mail .
 The cultural impact of communication technologies associated with globalization is also subject to political debate . Social media is a form of form of communication that can be traced to the Internet .
 Satellites, cable programs, and internet feeds from different countries and cultures are broadcast into student union buildings and homes .
 This exposure allows for people of different backgrounds to see what they have in common as much as what differentiates them . The exposure allows people of all backgrounds to be exposed to each other's similarities .
 Such global access can often distress parents, ethnic and religious leaders, and governments worried about “cultural pollution” and the allegedly pernicious effects of foreign values .
 Minority cultures may view foreign programming as a threat to group identity and traditional values . Minority cultures in particular may view such programming as an identity threat .
 There is a pervasive sense that the world is rapidly growing more integrated, resulting in assessments of the impact of economic, social, and cultural interactions and, in turn, political implications for international relations and world politics .
 It must be emphasized that all states and peoples do not experience equally the impact of globalization . It must also be emphasized, however, that all countries and peoples don't experience the same impact of globalization .
 There is no doubt that advanced industrial states in Europe, North America, and Japan are much more economically and politically interdependent with one another than they are with the countries of sub-Saharan Africa .
 Commercials for computer firms would have us believe that the communications revolution is already well entrenched in Tibetan monasteries and Brazilian rain forests . But this is simply not the case .
 The poorer countries and their peoples in the euphemistically termed ‘developing world’ are not equal players in the global economy . Similarly, the poorer countries in the . euphemistically . termed “developing . world” are not equals players in global economy, says David
 In fact, they are dependent on and sometimes see themselves as exploited by better-off countries . They are victims of globalization, they say, and hence are victims .
 We want to note that the critical element of globalization is not limited in its applicability to the contemporary era . The critical element is interactions across political boundaries, we say . We also want to point out that globalization is still relevant in the modern era .
 Interdependence characterizes a number of historical international systems over the past two thousand years . Interdependency, as we will see in Chapter 3, characterizes some of the world's most important systems .
 What is different today, however, is the extent and depth of globalization, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Two hundred years ago, letters took weeks if not months to make their way from one end of Europe to another . Culture and political influences and trends took time to affect distant societies, just as cultural and political .
 The French Revolution, for example, had a profound historical impact, but not immediately on the Asian, African, and Latin American continents . The French revolution was a major event in France, Africa, Latin America and Asia .
 The collapse of the nuclear-armed Pakistani government would have a profound ripple effect well beyond the South Asian subcontinent . But today the collapse would have an immediate and profound ripple .
 Humanity has recognized that pooling of resources and energy is generally the most efficient way for individuals or groups to fulfill their wants and needs . Indeed, throughout history humanity has . recognized that . pooling . resources and . energy is . generally the best way to fulfill needs and wants .
 The expression of this collective effort will vary depending on the importance of the issue and the time available for it to be resolved . It will be a collective effort at the local, tribal, state, or international level .
 Much of our discussion revolves around states . As is evident throughout this book, much of this book is about states .
 The state is traditionally viewed as the most important of the three basic organizations in the previous list . A geographical entity governed by a central authority, the state is viewed as one of the top three .
 A state takes the lead in attempting to defend the physical security of the population, ensures the economic welfare of its citizens, provides a focus for loyalty and identity, and claims sovereignty . A state is responsible for protecting its citizens and ensuring their economic welfare .
 Its leaders claim to represent and exercise authority over all persons within the state’s territory . They claim to have a right to autonomy internationally . This means they claim to be able to represent all persons in their territory .
 When it comes to international relations, states dominate conventional discourse . States dominate the world's most complex issues of international relations . The U.S. State of the Union has been accused of being a state of stateless .
 Nongovernmental movements such as insurgencies and terrorist groups may attack particular states, but very often their goal is either to take over the reins of power in an existing state or to create a new state .
 Even if broad-based political-cultural-religious movements transcend state borders, a political-military security economy is key . Security Economy States IOs NGOs Individuals Identity Globalization .
 I Concepts and Actors Actors 7 entity is needed to carry out the agenda . I Concepts is needed for the purpose of the 7 entity . The idea is to create a network of actors and actresses in the U.S. to collaborate with the government .
 States are expected to take the lead in developing and implementing policies to deal with overpopulation, environmental degradation, and mass migration .
 States can be viewed as obstacles to the achievement of security, economy, and identity when they persecute their own citizens, pursue counterproductive economic policies, and demand complete and undivided loyalty to the point where no dissent is allowed . States, however, can also be seen as obstacles
 In their pursuit of security, states clash with one another, leading to international tension and perhaps war . In addition to security, in pursuit of it, states also clash with each other, perhaps leading to war .
 A key domestic role of states -- to adjudicate domestic disagreements -- is difficult to perform in the international arena . The U.S. has been accused of playing a key role in the Middle East, but it's difficult to do so .
 There is no world government, international courts are weak, and states often resort to the use of force . There are no world governments, and there are no international courts and international courts . There is also a lack of world government and a weak international court .
 International Organizations are not the only prism through which to view international relations, particularly in the current era of globalization . No single state can hope to be the sole agent of collective action to solve global problems . International Organizations Second, states are not only states but international organizations .
 International organizations —also known as intergovernmental organizations —play a role in lOs . Most are multilateral because three or more states are members of such organizations .
 A dramatic expansion of lOs and NGOs occurred in the 20th century, ranging from military alliances to UN-related organizations concerned not just with security, but also with economic and social issues .
 The Food and Agricultural Organization, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund barely begin to cover the veritable ‘alphabet soup’ of UN-related agencies and other international organizations pursuing specific objectives .
 The growth in numbers and activities of lOs has also been accompanied by a proliferation of NGOs . NGOs actively pursuing their own objectives or agendas . The lOs have also been involved in the fight against the government .
 Though lOs were created by and for states, it is interesting to consider the extent to which they have come to be significant actors .
 LOs may come to be purveyors of global norms -basic values that over time states come to take seriously . Whatever influence lOs may have in particular functional areas such as financial loans or mediation efforts, their key role may be to be that of providing global norms .
 Many states around the world continue to violate human rights, but norms have evolved that allow outsiders to make this issue a matter of international and foreign policy discussion and even punishment or sanction . For example, while many states continue to .
 Many states and human rights groups continue to condemn Beijing for its harsh treatment of political dissidents . Despite vigorous protest from the Chinese government, many states have condemned Beijing's harsh treatment .
 Yugoslavia committed or allowed ethnic cleansing and other human rights violations against its own citizens . Another example involves NATO military action against Yugoslavia in 1999 . Yugoslavia did not invade another country but committed ethnic cleansing .
 NATO launched the air war against authorities in the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s . The campaign was motivated to serve human rights and related humanitarian goals rather than for such traditional purposes as seizing territory or repulsing an invader .
 Pursuit of those responsible for atrocities continues to the present day with arrest and trial of the alleged perpetrators . Slobodan Milosevic, Radovan Karadzic, and his military commander .
 More than bringing them to justice, these arrests and trials underscore the growing strength of increasing global commitment to norms against genocide and other human rights violations, says Amnesty International .
 Serbian General Ratko Mladic rose as a commander to lead the Serb Army in Bosnia as its chief of staff in the early 1990s . Born in 1943, Serbian general Ratko was born in 1943 . He rose to become a commander in Bosnia and became a Serbian general in
 Under his command his troops conducted a four-year campaign against Sarajevo, blockading and bombarding the city, producing terror from seemingly random attacks .
 Under fire from NATO air strikes in 1995, Mladic's forces overran UN safe areas at Zepa and Srebrenica . Some 8,300 were murdered, allegedly on his orders, for which he was indicted shortly afterward .
 Mladic finally was arrested in 2011 and brought to trial before the ICTFY in The Flague in The Netherlands . Long in hiding—some sixteen years— Mladice was arrested 16 years ago . The ICTF is based in The Hague, Netherlands .
 The Flague is a center for international jurisprudence, current institutions building on a legacy established by the Permanent Court of Arbitration CPCA . It was established in 1899, reaffirmed in 1907, and still exists as a mechanism for the peaceful settlement of international disputes .
 Like the World Court before its time, the ICJ has jurisdiction over cases brought before it by other states . The ICJ is a principal organ of the United Nations .
 The ICC, ICTFY, and other special tribunals hear cases against individuals like Mladic and the late Serb President Slobodan Milosevic .
 Arguments made by those opposed to joining the ICC rested mainly on two grounds . The ICC could issue arrest warrants and prosecute U.S. military members or civilian officials for alleged criminal violations .
 Advocates of American ICC membership argue that protections are already present to prevent abuse . Advocates say the ICC is already in place to prevent such abuse .
 The Rome Statute makes the ICC a court of last resort, taking up cases when domestic courts have not, or cannot, take up cases . ICC has very limited jurisdiction set out in the Rome Stute, which went into force in 2002 .
 American preference remains one in which tribunals like the ICTFY are created for specified purposes and are customized to particular wars or other contingencies that call for International legal action against perpetrators of such crimes . Nevertheless, the U.S. preference remains that tribunctions are created specifically
 Serbia is determined to ensure that Mladic is found and that he faces justice . I applaud President Tadic and the government of Serbia on their determined efforts to find him . Serbia is one of the most successful countries in the world to find the former head of state .
 Today is an important day for the families of Mladic's many victims, for Serbia, for Bosnia, Bosnia, for the United States, and for international justice . Serbia, Serbia, Bosnia and the U.S. are among the countries involved in the massacre .
 Mladic will now have to answer to his victims, and the world, in a court of law . While we will never be able to bring back those who were murdered, we can't bring back their victims .
 Former Secretary of State Madeline Albright, who held office when crimes were committed, added her comments . Albright was in office at the time of the crimes .
 He was the military commander who ordered the murder of thousands and attempted to destroy Bosnian society . He was a Bosnian general who tried to destroy the country's society .
 He lived as a fugitive in obscurity and now faces years in custody . Instead of being a fugitive, he lived in obscurity .
 There are still differences in views on how to hold individuals legally accountable for crimes against peace, war crimes, and crimes against humanity . But widespread agreement has grown in decades since World War II that this should be done .
 "We are witnessing the slow growth of global governance on matters of criminal accountability," says the author of the book . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a London-based law firm, based in New York .
 Some say this is indicative of the emergence of a global civil society — the rule of law even beyond the jurisdiction of particular states .
 NGOs are composed of private, nonstate international actors that cut across national boundaries . As the term suggests, NGOs are made up of private and nonstate actors .
 In this regard, we identify four categories of NGOs of interest and importance to us in the study of international relations and world politics .
 Although some writers reserve the term NGO for nonprofit organizations, we apply it to all nongovernmental organizations, including multinational corporations . Most of these organizations are private-sector organizations, most of which are private sector organizations .
 Multinational business corporations and banks are primarily motivated by enhancing the economic well-being of their stock and other stakeholders, not necessarily the economic  of any one particular state . Multinational firms are motivated primarily by enhancing their stockand other stakeholders .
 The United Fruit Company played a role in the overthrow of the Arbenz regime in Guatemala in 1954, just as British Petroleum and the CIA were implicated in the Mossadegh government in Iran in 1953 .
 Of particular interest to many observers of world politics, however, is the influence of major corporations and banking institutions routinely have on the economies of states, particularly those in the developing world dependent on foreign investment .
 Transnational NGOs claim to have a broader constituency than MNCs or international banks . Transnational NGO claims to have wider constituency than international banks or MNC's .
 In their attempt to help define the international agenda, they often act as pressure groups to influence international organizations' or states’ behavior .
 NGOs increase global awareness of such diverse topics as ozone-layer depletion, deforestation, epidemics, malnutrition and famine, religious persecution, genocide, and human rights .
 Many organizations do attempt to influence world politics by lobbying states and influencing state-sponsored meetings . But their influence is actually much more pervasive and their goals are much more sweeping .
 Activists aim at shaping public affairs and how people perceive national and global problems . Activists want to shape public affairs to shape how people see problems . They want to change the way people see the world .
 Global civil society and the rule of law associated with this term are increasingly prevalent in discussions of international relations, as well as efforts to spread democratic forms of governance . As a result, global civil society is increasingly prevalent .
 Global civil society consists of states as well as individuals and organizations that aggregate individual interests within or outside particular states . Civil society is typically beyond the border of any single state and operate beyond that .
 Certain organizations may originate in a particular country, but their global agenda makes them stateless . That is, in effect, stateless. That is the case of certain organizations that have global agendas .
 International and nongovernmental organizations play important roles in global governance . States and international organizations are key players in the global governance of global issues such as social, economic and political matters .
 multilateralism among diverse state and nonstate actors is characteristic of 21st-century globalization efforts . Multilateralism has been a hallmark of globalization efforts, says U.S. President Obama .
 Humanitarian nongovernmental organizations attempt to avoid overtly political roles . Humanitarian organizations are often criticized for their political leanings .
 The best examples are humanitarian relief organizations such as Doctors Without Borders . Transnational programs in Africa and Asia seek to improve the quality of life of the poor .
 If such an NGO engaged in politics and took sides in civil and international conflicts, it would most likely be denied access to combat zones . Such an NGO would be likely to be denied entry to combat areas .
 This and the previous category are what many people think of when the term NGO is used . This and other categories are what most people see when they hear the term 'non-profit'
 In recent years there has been a phenomenal explosion in the number of such NGOs, from approximately 6,000 in 1990 to more than 40,000 today . The number of NGOs has increased from approximately six,000 to over 40,00 today .
 NGOs have existed for centuries -- the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, for example, was around in the early 1800s . NGOs have been around since the 1800s, but have existed since then .
 The process of globalization has also encouraged the growth of NGOs . The end of the Cold War and subsequent efforts to spread democratic and market-oriented values and structures, technological change, and economic integration have also encouraged NGOs .
 Terrorists often claim to represent a broader constituency, whereas transnational criminal organizations prefer to focus on their narrow economic agendas . Terrorists become involved in politics only when the pursuit of their ill-gotten gains is threatened .
 In the past, terrorist activity tended to be more localized, often contained by the borders of a particular state . Terrorist activity in the past has been contained by borders .
 More recent is the globalization of terrorism by such networks as al-Qaeda . Al-Qaeda affiliates are said to operate in more than a dozen countries . The network is said to have ties to more than 12 countries, including Syria .
 TCOs like the Sicilian and American Mafias, the Russian “mafia,” Japanese Yakusa, and Chinese “Triads” have also established regional and global networks . The networks are essential to sustaining their “business” activities in drugs
 States, international organizations/IGOs, and nongovernmental organizations can be viewed as a means by which people strive to attain their individual and collective goals of security, economic well-being and identity .
 As already noted, states are not the only means by which security can be attained . Security is not only the only way by which it can be achieved, it is also the other way .
 Where authoritarian governments are in power, it may be the state that poses the greatest threat to one’s physical security . In fact, the state may pose the greatest security risk to one's physical security, according to the author of the book .
 In such cases, lOs and NGOs might be called upon to help protect human rights . Individuals may turn to organizations or revolutionary movements dedicated to the overthrow of the existing regime .
 The globalization of the economy has made this a much more difficult task for the state . The state should work to enhance the economic well-being of its citizenry, the author says .
 Key Actors in IR States, often viewed in terms of their political leaders, are seen by most observers as the key actors in international relations . The governments of some countries lacking financial reserves have turned to such international organizations as the International Monetary Fund .
 President Barack Obama meets with Canadian prime minister Stephen Harper during the president's visit to Ottawa in 2009 .
 The United Nations and the European Union hold the potential to be foci of loyalty beyond the state . Just as states have traditionally been the focal point of citizen identity and loyalty, at least in the Western world, other entities such as the U.N. and the EU hold potential to
 In some parts of the world, religious or ethnic identification seems to be becoming a more important bond among people than any sense of loyalty or identification with a particular state . On the other hand, and much more prevalent today, state political authority is tenuous, and more prevalent in some parts
 Individuals make a difference, whether a Mahatma Gandhi in India or a Nelson Mandela in South Africa . Individuals certainly make difference in India and South Africa, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Even those illustrious leaders found that a cause must be associated with an organization if the former is to be achieved . But even those . illustrious leaders . found that . a cause . must be . associated with . an organization . If the former . is to achieve, it will be achieved,
 Osama bin Laden, killed in 2011, relied on aTQaeda organizational network and affiliated groups . The same is true of bin Laden who relied on the network of al Qaeda-linked groups .
 While states, international organizations, and nongovernmental organizations are viewed as key actors in world politics, such entities are made up of flesh-and-blood human beings . We wish to emphasize, however, that while states and international organizations .
 States do not make the decision to go to war, people in their governments or societies do . States not decide to go war, they do, but people in governments or society do .
 States do not decide to engage in genocide or provide famine relief to parts of Africa . People in their governments or societies do. People in governments or society do. State does not decide genocide or famine relief .
 Individuals can have a tremendous impact on the short-term course of world events . Mikhail Gorbachev's actions contributed to the end of the Cold War . But it is extremely difficult to identify such individuals until after their impact has been felt .
 Gorbachev did not see himself as precipitating these events merely by calling for greater openness or restructuring state and society within his own country . Nor, for that matter, did he initially see himself precipitating events .
 As things turned out, pursuit of this essentially domestic agenda had the unintended consequence of the breakup of the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact alliance in Central and Eastern Europe . The U.S. was pursuing a domestic agenda, which led to the collapse of the Warsaw Pact .
 Most people who want to influence world politics must do so in an indirect manner through collective actors such as states, lOs, or NGOs . Most people in the world must use collective actors like states or lOs to influence their influence, says Julian Zelizer .
 Even Nelson Mandela of South Africa found it useful to be supported by the African National Congress in the presidential election campaign following his release from prison . Nelson Mandela was a longtime leader and symbol of the anti-apartheid movement .
 Former U.S. president Jimmy Carter’s leadership on election monitoring, conflict resolution, and other humanitarian causes is facilitated through his NGO, the Carter Center, in association with states and lOs . The Carter Center is a non-profit run by Jimmy Carter .
 While individuals can and do act on their own, they usually operate from an organizational base . States, international organizations, or nongovernmental organizations, are more effective when they operate from a base, says Julian Zelizer .
 Whether acting on their own or as agents of states or nonstates, actors can make a difference, they can do so, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 apartheid ■ a state policy of discrimination and strict racial segregation in a society SECURITY, ECONOMY, IDENTITY We offer a few comments concerning the title of this book . Put simply, human agency matters .
 International relations should refer to relations among nations, people with a common identity such as the French or Japanese nation . To be precise, the concept international relations should .
 Conventional discourse has come to equate the term international with interstate relations . FIowever, over the years, the term has been used to refer to international relations . The term 'international' is used to describe international relations in the United States .
 Even international organizations such as the United Nations, International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank are composed of member states .
 Much of international law deals with regulating relations among states . Similarly, much of the international law does with relations between states .
 Realists who put emphasis on states, power, and balance of power among states tend to feel most comfortable with this use of the term international relations . Realists tend to be more comfortable with using the term 'international relations' in this context .
 World politics is a more inclusive term as it captures much of today’s reality to include states and international organizations, transnational actors, the phenomenon of globalization, globalization, vast social and economic global inequalities, and emergent global norms . We believe the term world politics is more inclusive
 One must be wary, however, as to the assumed connotations of ‘world’ politics . One must also be wary of the assumed . connotations .
 Not every one we address is equally salient or important to all peoples or regions of the globe . Second, although a case can be made that the trends we discuss in this book are indeed found throughout the world or at least have global ramifications, not every one is equally important .
 Sweeping generalizations about the condition of the entire world should be viewed with suspicion, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Environmental degradation, for example, may be a global concern, but its manifestations are certainly much worse in some areas of the world than in others . Environmental degradation may be global, but it may be much more pronounced in some countries than others .
 In North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, high or increasing standards of living prevail . In Europe, Asia and Australia, the standards are high or high .
 Observers of international reiations known as realists argue that the state is the key actor in internationai relations . The state is a key player in international relations .
 States are the starting point for analysis . Whether we're taiking about Greek city states of the 5th centuryc.c.e. or the rise of the modern state in the 16th century .
 Realists are interested in developing theories of international relations . This is particularly true for realists interested in international relations.
 Students of international relations cannot ignore states and their interactions with each other . Students can't ignore international relations and world politics, they must focus on states and interactions .
 States have not yet withered away, however desirable they may or may not be . States are not yet withering away, even though they may be desirable .
 Important academic research in the early 1970s made the case for taking nonstate actors seriously .
 This work has come to be associated with the liberal school of thought, also discussed in Chapter 2 . Chapter 2: This work is discussed in chapter 3 .
 Keohane and Joseph S Nye, Jr. are two prominent academics associated with this literature . Nye is a prominent author of the book .
 They have emphasized the actual and potential roles of International organizations as well as nongovernmental organizations . International organizations have emphasized their role in the development of the country .
 Thousands of international NGOs lobby states and international organizations, some to promote international cooperation, others to keep states from interfering with the activities of private citizens . Both authors recognize the centrality of the state yet sensitive to the impact of transnational interdependence on world politics .
 There are also thousands of multinational corporations with subsidiaries that have gross sales larger than the gross domestic product of even some major countries .
 More recently, the term transnational corporation has been coined to account for global firms that do not associate themselves with a home country . Transnational corporation is a term used to describe transnational firms that don't associate themselves .
 The biggest problem with most works on transnational actors is that they tend to be highly descriptive but with low theoretical content . "The biggest problem is that most works are highly descriptive, but with little theoretical content," she says .
 The International Criminal Court in The Hague, Netherlands was established in 2002 .
 It is an independent 10 and not part of the United Nations, yet it receives funding from states, other lOs, individuals, and corporations . It is funded by states, others, individuals and corporations, but it is independent .
 The court's statutes permit it to prosecute people for suspected genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes committed in any signatory state when that state is unwilling or unable to do so . The court can also prosecute people accused of genocide, war crimes and crimes against human rights .
 The U.N. Security Council can investigate atrocities in nonmember states . It can also investigate atrocities if the United Nations Security Council decides such actions are a threat to regional peace or security .
 The current role of the ICC is an excellent example of the Interaction of states, international organizations, and transnational nongovernmental organizations that pressure state authorities to pursue justice against certain indivuduals accused of committing or authorizing atrocities . Such actions are often encouraged by nongo
 The small upper-, but growing middle classes in the BRIC countries are doing relatively well . They still have large numbers at lower socioeconomic levels to include those living in abacious poverty .
 With rapidly growing economies that have substantial wealth and opportunity concentrated in the upper rungs of society, the larger mass of the population is not so advantaged . Wealth and opportunity is concentrated in wealthy economies .
 Some 55 percent of Chinese people still live in the countryside as peasants . A growing percentage concentrated in the urban areas enjoy a level of living comparable to those in North America, Europe, and Japan .
 South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and other new industrialized or industrializing countries in which gains from economic development have been distributed more widely . Also in this middle category are South Korea and Taiwan .
 Some analysts have added South Africa, Chile, Argentina, and, most recently, Indonesia to the list . Indonesia is the most populous country in the world .
 Malaysia, Vietnam, and the Philippines clearly want to make and stay on this diverse, middle-category list . Malaysia and Vietnam are among the three countries in the middle-class .
 Apart from relatively privileged elites, much of the rest of the world suffers from varying degrees of poverty, low levels of economic development and high rates of population growth, disease, and environmental pollution .
 A number of these countries are plagued by collapsing social and political orders . Moreover, a number of countries are also plagued by collapse of social, political orders, says CNN.com .
 We use three key concepts in international relations or world politics to organize much of the material we present . Security, economy, and identity are key concepts to our discussion .
 Security is often viewed in terms of the basic survival, welfare, and protection of the state existing in an international “system” of states . Each state is characterized by self-help, securing its own position in the global order as best it can .
 International organizations, alliances, and negotiated agreements are often used to enhance security . But states may place varying degrees of faith in the role of international organizations and alliances .
 Others argue that since states are often the cause of insecurity through the use of force or conduct of war, we ought to focus on human security . Human security is defined in group and individual terms and associated with socioeconomic well-being and human rights .
 State policymakers or practitioners working for an international organization or nongovernmental organization may all play a role in building and maintaining international peace and security . However defined, state policymakers and practitioners may all work for international organizations or NGOs .
 Discussions of the international economy generally revolve around trade, monetary issues, finance for trade and investment, foreign aid, health, and health .
 Economic issues are particularly important as they influence a state’s overall power . Economic issues such as economic issues are especially important in a state's overall power, experts say .
 The international economy is a critical aspect of world politics and raises issues of global disparities and inequalities . Eor many observers, many observers say, it is an important issue of global inequality .
 Economic matters may be viewed as individual security concerns such as feeding one's family, which may dominate every waking moment for many people in the world’s most impoverished countries . Economic matters are viewed as personal security concerns like feeding a family .
 Global economic trends, growth rates, balance-of-payments problems, and exchange rates are irrelevant abstractions . Eor them, global economic trends and growth rates are meaningless abstractions, Eor says .
 Minimum economic subsistence is the goal of the vast majority of humanity . It is also the goal for most of humanity to achieve minimum economic subsistence .
 Identity is most security athe basic survival and protection of a state, but can also refer to individuals economy a The production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services . Identity is the most security in terms of international relations .
 May be associated with a state, religion, ethnicity, ethnicity and have political implications . May also have a political meaning .
 Transnational movements may also be purveyors of emergent identities that parallel or transcend those associated with the state . Thus, transnational movements are purveyorors of an emergent identity that parallel the state, or transcend it .
 Some people identify strongly with an international movement concerned with such goals as protection of the global environment . Some people may identify strongly .
 These people may see themselves more as citizens of the world rather than as citizens . These people are more than citizens of any single country, they say .
 For others, identification with a particular religion such as Islam is more important than association with any one state . For others it is important to identify with a specific religion rather than a state .
 Identity may also be based on economic class and hence may also transcend any state boundary . Identity can also transcend state boundaries, such as economic class . Identity is based on a person's identity, not on state borders .
 More than factory or farm workers, owners or managers of capital may have strong identities even as they compete for business globally . Capital owners and managers of companies have strong, common identities even though they compete globally .
 This is not surprising, we suppose, in a capitalist world economy that is so much a part of globalization . Capital interests, acting in their own interests worldwide, to find gains from labor and natural-resource savings .
 Whatever the basis for identity, it will play some role in how a practitioner engages in international relations and world politics . The identity of a person will play a key role in the future of international relations .
 A useful metaphor that captures our approach to the study of international relations and world politics is a chessboard . The chessboard is a metaphor for international relations, the author says . The world's most important place is to be seen in the chessboard, he says .
 Chess consists of different actors, kings, queens, rooks, bishops, pawns . International relations and world politics involve different actors in different ways .
 International relations and world politics is a three-level game of chess, with at least three games in progress at once . Security, economy, and identity are key issues in the world's world politics .
 Within and around each game various levels of interdependency exist . Within and between each game different levels of interdependency exist .
 The actual size and boundaries of the chessboards are unclear . But to make the game even more of an analytical challenge, the actual size of the boards is unclear .
 "The constituent elements and complex, multidimensional nature of contemporary world politics are continually evolving," says President Obama .
 Most observers agree that the state continues to be the preeminent actor in world politics . This may or may not be the case at the end of the 21st century . But because of globalization and crises of authority, this may not have been possible .
 The challenges of security, economy, and identity remain with us, providing the principal themes of this book . For now, at least, the challenges are still with us .
 The struggle over these three issues and their interrelations— particularly the security dimensions of economy and identity—define much of what is important and interesting today about international relations and world politics .
 As noted, all three concepts relate not just to individuals, but also to the collective aspiration of peoples in states and societies throughout the world .
 A substantial challenge is how to satisfy and attempt to reconcile common aspirations for security, economic welfare, and identity, says the U.S. President .
 Human behavior in international relations and world politics involves goal-seeking behavior . The processes of deciding who gets what, when, and how are involved in goal seeking .
 In sum, these three themes represent three universal concerns . Conclusion 19: The themes of these three concerns are universal concerns. 19: These three themes are connected to universal concerns in the world .
 In this book we examine the means by which states, organizations, and the individual practitioners who comprise these entities have attempted to achieve security, economic welfare, and identity . We examine the obstacles to this achievement and overcome them .
 In a world of scarcity, the means for some to achieve these goals can be an obstacle to their achievement by others . The means of some people achieving their goals are often an obstacle .
 Some states at a minimum may seek to be left alone, others have a more expansive definition of security . The fulfillment of these opportunities might come at the expense of their neighbors . Similarly, some states may seek more security or the pursuit of other opportunities abroad .
 One must be wary of thinking that common concerns are necessarily a force for universal harmony . One must also be wary that such common concerns don't necessarily be a force of universal harmony.
 In fact, the manner of security, economic welfare, and identity can vary widely . The manner in which these concerns for security and identity are specifically defined and pursued varies widely .
 They can just as easily divide people as unite them and be source of conflict . Indeed, they can be a source of domestic, regional, or global conflict . The U.S. has been in touch with the world for more than a decade .
 There may be grounds for hope if professionals or practitioners like you, the readers of this book, will see and lead the way to improving the human condition . Still, there may be a lot of hope, but there may not be enough hope .
 The Tunisian people’s revolution had a galvanizing effect on populations across North Africa and other countries of the Middle East . CNN's John Sutter says the Tunisian revolution galvanized populations across the region .
 Social media and international telecommunications played a larger role than in Tunisia . In this case the role of social media played an even larger role in Tunisia.
 Eacebook, YouTube, A1 Jazeera (a satellite news organization based in Doha, Qatar), and the ability of protestors to send cell phone photos and videos around the globe encouraged the world to pay attention .
 Supporters of democratic freedoms in authoritarian states it was exhilarating and heartening moment . Eor supporters of democracy in authoritarian countries it was an exhilarating moment .
 Anti-regime movements emerged in Libya, Bahrain, Yemen, and Syria . Eor leaders of these states were a cause of real concern .
 This “Arab Spring” was fraught with crises of authority that many observers saw as long overdue in a region dominated by anti-democratic, authoritarian elites . Many observers saw it as a crisis of authority in a country dominated by authoritarian elites often backed by military and police forces .
 Communication technology was obviously critical in the development of popular democratic movements . Communication technology is critical in development of democratic movements, says author .
 Iran successfully repressed demonstrators and access to the internet in 2009 . Iran successfully re-ruled demonstrators and internet access in Iran in 2009.
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s democratic social and political movements appeared in central and Eastern Europe . In the 1990s and 1990s, social movements were formed in the form of democratic social movements in the region .
 Despite not having access to the extensive social media of today, these movements were eventually successful . Despite not being able to use social media today, the movements were successful .
 Nothing can match the speed and pervasiveness of today’s communication and transportation capabilities, says CNN.com . But nothing can match that of today's communication and transport capabilities .
 As a critical aspect of globalization, such technology will undoubtedly continue to play a major role for practitioners in the organization of social and political protest movements throughout the world .
 At the same time policymakers will have to ponder how to deal with such technology and its social, economic, cultural, cultural and political impact .
 First five chapters provide important foundational material for aspiring practitioners to improve their understanding of international relations and world politics . The first five chapters of the book cover international relations .
 Key concepts involving theory, history, geography, and globalization are introduced and developed as tools for dealing with the subject matter that follows . Readers of this book likely will be deeply engaged in the world in which readers will most likely be .
 After assembling these tools, we turn to discussions on power, foreign policy, international organizations, and international law . We also discuss power and international organizations .
 Subsequent chapters analyze interstate and asymmetric war, followed by an in-depth examination of international trade, finance, and development issues .
 We conclude with discussions in chapters on human rights and the global environment . We also discuss the role of the environment in the book .
 Our increasingly globalized world is in a state of flux, exhibiting a number of disturbing trends, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Some of these trends certainly existed during the Cold War . But the forty-five-year-long East-West confrontation between the democratic capitalist and communist worlds overshadowed them .
 The Post-Testa Chapter ^s objective and balanced presentation of key global issues as we can . Observers of international relations through the centuries have made similar observations .
 We try to Examatmypoliscilab.com to be even-handed, not taking sides . We offer you an opportunity to weigh different arguments as you try to make the world around us more intelligible .
 For most readers of this volume, it is your generation more than ours that will have to deal with the problems that face us throughout much of the 21st century . For most of the readers, this volume will be your generation .
 Illustrate specific aspects of globalization in the economic, social, and cultural realm and the role of technology . Use this article to help students understand and understand the meaning of globalization .
 Globalization refers to the continual increase in worldwide economic, social, and cultural Interactions that transcend the boundaries of states and the resultant political implications . Globalization is a term used to refer to the constant increase in global economic and social interactions .
 These interactions are aided by technologies that enhance financial and trade transactions and encourage the rapid dissemination of political as well as cultural Ideals and values . The resultant impact could have either negative or positive consequences in terms of peace, stability, and conflict .
 This book examines the social, economic, cultural, cultural and political impact of globalization using real-world examples . It examines the impact of globalization in the United States and Canada .
 Chapter Review 21 E Define and provide examples of key actors in international relations and world politics . Define the key actors involved in world politics and international relations .
 Individuals are the actual policymakers and practitioners who make decisions in the name of these organizations . Yet flesh-and-blood individuals are the people who make these decisions .
 Robert 0.0: sovereignty 6: International organizations 7: Norms 8: Nongovernmental organizations 10: Global civil society 10: Apartheid 15 . Robert 0: Sovereignty, Norms, Nonsonsons and Norms are key issues in the U.S.
 This is the first systematic examination of nongovernmental organizations written by two prominent theorists and observers of international relations and world politics .
 International relations is a term that generally refers to relations among states . International relations refers to international relations in relation to international relationships .
 World politics is a more encompassing term that also includes nonstate actors . World politics can be described as 'world politics' and 'nonstate'
 Security, economy, and identity can be viewed as three basic goals or concerns that organizations and individuals seek to achieve . Security and identity are three goals for organizations, individuals, organizations and organizations .
 The struggle over these three goals helps explain much of the conflict and cooperation evident today in international relations and world politics . It also helps explain why some of the world's most successful nations are struggling to achieve their goals .
 A unique visual survey of political, economic, and social trends that is superior to the usual charts and tables . The results of this visual survey will be published by CNN iReport .
 Globalization has increased substantially over the decades . decreased slightly in recent decades . remained about the same over the years .
 Globalization is evident in the economic, social and cultural realms of the U.S. all of the above . Globalization was evident in many ways, including in the social, economic and cultural arenas .
 The impact of globalization on international relations and world politics is minimal. is entirely negative, especially in the economic realm. The impact on international politics and international relations. is minimal, he says .
 The major actor in world politics is the state. the international organization. the multinational corporation. the. global civil society. The state. is the major actor, the international . organization. The international organization . the multinational . corporation. The multinational corporation . The state is the most powerful actor
 A multilateral institution created by states in order to pursue common objectives is called a nongovernmental organization . System of global governance is called the world government. international organization .
 The World Bank is an example of a unilateral organization. World government. nongovernmental organization. world government. international organization. International organization.
 Amnesty International is an example of a unilateral organization. nongovernmental organization. world government. international organization. Amnesty International . Amnesty International. is example of unilateral organization .
 International relations and world politics have the same meaning as they emphasize the same international actors . are complementary as world politics encompasses the state . are both primarily defined in terms of the globalization process . both exclude the role of the individual policymaker or practitioner .
 The theoretical framework provided by the authors of this text includes security, economy, and identity. power, interdependence, and decision making. democracy, totalitarianism, and dictatorship. politics, economics, and international relations. politics .
 Apply the levels of analysis framework to current . Define the concept of theory and formulate . Compare and contrast the essential elements of four images of international relations and world politicsrealism .
 Four images offered by constructivists, feminists, critical theorists, and postmodernists . Describe the different interpretive understandings and the critique of the four images of constructivism .
 G ene Sharp is a political scientist and philosopher who for decades has argued that nonviolent political action is the best means for overthrowing corrupt and repressive regimes . QjHRead and Listen to Chapter 2 at mypoliscilab.com .
 Violence, even if serving a just cause, often creates more problems than it solves, often leads to greater injustice and more suffering . The author's hypothesis is that violence creates more than it does, often leading to more injustice .
 Nonviolent resistance requires dedication and courage, and does not guarantee success . Nonviolent Resistance requires dedication, courage and courage to resist, says activist .
 In his book he develops a theory of political power, defines key terms, relates means to ends, hypothesizes four ways in which nonviolent action produces change . He analyzes specific weaknesses of regimes that render dictatorships highly vulnerable to skillfully implemented nonviolent strategies .
 History tells us what history tells us in terms of what strategies should be pursued once a dictatorship collapses, says Julian Zelizer .
 Venezuela's Hugo Chavez personally condemned by Hugo Chavez and Iranian officials . Iranian officials fear popular unrest if they fear unrest .
 The overthrowing of authoritarian regimes in Tunisia and Egypt in early 2011 have been dubbed Twitter revolutions based upon the role of social media . Tunisia and then Egypt have been overthrowing authoritarian regimes based on social media.
 The most salient characteristics of these movements is the fact that they were relatively peaceful . Yet the most salient . characteristics of the . movements is that they are relatively peaceful, the author says .
 These outcomes would seem to vindicate Gene Sharp’s theory of nonviolent resistance . Sharp: These outcomes vindicate his theory of nonviolence .
 The circumstances were conducive to the application of a nonviolent strategy in both Tunisia and Egypt, he says . As he would be the first to acknowledge, however, the circumstances were .
 Theory can help explain international outcomes, but also provide insight as to the circumstances under which such outcomes are more or less likely to be achieved . The point, however, is that theories can help not only explain outcomes but also give insight into the circumstances of those outcomes .
 The ability to develop hypotheses and test them against real-world data is critical skills for any aspiring world politics . Being aware of the implicit images and assumptions one brings to the study of international relations .
 Studying theory is tougher for some of us who are more comfortable with the here and now than others who like to deal with abstractions . Studying theories is tough for those of us .
 A good theory tells us how the world works, explains causally why things happen, and gives us an ability to anticipate or predict what is likely to happen in different circumstances . Nothing more practical than a good theory can be more practical .
 Those who 'like to think theoretically' tend always to ask questions about the world around them, and they try to figure out what is going on . Those who like to think theoretical' tend to always ask questions, and always try to find out what's going on, say experts .
 Some people think something is true, but look at the world to see if what is going on conforms to their expectations . Or maybe they think something to be true, or maybe they don't think it's true .
 Such theoretically oriented persons tend to deal well with uncertainty, he says . Such theoretically orientated people tend to be able to deal with uncertainty .
 'They tend to have a high tolerance for ambiguity and their theories help them cut through this uncertainty,' says the author of the book .
 The ability to think theoretically is an important element in your conceptual toolbox and informs your approach to our world . Think theoretically is important to your thinking, and it informs you of your world .
 Many people make the assumption that theory is divorced from reality, is merely an intellectual exercise, and is most likely a complete waste of time . This is the case of theory .
 Theory is simply a way of making the world or some part of it more intelligible or better understood . Another meaning, consistent with usage in this book, has a much more positive view of theory, says author .
 Theories dealing with international relations and world politics aspire to achieve this goal . Theories of international relations, world politics, aim to achieve the goal .
 Making things more intelligible, of course, may amount to nothing more than better or more precise descriptions of the things we observe . Making things better intelligible might amount to simply being more precise, more precise .
 Theory makes the world more intelligible by offering interrelated statements or hypotheses which, taken together, purport to explain what we observe . Theory makes it more comprehensible by combining statements and hypotheses into theories . Theory is a form of science that can be applied to science .
 Explanation involves accounting for, or understanding causes of, such phenomena as war, arms races, and global poverty . Explanation of such phenomena involves understanding causes such as war .
 For some theories, theories aim to make generalized predictions of future patterns or trends, given the presence of certain factors . For some, theories also aim to predict future patterns and trends .
 To think theoretically, however, is not to engage in point predictions like “A will attack B the first week of the year, “ however much we may want the answers to such questions . It's not to think theoretically about what will happen in the new year, but to
 They cannot predict the precise time a leaf may fall and can only predict, for example, that leaves will fall in the autumn depending on variations in daylight, temperature and weather conditions .
 International relations theorists have to be content with specifying conditions or factors that increase or decrease the probability of war between State A and State B . What one is trying to explain is known as the dependent variable, such as the existence of interstate war .
 Factors we suspect as being causally related to what we are trying to explain typically are termed independent variables . Factors are often called independent variables, such as the number of factors we suspect are thought to be related to the cause of an illness .
 Other factors, such as intervening variables, may facilitate or block the effects of the independent variables on each other or on the dependent variable . Sometimes other factors—dubbed intervening variables —may facilitate or, conversely, block the effect of the dependent variables .
 According to mainstream social science, the theoretical task is to engage in causal explanation or prediction based on certain prior occurrences, patterns, or conditions . The task of social science involves engaging in causal explanations or predictions based on prior events, patterns or conditions, such as certain prior events .
 If Pakistan and India both increase their military spending, then the likelihood of war increases . The likelihood of a war between the two countries is likely to increase .
 What might be a possible intervening variable in this hypothesis that would affect the outcome 1 variable. 1 variable . The outcome of the hypothesis would be determined by the hypothesis .
 The U.S. engaged in vigorous diplomacy to reduce tensions between India and Pakistan . Let’s assume this causal relation holds except for circumstances in which an intervening variable is present .
 Many scholars see formal statement and tests of hypotheses through the use of statistical or quantitative methods as central to theorybuilding .
 Others prefer to rely on nonquantitative case and comparative case studies, historical methods, and reasoned arguments . The so-called traditional or qualitative methods of theory building .
 It is the testing with data of propositions or hypotheses grounded in theory that gives meaning to the ‘facts” about the world .
 It is a fact that the Soviet Union and its empire or sphere of influence collapsed in the early 1990s . Good theory would help us understand why this occurred, an explanation for what happened .
 Scholars of international relations would agree that theory is necessary and unavoidable when it comes to explaining and attempting to foresee the future of world politics or world politics . Theory is necessary when trying to explain and foresee future of the world politics, they say .
 Theory is unavoidable in that all people approach their subject matter from prior assumptions, perspectives, or images . The subject matter is a subject subject of the work of art .
 An analyst needs to be theoretically self-conscious . An analyst should be aware of the perspective or bias he or she might bring to a problem . The analyst is self-aware of his perspective and bias .
 Theory tells us what to focus on and what to ignore in making sense of the world around us . Theory also tells us how to make sense of world around them .
 Without theory we would be overwhelmed and immobilized by an avalanche of mere facts . Without theory, we would have been immobilised by mere facts, says Dr. John Sutter .
 The sense we make of what we observe is informed by the perspectives, concepts, and theories we hold . We make the sense we observe what we see in the world informed by perspectives and theories .
 A theory is an intellectual construct that helps us explain or predict what we observe . A theory helps us understand or predict the things we observe, such as regularities and recurrences or repetitions of observed phenomena .
 Fitting pieces into a larger whole makes theory building analogous to puzzle solving . Theory building is akin to puzzle-solving in the world of puzzle theory .
 Thinking theoretically is important, necessary, and very satisfying when one achieves better understanding of international relations or world politics . The bottom line is that thinking theoretically is necessary, necessary and satisfying .
 Thinking theoretically can be done by any of us, says John Sutter . Thinking theoretically is possible, he says, but it's not always easy to do .
 Consider how often you contemplate if-then hypotheses in your own life when you analyze an experience or outcome . Consider how much of your life can be analyzed with an 'if-then' hypothesis .
 You Are a Presidential Advisor"" at mypoliscilab.com levels of analysis framework . A way to organize thinking about world politics and generate hypotheses. You Are A Presidential Advisor?
 Individuals, groups, states and societies, or the overall international system are points of focus . Focus is on individuals, groups and their societies .
 Let’s turn now to a more specific analytical tool that will make it easier to think theoretically . The level of analysis is the level of an analysis that will be used in the future .
 Levels of analysis framework is useful precisely because it provides a checklist that allows us to make educated guesses as to what factors might account for the international behavior we are trying to explain or predict .
 Applying it to the United States troop presence in Afghanistan, we’ll see how this tool works .
 This question is our dependent variable, perhaps part of an even broader, more theoretical question on what explains policy changes . This question may be part of a larger theoretical question .
 President Obama is the key and ultimate decision maker in the decision making process . President Obama was the president of the United States . Obama's personal and personal impact on the White House has been questioned .
 Another possible explanation involves the impact of the president’s closest advisers for example, the secretary of state, defense secretary, national security adviser, and chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The president's closest advisers may be responsible for the decision .
 In this regard, we may try to identify the relation between X 2 and Xj—the influence advisers had on the president or whether he acted independently of those giving him advice . We may also try to find out whether the president acted independently .
 From this perspective, the U.S. naturally took the lead as the world’s sole superpower because it was in its national interest to increase troop levels in Afghanistan . The state is a rational, self-serving actor that we expect will seek to achieve national objectives through available means
 This focus on rational choice and cost-benefit analysis related to the decision to “up the ante” in Afghanistan will be treated in greater detail in Chapter 6 when we discuss the role of power in international relations .
 Levels of Analysis Framework 29 related to what we are trying to explain, the dependent variable . The levels of analysis are useful to students of international relations or world politics .
 This could be a state’s foreign policy behavior or, more generally, such international outcomes as the outbreak of war between or among states . This could also be the outcome of an international outcome, such as an outbreak of conflict .
 Using levels of analysis helps us along the road to the major goal of theory, perhaps, even prediction . Put another way, analysis helps to explain and predict what happens .
 The levels move on a continuum from the individual to smaller, then larger groups, and conclude with analysis at the global level . The levels of individual to small, then large groups, move on to larger groups .
 Throughout this process, it is important to evaluate both the psychological and sociological factors impacting the decision and behavior being evaluated .
 Attempts to explain why wars occur have led theorists to look for factors that are present (or absent) prior to the outbreak .
 While a useful checklist and source of hypotheses, the levels of analysis framework does not tell us what is the relative importance of these various levels . Counter-arguments are a useful checkpoint and a useful source of hypothesis .
 Choose a current international issue involving a state making headlines such as a decision to crack down on domestic demonstrators or threaten a neighboring state . Choose a country making headlines in order to make headlines, such as cracking down on protesters .
 Generate two hypotheses utilizing the levels of analysis framework that might conceivably explain that behavior . identify. identify . identify . generate two hypotheses . Generate . two hypotheses to try and figure out how to explain behavior of a person .
 Using levels of analysis broadens our focus, provides a way of organizing the factors that may influence outcomes, and helps us avoid overlooking or ignoring factors that should be part of our explanation . We should use the analysis to help us understand and understand how things happen .
 The critical importance of the image or perspective we have stems from the fact that everyone, even implicitly or unconsciously, has or holds one -- sometimes more than one depending on the issues or circumstances at hand . Compare and contrast the essential elements of four images of international relations and world politics .
 Such sets of assumptions about international relations or world politics influence the approaches we take to studying and understanding the world around us . The questions asked and how we answer them are the types of questions we ask .
 Images help to orient our reading and research by highlighting certain actors or concepts and discounting or ignoring others, as well as influencing the interpretation of particular international trends . As such, images help us orient our readings and research .
 Images can be compared to what we see when we wear a pair of glasses to look at the world around us . Images are similar to what you see when you wear glasses to see the world .
 We may prefer a particular pair of glasses because it gives what we think is the clearest vision, a correct understanding of what is going on . We prefer to wear glasses because we think they give us the best vision .
 Sometimes we may decide to change glasses, looking through an alternative set of lenses that may lead us to see, or interpret what we see, differently .
 We ask which image or set of lenses gives us the clearest vision, the most accurate view of the world .
 The images we are about to discuss are not the only ones that can be used to view the world, but they have many adherents among students of international relations and world politics . The images are not only those that can't be used as a view of the world .
 A fourth perspective is that of English School “rationalists” — those who portray international or global society in which one finds operative not only realist ideas of power and balance of power in Machiavelli or Hobbes, but also the rules, ideas, and institutions one
 For readers interested primarily in the practical side of politics, pay particular attention to realism and liberalism . These images are most often held by practitioners—foreign and national security policymakers .
 English School theorists draw from realist and liberal understandings . For their part, theorists in the English School combine the two images of the two .
 Economic structuralists paint a different vision of the world, one in which the economically powerful dominate those lacking these resources . The economic structuralists, by contrast, paint a picture of the rich and powerful in this way .
 In our quest to think theoretically, we will look at the world image through various lenses to see which ones give us a more accurate view depending on what we are trying to explain . Or, conversely, which ones we consider misleading or distorting our understanding of international relations .
 To complete the metaphor, try on all four pairs of glasses before deciding which one to wear .
 You may want to reevaluate your initial choice during the course of your studies and afterward . Whichever lens you now think best captures the essence of international relations or world politics .
 We ask whether science provides the means to understanding the world around us, explaining and predicting the phenomena we see as well as the degree to which we need to interpret the phenomena . We ask if science provides a means to explain and predict the phenomenon we see .
 An image of international relations or world politics that can be traced back more than two thousand years. An image that can't be traced to more than 2,000 years. The image of the world politics is traced back to the Middle Ages.
 Realists tend to hold a pessimistic view, emphasizing the struggle for power and influence among political units acting in a rational, unitary manner in pursuit of objectives grounded in their separate, often divergent interests . The absence of political authority is the absence of authority .
 International politics or the international system is said to be anarchic as there is no world government . There is no central or superordinate authority over states, which retain their sovereign rights .
 The tradition of political thought known as realism has dominated thinking about international politics over the millennia . Realists have been around the world for centuries, including the Middle Ages .
 Realistic writers and political theorists claim to view the world as it is, not as it ought to be . As the term suggests, realism is a view of the world, not how it should be, not what it is . Realism is a form of realism, with realism being
 In terms of domestic politics, a primary concern for any ruler is stability . The ways and means of gaining and staying in power are key to stability in the country .
 Without some degree of order or internal stability, it is difficult to pursue other political, economic, or social objectives . Without order or stability, "it is difficult for other political or economic objectives," says President Obama .
 The challenge of establishing authority has drawn the attention of many realist writers . The challenge has drawn many realists to realist writing .
 Realists emphasize struggle for power and influence among states, empires, and principalities . In terms of international relations, realists emphasize the struggles for power among states and empires . Realists are concerned with the struggle for influence in international relations .
 Some, however, may have a more extensive agenda of opportunities to pursue and may even aspire to regional or world conquest . Some of the world's most powerful nations may have ambitions to conquer the world .
 All realists agree that the mere existence of independent states, empires, or principalities, creates a dynamic that encourages violence and violence . All realist agree that independent states and empires create a dynamic of competition and violence that encourages conflict .
 No central, global power exists to enforce peace among the various political units, whether they are city-states, empires, principalities, or modern states . No central power exists for peace among all political units .
 A political leader’s primary concern is to protect the national security of the country . As a result, a political leader, a politician's primary concern, is protecting the country's national security, he says .
 At a minimum this means defending the physical and territorial integrity of the state . At a . minimum this . means defending . the physical, territorial integrity, the state says .
 For many realists, the competitive and often warlike condition of international relations is essentially the result of some combination of factors—human nature or the psychology of individuals and dynamics of small groups . The nature of certain types of states or societies; and the structure or distribution of power among states
 World Images 33 Power is important to achieving the objectives or satisfying the interests of states . Power is also important to satisfying the objectives of states, says World Images .
 International organizations, alliances, and other coalitions are merely mechanisms used by states to exercise their power in the conduct of their international relations . The U.S. has been involved in a number of coalitions in the past, including NATO .
 For some realists, the pursuit of power by states is not so much a means to achieving these ends . Indeed, it becomes an end in itself, says the realist .
 The state’s concern both for its security in an anarchic world and its capacity to achieve its other purposes make it focus on its relative power position in relation to other states . The state wishes to strengthen rather than weaken its power position, says the author .
 To realists, whether power is sought as a means or an end in itself, it is the acquisition and use of power by states that tends to produce or result in an equilibrium or balance of power .
 Some realists see states, particularly the most powerful, as actively constructing power balances to assure the best position they can in such balances . The most powerful state is seen to be actively constructing its power balances .
 Other realists see balance of power as something that simply occurs, whether or not states will seek such an outcome . Balance of power is not a state of power, it is a matter of state sovereignty, realists say .
 An alternative image of world politics is most commonly referred to as liberalism . Liberalism is an alternative to the current image of the world's politics .
 The liberal image is of a very complex world in which multiple kinds of actors are active players engaged in international relations or world politics in an increasingly global society . The understanding is compatible with a very rich tradition of liberal thought that can be traced back to the ancient Greek and Roman Stoics .
 We're careful to note that classical liberal thought should not be confused with present-day debates in the United States or elsewhere between social liberals or conservatives on the domestic role of the state .
 Liberals adopt an inclusive view of world politics that takes a multiplicity of actors into account . Liberals adopt a view of the world that takes into account all of the actors involved in the process .
 States are usually recognized as key actors in world politics, but they are not the only important ones . U.S. is one of the most powerful countries in the world, but it is also a key player in international politics .
 Realists tend to prefer the term international relations because they see it as putting emphasis on states as the key actors . Liberals often prefer to use the term world politics for world politics that take place in an increasingly globalized context .
 Even when they use the term international relations, they do not confine themselves primarily to states as realists are prone to do, they say . Even though they use international relations more often, they are not limited to international relations .
 liberals tend to see international relations as going beyond just the state to include individuals as well as nongovernmental organizations that engage in activities that do indeed move internationally both between and transnationally across national borders .
 International organizations such as the U.N. and the European Union are often independent actors in their own right that increasingly set the international or global issue agenda . International organizations are often arenas within which states compete for influence .
 Liberal scholars debate the privileged position in which realists place the state . A growing number of liberal scholars debate this privileged position . Realists are realists, they say, but realists are not realists .
 The emergence of the modern state is, historically speaking, a relatively recent phenomenon, going back to perhaps the 15th century . They say they note that the emergence of state is a relatively modern phenomenon .
 Other forms of political and social relations develop and are carried on across state borders in the form of transnational organizations . Transnational organizations form part of social relations that develop across borders .
 liberals also see the state as a battleground for conflicting bureaucratic interests . The state is subject to pressures of both domestic and transnational interest groups .
 The term global civil society refers to growth in international law, but also describes the multitude of institutions, voluntary organizations, and networks ranging from women’s groups and human rights organizations to environmental activists . Global civil society has multiplied rapidly since the beginning of the 20th century .
 Most originated and confined their interests to the capital-rich, industrial countries, this is no longer the case . This is not the case. It is the case that many of the world's most powerful countries are no longer capital rich .
 Today such organizations are found not only in capital-poor, developing countries, but also in the Russian Federation, the former Soviet republics, and the former communist countries of Eastern Europe .
 Liberals note that such organizations are more than special interest groups attempting to influence state policies . Liberals say they're not just a special interest group trying to influence the government .
 These groups play an important role in forming an international consciousness among peoples around the globe on such diverse issues as the environment, human rights, and weapons proliferation . These groups form an important part of the global consciousness .
 It allows one to speak, at least in terms that originated in the Western world, of a growing liberal-capitalist civic identity . Indeed, it allows one . to speak . of the Western . world, the author says .
 The realist and liberal views of the possibilities of peaceful international change are also at odds . The realists and liberals are at odds with each other's views of peace in peace .
 Realists tend to be more pessimistic about future prospects, viewing international relations as “more of the same old thing” Realists are pessimistic about the future of international relations .
 Liberals tend to be more optimistic, especially in terms of their underlying view of human nature . Liberals foster the spread of democratic ideals that over time will tend to have a pacifying effect on peoples and states . Liberals are optimistic about cooperation and accommodation on a person-to-person level,
 As a practical matter, liberals are interested in the ways issues on the global agenda will be addressed . Liberals are also interested in ways to address issues on global agenda .
 These issues reach well beyond the capability of individual states to resolve; they often call for regional or global approaches . These issues need to be addressed by regional and global approaches, says the UN .
 Liberal liberals are interested in the modalities of global governance and the role of global institutions in these processes . Liberals want to know how the world is governed by global institutions .
 Global governance refers to ways and means by which state and nonstate actors deal authoritatively with issue on global and regional agendas . In this regard, global governance does not mean world government, but it refers to the ways and ways of dealing with issues such as terrorism and terrorism .
 Immanuel Kant said a world of morally responsible states would be less likely to engage in wars . Kant's essay “Perpetual Peace” was published in the 18th-century German essay ‘Perpetually Peace’
 Many liberals argue that the emphasis on international anarchy and the consequent insecurity is excessive . The realist emphasis on anarchy is excessive, many liberals argue .
 International cooperation and peaceful engagement among states and other actors is possible . There are no insuperable obstacles to block us, says World Images 35 . achieving such progress takes decisive actions by state and nonstate actors .
 Liberal liberals tend to rely on the ability of political leaders and nations to learn from mistakes . The past is not necessarily prologue, says Julian Zelizer . But the past has a long history, he says .
 State interests can be redefined and new identities, not restricted to loyalty to the state, can be created . New identities can also be created, says the author of the book "New York Times"
 Policymakers seeking to universalize gains through peaceful engagement and international cooperative and collaborative efforts are sometimes referred to as liberal internationalists . Policymakers and others who adopt this more optimistic perspective are sometimes called liberal internationalist .
 A third image is economic structuralism —the operation of material factors or structures in a truly global context . Economic Structuralists are often called economic structuralists . Economic structuralism is a theory of economic structuralistism .
 This image of world politics is fundamentally different from the realist and liberal images . Not to be confused with the term globalization, this image is also fundamentally different . The term globalization is not the same thing as globalization .
 Economic structuralists, both Marxists and non-Marxists, argue that one must comprehend the global context within which states and other entities interact . Those we identify as economic structuralists argue that this is necessary to understand global context .
 Economic or material structures matter -- whether these take the form of capital-owning classes of people or capital-rich blocks of countries arrayed respectively against other classes of countries . Capital rich blocks of nations arrayed against each other classes or blocks of people .
 References such as rich vs. poor, capitalists vs. peasants and workers, capital-rich North vs. the capital-poor South, are reflective of understandings of those without such advantages .
 World shaped by global social and economic structures or forces whose impact is not always readily apparent in the day-to-day world of domestic and international political competition . Though important, such actors, processes, and relations are part of a world shaped by such structures .
 These forces condition and predispose actors to act in certain ways; they also account for the generation of these actors in the first place . The forces condition, predispose actor to act certain ways, and account for their generation .
 Economic structuralists are interested in explaining how they came into existence in the first place . Realists tend to view state actors and their interests as givens, but structuralists want to explain how they were formed .
 Marxists typically mean global class formations as in the bourgeoisie or capitalists in various countries that occupy a position of dominance over the ‘downtrodden’ — the worker and peasant classes . Marxists say they want to see the structure of the global class structure .
 Marxist-Marxist understanding sees global capitalist structures of dominance by the core of advanced capitalist countries over the periphery of capital-poor countries . Some countries caught in between—the semiperiperiperiphery .
 Marxist and non-Marxist economic structuralists paint a picture of exploitative relations in which capital-poor countries of the South are kept in a position of dependency or bondage by the capital-rich countries of North . These countries are caught on the downside of the global economic structure of world
 Marxists refer readily to the bourgeoisie or capitalist class that establishes a structure of global dominance over the working class or peasantry . Non-Marxists, less concerned with relations among classes or class conflict, generally prefer to describe economic structures of dependency as between capital-rich countries of the North
 Economic structuralists argue that it is absolutely necessary to view international relations in historical perspective . They say it is essential to view the world in historical context .
 Realists tend to emphasize the timeless and repetitive nature of world politics dating back to ancient times . Structuralistists use as a benchmark the historical emergence of capitalism as an economic benchmark .
 The emergence of capitalism in 16th-century Europe was a 'breaking point' in world politics, say the authors . They argue that it was a fundamental breaking point in the structure and dynamics of world politics .
 Some date the origins of the concept of globalization to this era, but others see even earlier historical roots for this phenomenon .
 Capitalism has continued to spread today to the point some economic structuralists describe as a capitalist world system . Be that as it may, capitalism has spread today .
 Liberals tend to emphasize the growing transnational nature of world politics and foresee the possibility of a fundamental change in the nature of international politics and modes of global governance . Economic structuralists instead emphasize how the continual, incremental evolution of capitalism goes a long way toward accounting for recent changes .
 Economic structuralists argue that capitalism must operate internationally as part of a global or capitalist world system that conditions and constrains behavior of all states and societies . Individual countries may claim to base their domestic economic systems on something other than capitalism .
 Economic structuralists frequently view these entities in light of how they act as mechanisms of dominance in a capitalist world order . While recognizing the importance of states as actors and nonstate actors such as international organizations, multinational corporations, and banks, economic structuralists often view them as nonstates .
 Economic structuralists examine how some capitalist states, elites, or transnational classes extract profits and other benefits from the capitalist world system at the expense of others . They examine how they extract profits, other benefits, from the capitalism system .
 The exploited occupy the euphemistically termed ‘developing’ or ‘capitalpoor, economically less-developed countries . They are characterized by large, poverty-stricken sections of their populations . The exploited are often found in poorer countries .
 Using the term Third World to describe these countries seems offensive to many liberals who politely refrain from using it nowadays . The term 'Third World' is offensive to some liberals, including liberals .
 Economic structuralists are more prone to see it as capturing an unpleasant, but certain reality suffered by the downtrodden . Liberals prefer the term developing world preferred by liberals . On the other hand, structuralists say it captures an unpleasant reality .
 Economic structuralists argue that capital-rich countries keep their populations dependent by capital rich countries . Some say this is not because they have failed to develop capitalist economic systems or because they are poorly integrated .
 Less-developed countries play an important role in the capitalist world system, acting as a source of cheap labor and raw materials . These less developed countries are important to the capitalist system, the BBC says .
 Far from being outside the capitalist world system, they are an integral part of it . Their exploitation helps account for the continual economic dominance of the northern capitalist states in North America, Europe, and parts of Asia .
 LDCs are ensnared in the structure of the capitalist world system net and often poorly served by their own elites or comprador class (capitalists constituting the local bourgeoisie in an LDC, seen as subordinated to the bourgeoisie in advanced capitalist countries) The LDC is
 Economic structuralists emphasize the critical importance of economic or material factors . It is apparent, therefore, that even more so than the realists and liberals, these economic structuralists stress the importance of those factors .
 For economic structuralists, economic considerations in the form of global structures of dominance are the key starting point for understanding international relations or world politics . Economic structuralists say the creation and development of the capitalist world system or global society within which these structures operate .
 Scholars in what is called the English School draw on elements of the other images, particularly realism and liberalism . English School “Rationalists” are “realistic” and “liberal” thinkers .
 Their image is of an international society composed of both state and nonstate actors . The image of the international society is that of both states and non-state actors, the group says .
 The world can be understood as an anarchical society, lacking central authority or the degree of governance one typically finds in the domestic society within a state . The world is composed of independent sovereign states and other actors, but lacking in central authority . It is also a society that lacks central authority
 Other similar deals had been brokered throughout other poor areas of the world .
 The promise was to provide not only jobs, but also technology, capital, and better infrastructure . The promise is to provide jobs, and technology, and capital .
 Recent studies, including one on some hundred such land deals, have resulted in a damning indictment of the foreign companies .
 310,000 square miles had been subject to some sort of negotiation with a foreign investor . It was estimated that some 310,00 square miles of land had been under negotiation with investors .
 This amount of land is more than the farmland of Britain, France, Germany, and Italy combined . It's more than farmland of all four countries combined .
 Economic structuralists would argue that such a dismal outcome was to be expected, given the exploitive nature of international capitalism .
 The three dominant images of international relations and world politics vary in their underlying assumptions on a number of dimensions . Realism, Liberalism, & Economic Structuralism are the three dominant themes of international politics and international relations .
 There is, then, in its rules or norms, a rational or rule-oriented basis for order in this anarchic international society that lacks central governance . There is then a rational, rule-orientated basis to order in an anarchic society that needs central governance.
 To this rationalism we can add—as in the writings of the East Prussian Immanuel Kant —the moral or ethical principles that come to be accepted internationally and thus contribute to a more orderly form of international anarchy . The absence of central authority over states that remain sovereign entities can be
 Other English School scholars disagree, however, referring to such thinking as idealistic or utopian . Other scholars disagree .
 Understanding international relations as occurring within international society also puts emphasis on the human dimension of international society . Understanding the human aspect of international relations is important, but some see it as mechanistic relations among abstract units .
 That international society can become a global civil society under the rule of law is also compatible with such English School thinking, says the English School .
 This idea that international relations or world politics occur in an international society is not limited to the English School . This idea of international relations and world politics is not only limited to English School, it is said .
 Classical realism is compatible with classical realism’s focus on the pursuit of interest using state power or capabilities . It is also compatible with acknowledgment of roles played by multiple state and nonstate actors in liberal understandings .
 Marxist and neo-Marxist scholars are comfortable with portraying classes and class struggles as occurring in domestic society, but also more broadly in international or global contexts . Eor that matter, many Marxist scholars are quite comfortable .
 realism, liberalism, economic structuralism, and English School rationalism have become fairly well-established, mainstream images and approaches to international relations or world politics . But they are by no means the only ways to look at the world . Realistic, liberal, and rationalism are not the
 We owe to the late-19thand early-20th-century scholar Max Weber the insight that we need to take account of the deeper understandings tied to the terms we create or use to describe the world around us .
 Weber used the German word verstehen to capture the empathetic bases of deep understandings that human beings can attach to the descriptions they advance and the words they use . Weber's use of the word verststehen captured the empathy of people who use it .
 Interpretive understandings, therefore, question what the four images take for granted concerning our ability to use mainstream social scientific methods to comprehend world politics .
 Erom the policy perspective, you’re unlikely to find many practitioners even acknowledging awareness of their existence . You’ve likely not even acknowledged awareness of the existence of them .
 interpretive understandings challenge the objectivity on which most policymakers pride themselves . Indeed, interpretive understandingings challenge objectivity, which is possible among subjective human beings .
 Policymakers need to understand the subjective component of how we see the world and, as a result, the decisions we make .
 At the very least, they sensitize the practitioner to the diverse meanings different observers may draw from what we observe in international relations or world politics .
 Constructivism has provided a provocative challenge to realist and liberal conceptions in particular . Constructivism challenges realist, liberal conceptions of constructivism . Constructivists provide provocative and intriguing challenges to realists and liberals .
 Constructivists claim that what realists and feminists are not essential attributes but are rather of human origin and humanly constructed . Describe the different interpretive understandings and the critique of the four images offered by constructivists, feminists, critical theorists, and postmodernists .
 Constructivists take on the typical realist claim that actors have a more or less fixed nature . They say they are and seemingly always will be self-interested and security-conscious . Constructivistists say that actors are not fixed and that they always will always be security conscious .
 Realists tend to see states continuing to compete for power, influence, and prestige . Whether due to what they see as an unbending or essentially unchanging human nature or the eternal existence of an anarchic international environment, realists see states competing for power .
 Constructivists argue that states don’t simply react to their environment but dynamically engage it . Constructivism is a form of statecraft . Constructivist states don't react to the environment, they engage it dynamically, say constructivists .
 Just as the environment influences the behavior of the actors, so too do the actors or agents who over time affect the environment that surrounds them . The environment of an actor or agent can influence the behavior and behavior of an agent .
 Human beings develop ideas among themselves, thus constructing their knowledge of the external world around them . As essentially subjective persons, human being develops ideas .
 States can and do redefine their interests, objectives, and individual courses of action . States—the agents or persons acting for them—can and do . States can redefine what they want or what they need to do .
 Collectively it is they who effectively construct the norms that influence international relations or world politics . Collectively, they are influential in shaping international relations, world politics, they say .
 These ideas can become so deeply set or widely accepted over time that they become structures that facilitate or serve as obstacles to courses of action states choose to follow . These ideas become so widely accepted that they are structures that can facilitate or be obstacles to states' actions .
 To constructivists, ideas are important particularly when they take such structural form . They can impact the behavior of both state and nonstate actors at least as much as the materially based power or class structures found in realist and economic-structuralist thought .
 As people we are the ones who formulate the ideas and construct the norms that define the context within which states and nonstate actors operate . We are also responsible for shaping the norms we create in the context of state and non-state actions .
 Consider how slavery was once an accepted aspect of international relations . Consider slavery once a part of the world's most powerful power .
 slavery was considered an economic imperative in the United States and many European countries . Slavery was an institution of critical importance to the economic interests of slave-trading states as late as the 18th and well into the 19th centuries .
 Global and national norms make such practices not only morally illegitimate, but also illegal . Sadly, however, various forms of human bondage persist to the present day, but such practices are illegal .
 European states engaged in two major world wars, supposedly in defense of their respective national interests . Or consider that, in the first half of the 20th century, European states were engaged in world wars . Consider that in Europe, Europe has been involved in two world wars since 1900s .
 For centuries Germany and France had been bitter, war-prone rivals . But now Europe has created what amounts to a zone of peace, says historian . Europe has now created what amount to a 'zone of peace'
 From a constructivist perspective, actors or “agents” constitute or shape over time their own social context . This context in turn shapes the behaviors, interests, and identities we observe we observe .
 Concepts such as ‘interests,” ‘sovereignty,’ and ‘anarchy” are exactly that—concepts given meaning by actors, not eternal, unchanging aspects of reality beyond the control of these agents . Concepts like “interests
 Feminist scholars focus on gender as a category of analysis or factor in order to highlight an overlooked perspective on social political, and economic issues . Feminist scholars highlight gender as an analysis of analysis .
 Much of contemporary feminism is committed to achieving equality for women through the elimination of discrimination and unequal gender relations . Interpretive Understandings 41 aims to eliminate discrimination and equal relations .
 Gender, which embodies relationships of power inequality, is understandably the starting point . Gender is a sign of inequality in relationships between power relationships .
 Feminists who define gender as a set of socially and culturally constructed characteristics share an affinity with the social constructivists . The social constructivistists are often more likely to be women .
 Masculinity is stereotypically associated with power, rationality often cold to human concerns, self-empowered autonomy, and assumption of leadership in public roles . Masculinary is stereotyped with power and rationality often .
 Social constructed feminine characteristics include less assertive or less aggressive behavior, dependence on or interdependence in nurturing relationships with others, sensitivity to emotional aspects of issues, and a focus on the private realm . Conversely, socially constructed .
 The two gender categories are dependent upon one another for their meaning . The two genders are dependent on each other for the meaning .
 Society reinforces the idea that to be a ‘real man’ means not to display ‘feminine’ characteristics . To be a real man, not a man who displays feminine characteristics, is considered a good man .
 The emphasis on gender is not just about women, but men and masculinity as well, as well . Hence, the emphasis is not only about women but also about masculinity .
 From the feminist perspective, gender is particularly important as a primary way to signify relationships of power, not only in the home, but also in the world of foreign policy and international relations . Gender is especially important as it signifies relationships in relationships with power .
 By privileging masculinity, women can be socially and also legally cast into a subordinate status . Women can be social and legal cast into subordinate status, says author . Women's rights in the U.S. can be legally and legally cast as a subordinate .
 Feminist theorists claim that as gender permeates social life, it has profound and largely unnoticed effects on the actions of states, international organizations, and transnational actors . Feminist theorists say that gender has profound effects on state and international organizations .
 Scholars seek to develop a research agenda and associated concepts to trace and explain these effects . These scholars are seeking to develop an agenda and explain the effects of the environment .
 In recent years feminism has cast its net much more widely, examining the interplay of gender with race and class . In the past, feminism has focused more on race, class and race .
 What connects all three is a concern for the nature of power relationships and points of convergence and divergence in relation to the study of international relations and world politics .
 Scholars with a feminist perspective have been critical of ‘masculinist’ approaches to conflict that tend to emphasize coercive diplomacy, unilateralism, and the use of force . Since feminism as an approach to international relations first began to appear in the international relations literature in the 1980s
 From this perspective, conduct in international relations seems similar to schoolyard conflicts, particularly among boys . The strong does what they will and the weak do what they must, especially among boys, writes Peter Bergen .
 Feminist approaches to conflict tend to look for common ground in conflict . By contrast, feminist approaches tend to search for positive gains for all parties . This is not the case for women in conflict, but for men and women, it's a problem .
 Feminist writers have made us more aware of how gender—both feminine and masculine constructions—affect the way we understand and conduct relationships in daily life, but also in international relations and world politics .
 The dominant approach to knowledge has been referred to as modernism . Critical Theorists and Postmodernists are critical theorists and postmodernists . Modernism is the dominant approach of knowledge .
 Critical theorists claim all knowledge is historical and political in nature . This also entails a critique of positivist-empiricist approaches to knowledge . What we see and how we analyze international phenomena rely on our perception .
 Even the language we use reflects values. hypotheses drawn from theories. We use language that reflect values. Even the words we use reflect values, we use them to reflect our beliefs .
 Critical theorists and postmodernists make the assumption that facts, concepts, and theories may not be separated from values . All three stem from their observation and construction by human agency, they say .
 To postmodernists, what we see is what we choose to see or measure, and the mechanisms or methods we employ are all of human construction and essentially rely on perception and cognitive processes influenced by prior understandings and meanings .
 Even the language we use constitutes an embedded set of values that are an integral part of any culture . The language is embedded in a culture that is integral to any culture, even the language itself .
 What we observe in either the natural or social sciences is heavily influenced by the interpretive understanding we have of the concepts we employ . What is observed in either of the sciences is influenced by our interpretation of concepts we use in the sciences .
 The same holds for causal relations we infer when we specify the relations among variables, theories, hypotheses, and the observed behavior of states and nonstate actors in the political and social milieu in which they are immersed .
 Critical and postmodernist theorists set aside as problematic the abstract, universalist, scientific claims of positivists . The central question of epistemology is how we know what we think we know, critical .
 Critical theorists argue that beliefs held by theorists necessarily bias their truth claims . Some critical theorists argue this may well be part of global ideological schemes to legitimize particular world orders .
 In supporting an alleged agenda of dominance (whether based on class, power, ethnicity, gender, or values), it may be convenient to advance ideologies often masquerading as scientifically based theories . In supporting a political agenda, it may also be convenient for the left to advance ideology .
 Critical theorists do not reject science or the scientific method as such, but they do subject theoretical and other truth claims to greater scrutiny . Critical theorists are critical of science or scientific method, but subject theoretical claims to be subject to scrutiny .
 Critical theorists unmask deceptions, probe for deeper understandings or meanings, and expose the class or other interests these ideologies or alleged theories are designed to serve . Critical theorists are tasked with unmasking deceptions and probing for deeper meanings or meanings .
 Power is a core concept for critical theorists, particularly in relation to those who wield it . Critical theorists are concerned with the use of power to wield power .
 Some authors associated with economic structuralism, constructivism, and feminism are sympathetic to the assumptions of critical theory . Critical theory focuses on human perception and understandings that give diverse meanings to the concepts and theories we formulate .
 Critical theory may be viewed separately from postmodernism . Most critical theorists retain scientific, strict methodological criteria to guide their work . Critical theory is different from post-modernism because of its scientific criteria .
 Some critical theory does overlap with or can be understood more broadly as, part of a postmodernist understanding . Nevertheless, some critical theory is still relevant to some of the world's postmodernists .
 In this regard, postmodernist ontology (or assumptions about being—the way things are—that inform an individual’s worldview) is prone to find subtexts and to deconstruct—unpack and take apart—the meanings embedded in what we say or write and
 To postmodernists, claims made to empirically based, objective truth are necessarily hollow . Postmodernists say that claims made based on empirical evidence are hollow . They say that if you want an objective truth, there is no evidence of truth .
 No knowledge or truth is possible apart from the motivations and purposes people put into their construction . In the extreme, no knowledge of truth or knowledge is possible except from people's motivations .
 From this extreme postmodernist perspective, truth is entirely relative . "Truth is all relative. Truth is all the most important thing in the world," says author .
 Normative Theory 43 Assessing the Challenges to Mainstream Science and Positivism . These are, to say the least, significant challenges to “modernist” or “positivist” science more generally .
 It is difficult to deny or dismiss scientific methodologies that have produced so much accumulated knowledge in so many diverse fields of human inquiry . It's difficult, however, simply to simply to deny . simply to dismiss or dismiss science methodologies .
 Defenders simply see postmodernist thinkers as misrepresenting science . The scientific method is skeptical enterprise that subjects all truth claims to both logical and empirical tests .
 Constructivist, feminist, critical, and postmodernist perspectives contribute to theorizing about international relations and world politics . What constructivist and feminist perspectives do contribute is an ever-increased epistemological sensitivity to, and caution concerning, the fragility of what we think to be true
 The values we hold influence the interpretive understanding that leads us to formulate the concepts we adopt . The values of our values are important to our interpretation of our concepts, says author .
 Interpretive understanding has its place in international-relations theorizing by aiding in the ongoing search for new syntheses in human understandings of our political world . Interpretive understandings are important in international relations theorizing .
 Even for the policymakers with little interest in theorizing, such understandings are a useful caution that we take our human subjectivity explicitly into account .
 Social science attempts to explain what is . Mainstream social science tries to explain why is not social .
 Normative theory is driven by a concern for what ought to be or should be . Normative theories are driven by concerns about what should be and should be, say experts .
 Because normative theory deals explicitly with norms and values, it has particular relevance to policymakers who must make the hard choices, particularly those involving moral or ethical questions .
 normative theory strives to provide moral or ethical guidelines not only for policymakers, but also for any individual who is engaged in international relations and world politics .
 Normative theorists, however, fully realize that choice is constrained by circumstance . Normative . theorists, though, fully realized that choice was constrained by circumstances .
 Applying normative theory to practice to practice crosses a wide diversity of global issues now confronting humankind . Applying Normality to practice can be applied to a wide variety of issues now facing humankind .
 normative theory focuses on what ought to be as opposed to what is . Evaluate relevancy of normative or value theory to policymakers . Value-oriented or philosophical theory is a philosophical theory .
 It is usually different from empirical theories, which try to explain the way things are or predict what they will be . As such, empirical theories are different from theories that try to predict or explain how things are .
 President Theodore Roosevelt was known for his progressive domestic policies . Roosevelt's policies were known for their progressive stance on the domestic economy .
 Former secretary of the Navy sent the United States Navy on a world tour to demonstrate U.S. military power . President Obama sent the Navy on the tour .
 He shares an affinity with the perspective of the English School . Although the term wasn't even used at the time, in retrospect he shares a affinity for the English school .
 Many students of international relations and world politics have felt a growing sense of intellectual inadequacy resulting from the collective failure to foresee the rapid end of the Cold War over a several-year period .
 normative concerns may well play a role in helping all of us think through the appropriate responses to the issue . Depending on the issue, normative concerns could help guide us through our responses .
 There is a vast and still-growing literature (with roots in the ancient world as well) to help guide practitioners properly concerned with doing the right thing . Fortunately, there is a still growing literature to help .
 Normative theory also underlies international law, which draws moral insights that inform the general principles, customary practice, treaties or conventions, and writings of jurists . Normative theories also underlie international law .
 Thinking critically and theoretically does not mean a flight from reality, but is actually a way to engage reality systematically in an attempt to understand some aspect of it . Thinking critically doesn't mean "flight from reality," but it is a way of engaging reality systematically .
 Gene Sharp and other practically oriented theorists approach the issue of overthrowing dictatorships from an empirical, historical, and conceptual standpoint . Sharp: "Gene Sharp and others approach the question from empirical and historical perspective"
 No one need accuse him of being excessively abstract and engaged in work divorced from reality and the major concerns of the day . He or others like him are not concerned with reality and major concerns, he says .
 "All theory need not be so policy-relevant. At the same time, of course, all theory need to be so . At the end of the day, it's a good thing to say, but it's not a good idea .
 It may be enough for many of us merely to understand better how the world works, based on insights from both explanatory and predictive theories . It may not be enough to know better how to understand the world .
 Thinking theoretically helps to get you to ask key questions about international politics, sensitize you to patterns of behavior, and identify anomalies . Thinking theoretically can help you to identify anomalies in international politics .
 Theory may help policymaker navigate through troubled waters of international relations . Theory, therefore, may actually help policymakers navigate through the troubled waters . Theory may even help policy makers navigate through difficult international relations, says Peter Bergen .
 At a minimum, knowledge of basic images, interpretive understandings, and normative principles makes one more aware of potential biases .
 Critical theorists and postmodernists challenge the positivist assumptions that underlie most of the theoretical work in international relations . They do bring us to understand better the essentially subjective nature of Learning Objectives Review 47 human beings .
 normative theory is important to policymakers as it asks value questions . It emphasizes the what ‘ought to be” as a way to challenge what “is” or may be the case .
 The theory of international relations is defined by theory and test hypotheses . The theory is based on how arms races between states may increase the chances of war .
 Causal explanation or prediction is based on certain prior occurrences, patterns, or conditions . Causal explanations or predictions are based on prior occurrences or patterns of events .
 What one is trying to explain—such as the existence of interstate war—is known as the dependent variable . What one tries to explain is known as "the dependent variable" in the theory of statehood .
 For more information on methodological challenges and theory building, visit www.philanthropic.org.uk .
 Use the levels of analysis framework to generate hypotheses that help you determine the factors affecting world politics . Apply the same framework to current international events, like U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan, to generate hypothesis .
 The levels of analysis framework is useful because it provides us to make educated guesses as to what factors might account for the international behavior we are trying to explain or predict . It provides us with a checklist that gives us a checklist .
 Levels include individual and group, state and society, and international or global . Levels include individuals and groups, group, society, individual or society, or individual or group .
 Images are sets of assumptions about international relations or world politics that infieence the approaches we take to studying and understanding the world around us . Images are the sets of questions asked and how we answer them. Images are .
 Images help to orient our reading and research by highiighting certain actors or concepts and discounting or ignoring others, as weli as infiuencing the interpretation of particuiar international trends .
 Four major images are reaiism and liberaiism, economic structuraiism, and the English School . The English School is a model for the modern world of English education .
 This volume goes into much greater depth on images, interpretive understandings, and normative theory than space aliows .
 Kenneth N Waltz, Theory of International Politics, is now a ciassic work on structural realism . Kenneth Waltz is now an expert in structural realism and theory .
 Anthoology of selected articles is a useful anthoiogy that contains selected articles of this genre .
 A creative attempt to reformulate major concepts within the English School . Describe the different interpretive understandings and the critique of the four images offered by constructivists, feminists, critical theorists, and postmodernists. Describe each of these four images .
 Interpretive understandings question what the four images take for granted concerning our ability to use mainstream social scientific methods to comprehend world politics .
 Constructivists claim that what realists and liberals take for granted are malleable, constructed and subject to change by the actors themselves . Constructivism is a form of constructivism that claims that the identities of actors and interests of actors can be changed by actors .
 Critical theorists skeptical about truth claims made by mainstream scholars and political leaders . Critical theorists are skeptical about mainstream scholars as well as political leaders' statements . They say they are skeptical of mainstream scholars' claims about the truth .
 Postmodernists have doubts as to our ability even to comprehend the supposed self-evident reality of international relations . Postmodernistists have severe doubts about our ability to comprehend international relations.
 By utilizing the concept of gender, feminists have provided an insightful and unconventional way to analyze and interpret world politics . Feminists have provided a unique way of analyzing and interpreting world politics, says Gloria Borger .
 A collection of articles by a prominent postmodern and critical theorist . Includes articles by prominent post-modern thinkers and critical theorists .
 An overview of the development and trials and tribulations of feminist IR theory . The theory of IR theory is an attempt to explain the phenomenon .
 Major topics include just war, humanitarian intervention, conditions for the use of force, and responsibilities to a broader humanity . Major topics: Just war and humanitarian intervention and conditions for force .
 A diverse collection of articles by a thoughtful observer of the role of . normative theory in international relations and world politics .
 A cosmopolitan approach to global political theory that critiques realism, nationalism, and the society-of-states tradition . A Cosmopolitan Approach to Global political theory critiques realism and nationalism .
 Theory attempts to tell us how the world works. explain why things happen. anticipate what might happen in different circumstances. all of the above. predict what might be the case. predict why things happened. predict how things might happen. predict that things will happen .
 This chapter covers theory-building. levels of analysis. world images. interpretive understandings. all of the above . This chapter includes analysis of the . world images .
 What a theorist is trying to explain is the independent variable. intervening variable. dependent variable. constant variable. .
 A possible factor to explain a phenomenon is independent variable. non-constant variable. dependent variable. constant variable. independent variable .
 An hypothesis is a proven empirical fact. A dependent variable is a dependent variable. An educated guess is an educated guess. A hypothesis is an empirical fact or an educated fact.
 Individuals and small groups, state and society, and the international system are levels of analysis economic structuralist categories . liberal references of multiple actors. social constructivist categories . social constructivism categories. .
 Political scientists who claim to view the world as it is, not as it ought to be, are often called liberals . Political scientists often call themselves liberals . They say they are liberals .
 Political scientists who claim to view the world in terms of a multiplicity of different kinds of actors engaged in transactions in multiple paths or channels of interaction are called optimists. economic structuralists. pluralists or liberals. realists . pluralists .
 Thomas Hobbes was concerned with the security implications of anarchy . Hobbes concerned with political equality. assuring due process of law. political equality . assuring . due process . of law .
 Realists tend to see world politics as a result of the combination of power, democracy and human nature . Human nature, conflict and the structure of the state. human nature, ethics, and the characteristics of political organization .
 Liberals tend to dispute the claim that to understand international relations or world politics one need only focus on the state . see the state as a unitary, rational actor. downplay the importance of international organizations. see international organizations only as arenas in which states compete with each other . see international
 Conventional discourse, particularly among realists, has come to equate the term international relations with global politics . interstate relations. interstate government. interstate politics. interstate relations . The term 'international relations' is often used to refer to international politics .
 A focus on mechanisms of domination in a capitalist world order is most closely associated with realism . Social constructivism is a form of realism associated with liberalism .
 Those in the English School tend to see international politics in terms of class struggle conducted on a global scale. interactions within a worldwide or international society. interactions . The English School tends to see global ideals that ultimately will displace realist balance-of-power understandings. an almost mechanical
 Grotius is associated with rules that influence the behavior of states . His work on international law is often associated with laws that influence states' behavior .
 Locke and Rousseau's social contract is key to understanding anarchy in international society . The social contract in Locke's writings, Rousseau and Locke, is a key to the understanding of anarchy in society, he says .
 Immanuel Kant was an East Prussian philosopher and philosopher of the Enlightenment . Kant's writings were published in Germany in the early 1900s . Kant was a German philosopher of philosophy and philosophy . His work was translated into philosophy .
 That states don’t simply react to their environment, but dynamically engage it, is a view most closely associated with economic structuralism. feminism. both realism and pluralism or liberalism. social constructivism. social constructionivism. both .
 Feminism involves using gender as a category of analysis, focusing on differences between feminine and masculine understandings and actions . a view of women as typically exhibiting assertive, often aggressive behavior . a perspective that sees women as customarily assuming leadership positions in society .
 Postmodernists are most closely associated with critical theorists. realists. social constructivists. liberals. postmodernists. modernists. realistists. liberalists.
 Normative theory associated with just war is associated with what should be. all of the above . Normative theories are associated with the use of force in war .
 History History 53 LEARNING OBJECTIVES m Compare and contrast the four types of international systems we identityindependent, hegemonic, imperial, feudal —and explain the benefits of applying this conceptual understanding to the history of international relations .
 Apply to the four categories or types of international systems to the cases of ancient Persia, Greece, India, Rome, and feudal Europe . Apply, or not, to the case of ancient Persian Persia, or Greece, or India .
 Explain the key developments that led to the rise of the European independent state system and how it eventually became globalized as a form of international politics . Evaluate the relative success and failure of attempts by states to develop collective security arrangements .
 Evaluate the impact of the rising economic strength of the European Union and the four rising BRIC powers on future international developments . Find out what the impact will have on the future of the EU and BRIC countries .
 One suggestion was pushing for continual preeminence, assisted by a monopoly on atomic weapons . One suggestion suggested a monopoly of atomic weapons in the world .
 Another idea was to multilateralize security by creating a United Nations . Another idea would have been to create a multilateral organization .
 U.S. could encourage economic, political, and military alliances in conjunction with a weakened western Europe in the hope of assisting their recovery and providing an added bulwark against a potentially ambitious Soviet Union . Or, alternatively, the United States could encourage .
 Deciding which way to go was argued and debated by President Truman and some of the leading statesmen of the day . Deciding whether to go is debated by some individuals as President Truman .
 Their approach to engaging a new international environment with its new distribution of international power was pragmatic and nonpartisan . Their approach was devoid of ideological fervor, they said .
 Despite being criticized by some contemporaries as an East Coast elite, they succeeded in devising a series of policies aimed at protecting American interests . The policies included the broad goal of international stability, including international stability .
 The rationale for the importance of this historical overview as part of our toolkit is as follows . Assuming you have some interest in pursuing a career as a practitioner engaged in international politics, the rationale for this is that this is important to you as a professional .
 History contributes to our contemporary understanding of international politics, says Eirst . Eirst says history contributes to modern understanding of world politics . He says history adds to our understanding of global politics .
 Second, a study of history should make us careful in applying historical analogies or comparisons to current events . Second, we should be careful not to apply historical comparisons to today's events .
 Rarely are circumstances exactly the same and hence it is dangerous to assume that the lessons of history are always clear-cut . Rarely assume that history lessons of the past are always the same, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Third, a discussion of historical forms of relations among states, city-states, or other units allows us to mention some of the political theorists who have influenced contemporary thinking about world politics .
 The discussion will expose the would-be practitioner to a conceptual and theoretical understanding of international relations and world politics beyond historical facts and figures .
 To think historically and conceptually is to be better prepared to anticipate future international developments such as closer integration or disintegration among European Union members, a resurgent Russia, and the rise to major-power status of China, India, and Brazil .
 Compai'e and contrast the four types of international systems we identityindependent, hegemonic, imperial, feudal — and explain the benefits of applying this conceptual understanding to the history of international relations . Compai’e explains the benefits and importance of applying the concept to international relations
 Historically most peoples’ lives—economic, social, and political,  revolved around an isolated village, clan, or tribe . Historically most people’s lives -- economic, social -- revolved around isolated villages .
 The local economy was usually insulated, particularly in subsistence economies, with little trade among communities . Similarly, there was little trade between communities .
 Political and economic interactions outside of one’s own community were minimal or nonexistent . Hence political and economic—indeed, any . political and . economic .interactions outside of the . own community was minimal .
 Spanish and Portuguese explorers set forth in the 15th and 16th centuries . They had little idea what other cultures and civilizations they would encounter .
 It was not until adventurers and traders trekked to China along what came to be known as the Silk Road that economic exchanges occurred between West and East .
 The definition and scope of capitalism is that of capitalism through both trade and colonialism . The definition of capitalism was defined as capitalism through trade and exploitation .
 The concept of what we now call globalization, however, did not take hold until the worldwide expansion of markets, transportation, and communications penetrated national borders globally . Globalization was not until the last half of the 20th century, especially during the 1990s .
 The world has not always been organized the way it is today, it makes more sense to speak historically of different types of international systems . These systems were limited in geographic scope and hence cannot accurately be described as global or world systems .
 The concept of system used here is defined as an aggregation of diverse entities linked by regular interaction that sets them apart from other systems . The concept was defined as a 'system' defined by a system that sets it apart from others .
 The definition of regular interaction varies depending on the nature and intensity of the interactions . The definition is defined by the nature of the interaction .
 The nature of the interaction could be war, with such conflict being of greater or lesser intensity . For example, such conflict could be of greater intensity . The interaction could also be war .
 The interaction could be trade, ranging from minimal to a large volume . Or the interaction could have been minimal to large volume. Or it was trade .
 The nature of the system’s units and their relative capabilities or positions in relation to each other give the system structure and set the system apart from other systems . The nature and relative capabilities of the units are also set apart from each other in the system .
 For example, we can speak of relations in the contemporary European Union as a political-political system . We can also speak of commercial interactions in the North American Free Trade Agreement among firms and consumers in Canada, Mexico, and the United States as separate North American economic systems .
 Today a world or global system also exists, as the distinct boundaries between separate international systems of earlier historical periods are lacking . In this regard it can be said that today a world . also exists as a global system .
 The current global system is characterized by extensive economic and technological interdependence and interconnectedness among a diverse set of international and transnational actors . Furthermore, the global system, although dominated by states, is also characterized as interconnectedness .
 EU and NAFTA examples could be seen as regional subsystems of the larger global system . From this perspective, the EU, NAFTA examples are regional parts of the global system, says John Defterios .
 A system is simply an analytic device to allow an observer to deal with an aspect of international relations that is of interest . It should be remembered, however, that a system is just an analytic tool to allow a system to be used .
 While we characterize the world today as a global system, we can also focus on various subsystems . To summarize, while we . characterize the . world today, while . we can . focus on different subsystems, we . also focus . on various . subsystems of the global system
 The subsystems may be defined in functional terms, such as telecommunications, trading, transportation and financial transactions . Or the subsystems can be defined as a telecommunications subsystem, a trading subsystem, transportation, a transportation subsystem, or a financial transaction subsystem .
 Lines crisscrossed the globe, illustrating the density of transactions . These latter types of subsystems could be depicted visually, with lines crissCrossing the globe . Lines could also be shown to illustrate the denser transactions .
 Instead of the globe being divided into geographic entities, it would look more like a cobweb or latticework . The image with which we began this chapter was the image of the world .
 It is difficult to determine a precise date, as the globalization process occurred incrementally over many centuries . The globalization process was incrementally developed over centuries .
 The globalization of the European state system began in earnest in the 19th century at the same time that global economic interdependence began to accelerate . We would suggest, however, that the globalization of European state .
 It has been only since 1945, or the end of World War II, that the technological and communications revolutions in transportation, communications, information transfer, have gathered speed and had a global impact .
 The internet, dubbed appropriately the World Wide Web, now connects people, their governments, corporations, corporations and both international and nongovernmental organizations in ways that were inconceivable to most just a few decades ago . The internet is now connecting people, governments and corporations in ways inconceivable
 Up until the 19th century it makes more sense to speak of various regional or international systems, meaning they were not global in scope . The 19th Century was when the system was more global than global .
 In historical references we prefer to use the term international to regional . We prefer to refer to the term 'international' rather than 'regional'
 In ancient times people had no idea that other civilizations existed in other parts of the world . Ancient times were unaware of the existence of other civilizations in the ancient world .
 As far as they knew, they were the world if not the center of the universe . They knew nothing more than what they knew .
 This was as true in Europe as it was in the Americas, Africa, China, or elsewhere in Asia and the Pacific . This was true in Asia as well as Europe, Africa and the Americas .
 In this chapter we examine four different types of historical international systems . Eirst, an independent state system consists of political entities that each claim to be sovereign with the right to make both foreign policy and domestic decisions .
 "No superior power is acknowledged and other states recognize these claims," says U.S. President Barack Obama . No superior power acknowledged and others recognize this .
 Some interdependence exists, resulting in a certain degree of constraint on any one state’s actions . Simply by interacting with other units, some interdependency exists . This is the result of interacting with each other .
 States are equal in terms of their claims to sovereignty, though they obviously differ in their capabilities and power . States should be equal in the sovereignty of the United States, the author says .
 An ambitious and rising power may be viewed as a threat to the independence of other states, resulting in the formation of a counterweight or countervailing coalition or alliance . The rise of a rising power could lead to the creation of counterweights or alliances .
 The rising power is constrained by the actions of the others, just as the members of the alliance will witness some degree of limitation on their freedom to maneuver . The alliance will work together to deter or defeat the ambitious state and maintain a balance of power .
 By hegemony we mean one or more states dominate the system, set the “rules of the game,” and thus have some degree of direct influence on the external affairs of member states .
 Three or more states dominate: 1815-1918: Great Britain, France, Russia, Austria, Prussia (Germany after 1871) Two dominant states: 1945-1991: United States and the Soviet Union . Three variants: hegemony: hegemony, hegemony, dominance, hegemony .
 Two dominant states, such as Athens and Sparta in the second half of the 5th centuryc.e. or the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War 3.i.
 Three or more states dominate international relations, such as the five great European powers after 1815 hegemonic state system . ■ One or more state dominates the system. ■ One state dominates international relations.
 Variants include unipolar, bipolar or dual hegemony, multipolar or collective hegemony . Variants inciude unipolar or bipolar, bipolar, dual hegemony . Variant names range from unipolar to unipolar .
 In any of these hegemonic systems, the less powerful members may interact with one another, but they take their cues from the hegemon authorities . The less powerful member of these systems interact with each other but take cues from authorities, the author says .
 They may even derive important benefits such as security by aligning with the more powerful states . They may also benefit from the benefits of aligning to the most powerful states, experts say .
 The domestic affairs of states, however, are generally left untouched by the hegemonic powers . Domestic affairs are left untouched for the state .
 Political leaders are not installed by the hegemonic powers, they have little room for maneuvering in their state’s foreign policy . Political leaders have little choice but to make their state's foreign policy their own .
 The third type of international system is evident in recent centuries as well as in ancient times— imperial systems such as those of Assyria, Persia, Macedonia, and Rome . Imperial systems were those of . Assyria . Persia, Macedonian, Rome . Rome .
 An empire consists of separate societal units associated by regular interaction, but one among them asserts political supremacy . The others formally or tacitly accept this claim . An empire is a separate societal unit with regular interaction .
 In an empire the dominant state is more likely to manage subject colonies’ or territorial units’ affairs, appointing local political officials, collecting taxes, drafting recruits into the imperial military, and creating and maintaining a system of roads and other transportation networks . The difference between this and the he
 Military conquest historically has been the principal means by which empires have been established . Military conquest has been a means of establishing empires .
 Authority crises within a particular political system can make it weak and vulnerable to foreign pressure . But authority crises in particular political systems can make them weak, vulnerable to pressure from abroad .
 The fourth type of international system is the feudal system from about the 9th to the 14th centuries . Within any particular geographic area, any of these three systems can ebb and flow, rise and decline, evolve from one into another and back again .
 What makes the feudal system so unusual is the diversity of the entities that comprised it and the manner in which relations among these units were structured . The feudal system is unusual because of its diversity of entities, says historian .
 Power was decentralized and claimed by a diverse group of governmental units, only some of which evolved into modern states . Only some of the modern states were modernized .
 Other actors included trading associations, the great houses of merchant bankers, and local feudal barons . Local barons and trading associations were involved in the fight .
 The one institution to claim universal or global jurisdiction was the pre-Reformation Christian Church in Rome, now the Roman Catholic Church . The Catholic Church is the only institution that claims universal jurisdiction in Europe .
 As scholars point out, the feudal system reminds us that the key actors of international politics have not always been, and in the future may not necessarily be, states . The feudal system is a reminder that states are not always state actors in international politics .
 All four categories of international systems, independent, hegemonic, imperial, and feudal, are ideal or pure types . Actual historical examples placed within any single category will not line up exactly, but will have their variations .
 The ideal or pure type is a yardstick or standard against which we measure real-world examples . As such, the ideal is the standard against the real-life examples .
 It is possible for such systems to coexist and overlap, as was the case during the period of Spartan-Athenian hegemony and their relations with the Persian Empire .
 Such systems remained important even as the globalization process was beginning to emerge in the 18th and 19th centuries . Such systems were important even in the early 19th century .
 The Cold War had many of the hallmarks of a dual hegemonic state system . Roughly the first half of the 20th century, for example, most closely resembled collective hegemony (or a multipolar system)
 We should keep these questions in mind as we consider the problematic integration of European countries in the EU and the rise of China, India, Brazil, and a resurgent Russia .
 We must also realize that the future is not inevitably a mere continuation of present trends . Just as we must be wary of assuming that the past was somehow predetermined, we must realize that we must not expect the future .
 It is extremely difficult to judge how various political, economic, social, and technological forces may come together to influence the evolution of the world or world politics . It is difficult to predict how these forces will influence the world's future .
 The popular uprisings against authoritarian regimes in North Africa and the Middle East is a more recent case . The popular Arab Spring is one of the most recent cases in the world .
 This should give pause to anyone who assumes the U.S. dominance or hegemony is now a fixed characteristic of the international system . China's rise of the rise of China is not somehow inevitable .
 Some of the most critical concepts and ideas that have shaped contemporary thinking about the nature of international relations have deep historical roots . A related point we wish to make is that some of the key concepts have been shaped by historical precedents .
 One should not underestimate the power of ideas in influencing the course of history, says historian . One should never underestimate the impact of ideas on history .
 Human beings do not just passively react to their environment, but they also shape it . Human beings shape it, whether ecological, economic, social, social or political .
 Ideas about international relations are sometimes used to justify the status quo in any era . Ideas about the world's future can be used as a tool to justify any kind of policy .
 Ideas can also help to overturn that status quo by providing inspiration and guidance to those who seek an alternative world future .
 The concept of democracy has gripped the imaginations of many people all over the world to include portions of the Middle East and North Africa in 2011 and afterward . Consider, for example, how the concept has gripped many people's imaginations since 2011 .
 It has motivated them to take up a struggle against authoritarianism even though in many countries the quest would appear hopeless . In many countries it would appear to be nearly hopeless .
 Ideas about democracy, political economy, social justice do matter, sometimes succeeding against enormous odds . Ideas about politics, the economy, and other concerns do matter. Ideas about social justice, political science do matter .
 Those holding conservative or reactionary views challenge those committed to a more forward-looking, progressive future . At the same time, those calling for a return to some idealized golden age of the past .
 We now turn to a discussion of historical international systems . HISTORICAL INTERNATIONAL SYSTEMS .
 Our purpose is to illustrate the diversity of systems, actors, and processes of world politics . We hope to use this to highlight the diversity and complexity of the political system .
 The application of the concept of system also allows us to compare and contrast how political authority was organized in different times and geographic regions . The application also allows . to compare . and contrast . how political authorities were organized in . different times .
 This also encourages aspiring practitioners of international relations to judge how past periods of history may enlighten us as to the current and future direction of world politics and world politics .
 The Persian Empire is one of the best examples of imperial organization in the ancient world . The Persian empire was one of its most successful empires in the world .
 Apply the four categories or types of international systems to the cases of ancient Persia, Greece, India, Rome, and feudal Europe . Centered in present-day Iran, Persia was founded on the ruins of the Assyrian empire but was much larger .
 Persians were particularly adept at assimilating those local customs that eased the expansion and efficient control of their empire . The Persian empire was particularly adept in assimilating local customs .
 The Assyrian network of roads, for example, was extended, and Egyptian advances in administration and science were also adopted .
 The inner core was directly administered, but as one moved farther away from the capital of Persepolis, control was more decentralized . Control was more decentralized as the city moved further away from capital . The city's inner core is directly administered .
 The threat of imperial military forces was always there . garrisons were established at key locations, and local troops were trained and armed .
 The Persian overlords preferred to rely on persuasion to maintain control . But the Persians preferred to use persuasion to keep control .
 Historians note the relative moderation of Persian rule over other peoples . Historians also note the moderation in Persian rule .
 Local governors, termed satraps, were either Persians brought in from outside or members of the local royalty .
 Aided by advisory councils, political rulers had jurisdiction separate from that of the local garrison commander and the representative of the imperial intelligence service .
 To accommodate regional and cultural differences across the far-flung empire, local administrative customs were generally adopted without substantial change .
 Administrators below the imperial level ranged from priests and kings to land-owning aristocrats or merchant families, depending on the custom of the area . Administrators include priests, kings and kings, as well as aristocrats .
 Persian rulers avoided conflict among the diverse members of their empire . The Persian rulers were successful in avoiding conflict among their diverse members .
 Persians supplied money and ships to whatever Greek coalition was formed to counter the strongest Greek city-state . After failing to conquer the Greeks directly, the Persians astutely supplied money, ships to the coalition .
 Persians extended their authority over the Greek and Phoenician cities located along the Mediterranean shore . Cyrus and Darius extended their control of the cities along the shore of the Mediterranean .
 The Greeks and Phoenicians were allowed to retain almost complete control over their internal affairs . These trading cities brought the Persians considerable economic benefits, so the Greeks and the Phoenician had to retain control .
 Special rules also devised for the government of Egypt, which by some estimates accounted for one-fifth of the population of the Persian Empire . Special rules were devised for Egypt .
 Persian approach to empire established a practical precedent followed by leaders of the Macedonian and Roman empires . In sum, the Persian approach provided internal autonomy to constituent territorial units .
 The Greek world of the 6th to the 1st centuryc.e. was composed of a variety of political entities that today we call city-states . Classical Greece is composed of various political entities such as city-state states .
 Historical International Systems 61 refers to the Italian Renaissance city-state system . Not to modern states, most of which consist of comparatively large populations and often vast territorial expanses .
 The political forms of Greek city-states, as discussed by Plato and Aristotle, included monarchies that often degenerated into despotism and other forms of rule . City-states were often ruled by a powerful individual .
 City-states worked assiduously to maintain their independence . However they were organized, all of the city-states were organized . The city-state was organized in a single state .
 City-states were naturally more powerful than others, dominating weaker city-states and sometimes extracting tribute in return for military protection . Some of the city-state's most powerful cities were larger than others . Some cities were naturally stronger than others and dominated weaker cities .
 Diplomatic practices were rudimentary, generally consisting of delegations that traveled to other city-states in order to present demands, resolve disputes, or negotiate trade agreements . Diplomatic practice was rudimentary, with delegations traveling to other cities to present their demands and resolve disputes .
 Classical Greek period served as a model of interstate relations for European and American diplomats in the 18th and 19th centuries . The classical Greek period was a model for interstate relations between Europe and America .
 During the 5th century, the rise of two city-states—Sparta and Athens—turned the Greek independent state system into a dual hegemony .
 The Spartans played a minor role in repelling the Persian invasion of northern Greece in 490c.e.e., which ended with the spectacular Greek victory at the battle of Marathon . The Spartans were a minor part of the battle which ended in a spectacular victory .
 10 years later, the Spartans reluctantly agreed to accept the command of combined Greek forces to repel the second Persian invasion led by King Xerxes in 480c.e. i.i. The Spartans agreed to take part in the battle against the Persian invasion of 480c .
 Athens was known for its navy as well as its democratic form of government . The city-state of Athens argued for a naval confrontation with the Persian fleet . The Persian fleet was defeated at the battle of Salamis .
 The Spartan army routed the Persians at the battle of Plataea, and Xerxes’ forces retreated . Xerxes' forces retreated from the battle, and the Spartan army defeated him . The following year, Xerxes and the Persian army were defeated .
 Athens came to the fore and, hoping to prevent the Persians from launching another invasion of Greece, proposed the creation of the Delian League . Athens hoped to prevent a Persian invasion of the country .
 This alliance was composed of citystates most vulnerable to Persian pressure, including those along the west coast of Asia Minor and islands in the Aegean . It was composed principally of the city states most vulnerable .
 Athens continued to expand the size of its navy and other military forces . In order to protect these city-states and sweep the Persians out of northern Greece, Athens expanded its navy .
 The Delian League of citystates totaled some two hundred members . After a series of victories against Persian forces, the Delian league was defeated by Persian forces .
 Once the foreign threat had been neutralized, problems among the member citystates soon began to appear . But, as so often happens in alliances, problems soon started to appear.
 These states were formally autonomous political units, or polities, forced to pay tribute to Athens . Athens determined not only their foreign policies, but also important domestic policies . These states, although formally autonomous, paid tribute to the Greek city .
 The ensuing peace allowed the two hegemonic rivals to consolidate control in their respective spheres . The peace was the beginning of the Second World War .
 Thucydides took up the story in detail and discussed the specific events that led to the outbreak of the second Peloponnesian War . It was at this point, in 435c.e. i.e., that the historian discussed the events .
 The Greek international system was essentially an Athenian-Spartan dual hegemony . Other states such as Corcyra, Thebes, Argos, and Corinth also had significant capabilities that distinguished them from the vast majority of city-states .
 The final defeat of Athens in 404c.e. at first seemed to usher in a return to the independent state system . Athens defeated by 404C.i. at the end of 404c., at first .
 Sparta soon began to assert hegemony over the rest of Greece, interfering in the internal affairs of other city-states . Sparta lost the support of its former allies and lost its support of former allies .
 The Persian Empire, alarmed by Sparta’s attempts to extend its rule to citystates in Asia Minor, joined in this new alliance . Persian Empire was alarmed by this alliance and joined in .
 Persia was unable to control Greece directly . The next best thing was to support whatever anti-hegemonic coalition was formed . No single Greek city-state could threaten Persia itself .
 But their primary concern was stability on the western border of their empire . But they were also concerned about stability on their western border .
 They pushed for a negotiated peace with Sparta and later a general peace conference among all the belligerents . Hence they pushed for an agreement with the Greeks .
 The resultant international system was composed of independent states with a balance of power among them . The resultant system was made up of independent countries with power balance . The resulting system was called the International System of Power .
 The Spartans, Athenians, and Thebans maintained their respective hegemonic ambitions . The Spartans and Athenians were the most powerful statesmen .
 Several states vying for hegemonic control, but thwarted in their effort by shifting state coalitions or balances of power . This international system, therefore, can be characterized as one with several states vying to be hegemonistic .
 Later European leaders found many parallels between their condition and the classical Greek international system . It is no wonder that later European political leaders found parallels with their condition in Greece .
 The Persian Empire and the Greek system ultimately came under Macedonian imperial rule . Philip of Macedon to the north and his son, Alexander the Great, ruled both empires .
 Prior to the sixth century, ancient India drew much of its common identity from geographic isolation and the impact of Hinduism . Ancient India's identity was largely due to its geographic isolation .
 Hindu ideas represent a broad-based set of values that became deeply embedded in Indian culture . More than a religion, Hindu ideas are deeply embedded into Indian culture, says author .
 Hinduism influenced social and economic life in one of the world’s great civilizations . As such, Hinduism is a major factor in the history of Hinduism .
 Despite a common civilization, the Indian subcontinent was divided into a number of independent political units . Despite a shared civilization, however, the Indians were divided into separate political units in the Indian Subcontinent .
 Some were more powerful than others, and warfare and expansionism was common . Some of the world's most powerful men were more than others .
 There was a degree of common cultural identity and interdependence that encouraged the development of common rules and customs to guide relations among the various states . But, aided by Hinduism, there were also common cultural and inter-religious beliefs .
 Although some were ruled by elected leaders and a few were republics, most were governed by kings belonging to the second-highest kshatriya caste . They believed their primary role in life was to govern and to fight, rather than govern .
 Hindu contact with the outside world led to fundamental changes in the Indian international system of independent states . As is so often the case, however, it was Hindu contact .
 As the Persian Empire expanded eastward, it eventually conquered what is present-day Pakistan . The Persian Empire eventually conquered part of Pakistan .
 It was at this point that the concept of empire began to circulate among Indian rulers and the educated castes . The concept of empires was circulated among rulers and castes in India . It was the first time the Indian empire was considered an empire .
 Persians showed how a vast territory could be governed from an imperial center . An extensive road network could facilitate interdependence through commerce and movement of people .
 Persian influence was followed by the invasion of Alexander’s armies . Some two centuries of Persian influence were followed by Alexander's invasion of the Persian empire .
 Chandragupta Maurya managed to transform an independent Indian state system into an empire . He managed to create an independent India state system and become a powerful empire .
 Day-to-day rule of the Indian Empire was heavily infused with indigenous values and customs . Although it was similar in scope to Persia, it was heavily influenced by indigenous values .
 Maurya worked to provide an extensive treatise on the ways and means of governing . He was accompanied in his rise to power by a man of intellect who worked on how to govern .
 Chandragupta and Kautilya seized the opportunity to establish the Mauryan Empire after Alexander's death . The Mauryans established their empire after the death of Alexander in the 10th century .
 Chandragupta’s control of most of India was ruled by his son-in-law . He ruled most of the country until his death in 17th century .
 An attempt to reclaim what had been the Persian part of India was turned back in 305c.e. i.i. The attempt was made to reclaim the Persian territory of India .
 Domestic security and the neutralization of foreign threats encouraged the expansion of trade . The U.S. government says it is committed to protecting its citizens from terrorism .
 Chandragupta’s rule became heavy-handed, and not surprisingly he made enemies . He made enemies against Kautilya's advice, but his rule was heavy handed . Not surprisingly, he also made enemies with his rule .
 He became isolated and withdrawn, surrounding himself with a large personal bodyguard of armed women for protection .
 The grandson, Asoka , initially expanded the empire by brutal methods . He was known for his concern over the welfare of his subjects . Asoka became a devout Buddhist .
 The desire for independence was reasserted by elements throughout the empire . A crisis of authority ensued, and the empire eventually collapsed .
 India reverted to a series of independent warring states, the very condition Chandragupta had surmounted more than a hundred years before . India reverted back to a number of independent states .
 Rome represents the ultimate historical expression of the imperial international system . The Roman Empire is the ultimate expression of imperial international relations . Rome is the birthplace of the Roman Empire .
 Rome started out, however, as a citystate, indistinguishable from its neighbors on the Italian peninsula . Rome is now a city state, but it is still a city .
 The importance of the Roman Empire lies not in its size, but in the fact that it came to be viewed as the legitimate authority by the vast majority of its diverse communities . The Roman Empire, however, was viewed as an authority by many of its communities .
 Rome shaped current thought and practice about the state, international law, and international society . Rome shaped today's world politics, and today's international society, in Rome .
 Rome was ruled by kings in its early years, but with the development of aristocratic rule came the rise of the Senate . Executive authority resided in two consuls with executive authority in Rome .
 The lower class, or plebeians, also elected tribunes to keep watch over their interests . The tribunes were tribunes of the lower class . Plebeians were also chosen tribunes .
 As Roman rule expanded outward, so did Rome’s wealth . Rome's wealth grew as it expanded outward . The Roman empire was known for its wealth .
 Increased wealth combined with able rulers strengthened the power of the Senate .
 The senators were shrewd enough to realize that their long-term interests would suffer if they abused the newly subjected communities . The senators are shrewdly aware that they would be better off if they didn't abuse their communities .
 The Roman Empire extended Roman citizenship to certain populations via extension of Roman citizenship . Instead they bestowed upon these populations the advantages of Roman order and law, co-opting certain individuals via the extension .
 As with such earlier empires as Persia, the degree of direct rule lessened with increased distance from the imperial capital, allowing more distant communities substantial self-rule . More distant communities were able to take control of their territory .
 Rome’s interest in Sicily brought it into contact with the Phoenician trading city of Carthage . Carthage is now the capital city of Tunis located on the Mediterranean coast of present-day Tunisia .
 Rome absorbed the Carthaginian Empire . With ultimate victory in the Punic wars, Rome absorbed Carthaginians . Rome was victorious in Punic Wars .
 Rome looked to the east toward Greece and the Macedonian kingdoms . As this struggle concluded, Rome looked toward the east .
 Rome soon gained control of the region after the Greeks and Macedons were unable to form an anti-hegemonic coalition . Rome soon became the most powerful city in the world .
 Roman imperial lands were divided into provinces, ruled and taxed by Roman governors . At this point the Roman empire was ruled by governors . The provinces were ruled out by governors and ruled by the governors .
 As long as they pledged loyalty, these kingdoms were granted local autonomy, and indigenous customs were generally respected . The kingdom was given local autonomy as long as it pledged loyalty to the people .
 Roman occupation of Eastern civilizations brought values and culture back to Rome . Roman occupation was due to Roman occupation that brought values back to the city .
 The rapid expansion of the empire, however, made it difficult to control territories effectively . The central government was constrained by a weak executive authority and a small bureaucracy .
 Attempts to fill the executive vacuum were made by various military leaders who promised stability but generally brought unrest and near civil war to Rome . Attempts were made to fill this executive vacuum made by military leaders .
 Caesar Augustus was a moderate who brilliantly reorganized the empire and provided it with a respite from internal strife . Augustus was Ruthless in battle, as a ruler, he was ruthless in battle .
 Augustus allowed for the restoration of the Senate and some of its privileges and responsibilities . Augustus helped to legitimate his authority by allowing for the Senate to be restored . Augustus had ultimate power, but retained ultimate power .
 His successors helped to consolidate his basic achievement, which was to improve dramatically the governance of the empire . The British Empire was founded in 1881 .
 Periods of instability spurred the further growth of a centralized bureaucracy in Roman law . The bureaucracy helped streamline and rationalize the legal and administrative systems throughout the empire .
 Problems began to arise in the 3rd century, however, in the 2nd century . Problems were not solved until after the 3th century .
 When Roman troops in Germany were called back, the northern frontier of the empire became open to attack . Armies of the Persian Sassanid Empire invaded Roman territory .
 A series of Roman generals came to power, vowing to restore order in Rome . Not surprisingly, they did, and they were able to do so .
 Imperial authority became even more concentrated in the hands of the emperor at the expense of the Senate . Imperial authority was increased in the eyes of the senate .
 To those parts of the empire under threat from foreign armies, such a development was welcome . Such a development is welcome for those areas under threat .
 Following the death of the emperor Constantine inE. 337, the western half of the empire began to crumble . The western part of the Roman Empire began to disintegrate following Constantine's death .
 The stronger eastern half of the empire, based in Constantinople (present-day Istanbul, Turkey) remained politically, economically, and culturally vibrant for several more centuries .
 Communities missed the stability the empire had provided . Although the new rulers adopted many of the Roman administrative forms and functions .
 The beginning of the Islamic era in the 7th century led to dramatic changes in the East . The Islamic era led to the rise of Islam in the Middle Ages .
 Muhammad was inspired by Christianity, Judaism, and an abhorrence of the moral decadence of Mecca . Muhammad was the founder of Islam .
 Islam offered a comprehensive system of law and precepts for good government . Islam has influenced millions of people around the globe down to this day . Islam's teachings have influenced millions around the world .
 One of every five human beings is a Muslim . Islamic world extends from Morocco in the west to Indonesia and some of the Philippine islands in east .
 China and Japan ancient civilizations marked culturally by Confucian, Taoist, Buddhist, and in the Japanese experience, Shinto traditions that survive into the present period .
 China has had substantial influence over peoples in Korea, Japan, and those in southeast and central Asia on the borders of China’s frontier . With a written history extending over five millennia, China has influenced peoples in southeast Asia .
 The emperors of China saw themselves as presiding over the middle kingdom . The world-center toward which others always would turn .
 As in the West, empires emerged in ancient China and Japan, the imperial type of system survived into the 20th century . The imperial system survived in China, Japan and the U.S.
 Marco Polo made his famous 24-year trip to China in 1369 at about 15 years of age . Marco Polo returned to Venice just before turning 40 some 24 years later .
 Christopher Columbus thought he had discovered a passage to India . Tales of this great adventure awakened Europeans to life on the other side of the world, which contributed to enthusiasm a century later .
 The decline and fall of the Roman Empire and the resulting decentralization of authority produced a high degree of diversity in Western Europe . Medieval Europe and the Feudal System was founded in medieval Europe and spread throughout Europe .
 The final collapse of Rome in the 5th centuryE. was followed by some thousand years that came to be known by later scholars as the Middle Ages or the medieval period . The end of Rome's reign in Rome was followed with a thousand years of prosperity .
 Its end point is generally marked by the Renaissance and the Reformation of the 15th and 16th centuries .
 This period is of particular interest to students of international relations because it encompasses the period immediately prior to the onset of the current state system . The period is particularly important to students because of the period before the current system began .
 As we will see, the organization of the world into territorially based states was not an inevitable outcome of the Middle Ages; other possibilities existed . We will see that organization was not inevitable .
 Christianity offered religious-cultural frame consistent with earlier Stoic philosophical roots . Christianity offered a religious-culture frame consistent in Stoic philosophy . Christianity .
 As Rome’s empire collapsed in the following century, Christian leaders realized that they would need to develop their own sources of worldly power to support their evangelical mission . Christian leaders .
 The Church became an increasingly wealthy and privileged organization with much to lose from invasions and general chaos . Thus the Church became the Church .
 The Church continued in self-defense to strengthen its organization and centralized authority through the papacy in Rome . Even later, as more and more “barbarians” came under the influence of Christianity, the Church continued to protect itself .
 Christianity was the framework within which medieval life, private as well as public, was conducted . Despite the sometimes corrupt and hypocritical behavior of many members of the Church hierarchy, Christianity was still the framework of medieval life .
 The Church in Western Europe proclaimed the universality of its message in the sacred realm . Political power in the secular or temporal realm was greatly fragmented with a wide variety of different types of actors claiming legitimacy .
 The Holy Roman Empire, founded by Charlemagne in the early 9th century, was centered in Germany . It was not very holy, Roman, or much of an empire, compared to that of the Caesars or even that of Byzantium to the east .
 Charlemagne’s successors provided a limited secular counterweight to the growing power of the Church . Yet they were a limited . counterweight .
 Christian doctrine initially allowed for two separate but essentially equal papal and imperial powers . Christian doctrine first allowed for the papal, imperial powers to be essentially equal .
 The Holy Roman Empire effectively collapsed because of internal weaknesses and invasions by invaders . The Saracens, Magyars, and Norsemen invaded the Roman Empire .
 Constituent kingdoms still existed, but administratively they lacked efficient bureaucracies and permanent military forces . Constituents still exist, but they still lacked efficient bureaucracy and permanent forces .
 Historical International Systems 67 barons . As a result, kings often had little power over local kings . Historical barons had little influence over local governments .
 There developed a contradiction between the actual diversity of medieval institutions and the religious and philosophical emphasis on greater unity as provided by emperor or pope .
 feudalism was the preeminent form of authority that emerged earlier and became prominent by the 10th century . The power of local barons was reflected in feudalism, which became prominent in 10th Century .
 A defining characteristic of feudalism is public authority placed in private hands, says David Cameron . The government has been accused of corruption in the U.S.
 As a result of the chaos of late-9th-century Europe, public authority came to be treated as the private possession of local lords who controlled territory known as fiefs . Roman law and legions had faded from memory in the late 9th century .
 The lords held their authority at the expense of kings, who were often distant and weak . The lords were often the kings of their time .
 Courts of justice were viewed as private possession of individual lords who passed judgment as they saw fit . For example, courts of justice was viewed as a private possession by individual lords . Courts were seen as private possessions of individuals who saw fit to pass judgment .
 In sum, this privatization of public authority in the hands of local nobles was a cause and consequence of the predominance of local government over the claims of kings and the general fragmentation of political authority .
 Political authority during feudal times was claimed by a diverse collection of institutions and individuals, including local barons, bishops, kings, and popes . Political authority was claimed in feudal times by a wide range of institutions .
 For students of international politics, it is interesting to note that, depending on their status, any one of these entities could be granted or denied diplomatic status or right of embassy .
 Perhaps, even though it does not have the elegant simplicity of an international system composed of sovereign states, perhaps it does have the simple simplicity of the international system . Perhaps, perhaps, it does .
 The present-day distinction between internal and external political realms with rigid territorial demarcations, a centralized bureaucratic structure claiming to exercise public authority, would have seemed odd to the medieval mind .
 In terms of secular contributions, personal relationships were a key to diplomacy . Personal relationships were key to diplomatic success in the Middle East .
 Territorial borders were fluid, and relations between kingdoms were a function of dynastic marital connections . Relations between kings and queens were a result of marital ties .
 "One did not speak of the national interest, but rather the interest of particular rulers or dynasties," he said . "One was not speaking of national interest," he added .
 This web of dynastic interdependencies, characterized by royal mobility and a sense of common identity, was paralleled in the rising merchant or bourgeois, middle classes . The interest in commerce also made for a more cosmopolitan view of the world, the author says .
 Explain the key developments that led to the rise of the European independent state system . How it eventually became globalized as a form of international politics .
 By the 12th century, there was some reconcentration of political power in the hands of kings . You Are a Citizen of Europe?
 Invasions around Europe’s periphery ceased, allowing kings and nobles to devote more attention and resources to internal affairs and expand the size of their bureaucracies .
 Peace on the periphery also helped to account for the dramatic increase in the size of the European population . Peace in the periphery is also a major factor in Europe's population growth .
 A larger population helped to revive towns, increase the size of the artisan class, and encourage greater trade . The population increased dramatically in the early 1900s .
 With expanded economic activity, taxation reappeared . Taxation was levied against churches, towns, and nobles . It was levied in response to increased activity .
 Greater royal income encouraged the payment of troops as opposed to relying on the ‘vassalic’ contract based on mutual obligation between lord and vassal . The greater royal income allowed the payment .
 Kings began to acquire two of the key elements associated with effective rule— financial resources and coercive power . Kings began acquiring financial resources, coercive power, they say . Kings, therefore, began acquiring coercive power in order to rule .
 The 12th and 13th centuries were also an era in which major strides were made in education . Education was also made in the 12th, 13th and 14th centuries .
 It is impossible to underestimate the importance of the growth of literacy to the rise of the state . The state's literacy rate has been at the heart of the rise in recent years .
 As literacy expanded, the idea of written contracts gained currency, and ideals, norms, norms of behavior, and laws could more easily be passed from one generation to another .
 Aquinas drew inspiration from the ancient Greek writers, universities were established (Paris, Padua, Bologna, Naples, Oxford, Cambridge) Roger Bacon engaged in experimental science, Dante wrote in the language of the common person, and Giotto raised art to a higher level .
 With the rise of educated bureaucrats, states formed archives that were essential to the continuity of government . States formed archives essential to continuity of the government, says historian .
 The clash between scholars with their emphasis on reason and the Church with its claims to authority would continue through the centuries . In terms of learning, the clash between the two sides would continue .
 The growth of capitalism led to a clash between the Church’s emphasis on religious man and the emerging capitalist view of economic man . In the realm of commerce, the growth of commerce led to the clash .
 The medieval Christian attitude toward commerce was that those engaged in business should expect only a fair return for their labor efforts . Earning interest on the loan of money and even making profits on sales were considered sinful .
 Marc Bloch, Feudal Society, 2 , 421^22.22. Gradually the feudal notion that the ownership of property was conditional was replaced by a feudal notion of ownership .
 The Rise of the European Independent State System 69 on explicit social obligations was replaced by the modern notion that property is private . Property is private, to be disposed of as the individual sees fit, says the historian .
 Politically the clash between the sacred and secular realms resulted in a breakdown in the balance of power between the pope and the emperor . Politically, the clash . resulted in the breakdown of the balance . between the . balance of the power .
 This contributed to the breakup of the unity of Christendom, weakened the empire and the papacy, and hence assisted the rise of national states . This contributed . to the break-up of the . unity of the empire . and the . papacy .
 The Renaissance and the Reformation were the two most important developments during the mid-15th century . Renaissance and Reformation began in the 15th century at the beginning of the Renaissance . The Reformation was the first major Protestant reform of the Protestant faith .
 Historians say they are twin cradles of modernity . Taken together, they have been viewed by historians as the twin cradships of modernism .
 Renaissance generally associated with Western Europe’s cultural rebirth in learning, the arts, exploration and commerce . The Renaissance was an ethical and humanistic movement that also elevated the individual .
 The Reformation is closely associated with the German religious leader Martin Luther and his personal struggle for a right relationship with God . It was a religious movement that eventually undercut papal authority and any hope for a unified Christendom .
 Luther and fellow Protestant John Calvin believed that secular and religious authority should be separate . Luther and John Calvin emigrated to Geneva to escape religious persecution . Luther was a native Lrenchman who moved to Geneva from France .
 As Protestant movement spawned greater religious pluralism, national monarchies grew in strength . Religious differences among the ruling houses exacerbated political problems .
 Conflict over religion, religious authority, and the power of the Holy Roman Empire touched off civil war in 1618 in Bohemia . Civil war eventually expanded throughout Europe into what has come to be known as the Thirty Years’ War .
 The underlying cause of war was arguably the shifting balance of power among the major states . The rise of Athenian power and the fear this inspired in Sparta, says Thucydides .
 The Peace of Prague in 1635 addressed the religious problem in the empire . It provided a basis for dealing with the issue in the Peace of Westphalia, which ended in 1648 .
 The ruler of a state would determine the religion of the inhabitants of that state . The ruler would then determine the religious beliefs of those in that state.
 secular leaders of Catholic countries could ignore papacy's call for a militant counter-reformation policy . As a result, secular leaders could ignore the papacy’s call for an anti-reform policy .
 Second, a new balance of power emerged that led to the rise of Brandenburg-Prussia , Sweden, and Prance as the most powerful states in Europe .
 The chance of a secularly or temporally based empire was now as distant as the pope’s hope for the unity of Christendom under papal guidance . The chance, therefore, of a . secularly . or temporalally based . empire was no longer as far as
 The writings of Englishman Hobbes captured the essence of the modern state and the new international system of which it was a part . Hobbes' book Leviathan captured essence of modern state, whether monarchy or parliament .
 Hobbes argues that order in international relations depends upon state power and balance of power among states . As realists who draw from Hobbes argue, Hobbes argued that order is dependent on state power . Hobbes: Order in international politics depends upon balance between states and power .
 Grotius, a contemporary of Hobbes, provided a rule-based order for commerce and the conduct of war and peace . He earned himself the title “father of international law,” an honor he retains to the present day .
 If order were to be maintained within the newly emerging system of states, balance of power alone was not sufficient . Balance of power was not enough to maintain order in the new system of state, he says .
 Europe after the 1648 Peace of Westphalia is viewed as marking the birth of the modern state system and the principle of sovereign territoriality . The Peace of 1648 is seen as a key moment in history .
 The Ottoman Empire was also at its peak and threatened the security of Europe until its defeat at the battle of Vienna in 1683 . Note, however, the legacy of feudalism as exemplified by the fragmented nature of what is now unified Germany .
 European monarchs and other leaders would find security in the mutual acceptance of a set of agreed, legally binding rules to be in their enlightened selfinterest . The rise of the European Independent State System would be in its enlightened self-interest .
 English School “rationalism” rests on rules, many of which have the binding character of law, as a source of order among them . As also discussed in the previous chapter, it is this argument .
 By 1660 the territorial state was the primary political unit in Europe, so we can begin to speak of an independent state system . The territorial state became the primary unit in 1660, making it the most important state in Europe .
 The peace agreement at Westphalia in 1648 helped solidify the trend of increasing power to the modern state at the expense of the other political forms .
 Not only were rulers put in the position of determining the religion of the inhabitants of their states, but also the virtually complete authority of these princes in matters of state was recognized .
 With the realignment of territorial borders, the notion of the sovereignty of the state gradually became accepted . A new construction tied to the state was built around the idea of sovereignty .
 Sovereignty involves political authority based on the territory and autonomy of states . Sovereignty is based on territory, autonomy, and sovereignty .
 Territoriality means that there is a right claimed by states to exclusive political authority over a defined geographic space . Sometimes referred to as the internal dimension of sovereignty, it is sometimes referred to by state .
 Autonomy means that no external actor—such as another state—enjoys authority within the borders of the state . No external actor, such as another, enjoys authority within state borders . Autonomy is a form of autonomy in the country .
 Eor agreed to recognize each ruler as the final and absolute authority within his kingdom . rulers also agreed not to support internal subversion in neighboring states, stir up religious discontent, or otherwise interfere in their domestic affairs .
 Peace of Westphalia established a system that did little to curtail the drive for territorial conquests . Despite claims by princes to a right to be independent or autonomous in their foreign relations—the external dimension of sovereignty—wasn't enough .
 The relative military equality of the major states seems to have stimulated war . Many rulers thought they might be able to turn a system of independent states into an imperial system .
 Anti-hegemonic coalitions arose whenever a would-be emperor such as Louis XIV or Napoleon Bonaparte tried to conquer Europe . As a result, anti-heegemonic coalition arose whenever they tried to take over Europe .
 The balance of power, in other words, became a key aspect of the European independent state system . It is severely lacking in collective governing principles or conflict resolution norms or procedures, he says .
 Another equally important trend occurred along with the rise of the independent state system . The rise of independent state systems was also an important trend in modern times .
 Over time, people began to identify with a particular state to the point that in some countries the nation and the state merged into the concept of nation-state . In some countries, people identify with the state and the nation .
 Leaders could draw on their public’s nationalism to gain popular support for national defense and wars fought against foreign enemies . Leaders could use their public's nationalism to draw support from their public .
 Citizens provided troops for imperial conquest or national defense . Instead citizens provided the troops for conquest or defense .
 This trend further restricted movement toward the effective regulation of relations among states . This trend also limited movement toward an effective regulatory regime .
 The rise of the state and the independent state system was seen not only in the political, diplomatic, and military spheres, but also in the economic realm . It was seen in political, military, and economic spheres .
 Economic developments were critical in contributing to the ultimate victory of the state system over other contenders . Indeed, economic developments contributed to the eventual victory of state system, he says .
 The seventeenth century was the heyday of large trading companies . Eor example, the seventeenth . century . was the . heyday . of large companies .
 As these state-backed firms increased in power, private firms and trading associations declined . Private city-based firms and trade associations also declined .
 State trading companies and banks were part of the dominant economic doctrine of the 17th century known as mercantilism . The development of state trading companies was part of an economic doctrine that was dominant .
 Proponents of mercantilism preached that the state should play a major role in the economy . The state should accumulate domestic capital or treasure by running continual trade surpluses .
 This was not in pursuit of some lofty moral aim or simply for the benefit of private entrepreneurs . The ultimate objective was to provide resources that could be used for war or conquest . This was the ultimate objective .
 In the name of regulating and protecting commerce, authoritarian state bureaucracies emerged . This contrasts dramatically with the primary economic units of the late Middle Ages, the autonomous and self-regulating guilds . The guilds were self-regulated guilds in the late medieval period .
 In retrospect, all of these developments may seem to have led inexorably to the rise of independent, belligerent states, writes Andrew Hammond .
 This was certainly the view of such realists as Niccold Machiavelli and later Thomas Hobbes . The view of Hobbes was certainly certainly that of Nic cold Machiaverlli .
 There are also developments working to counteract or, or, at least, mitigate this trend . But there were also developments that could mitigate the trend .
 Hugo Grotius and other writers abandoned the medieval ideal of a world-state . They accepted the existence of the modern, secular, sovereign state . The modern state is a secular, secular state .
 They denied the absolute separateness of these states and the extreme version of international anarchy as propounded by Thomas Hobbes . But they denied the extreme versions of Hobbes' idea of anarchy .
 The idea of community or an international society of states could be applied to the modern European independent state system, they argue .
 Recognition of sovereignty’s external aspects expressed a certain degree of community . Even if not always followed, the recognition of sovereignty in international relations expressed community . The right of all states to be independent or autonomous in their international relations is a commonly accepted norm .
 Present-day scholars identify themselves with what has come to be called the English School of thought discussed in Chapter 2 . This is the same perspective as that of seeing international relations as occurring within a community or society of states .
 The Rise of the European Independent State System . 73 The Emergence of Collective Hegemony . The rise of European independent state system .
 All of the major European powers from the time of the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 to the start of the 20th century worked to delegitimize and eventually eliminate the practices of mercenaries and pirates .
 If force were to be used, armies organized by states and only states would carry it out . Only states would be able to carry out such an attack, says President Obama .
 The rise of Napoleon after the Erench Revolution that began in 1789 upset the European order . Erance moved eastward beyond its borders, invading other countries and establishing a Erench empire . Napoleon's rise was the result of the French Revolution .
 Napoleon's defeat of Napoleon was followed by the Congress of Vienna, which created a collective hegemonic system . The subsequent defeat of Napalistic Napoleon led to the Congress, creating a collective system .
 Certain rules, values, and expectations developed by the major powers influenced relations with lesser powers as well as lesser powers . Rules, values and expectations were developed by major powers .
 The major powers formed the core membership of what has been termed the Concert of Europe . The Concert of European Union was formed from the major powers .
 The early 19th-century effort by policymakers in Great Britain, Austria, Russia, Prussia, and France to create a society of states . This was an attempt to devise international rules of conduct and maintain the balance of power .
 Thucydides was interested in examining current events in order to shed light on underlying patterns of politics that transcend any particular age . His is the foremost ancient work on international relations, for example .
 The Peloponnesian War was inevitable, given the increase in Athenian military power and the fear this caused in Sparta . The war was the result of the increased military power of the Athenians .
 Thucydides is credited with being the father of what has come to be known as power transition theory . He was the founder of the theory of power transition .
 Power transition theorists see the international system as hierarchically ordered with the most powerful state dominating the rest of the system . The most powerful states dominate the rest, which are classified as satisfied or dissatisfied with the ordering of the world's system .
 Thucydides' argument has been applied to numerous cases throughout history, whether the rise of France under Louis XIV, Germany in the late 19th century and again in the 1930s, or the Soviet Union after 1945 . His explanation focused on the changing distribution of power in the Greek
 The nature of the state or society dictates militaristic actions, the author says . The author argues that the nature of society dictates the military's actions .
 Some states are statusquo powers, while others are revolutionary and seek to dominate the international system . Some states seek to be revolutionary and dominate the world's economic system .
 Revolutionary France before and during the reign of Napoleon and Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s are both examples of the nature of the state approach . Revolutionary France is an example of a state of state approach, says the historian .
 Conflicts of interest would continue, but it was hoped that disagreements also could be worked out in a pragmatic fashion . Conflicting interests would continue but it is hoped they could be resolved .
 Britain, Austria, Russia, Prussia, and France realized that nationalist and democratic sentiments could threaten all of them . In this sense their interests were broadly compatible .
 Europe, therefore, was viewed as a unique international society, not merely an international system . Europe was seen as an international society not merely a nation, but a unique society .
 Between 1830 and 1884, twenty-five meetings were held among the representatives of the major powers .
 Concert powers have a common responsibility for maintaining the Vienna settlement . Concert powers also have responsibility to maintain the Vienna agreement .
 No changes should be made that significantly disadvantage any one power or upset the balance of power in general . No changes to the law should significantly disadvantage anyone, says CNN.com.com .
 During the rest of the 19th century Europe experienced its longest period of stability since the rise of the modern state system . Despite revolutionary outbursts in a number of countries in 1848, the Crimean War of 1853-1856, and the Franco-Prussian War of 1870
 It is important to note that no single crisis or conflict in this period ever threatened to erupt into a continental war . No single crisis in the 1950s and 1960s threatened to break out into war .
 Not until 1914 with the outbreak of World War I—some ninety-nine years after the Congress of Vienna— was Europe to experience the awful consequences of a return to major or general warfare now made even more destructive .
 The collective hegemony of the great powers in the 19th century was apparent in the way they decided the fate of the smaller powers . The relatively peaceful period that resulted from the peaceful period is apparent in this case .
 The Concert sanctioned the independence of Belgium, Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro . It prevented war between Luxembourg and Belgium and between Holland and Belgium . The Concert stopped war between Belgium and Luxembourg .
 Concert powers were able to make the system work because of their flexible approach to balance-of-power politics . The Concert powers also had a common interest in European stability, the report says .
 This situation was also encouraged by the British desire to keep continental Europe divided . This is also seen as a result of Britain's desire to divide Europe .
 The European system of independent states did not confine territorial and economic competition to Europe . The Globalization of the European System is the result of the independent states' independence .
 Diplomats at Congress of Vienna attempted to rebalance power in Europe by increasing the territory of Prussia and Austria . Europe after the Napoleonic wars: Prussia, Austria .
 Note not only the expansion of the Austrian empire, but the reduction of the Ottoman Empire and consolidation of many minor German states into what would eventually become Germany . Note: The consolidation of what would become Germany was the consolidation of several minor states .
 The Spanish and Portuguese agreed to spheres of influence in 1492 . Spain and Portugal agreed to a sphere of influence following the discovery of a much larger world than previously thought .
 They treated the Americas as they treated the lands that fell under their dominion in the Iberian Peninsula as part of their kingdoms bound by their laws, administration, and Catholicism .
 The collapse of Europe's modern colonial empires began in 1947 on the Indian subcontinent with the creation of the states of Pakistan and India . Decolonization in Africa and Asia began in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Every state received independence from the 18th century (beginning with the United States) to today . You'll find a discussion of the emergence of the less-developed world, differing perspectives on decolonization .
 Winston Churchill dealt with many of the generals and admirals who dealt with him during World War 11 . This was certainly the view of many of those involved in the war .
 These professionals found his ""meddling"" in military matters to be annoying and frustrating and frustrating . The professionals found him annoying and frustrated .
 Churchill had an incredible appetite for information and wanted to know the basis upon which decisions were made . What the generals found irritating was that Churchill had a huge appetite for the information .
 He continually asked questions about military plans, excelling at pointing out unstated assumptions and questionable logic . He continually pointed out that military plans are flawed .
 He brought to the conduct of World War II a rich and detailed knowledge, however vicarious, of military history . He brought a rich knowledge of how the war was conducted .
 He echoed Clausewitz with cautions that history makes it quite clear that uncertainties were inherent in war . Faith in an unchanging blueprint for a successful war was an absurdity, he said .
 The cliche that “war is too important to be left to the generals"" is right . Point: War is not too important for the generals .
 The military is a means that can be used to achieve political ends . After all, the military is used for political ends, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 All military actions can have important strategic consequences in terms of affecting the outcome of the outcome and hence the original strategic objectives a statesman is attempting to achieve . The U.S. State of the Warringring Mideast is the author of a new book, The Warring M
 Potential practitioners of international relations do not necessarily have to have experienced military life to be able to make substantive contributions to national security and foreign policy decisions . Potential international relations practitioners should not have had military experience .
 The Dutch, French, and English believed the riches of the Americas and Asia were fair game for all . The Dutch and French believed it was fair for all to plunder the Americas .
 Few inroads were made initially in the Muslimdominated areas of the Middle East and North Africa . The Muslim-dominated areas were largely dominated by Muslims .
 The Ottoman Empire controlled approximately a quarter of Europe until the end of the 17th century . In fact, the Ottoman Empire was in control of the majority of Europe .
 In Asia direct colonial rule was initially not possible as indigenous authorities proved to be formidable representatives of advanced civilizations . Colonial rule was not possible in Asia because of the indigenous authorities .
 Europeans were allowed to establish trading posts at the behest of local rulers . The Europeans were no different from Arab and Chinese traders who sailed through the same waters .
 The Portuguese established a trading post in China in 1516 and another in Japan in the 1540s . The Portuguese, for example, established a trade post in the Chinese in the mid-1500s .
 The British and French trading companies concentrated on India . Although the initial amount of trade was minimal, the prospect for future gain was great .
 Such activities marked the beginning of European involvement with the advanced civilizations of The Rise of the European Independent State System 79 Asia as well as conflict among European states for commercial advantage .
 The pattern of dependent states in the Americas and mutually beneficial commercial operations in Asia continued until the end of the 1700s .
 European leaders continued to believe that colonies and their commodities were important sources of state power . Toward the end of the century, Britain lost North American colonies, but European leaders believed that colonies were important commodities .
 The 18th and well into the 19th century witnessed an increase in the ultimate expression of African slaves . African slaves were destined to provide backbreaking labor in the colonies of the Caribbean and North and South America .
 European rule continued to be established where indigenous authority was weak or divided . European rule was established in areas where indigenous authorities were weak or were divided .
 Britain worked hard for the independence of Latin American colonies . But in the 19th century, Britain tried to protect their independence .
 By opening up heretofore closed markets, British industry rapidly expanded, leading to dramatic gains in economic growth and wealth that could be translated into state power .
 The British navy, in conjunction with the Monroe Doctrine of the United States, discouraged the European powers from attempting to reassert control over the newly independent states of Latin America . The Monroe Doctrine discouraged European powers .
 European imperial expansion in the 19th century was directed toward the Middle East, Africa, and Asia . The European empire was centered in Africa, Asia, and the Middle Eastern world .
 As the Ottoman Empire began to weaken, both Russia and Austria saw an opportunity for imperial expansion . The Ottoman Empire, which included the Balkans and Greece, was weakened .
 A similar process of compromise was evident in the Congress of Berlin in 1884 . The major powers carved up the remaining territory of Africa, the slave trade having long since ended .
 In Asia, great-power cooperation was also evident during the collapse of the Manchu dynasty in China . Great-Power cooperation was evident in Asia, especially in China, during Manchu collapse .
 European powers, U.S. and Japan worked together in joint policing and military operations in China . The Boxer Rebellion in 1900 and attacks against foreign traders and diplomatic legations in China were the result of the attacks .
 By the early part of the 20th century, the areas of the world outside Europe and North America consisted of a variety of states with differing degrees of political, economic, and cultural dependence .
 None could avoid the influence of the emerging global capitalist economy . All took on at least some of the formal trappings of the modern state as defined by the European experience .
 This meant, at a minimum, acceptance of Western economic practices, commercial standards, and international law . This meant acceptance of the West, including international law, and economic practices . This was a minimum of acceptance .
 Locals who were hired to assist in administrative matters also were influenced by Western values .
 The elites from the colonies or dominions studied in Erance, Britain, or elsewhere in Europe, then returned to their native lands . This was especially true for those few .
 These negotiations established a new balance of power and provided for diplomatic arrangements known as the Concert of Europe among Britain, Austria, Prussia, Russia, France, and other European states .
 French power was again constrained by these formal agreements . The Bourbons were restored to the French throne and the territorial boundaries of France were drawn .
 The war was fought primarily to prevent the Russians from establishing military positions in the Crimea on the Black Sea . The Crimea is located in Crimea, Crimea, on the Crimean Peninsula .
 The dispute began with protests by France over efforts to assume the Spanish crown by a branch of the ruling Hohenzollern dynasty in Prussia . France was protesting attempts to assume Spain's Spanish throne by a family branch .
 The new regime in Russia under Vladimir Lenin quickly made peace with Germany in the Peace of Brest-Litovsk . However, western allies continued to fight until they defeated Germany in 1918 .
 The Peace of Versailles established a League of Nations for a new postwar order . It also imposed harsh terms on Germany . The peace was established for the first time since the war .
 Historians believe these terms contributed to the failure of democracy in Germany and the rise in the 1930s of nationalist revanchism that led to World War 11 . Most historians believe they contributed to failure in Germany .
 The defeat of Axis powers by the Allies was followed by three peace conferences in 1945 at Yalta in the Crimea, Potsdam just outside of Berlin, and San Francisco . The United Nations Charter was signed, laying a basis for a postwar world order .
 When World War I finally broke out in August 1914, its viciousness and degree of devastation was shocking . World War One was the most vicious and devastating war ever seen .
 Industrial Revolution had helped produce weapons of tremendous destructiveness . This was partly due partly to the Industrial Revolution, which had helped to produce weapons that were very destructive .
 The other important factor was inflamed nationalism, which spurred the development of mass armies and political-ethnic consciousness coterminous with state boundaries .
 Karl Marx’s hope that workers of the industrial world would unite to overthrow existing governments and institute an international system of peaceful socialist states was not achieved . Workers tended to identify nationally or patriotically more with their own countries than with fellow workers in other countries .
 At the end of World War I in 1918, an attempt was made to create an international organization that would prevent the outbreak of future wars . An attempt to prevent future wars was made in 1918 to create the organization .
 The key legal concept underlying the League of Nations was faith in collective security . The idea that if one state behaved aggressively, other states had a legal right to enforce international law against aggression by taking collective action to stop it .
 League of Nations hoped to institutionalize the historical phenomenon of anti-hegemonic coalitions . League of N.N. hoped it would institutionalize legal phenomenon of opposing hegemonic coalition .
 International law alone was not enough to stop Germany in Europe or Japan in the Ear East from using force in acts of aggression against other countries in their respective regions . Germany and Japan in Europe and Japan used force against each other .
 Cold War politics and ideology prevented the U.N. from playing a major security or law-enforcement role . Peacekeeping missions in places as diverse as the Mediterranean island of Cyprus and the Sinai desert are rare exceptions .
 While East and West were locked into a conflictual situation of strategic interdependence, economic, ideological, and political independence between the blocs was the norm . In the 1950s, the West and the East were more likely to be more independent than the West .
 Within the blocs, economic, social, and political interdependence dramatically expanded . In the 1950s, the relationship between the two blocs became stronger and stronger .
 A political disjuncture was occurring between the so-called Eirst World of the West and the newly emerging states and developing societies of the Third World . A disjunct, however, was occurring in the West, writes David Frum .
 The victorious allies had fought Germany, Japan, and Italy in the name of freedom and independence . The victorious Allies had fought Japan, Italy, Germany, Italy and Italy .
 In some cases, such as the British in India, Palestine, and Yemen, the colonial power grudgingly disengaged .
 In other cases, particularly the French in Vietnam and Algeria, insurgencies came to power violently and eliminated direct foreign rule . In some cases, the French were overthrown by insurgents in Vietnam, Algeria and Algeria .
 It could be argued it began in 1939 when two dictators agreed to divide Poland . Joseph Stalin of the Soviet Union and Adolf Hitler of Germany agreed to split Poland .
 Stalin hoped to influence events in Eastern Europe and Germany . Beyond that, Stalin hoped that he could influence events such as events in the region .
 With the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, the Soviets joined the Western alliance in the battle against fascist Germany, Italy, and Japan . The Soviet Union was invaded by the Germans in 1941 .
 Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill met at Yalta Conference to discuss postwar future of Europe . Stalin, Churchill, Roosevelt, Churchill met to discuss post-war Europe . Roosevelt, Winston Churchill and Stalin met at the conference in Russia in 1945 .
 The Soviet Union had suffered more than twenty million dead and vast destruction of property as well . More than 20 million people were killed in the Soviet Union during the war .
 Stalin argued Eastern Europe should fall within Moscow’s sphere of influence . It was not surprising, therefore, that Stalin argued that it should be within Russia's sphere of power .
 The U.S. response was to be a policy of global containment of the Soviet Union specifically and communism in general . The United States responded to the threat of communism in Russia and the West .
 The U.S.-sponsored Marshall Plan, designed to revive economically war-torn Europe, was viewed with suspicion by Stalin . The Marshall Plan was viewed by Stalin with suspicion . The plan was intended to revive economic and political stability in Europe .
 An ominous sign was the creation of the Communist Information Bureau in September 1947 . The bureau was created by the Communist Party in 1947 .
 At its inaugural meeting, a close aide to Stalin announced to the assembled delegates that Europe and the world were divided into two hostile camps, capitalist and communist . At its first meeting, Stalin's aide said that Europe, the world, and Europe, were divided between capitalist and Communist camps .
 In February 1948 the Czech government was overthrown, and soon after the Soviets began harassment of western trains into Berlin . Soon after, the Soviets also began harassing western trains in Berlin .
 By midJune the blockade of the three western sectors of Berlin had begun . The blockade of Berlin's western sectors began .
 Road and rail access across East Germany was denied to the Western allies . Western allies were denied access to East Germany by the West .
 The blockade was broken only by a dramatic eleven-month airlift resupply effort . The blockade only lasted eleven months .
 The West believed it could not work out a deal with the Soviets on a unified Germany . The West proceeded in its preparations for a West German government and the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949 .
 North Korean communist regime invaded South Korea in June 1950 . North Korea invaded the Korean peninsula in 1950 . South Korea was invaded by the North Korea communist regime .
 The invasion galvanized the United States and led to a dramatic increase in the defense budget . The decision was also influenced by the Soviet Union’s successful test of an atomic bomb in 1949 .
 In September 1950 the administration of President Harry Truman adopted a new national security document, NSC 68 . The document laid out the U.S. view of its Soviet adversary throughout the Cold War .
 The Soviet Union, it was stated, aimed at nothing less than the destruction of the free world . It was stated that the Soviet Union wanted to destroy the world's free world.
 Western capitals discussed the danger of a major East-West war in 1950s . The Chinese intervention in the Korean War in November 1950 only reinforced this view .
 The prescription in NSC 68 for the West to match the Soviet Union in conventional arms in Europe was never implemented in large part because of the enormous cost of doing so, particularly with a war on in Korea .
 The U.S. relied more on nuclear weapons to balance the conventional and nuclear forces of the Soviet Union and its Eastern European satellite countries . The Eisenhower administration was following doctrine articulated by the Eisenhower administration . The United States and its NATO allies relied on more nuclear weapons than conventional forces .
 With the death of Stalin in 1953, there was cautious hope that a new Soviet leadership would be more accommodating in trying to settle East-West differences . In 1953, the Soviet leadership was more accommodating .
 A summit meeting in Geneva in 1955 left political leaders and outsiders with the feeling that although the Cold War would continue in Europe and Asia, it would not turn into a ‘hot’ or shooting war .
 Even as the summit was taking place, a Soviet ship was unloading Czech-manufactured weapons in Egypt, marking the expansion of the Cold War into other areas of the developing world .
 Europe in general, Germany in particular, remained deeply divided between East and West throughout the remaining decades of the Cold War . Germany was deeply divided by East and west throughout the remainder of the decades .
 Soviet support for national liberation movements in the less-developed world was matched by United States support for pro-Western regimes . U.S. attempts were made to overthrow a number of nationalist and pro-Soviet leaders in these countries .
 The most dangerous crisis, however, focused on Cuba during thirteen days in October 1962 . The crisis occurred during 13 days in Cuba during October 1962.
 President Kennedy learned the Soviets were constructing sites for nuclear-armed, intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Eidel Castro’s Cuba . Kennedy learned that the Soviets had built sites for such missiles in Cuba .
 The president and his key advisers at the time saw Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev’s actions as an intolerable provocation . The president saw the actions as intolerable provocation.
 The Peloponnesian War pitted two city-states —Athens and Sparta—and their respective alliances against each other . Sparta and Athens were victorious in the war . Athens and Athens fought each other in the Pelopannesian Wars .
 Sparta's ally, Syracuse, defeats the Athenian fleet in the Battle of Syracuse . The battle took place in the harbor at Syracuse, Sicily, on the island of Sicily .
 The key political-military decision was to establish a naval blockade of Cuba as opposed to launching an invasion or air strikes on the missile batteries . The decision was made to establish the naval blockade rather than launch an invasion .
 A second major crisis occurred in 1973 during the Arab-Israeli War when Moscow raised the possibility of armed intervention in the conflict . Moscow also raised the issue of possible intervention in Israel .
 The United States responded quickly by putting its nuclear forces on alert, signaling its resolve to oppose any such action . The U.S. responded quickly to the threat of a nuclear attack .
 After the Cuban missile crisis passed, the two superpowers did agree in 1963 on two important arms control agreements . One a test ban on nuclear tests in the atmosphere or oceans and the other a hotline between Washington and Moscow to allow leaders in the two capitals to talk directly .
 The two sides continued their strategic nuclear arms buildup that further strained East-West relations . At the same time, however, the U.S. continued its strategic nuclear weapons buildup .
 Armed intervention by the U.S. and support for the South Vietnamese government escalated dramatically in 1965 and 1966 . Soviet aid to North Vietnam and its communist allies in the South was also countered by Soviet aid .
 The Chinese-Soviet split was apparent in the early 1960s, leading ultimately to armed clashes along the Sino-Soviet border in 1969 . Another major development in the 1960s was the Chinese-Russian split, leading to clashes in China .
 Henry Kissinger’s secret trip to Beijing in July 1971 opened the way for the U.S. to play the so-called China card . Kissinger's trip to China in 1971 helped open the door for China to be used in the 1970s and '80s . Henry Kissinger
 President Nixon made a formal visit in February 1972 and the Shanghai Communique signed there set in motion a path to normalization of diplomatic relations between the two countries . Diplomatic relations continued in President Ford’s administration, and were completed in 1979 .
 The 1971 SinoUnited States summit and other factors persuaded Feonid Brezhnev and the Soviet leadership that a relaxation of tensions with the West was a viable option . The 1971 U.S. and Soviet leaders agreed to relax tensions and detente .
 The first set of Strategic Arms Fimitation Talks resulted in arms control agreements signed in Moscow by Nixon and Brezhnev in May 1972 . The first round of talks was held in Moscow in 1972 .
 Further progress in arms control was made by the subsequent administrations of Presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter and their Soviet counterparts .
 Detente suffered a major setback with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in late 1979 . Detente has been in place since 1979 .
 This event and the inability of the United States to do very much about it aided the election of Ronald Reagan . Reagan continued and expanded substantially the massive U.S. military buildup begun under his predecessor .
 The imposition of martial law in Poland, designed to squash a reformist labor movement, further soured EastWest relations . The imposed martial law was intended to squash the reformist movement .
 Soviet experience in Afghanistan resulted over several years in enormous human and material losses, proving to be a disaster . The Soviet experience was a disaster for the country .
 Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the Kremlin in March 1985, at a time when it was obvious to all that the Soviet economy was failing . This was one of the reasons for Gorbias' decision to come to power .
 Some theorists argue that the replacement of a multipolar world with a bipolar structure of power after World War II contributed to international system stability . The supposed advantage of a bipolar distribution of power over multipolarity is that the responsibility for maintaining the system is concentrated .
 Calculations between two principal competitors are also simpler than in a multipolar balance when the calculations and interactions of several states are at issue . Calculations are simpler between two main competitors .
 A superpower can even tolerate an occasional defection from an alliance because the overall distribution of power would not be affected dramatically . A superpower would even tolerate such a defection because of the size of power it has .
 Once nuclear weapons were available to both the Soviet Union and the U.S., neither side was willing to run the risks required to achieve its objectives by force .
 The consequences of a nuclear war could easily be imagined by leaders on both sides . Leaders were self-deterred from using their nuclear arsenals . This is why they chose not to use nuclear weapons .
 Obsolescence of major war deterred the outbreak of a Third World War . War was the first major war to break out of existence of major wars .
 This view argues that the two previous explanations are essentially irrelevant to explaining the long peace . It argues that previous explanations of the peace were essentially irrelevant . This view is based on the fact that the peace has lasted for centuries .
 The long peace after 1945 would have ensued even if nuclear weapons had never existed . This war simply confirmed the catastrophic results of war in the industrial age, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Given the cataclysmic effects of two world wars that took place within just three decades in the first half of the 20th century, national authorities finally had learned to avoid stumbling yet again into general war .
 Make an argument that these three competing explanations are actually complementary . Make a claim that these competing explanations actually complement each other .
 The Soviet Union found matching American efforts to expand its conventional and nuclear arsenals extraordinarily expensive . Lacking an economic base comparable to that of the United States, the U.S. found it difficult to match American efforts .
 The United States during the early years of the Reagan administration was better able to afford outspending the Soviets on defense . But doing so contributed to trebling the U.S. national debt during the twelve Reagan-Bush years .
 Soviet spending sustained at high levels in the 1970s and 1980s had had adverse effects on the country’s economy with a disproportionate share of GDP allocated to defense . In the 1980s and 1990s, Soviet spending had had an adverse effect on the economy . In any event,
 Economists estimated about a third of Russian GDP had been spent on defense . As much as 50 percent of Russia's GDP was spent in Ukraine, experts said .
 If true, it is no wonder that the economy collapsed, precipitating the demise of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War . Russia's economy collapsed after the collapse of Soviet Union .
 Gorbachev's shifts in domestic and foreign policy set in motion events that ultimately led to the collapse of the Soviet empire and the end of the Cold War . The former Soviet leader's shift in policy was not expected to lead to a collapse in the Soviet Union .
 Arms control efforts begun in 1981 at the outset of the Reagan-Bush administrations became more successful from the mid-1980s onward . The Soviet leadership under Gorbachev agreed to eliminate shortand intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe .
 The Clinton administration continued to pursue arms control with the Russian Federation throughout the 1990s . Clinton administration pursued arms control efforts with Russia .
 President George W Bush’s administration abrogated the earlier Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which it deemed obsolete . The Bush administration did not pursue arms control with the same priority given it by previous administrations .
 The Barack Obama administration has been somewhat reserved in advancing arms control agendas . A follow-on strategic arms reductions treaty with Russia will reduce strategic nuclear weapons on both sides to just under 90 percent of Cold War levels .
 You’ll be surprised at the number of institutes, conferences, research projects, and books devoted to this topic .
 Speculation began after the fall of the Soviet Union and the end of the bipolar world in 1991 . Speculation on which states would challenge the U.S. as the sole superpower began immediately .
 Many argue that the relative power position and thus influence of the United States is gradually eroding . Athough there are dissenters, many argue that U.S. power position is gradually diminishing .
 It is not so much that the country is losing its absolute amount of socalled hard power, but rather that other countries are rising in comparison . The country is not losing absolute amounts of hard power .
 The European Union has become more integrated in an economic and monetary union with its own currency, the euro . The euro is used by most EU members in lieu of national currencies . The EU has become a more integrated economic, monetary union .
 The aggregate size of the United States economy and that of the EU taken as a whole are both over $14 trillion . The U.S. economy and the EU's combined size is over $15 trillion .
 European concern voiced in the 1980s and afterward that in order to compete globally Europe would have to come together, realized economies of scale and free movement of resources, capital, and labor enjoyed in the U.S. economy . An important motive for this deeper level of economic integration is this
 Estimates hold that these four countries by 2020 will account for a third of the global economy . They will be the locations of a continually expanding middle class . We will briefly examine each in reverse order .
 We will first make the case for their increase in power and then note limitations to this line of argument . We also note limitations of this argument .
 The conceptual framework is what has come to be known as Thucydides’ power transition theory . This is the conceptual framework of Thucedides' power transition .
 BRIC refers to Brazil, Russia, India, and China as rising economic political powers . China is one country that figures prominently in speculation of what international relations and world politics will look like in the next few years .
 Despite unprecedented access to China in the past three decades by scholars, businesspeople, journalists, diplomats, and tourists, the country conjures up many different and conflicting images .
 China is epitomized by its economic miracle and skyscrapers of Shanghai, the spread of cell phones, and dusty construction sites . Eor some, China's economic miracle epitomizes its economic success .
 Others point to the suppression of pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in 1989 and the continual repression of dissidents as evidence of the real China .
 The diversity and complexity of this giant country provide evidence to support almost any point of view, CNN.com reports . The diversity of the country provides evidence to back almost any view of the U.S.
 The United States and its allies in East Asia, Japan, and South Korea, are wary of China’s military modernization . The U.S. and allies in Japan, South Korea and Southeast Asian states are also wary .
 This modernization includes the building of several aircraft carriers, modern submarines, and new destroyers . The U.S. Navy has been criticized for its lack of modernization .
 Carriers in particular are usually viewed as expressing the goal of creating a ‘blue water navy,” meaning the ability to project power far from one’s shoreline . Carriers are seen as expressing a desire to create a blue water navy .
 China has dramatically expanded its land-based ballistic and cruise missile capabilities . China also has expanded its missile and missile capabilities in recent years . The country has also expanded its range of land and cruise missiles .
 Over a thousand short-range missiles are aimed at Taiwan, the independent island country off the coast of the Chinese mainland . Beijing has claimed since 1949 that Taiwan is a part of its People’s Republic .
 China’s submarines, missiles, and anti-ship cruise missiles could threaten U.S. aircraft-carrier battle groups operating in the East Asian area . China's submarines could threaten United States aircraft carrier battle groups .
 China’s military has worked assiduously to improve its capabilities to act as one integrated force . At the same time, it allegedly has taken a major role in cyber espionage in an attempt to gain Western technological and military secrets .
 The United States military has stated publicly that China has the greatest potential to compete militarily with the United States on a global scale . The U.S. military has said that China is capable of competing militarily in a global war .
 Critics say China spends less than half the U.S. military budget on military defense . Critics say that as a share of gross domestic product, China spends far less on military budgets .
 A Special Report on China’s Place in the World,” The Economist, December 4, 2010, 9.9.10 .
 Painting China as an inevitable adversary will lead the U.S. to pursue militant policies likely to produce that outcome . Painting China is a self-fulfilling policy, says John Avlon, a former CIA operative .
 There are mixed feelings concerning China’s spectacular economic growth over recent years . There are also mixed feelings about the Chinese economy .
 China is now the world’s second largest economy and perhaps the most dynamic . As a result of its continual double-digit annual growth, China has become the world's second largest .
 China will have to grow to far more than parity in aggregate economic size with the U.S. to approach, much less match, its per capita national income and wealth . China's economic growth will be far more difficult than parity with the United States to match .
 Instead of seeing China’s economic growth as a threat to the United States, an alternative take is that China can now play a greater role to promote the domestic and regional stability that is clearly in the country's economic and security interests . The U.S. should not see China
 Observers give major credit to the Chinese government for its investment in state-owned industries . China's economic infrastructure includes roads and bridges to power plants and dams .
 It has pursued an astonishing number of economic deals in Africa and South America to secure long-term access to natural resources . It also has facilitated the acquisition of foreign intellectual property .
 China has developed a thriving entrepreneurial class that exists outside the powerful state-controlled companies . But China has also developed an entrepreneurial class outside state-run companies .
 There is uneasiness in North America and Europe over the vast pool of Chinese savings that is today largely invested in these countries’ government bonds . China's savings are today largely in the form of government bonds in the U.S.
 Many businesspeople in the West see China simply as a vast market, its huge population potential customers for a wide variety of consumer goods . Such capital could be used to buy foreign companies, but this uneasiness is tempered by the fact many businesspeople see China's vast market as a
 International businesses, the United States, the European Union, and other advanced industrial countries lobbied for China’s admittance to the World Trade Organization . China finally joined the WTO in 2001, which finally occurred in 2001 .
 Congress granted permanent normal trading relations status to China in May 2000 . Bipartisan U.S. political support had already resulted in Congress granting normal trade relations status .
 Both China and its trading partners, it was claimed, would benefit in economic terms from the tariff-reduction and market-widening proposals . But so would purchasers of Chinese products in other countries, they said .
 China no longer is the self-isolated Middle Kingdom, but rather a vested partner in a stable global economic system . There was also an important political argument as well as the importance of being brought into the global trading system as well . China is now an important partner in the global economic
 This follows the logic of economic liberalism and arguments for the pacifying effects of economic globalization, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "This is not the answer to the question: What do you think of the future of global capitalism?"
 Many in the West hope that economic development will lead to a transition from authoritarianism to a regime in Beijing more supportive of human rights . Although not all are so optimistic, some are not so optimistic . The West hopes that China will eventually become a more tolerant regime .
 Trade with foreigners will add needed pressure for the further development of the rule of law, observers say . To these observers more optimistic about prospects for liberalization in China, trade with foreigners is needed .
 Supporters of PNTR status for China have managed to combine economic self-interest with claims of being supportive of human and political rights in China . China's human rights record has been described as one of the worst in the world .
 Some realist critics dismiss the economic liberalism argument as historically unfounded and empirically incorrect . Realist critics say the argument is based on economic liberalism, not economic liberalism .
 In an anarchic world fear will be ever-present, and hence so will the possibility of war . The simple proposition that the benefits of Rising Powers 91 economic exchange make war too costly to pursue seems intuitively plausible .
 Trade with China has resulted in enormous deficits paid for with dollars and other currencies held by the Chinese central bank at levels well in excess of reserve requirements . China's central bank reserves are held at well over the reserve requirements, analysts say .
 Trade with China has made the U.S. dependent on Chinese willingness to buy American and other countries’ bonds, in effect, loans by China . To realists, trade with China makes the United States dependent on buying American and others’s bonds . China is a major
 Such vulnerability to possible shifts in China’s policy is what realists seek to avoid . Realists want to avoid such vulnerability to shifts in policy shifts .
 Other critics argue that in the pursuit of trade benefits the world is too willing to overlook China’s human rights abuses .
 By granting PNTR and admitting China to the World Trade Organization, advanced industrial states were, in effect, placing their seal of approval on the regime . The World Trade Organisation has admitted China to its membership .
 The single biggest challenge for the current Chinese leadership is the need to deliver continual economic growth or risk political turmoil . What most observers would probably agree on, however, is that the single challenge is delivering continuous economic growth .
 The economic reforms that began in the late 1970s generated catch-up growth . The gains from disbanding agricultural communes and the resultant influx of cheap labor to low-end manufacturing firms made for double-digit growth .
 Agricultural productivity has reached its limits due to a severe shortage of water in some areas . Growth rates in the manufacturing sector have slowed and agricultural productivity has hit its limits .
 The gap in the standard or level of living between the city and the countryside remains a serious problem, as is the growth in corruption and widespread environmental degradation . The gap between living and living in the countryside is a major problem .
 The Chinese government may well find that domestic challenges will preoccupy their attention and temper any possible shift to a more aggressive foreign and national security policy . China's economic, social, as well as political challenges are likely to be preoccupying them .
 With over 1. billion persons, India ranks only behind China in terms of population and work force . India is the world’s largest democracy with over 1 billion persons .
 In the late 1980s its economy was as large as China’s, but the latter soared ahead due to the introduction of economic reforms and the availability of capital from direct foreign investment .
 In recent years India’s own economic prospects have dramatically expanded since market reforms were instituted beginning in the early 1990s . In the 1990s, India's economic prospects dramatically expanded .
 India's economic future is even brighter than China's as it has a younger working-age population and a critical mass of English-speaking workers . Furthermore, in some ways India’s economic future will be even brighter .
 As a result it is on track to pass Japan to become the world’s third largest economic power .
 India has become a major player in high-tech industries, pharmaceuticals, and biotechnology . Once known to foreigners as essentially the location of call centers, India is now a major industry player . The country is known as one of the world's largest call centers .
 India is not viewed by powers outside South Asia as a political or military threat . Despite apparent economic and demographic similarities to China, India is seen as not viewed as a threat .
 Despite the fact India detonated nuclear test devices in 1974 and 1998, the U.S. decided to assist India in its development of its domestic nuclear power program . India placed the program under IAEA safeguards and inspections .
 India is the only country with nuclear weapons that is not a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . India can engage in international nuclear commerce with the U.S. and others . This agreement is unique in that India is not signatory .
 India's 1998 nuclear test spurred India’s next door neighbor and rival, Pakistan, also to seek a nuclear device . The 1998 test spurred Pakistan to seek its own nuclear device, which was tested in Pakistan .
 The resultant tense situation is a major potential flashpoint in world politics . The situation is the result of a tense situation in the world .
 The two rivals have fought three conventional wars and numerous border skirmishes since the breakup of British colonial India and the creation of India and Pakistan in 1947 . Pakistan and India have fought each other since 1947 . The two nations have fought several wars and skirmishes .
 The Kashmir region along the northwest India-Pakistan border, which dates back to 1947, could once again spark a military confrontation . Both states would have nuclear weapons at their disposal . The ongoing dispute over the Kashmir region is likely to spark another military conflict .
 Fear lest conflicts ever escalate to the nuclear level, which would be so devastating for both sides, has induced some degree of caution in relations between the two countries . On the other hand, fear must be raised to the level of nuclear level .
 There has long been a dispute between the two countries over areas along the Indian and Tibetan border . There has been a long-standing dispute between India and Tibetan Tibet .
 In 1962, a shooting war broke out in which some three thousand Indian troops were killed . Some 3,000 Indian troops died in the conflict .
 China has blocked India’s attempt to get a permanent seat on the U.N. Security Council . India has been trying to get permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council for years .
 China also has close relations with Pakistan in a classic example of balance-of-power politics . The enemy of my enemy can be my ally. China has close ties with Pakistan .
 Despite India’s booming economy and the resultant growing confidence on the international scene, it still is faced with a number of significant domestic challenges . Despite India's booming economy, there are still many domestic challenges to overcome .
 Although generally known as a Hindu nation, it is in fact the second largest state in terms of the number of Muslims in the country .
 Tens of millions of its citizens struggle to maintain the most basic level of living . The country is home to the poorest in the world .
 Within India, there is a tremendous literacy and digital divide between those who have these skills and electronic access and those who do not . Despite its international reputation as a center for IT innovation, within India there exists a huge digital divide . Despite India's international reputation, there has been a tremendous
 Russia has an impressive imperial past whether under the czars or the Communists . Russia is the core of the former Soviet Union . Russia's imperial past is reflected in the history of the country's imperial history .
 It is the largest country in the world in terms of land mass . It spans nine time zones from East Asia to Europe . It is also the largest time zone in North America .
 In the decade following the collapse of the Soviet Union and the independence of constituent republics and former satellite states in Eastern Europe, Russia entered a troubled decade . Russia's relations with the West have been deeply troubled since the fall of the USSR .
 The privatization of state agencies to well-connected individuals led to a flight of capital to foreign countries and widespread corruption . The privatization led to the flight of state capital to abroad, widespread corruption, officials say .
 Steep economic decline was accompanied by dramatic increases in crime, crime and overall declining health conditions as well as further environmental degradation . Steep decline is accompanied by social problems such as crime and declining health .
 Rising Powers 93 is a nationalist backlash against the U.S. and the West . Rising powers 93 was formed in the wake of the West’s unchallenged role as a superpower . It is the first time the West has seen a backlash against its unchrenged role in
 Vladimir Putin was elected president of Russia in 2000 . He has been in power since then since then . Putin was the first president of the country to be elected in a presidential election .
 High oil prices and increased domestic consumer demand contributed to a decade of improved level of living . President Obama's presidency began at a time when high oil prices were high .
 Putin inherited the problem of restive ethnic movements in the Northern Caucasus in such regions as Chechnya where a brutal war broke out between separatists and security forces .
 The heavy-handed military approach led to international condemnation over human rights . Putin replied Russia was merely engaged in its own war against Islamist extremism . Russia is engaged in a war against Islamic extremism .
 Russia contains the world’s largest reserves of natural gas, is eighth in oil, second in coal, and also contains a treasure trove of minerals . The single most important factor that has fueled Russia's economic resurgence and designation as a rising power is its natural gas reserves .
 Russian financial reserves have increased from $3 billion in 1991 to $430 billion in 2009 . Russian financial reserve reserves have risen from $300 billion to more than $1 billion in 2007 .
 Russia in recent years has reasserted its claim as a major international player . Russia's interests and views on any number of international issues must be taken into account .
 Putin, even in his postpresidential period, has been unapologetic about this . Putin has a long history of anti-Western sentiment in Russia .
 His confidence made him popular among Russians of many different backgrounds and classes . Recent years have witnessed a reduction in political freedoms and increasing recentralization of power in Putin’s United Russia party .
 In the last several years, some of the steam has gone out of the Russia economic engine . Russia's economic growth has been slow in recent years, but it has been steady in the past decade .
 The country was particularly hard-hit by the global financial crisis that began in 2008 . The country has been hit hard by the 2008 global financial collapse .
 What this means in terms of Russia’s foreign policy and national security objectives remains to be seen . It is not clear what this means for Russia's foreign policy .
 A resurgent Russia is reassuming a prominent role in Eurasian and global politics, says Vladimir Putin . Russia is "reclaiming a significant role" in Russia's role in the world, says Putin .
 In May of 2010, Brazil and Turkey surprised the world by announcing a diplomatic mission to break the stalemate between Iran and the West over Iran’s nuclear research and development program . Brazil, Turkey and Turkey have been involved in the talks .
 This foray into international diplomacy was not well received by the U.S. and its European allies . But it represents the growing confidence Brazil has in terms of its place and role in the world . Brazil voted against a UN resolution to tighten sanctions against Iran's nuclear program .
 At a time when the U.S. was dealing with Iran, North Korea, wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, Brazil believed it had something to offer as a truly international and not simply regional player . Brazil is now a nation of more than 1,000 people .
 Originally a Portuguese colony and hence the only country in South America where the official language is Portuguese, it is the world’s fifth largest country in both land mass and population . The country is the only nation in the world to have a Portuguese language .
 Economically Brazil is eighth in the world in terms of GDP, but the economic trend lines are moving upward . Brazil is the world's eighth-largest economy, according to the World Bank .
 South America is the largest economy in South America and has a booming agricultural sector . It is also home to the largest agricultural sector in the world .
 Trade is the centerpiece of China's foreign policy, and in 2008 it passed China in an index measuring emerging markets . Trade is a key component of its foreign policy . In 2008, China passed an index of emerging markets in the world .
 Brazil’s upper and middle classes continue to expand, resulting in a consumption boom that helps keep the economy moving forward . Investment from China and India is significant, and investment from Brazil is significant .
 The gap between rich and poor has shrunk in recent years more than in any other South American country . The gap has shrunk more than any other country in South America .
 Brazilians took great pride in Rio de Janeiro being awarded the 2016 Olympic Games . Chicago beat out, among other cities, Chicago to win the Games .
 Brazil is represented not only in the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris, but also in the Group of 20 that claims to represent the interests of less-developed countries . Brazil is a major part of the Organization for Economic Cooperation in Paris and the Group 20 .
 There is still a great deal of poverty and crime, particularly involving violent gangs in the slums of Rio . Such pride is tempered by the reality that there are still great problems in Rio .
 The country has a history of political volatility and short tenure of democratic rule . The country is known for its political volatility .
 Unlike China and Russia it is a full-blooded democracy; unlike India it has no serious disputes with its neighbors . Unlike India and Russia, unlike India, it is not a serious dispute with neighbors .
 The web of international organizations helped stabilize at least the economic world order in the aftermath of the most devastating war in history . While the basic motivation might have been the self-interest of the United States, the resulting web of organizations helped stabilise the world .
 As realists claim, international order historically has been a function of the distribution of power among major states . Realists claim that power distribution among major powers has been the source of international order .
 With the rise of the BRICs, it is not clear that the United States will be able to play a similar dominant role . The United States is not likely to be as dominant in the world as it is in the future .
 This might, as we will discuss in subsequent chapters, open the door for an enhanced role for multilateral institutions such as the Group of 20, the U.N. and its affiliated organizations . The creation of issue-specific international regimes is essential to 21st-century global governance arrangements
 The so-called “Wise Men” faced with a range of interrelated challenges . The challenges included containment of Soviet power and influence and the political and economic rehabilitation of Western Europe .
 All were well read in history and aware of the challenges faced by their predecessors in earlier times when the international power structure had been 'A Land of Promise'
 Thucydides’ pessimistic analysis of the implications of a rising power challenging a dominant state . None of the writers were strangers to the pessimistic analysis .
 These statesmen would have been well acquainted with the reasons for devoting this toolbox chapter to a discussion of historical international systems, such as international relations .
 It is hard to discern what may be unique about the current global system, unless we know what it has in common with earlier international systems . It's hard to see what may have been unique to the current system .
 The history of constant competition and conflict among diverse political entities should make us cautious about expecting global peace and harmony to break out any time soon .
 It is shortsighted to assume the planet’s future must necessarily replay the past, says the author . On the other hand, we have noted how international systems come and go, and it's shortsighted .
 A look into the past also teaches us that other peoples have experienced dramatic changes in the international systems of their day . A look at the history of the world has taught us that such changes have been made in the past .
 They looked to the future with a mixture of consternation and hope . They, too, no doubt looked to future with mixture of hope and hope. They also looked at the future of the future .
 Historical analogies and comparisons have their place, but there is always the danger of applying inappropriate historical comparisons to the current international 'am^rnypoifecnab^com environment .
 As noted at the outset of this chapter, rarely are circumstances exactly the same and hence it is dangerous to assume that the “lessons of history” are always clear-cut .
 A discussion of historical international systems reveals the conceptual contribution of a number of historians and scholars beginning with Thucydides . The discussion of international systems begins with a discussion of the contributions of ThucyDides .
 This chapter offered the would-be practitioner a conceptual and theoretical understanding of international relations in world politics beyond historical facts and figures .
 To think historically and conceptually is to be prepared better to anticipate future international developments such as challenges to integration in the EU alongside the current rise of China, India, Brazil, and a resurgent Russia .
 By placing historical overview in the framework of the rise, fall, and evolution of various types of international systems, we encourage the reader to think conceptually. By placing our historical overview . in the context of the . rise and fall of international . systems, the . reader will be able
 In the following chapters, we continue to introduce different concepts associated with globalization, international relations, and world politics, but they all start with an appreciation of the historical roots of many of the challenges facing us today .
 Compare and contrast the four types of international systems we identityindependent, hegemonic, imperial, feudal . Explains the benefits of applying this conceptual understanding to the history of international relations .
 International systems are limited in geographic scope compared to the globai system . As the term impiies, as the term 'impiies' is impiied, the term "impius" is used to refer to an impiius system .
 An international system is defined as an aggregation of diverse entities linked by reguiar interaction that sets them apart from other systems . International systems are defined as aggregated systems linked by interaction .
 If we were to recommend a single book on historical international systems and how to define them, it would be this work . This work would be the work on how we define international systems .
 The examination of select historical International systems utilizing the concept of system allows for the ability to compare and contrast how political authority was organized in different times and geographic regions . This examination of historical systems will examine how political authorities were organized .
 The Persian, Roman, and late Indian empires all controlled what were at the time vast geographic spaces . The Roman, Persian, and Indian empires ruled vast geographic regions .
 The classical Greece independent state system evolved into a hegemonic system dominated by Athens and Sparta . Persuasion and cooperation versus coercion was the preferred method of political control .
 Costly and recurrent wars weakened both states and made them susceptible to the rule of Macedonia . Costly wars ended up weakening both states, making them vulnerable .
 A focus on different historical empires including ones discussed in this chapter . The focus of this chapter is on the Roman Empire of Rome .
 This book offers a combination of history, IR theory, and normative considerations . It offers an excellent combination of both history and IR theory . The book is available in the U.S.
 An in-depth discussion of the Greek international system is particularly noteworthy . The discussion was particularly noteworthy in the book .
 Explain the key developments that led to the rise of the European independent state system . Explain how it eventually became globalized as a form of international politics .
 The 12th century witnessed the beginning of the gradual reconcentration of political power in the hands of the kings .
 Relative peace, larger populations, expanded economic activity, and an increase in literacy among the upper classes all contributed to the rise of the state . Relative peace and increased economic activity contributed to state's rise .
 With the Peace of Westphalia the concept of sovereignty began to take hold and contributed to the idea of the nation-state as the focus of loyalty . With the peace of peace in Germany, sovereignty was created .
 The rise of Napoleon in France upset the European political and military balance . His defeat was followed by the Congress of Vienna, which created a collective hegemony of the major states . Napoleon's defeat in France followed by his defeat in Austria .
 This European system of states spread to areas outside Europe in the form of colonies . The European system was created in the 1930s and 1940s . The colonies were colonies of European states .
 A very disturbing yet engrossing examination of the impact of colonialism in Africa, in this case the Belgian Congo . The film is based on the work of Belgian colonial colonialists .
 Evaluate the relative success and failure of attempts by states to develop collective security arrangements . Evaluate and explain the relative . success of attempts to . develop collective . security arrangements. Evaluate . and explain . why . states have not succeeded in developing collective security plans .
 By the end of the 19th century tension rose in Europe, particularly due to the rise in power of Germany . Germany was the most powerful country in the world .
 An attempt at collective security via the creation of the League of Nations ended in failure . Following World War I an attempt to collective security failed to succeed .
 Conflict between East and West made for a series of crises and expansion of competition to areas of the developing world . The Soviet Union and the U.S. were the two hegemonic powers in the world .
 With the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 the result was a unipolar system of U.S. dominance .
 A thorough and eminently readable overview of the rise of the U.S. in the 20th century . The book is published by John Sutter, a Pulitzer Prize winner .
 An anthology containing a wide variety of views on how and why the Cold War ended . The Cold War was over and over in the end .
 Evaluate the impact of the rising economic strength of the European Union and the four rising BRIG powers on future international developments . Find out what the impact will have on the future of the EU and BRIG countries .
 The single most important indicator of their power is not military capability, but economic prowess . Economic prowess is economic prowess, rather than military capability . The U.S. is one of the world's most powerful nations .
 China is known for its manufacturing and export revolution; India for its overall economic development and expanding technological industries . Russia for its oil, mineral, and natural gas reserves that have fueled rises in levels of living . Brazil for Its natural resources that have spurred a dramatic increase in international trade .
 Domestic challenges could have a major impact on the ability of these countries to continue their economic expansion . Domestic challenges, however, could be a major issue for these countries .
 It is not clear the extent of which these countries harbor larger international political and military ambitions . It is also not clear whether they will see themselves as having common interests with others in regional and global stability .
 Sang is a journalist who provides an alternative history of China from its founding as a socialist state in 1949 up to the present . Sang is an alternative historian of China . Sang provides a view of the country's history from 1949 to present .
 He does not interview top party officials, but rather gives voice to people who have lived in the maelstrom of China's economic reforms . Artists, businessmen, women, former Revolutionary Red Guards, migrant workers, migrants, teachers, computer geeks, hustlers and hustlers .
 All speak with candor about the realities of China as the rising power of East Asia, and the human costs involved . All speak about the reality of China's rise in East Asia .
 The earliest period to which the concepts of globalization and global politics can be applied is villages, clans, and tribes throughout history . Ancient civilizations. ancient civilizations. the rise of the modern state. none of the above .
 Independent state system . Feudal state system. Independent state . Hegemonic state system Feudic system . Independent state systems. Feudial system . All of the above .
 All actual historical systems must match up with one of the four discussed . All historical systems need to match up to one of four discussed systems .
 None of these systems can overlap in terms of characteristics or time period . None of them can overlap with other systems or time periods .
 Ideas and concepts have little impact on history compared to economics compared to history . Economics is the only way to get around the world's most complex ideas and concepts .
 Under the regime of Chandragupta Maurya, India was isolated from the rest of the world . India was influenced by Persians and Greeks . became Buddhist .
 The classical Greek independent state system evolved into a hegemonic system dominated by Athens and Sparta . The Persian-Athenian system after the defeat of Sparta was a Persian-athenian hegemon system .
 Athens and Sparta before the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War India prior to its development into an imperial system . The Roman empire due to its willingness to allow regional political independence .
 During the 12th and 13th centuries literacy expanded and universities were established . The idea of written contracts was relatively unknown . There was hardly any economic activity of any kind .
 The rise of an independent state system in Europe was associated with all of the following EXCEPT an increase in the religious authority of the Pope . The rise in the power of kings is associated with increasing trade .
 By the late 17th century, the primary political unit in Europe had become the church. territorial state. feudal kingdom . feudal kingdom. feudal state.
 The Concert of Europe refers to a treaty signed in 1648 to end thirty years of warfare in Europe . The Treaty of Europe was signed by the five major European powers that emerged after the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 .
 The European system of independent states confined territorial competition to Europe and the U.S. eventually spread throughout the world . Eventually, economic competition in the United States. collapsed in the Great Depression of the 1930s .
 The idea that states have a legal right to enforce international law against aggression by taking collective action to stop it is called alliance systems . collective sanctions. collective security . collective security. international cooperation. collective sanctions . collective national security. collective military action .
 China and the United States. the League of Nations and the U.N. China . the League . Nations . China and U.S. have been at odds with each other .
 The containment policy of the United States was principally directed against the Soviet Union . Communism in Europe and the U.S. communist parties in Europe . communism in general. communism in .
 The Cold War ended with the collapse of communist China . with the rise of NATO and the European Union .
 Detente refers to relaxation of tensions between East and West in the 1970s . containment of the Soviet Union in the 1950s through the early 1990s . Detente was a period of tension between the two countries .
 Napoleon's military campaign plans for Europe . Napoleon’s military campaign plan for Europe. the French colonial strategy. Napoleon's plans for the French .
 The two BRICs with the greatest natural resources are Brazil and Russia . Russia and Brazil are the two countries with the most natural resources . Brazil is one of the world's most populous countries .
 The common factor that may decide the role of the BRICs in the international system is the response of the United States . The United Nations, the European Union and domestic developments are key factors in BRIC's success .
 Identify the different policy approaches to dealing with nationalism and ethnicity and identify their limitations . Identify a different policy approach and identify the limitations of each policy approach . Identifying the different ways of dealing with nationalist and ethnicity as a matter of policy .
 M ahmud is a graduate student studying business at a college on the East Coast of the U.S. He is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 His hometown of Mumbai, India, is some 8,000 miles away on the other side of the world . Mumbai is eleven time zones and eight time zones away from the world's other side .
 Modern communications have allowed him to stay in touch with family and friends . Modern communications such as Skype, however, have helped him stay alive .
 Muslims account for some 13 percent of the population in India, making India the country with the third largest Muslim population in the world .
 Any serious student of international relations and world politics is required to have a basic understanding of geography . P3: Read and Listen to Chapter 4 at mypoliscilab.com V**— Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at mypoiisc.com . P
 All human actions must be played out on land, sea, air, or, some cases, space . Whether we are viewing the world through the lenses of politics, economics, history, or theory, all human actions are played out in the world .
 It is tempting to believe that globalization has reduced the importance of physical geography, at least . The far side of the globe doesn’t seem too far away given modern transportation and communication, it is tempting .
 Explain the difference between physical and human geography and why a basic understanding of both is necessary when studying international relations and world politics . Explain the differences in geography and international relations .
 Human geography (or cultural geography) involves the visual depiction of human activities overlaid on physical terrain maps . Human geography involves the depiction of humans and their activities on a physical terrain map .
 A diagram depicting population density on the European continent would be an example, with each dot representing 10,000 persons . The European continent is a large part of the continent's population .
 Other examples would include a map depicting locations and extent of religions, languages, and current locations and levels of political violence around the world .
 A graphic representation of spatial concepts. What both have in common is a graphic representation . The graphic representations are graphic representations of spatial ideas .
 Without such basic understanding, it would obviously be difficult to understand political and economic trends in international relations and world politics, let alone make sense of day-to-day events . Without basic understanding of global politics and international relations, world politics is difficult to make sense .
 Let’s further discuss both types of geography and their importance to understanding international relations and world politics by reference to historical and current examples .
 Maps will always be important tools for physical geographers . Physical Geography is an important part of the world's physical geography .
 Some tasks require getting a particular map or set of maps in hard copy or electronic form . Some tasks may require getting maps or maps in a hard copy .
 Erom west to east (left to right) are the Maghreb countries of Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia influenced earlier by Erench colonialism . Libya, Libya, which was an Italian colony; and Egypt, were under British influence .
 Our purpose here is that we all no doubt have locational-geography homework to do if we are to be effective as practitioners . Our purpose is to highlight the importance of locational and geography .
 As communities grew in size and expanded outward, they came into contact with other communities . But as communities grew, they began to see each other as a community .
 Territoriality is the attachment to a particular geographic area under the administrative control of an overriding authority . It became important not just in terms of political and military competition, but also in . commercial competition .
 Growing communities desired control over their expanding physical geography . Growing communities wanted control of their expanding geographical geography. Growing communities needed control of the landscape .
 Seaports and natural or human or humanly developed harbors were particularly important assets historically and politically, and indeed, they remain so today . Seaport and natural harbors are important assets in the world today and historically .
 Global trade of goods still depends heavily on sealift, accompanied on land by both road and rail connections . Sealift is an increasingly important means for transporting people and cargo .
 Great powers depend on navies to secure trade routes and deploy armed forces abroad . Great powers have always depended upon navies for their protection .
 Water covers more than 70 percent of the earth’s surface . It is not overlooked by naval advocates .
 Command of ports helped and continues to facilitate a state’s exercise of territorial authority over a geographic region, says the author of the book . "Command of ports" is a key part of the state's territorial authority, author says .
 Transportation at sea, on land, and in the air depends heavily on infrastructure . Infrastructure includes airports, airports and both road and rail lines that must cross geographical challenges .
 Since the 19th century technological advances in transportation have been breathtaking . From wind power driving sailing ships to steam engines powered by wood or coal, engines fueled by petroleum, and now some naval ships and submarines powered with nuclear energy .
 Civil and military aviation made the transition after World War II from piston-engine to turboprop and later to jet engines . The latter became prominent not only in combat applications, but also in greater airlift capacity for both passengers and cargo .
 High-speed rail in many countries is displacing 19thand 20th-century technologies in train travel . The technology is replacing 19th and 20th century rail travel .
 Automobiles and trucks are moving finally to more efficient engines . Automobiles are moving to hybrid, electric, and other alternatives to gasoline or diesel-combustion engines .
 The net effect of all these technological advances in transportation is to make the world figuratively a smaller place . Physical geography no longer the obstacle it once was to crossing oceans and continents . Technology has made it easier to cross oceans or continents .
 Who maintains control of the transportation routes, however, does impact access to the area .
 Cartography dates back in the West to Babylonian clay tablets from about 2,300c.e. and has always had military and economic implications . Cartography, the art and science of making maps, dates back to 2,000 years ago .
 The ancient Greeks and Romans made serious efforts to chart their spheres of influence and empires . The Middle Ages witnessed an increase in interest in cartography in Europe and even earlier in Arab lands .
 With the Renaissance and the age of exploration, maps became essential as trade routes were charted and reproduced for wider dissemination with the invention of the printing press . Maps became essential in the Renaissance, with maps charting trade routes charting and reproducing .
 The scientific revolution continually improved the accuracy and quality of maps . Maps were created in the early 1900s to map the world around the world .
 Maps were obviously useful when it came to engaging in wars of conquest and planning military campaigns . Maps were important for war planning and planning of military campaigns in Europe .
 Military theorists and practitioners such as Antoine Henri de Jomini discussed military lines of operations . Carl von Clausewitz noted the importance of logistics for any army that hoped to be successful in foreign military campaign .
 Maps were essential in depicting physical geographic obstacles to conquest . Maps were necessary to depict physical obstacles to conquests . Maps are essential to depict the physical obstacles of conquest .
 Island nations like Great Britain benefited from the protection of the English Channel . Island nations such as Great Britain were protected by the Channel .
 Pyrenees mountain chain of southwestern Europe formed a natural border wall between Erance and Spain . Erance is located in Erance, Spain, and is located on the Spanish border .
 The United States had an entire ocean between itself and the political competition and wars of Europe and Asia . The U.S. had an ocean of land between it and the world's enemies .
 Lack of mountains, major rivers, and other geographic barriers helps to explain the troubled history of Poland . Poland is a land of plains from the Baltic Sea to the Carpathian Mountains in the south .
 Belgium was quickly invaded and occupied by Germany in both of the 20th century’s two world wars . Also a country largely composed of flat plains and itself a creation resulting from historic conflict among great powers, Belgium was a creation of the country .
 Physical geography is also important in drawing our attention to the location of natural resources that can be critical components of state power . Physical geography can also be important to draw attention to natural resources .
 Saudi Arabia was the first concession for oil exploration in 1923 . The first concession was signed in 1923. Saudi Arabia is one of the most important oil expatriates in the world .
 Minerals from war-torn Congo in Africa are essential to the world’s laptops, GPSs, and PDAs . Minerals such as tin and tungsten are essential for laptops and GPSs .
 Congo has seen upwards of five million persons killed in civil war and violence over the past ten years . Violence is often fueled by violent competition to control mineral resources .
 Advances in communications have also made the world ever more interconnected . The world is now more interconnected with modes of communication .
 Mail transit by horse-driven carriage was replaced in the 20th century by trucks and aircraft .
 Nineteenth-century telegraph communications, followed by the introduction of the telephone, gradually removed geographical barriers to rapid communications within countries and across national borders .
 Development of Earth satellites in the last half century coupled with the digital transformation and advances in both fiber-optic and wireless transmission have so increased global reach that we now take for granted how easy and relatively inexpensive communicating globally has become .
 The rapid pace by which transportation, telecommunications, and digital technologies are all still moving not only removes geographical obstacles that were so foreboding in the past, but also facilitates transnational connections in this increasingly globalized world .
 The removal of the physical barriers makes communication much harder to regulate, as seen with China’s and other countries’ attempts to control their citizens’ internet access . The removal . of physical barriers is difficult to regulate .
 Should the canal be blocked as it was after the 1967 Arab-Israeli War (Egypt did not reopen the canal until 1975), ships would have to travel around the Cape of Good Hope at the tip of Africa .
 In recent years there has been a renewal of interest in physical geography . Physical geography has been the subject of much of the world's most famous books .
 Eor graduates to be taken seriously in government, business, or nongovernmental organizations that deal with international relations . They must know map locations and physical geography in order to make sense of our globalized world .
 The days of knowing only the geography of your own country are history are history . The days are when you only know your country's geography .
 The early literature on international relations used to devote a great deal of time to physical geography under the heading of geopolitics . Geography is a key part of international relations .
 Sir Halford Mackinder presented a paper entitled “The Geographical Pivot Point of History” to the Royal Geographical Society in London in 1904 . This is exemplified by the work of Sir Mackinder .
 Such geographical determinism is frowned upon nowadays by most historians and writers on international relations . Most historians are now frowning at such geographical determinisms .
 Mackinder popularized the concept of geopolitics, which, at its simplest, concerns the impact of geography on politics . Mackinder, who coined the concept, popularized geopolitics in his work .
 It also has policy implications when it suggests strategic prescriptions when dealing with such topics as the relative importance of land and sea power .
 A basic appreciation for the international landscape of human geography is also essential for students of world politics . Human Geography is essential to students of the world .
 Charts and tables can list data concerning such topics as arms expenditures, numbers of nuclear weapons, or the gross domestic product of various states . Such data have a greater impact if graphically presented or overlaid on maps .
 Fenguin State of the World Atlas, now in its eighth edition, is published by the Fenguins .
 This book creatively uses color-coding to depict the geographic location and size of casualties of war, ethnicity, religion, refugees, warlords, militias, human trafficking, sex tourism, and international terrorism hotspots .
 In some cases the data are configured to depict the relative size of state populations, economies, and energy use . The data is based on the relative sizes of each state's population, economies and energy consumption .
 Africa, Europe, the Middle East, South Asia, East Asia and Pacific, and the Western Hemisphere—North, South and Central America and the Caribbean islands . The U.S. is home to the largest economies in the world .
 Using the same global, regional, and state-and-society categories we can find data on human conditions . Life expectancy, life expectancy, health, population growth, per capita income, economic growth, production by sector .
 Demographic data of this kind can be extremely important in identifying trends and the relation between one or another of these factors . Demographics data can be used to identify trends and relationship between these factors and other factors .
 China’s one-child policy is a government policy designed to bring population growth into line with expected economic growth . Eor example, China's one child policy .
 Critics object to the loss of freedom to determine the size of one’s family . Critics also object to draconian measures including abortion and infanticide .
 China's population growth is essential for economic growth, government says . Restrictions on population growth in a country approaching 1.1 billion people are essential to economic growth .
 Keeping population growth within bounds is also part of the country’s pursuit of an improved regional and global position in world politics . The country is also seeking to improve its position in international politics .
 Francis Fukuyama in The End of History argued that democracy was the logical political outcome of the evolution of international society . Francis Fukuama argued in his book that democracy is a logical political result of evolution .
 democratic movements came to the fore in a number of the states of the former Soviet empire . Democracy was a key feature of the Soviet empire's rule of rule .
 His thesis was that post-Cold War conflict most likely would be due to clashes among civilizations marked by major cultural differences as opposed to the ideological clash between communism and democracy (e.g., the capitalist West).
 The rivalry of the superpowers is replaced by the clash of civilizations . The world is no longer dominated by superpowers, it's a clash of civilization .
 This use of civilization as the principal unit of analysis contrasts with the usual international relations emphasis on the classical notion of sovereign states as the key unit of study . The usual emphasis on sovereign states is on the idea of sovereign nations as key units .
 His policy prescription and warning was that Western nations, collectively constituting a civilization, would lose out to other civilizations if they failed to recognize the irreconcilable nature of this new global competition, he said .
 Critics prefer to speak of state and society as units of analysis, focusing not on alleged clashes between or among civilizations, but rather on cultural, economic, social, political, and other similarities and differences . Most of these critics (to include the authors of this book) prefer to focus on
 Viewing world politics from a human-geography perspective is useful, but this requires an understanding of some of the major transnational trends that involve what we call identity politics .
 Questions relating to religious, national, ethnic, tribal, clan, or other human identities are universal . Identities are universal, whether religious or ethnic, national .
 Human beings are social creatures, as Aristotle observed, a fact that has both up and down sides . "Aristotle observed that social life has both ups and downs," he said .
 "For the most part, we live and work together cooperatively, divided only by relatively small differences or conflicts," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "We live, work, live, and work with each other, but we are divided by very small differences
 The great achievements of humankind have depended on our ability to pool talents and resources in social groups, says David Frum . Frum says the social network is essential to our survival .
 Human beings who are organized into separate, conflicting groups can be the source of mutually destructive activities, as has been evident in recent years in parts of Africa and Asia . identity politics ■ the political implications of individuals identifying with religious, national, ethnic, tribal, or clan values .
 Social constructivists argue that identities are formed, created, malleable, and subject to change and self-definition . Conversely, social constructivistists argue identities are created, created and created . Social constructivism is a form of identity that can be formed and defined .
 Where one comes down on this issue has a dramatic impact on whether one is pessimistic or optimistic about groupings of individuals living in relative harmony .
 The world is conventionally divided into single nation-states, multinational states, and nations dispersed in two or more states . From the perspective of international relations and world politics, the world is divided into one nation-state, one multinational state, and one nation state .
 Individuals may derive a sense of security or other value from having a particular national or ethnic identity . But ethnic identification may make others, particularly minority groups, feel insecure .
 Mutually exclusive communities within, between, or across state boundaries appear to be the source of conflict based on national, ethnic, religious, historical, historical and cultural, racial and physical differences .
 Conflicts may smolder for decades and even centuries, breaking out as interstate or civil wars, insurgencies, terrorism, or other forms of revolutionary violence . Conflicts are often long-lasting, sometimes even more violent, sometimes lasting decades .
 One of the most vexing and important issues in world politics at the beginning of the 21st century involves conflicts relating to state sovereignty and national identity . State sovereignty is a key issue in the world politics .
 We devote the rest of this chapter to key aspects of human geography . Religion is religion followed by a discussion of nationality and ethnicity .
 The world is replete with conflicts and controversies related to religion, nationality, and ethnicity . We illustrate the obvious fact that the world is . replete . with religious, national and ethnic conflicts .
 We then discuss approaches designed to foster peace among differing religions and nationalities . We then turn to a discussion of approaches to fostering peace among religions .
 Evaluate *** the impact of religion in global politics, particularly with regard to conflict . Evaluate the impact on religion in world politics, especially in the context of conflict .
 One impact of the Cold War was to overshadow the role of religion in global politics . The Cold War overshadowed the role it played in the world of religion .
 The Cold War was a battle between Christianity and other religions against ‘godless communism’ Most people in the West saw it in nonreligious terms as a battle of two visions of the appropriate political and economic forms of governance . Western-style democracy and market capitalism versus centrally directed,
 Flistorically, religion has at times played a major role in international politics . Flist historically, however, has played a significant role in politics .
 Muslims fought to repel the ‘infidels’ and retain sovereignty over the territory . Conversely, Muslims fought against the “infidel’s” and retained sovereignty . Muslims fought for the territory against the infidels .
 The 17th-century Thirty Years’ War on the continent and the English civil war also concerned significant religious issues involving Protestants versus Catholics as well as various countries’ desires to improve their political positions .
 The Iranian revolution of 1978-1979 and the coming to power of Shiite Muslim religious leaders were seen as harbingers of things to come . In more recent times, the Iranian revolution was seen as a harbinger of what was coming .
 Observers of international relations almost universally failed to foresee the challenge to modern, secular regimes posed by a global resurgence at the end of the 20th century of religious ideas .
 What is fascinating about this global phenomenon is that it has occurred within diverse cultures, different types of political systems, and in countries with varying levels of economic development . The phenomenon has occurred in diverse cultures and different political systems .
 In this regard, Eigure 4. graphs the relative numbers of people who identify with one of the major religions with worldwide following .
 Transnational organizations such as the Roman Catholic Church, the World Council of Churches, and the Society for the Propagation of Islam presumably would assume more important roles . First, transnational organizations like the Catholic Church would assume important role .
 The pronouncements of various religious organizations over the years supposedly have had universal application, no matter where the flock may reside . But the pronouncements have been universal, even though there are no universal applications .
 Thanks to the internet, Skype, and other modern telecommunications technologies, religious organizations have found it easier to communicate their messages . The internet and Skype have helped religious organizations communicate with each other .
 Global religious networks reach out across and beyond the more confining physical borders of states . Their global religious networks also reach beyond the borders of the world .
 Some of the more extreme elements preach religious intolerance, if not hate, toward adherents of other religious faiths . It seems to be that it is not the mainstream religions that have benefited most from the communications revolution, but rather some of the extremists .
 Transnational religious movements and beliefs strengthen the development of transnational identities not constrained by state borders or secular, nonreligious forms of nationalism . Second, transnational religious beliefs and beliefs also strengthen transnational identity, authors say .
 For some, religious identity is more important than any particular national identity . For some religious identity, it's important not to identify with a nation .
 To these people, loyalty to their faith comes first with the state a distant second or third . Loyalty to the faith comes before loyalty to the state comes first .
 Third, if such a trend continues, its implications for global conflict are uncertain . If such an outcome continues, it is uncertain how long it will be possible to continue .
 Some religious movements have spearheaded peace movements and crusades for human rights and justice . On the one hand, some religious groups have led peace movements . Some religious groups are also involved in human rights crusades .
 Samuel Huntington suggested that religious identity could be a key component of a clash of civilizations . On the other hand, religious identity may be a factor in conflict between cultures influenced by Judeo-Christian religious traditions and those influenced by Islam .
 Religion and International Relations Theory is a factor in domestic or international politics . In this section we explore briefly and apply the images or understandings in international relations theory discussed in Chapter 2 to religion .
 We start with realism, liberalism, the English School, and economic structuralism as images . We then add some of the interpretive understandings offered by constructivists, feminists, postmodernists, and critical theorists .
 From a realist perspective, religion remains less important than other factors in relations among states . Religion is a key factor in relations between states, rather than religion, in states' relations .
 Most realists argue that governments will continue to operate in international politics primarily on the basis of national interests and security . Religious groups will undoubtedly continue to influence government policies around the globe .
 Even the Iranian and the now defunct Afghani Taliban governments have used religion not as the exclusive road map for foreign policy, but rather as a means to legitimate among their followers the pursuit of power linked to both domestic and foreign policy objectives .
 To realists, power and national interest remain the dominant factors, to realists . They say secular objectives are cast in religious garb in order to make them more appealing to peoples whose support they seek .
 It is one of the defining elements of an emerging global civil society . It is a key part of the emerging civil society. It's one of its defining elements.
 To liberals, national or other common identities that transcend religious or ethnic differences already exist in many countries . Over time, these identities can be constructed in others, liberals say .
 International, transnational, and nongovernmental organizations can facilitate development of greater understanding, tolerance, and even acceptance of religious diversity within and across national boundaries .
 To liberals increasing globalization may reduce or ameliorate conflict among religious groups professing different faiths . To liberals, this may reduce conflict between religious groups, liberals say .
 English School combines insights of Hobbes on power and balance of power as core factors in international politics with rule-oriented approach offered by Grotius as a remedy to the ongoing problem of finding order in international society .
 Grotius and scholars following in his path have explored religious or moral underpinnings of states . These rules, compatible as they are with the essentially secular, enlightened self-interests of states, often have religious and moral undertones .
 Some in the English School see global norms with morally binding content accompanying the transition from an international to what will become a world society . That said, secular factors are most prominent in international society .
 The idea of a world society built on observance of morally binding norms (as opposed merely to agreed rules based on interest) is expressed in secular terms, but is not without its religious underpinnings . Religion as such is not explicitly part of this construction .
 Critics within the English School are prone to see those anticipating the emergence of world society as idealistic . The English School is wedded to the idea of international society .
 Economic class identities dominate in both domestic and international politics, says Karl Marx . Eor economic structuralists influenced by Karl Marx influenced by Marx .
 Marxists have always recognized the pervasive power of religion as an ‘opiate’ to induce ‘false consciousness’ on the part of the working class . Marxists believe religion is an “opiate,’s power to subvert the will of the owners
 More often, churches usually side with the ruling powers and thus legitimize their dominance over mass publics . More often than not, churches often side with ruling powers .
 Social constructivists see religious identity as something socially constructed, not a given . Social constructivistists say religious identity is something social constructivist, not given .
 There is nothing inherently violent and warlike or pacifist or peace-oriented about any particular religion apart from the meanings those who construct these understandings give them .
 Religious and cultural understandings are ideational factors that impact the ways and means by which both domestic and international politics are conducted . These meanings do matter, of course, since religious and cultural understandingings are important .
 Many feminists see even mainstream religions reinforcing the already militant, masculinist tendencies found cross-culturally among political leaders . They see this as a way of exacerbating intercommunal strife and acceptance of war as somehow the answer to human conflicts .
 Postmodernists and critical theorists see religion as worthy of research because written and spoken religious words and phrases contain important meanings we need to unpack if we are to grasp their political significance .
 Critical theorist asks whether religious pronouncements and beliefs are cover stories for underlying political realities of power and dominance . It is the critical theorist who takes this inquiry to the next step .
 Many critical theorists tend to see religion advanced institutionally by churches or other religious forms of organization as legitimating the status quo among their followers . This legitimates the various forms human exploitation takes, whether within a particular state and society or among them in their international relations .
 The five major religious traditions representing over 4. billion people are comprised of the Eastern religions of Hinduism and Buddhism . The Western religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, with more than 2. billion in their ranks or directly influenced by them .
 The remaining human population on Earth fall outside these five traditions . Their spiritual identities are found in polytheistic or other naturalist understandings grounded in the human experience .
 Hinduism is itself a complex aggregation of many different sects with different theological understandings that have developed over several millennia . The Hindu religion is itself an aggregation of several different sects .
 Theravada and Mahayana are the two major branches of Buddhism . The two branches are in Sri Lanka and much of southeast Asia, and the latter in most of northeast Asia .
 Buddhism in China is mixed culturally with Confucian and Taoist understandings . It is also influenced by the secularism of the communist revolutionary period . Buddhism is also mixed culturally .
 Japanese Buddhist divisions overlaid not only with Confucian and Taoist philosophies that spread historically from China to Japan, but also with indigenous Shinto religious understandings .
 Emperor Meiji declared Shinto the state religion and himself its divine leader . The Shinto religion was impacted by political ambition when, in the late 1800s, Meiji .
 His imperialistic perspectives set Japan on a militaristic path and eventually led to the dismantling of the State Shinto religion by the Allied Forces after World War 11 . The Allied Forces dismantled the State of Shinto Religion in 1945 .
 All of the five major religions split into many, sometimes competing denominations or sects . When one considers cultural differences among followers in many countries, different theological understandings, it's not surprising .
 Sometimes we easily jump to wrong conclusions about particular religions being more or less warlike . Sometimes people jump to conclusions about religion being more than warlike, says author .
 In fact, human conflict and warfare can be found in peoples of all faiths, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 More blood shed in three decades between 1914 and 1945 in predominantly Christian Europe than ever occurred before then or since . World War I in 1914 and the end of World War II in 1945 was more blood shed than ever before or after .
 Islamic world caught historically between imperial struggles of the Ottoman and Russian empires . European colonial competition for spheres of influence . In recent decades conflicts among themselves and wars or the threat of war with Israel .
 Conflict between Buddhists and Hindus in Sri Lanka makes clear the universality of intercommunal strife that can occur within and across all of the five major religious identities . Conflict between Hindus and Buddhists in Sri Sri Lanka is a universal problem .
 The thesis that some religions are more warlike than others doesn’t stand the empirical test . Put another way, the thesis about some religions is not empirical test, it's not true .
 Human beings seemingly engage in conflicts and use force against one another regardless of religious identity or theological conviction . Human beings use force—sometimes even leading to genocide—against one another, regardless of their religious identity .
 Religions are deeply embedded in cultures and, as such, influence both believers and nonbelievers . Religious beliefs are deeply ingrained in cultures, and influence believers and unbelievers .
 The place of religion as part of culture in society in society has been compared metaphorically to the cat in Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland . Lewis Carroll's Wonderland is a metaphor for religion in Wonderland, the author says .
 Even in more secular societies, values people hold often have deep religious underpinnings . Even in secular societies where religion is separated from politics or the affairs of state, people hold religious beliefs .
 Each of these religions has deep divisions among adherents who identify with particular denominations or sects . Reflecting different interpretations that developed historically, each of these religious groups have deep divisions . Each religion has divisions among its adherents .
 Judaism, for example, is divided into orthodox, conservative, and reformed communities . Judaism has been divided into conservative, conservative or reformed communities for centuries .
 From its earliest days, Christianity included many different sets of interpretations . Christianity has a history of many different interpretations .
 The first major split occurred in Europe in 1054e. between the church in Constantinople and the pre-Reformation church in Rome in Rome .
 The Reformation quickly spread in the northern states of western Europe . Some four centuries later, the Reformation spread across the northern Europe .
 The Reformation began in Germany when, in 1520, Luther posted his theses . Henry VIII separated the English church from Rome in 1533 .
 Henry VIII’s separation may have had as much to do with power and land ownership as it did with his desire to divorce his wife . Henry VIII claimed that he had a right to divorce that was denied by the papacy in Rome in Rome .
 Before the split, the Roman Catholic Church owned the majority of land within Henry’s kingdom . The Roman Catholic church owned most of the land .
 Henry separated from the Church and the Pope, seized the Church’s assets, formed the Church of England, and declared himself the head of his new church . Henry seized the church's assets and seized himself the Church's assets . Henry declared himself head of the new church and declared
 The outcome of these divisions in England and Germany was a further split in Christianity . Roman Catholicism and various Protestant denominations appeared throughout Europe and America, splitting further .
 We each have a right to our own religious beliefs or, alternatively, to choose not to follow any of these traditions . We all have the right to follow our own beliefs or not .
 All of us can develop tolerance and acceptance of religious diversity in the world around us . As professionals, we need to be able to navigate successfully in a religious world of diversity .
 Full understanding of these religions, of course, goes well beyond the space we can allocate here to this important topic . Fuller understanding of this religion, however, goes far beyond this topic .
 We apologize that we are only able to present a short overview of four of these culturally rich religious traditions . We apologize for not being able to give an overview of the four religious traditions we offer .
 Given the misunderstandings about the Islamic religion that are rampant in other parts of the world, we’ve given more attention to it here . Given the misunderstandingings about Islamic religion, we've given more .
 International relations practitioners need to know and understand the extraordinarily important role Islam plays in politics, economics, and other social matters in societies from Morocco in the West to western China, Malaysia, Indonesia, and even some islands in the Philippine archipelago in the East . One out of every five
 The numbers of Muslims in Europe, the Americas, and other countries also have increased substantially . With ongoing globalization, the number of Muslims also has increased substantially. Muslims in the U.S. and Europe have increased .
 We encourage readers to be like the authors—still seeking to know more about all of these world religions and denominations that divide them .
 As both professionals and fellow human beings, we need to know how other people think . We need to be able to understand how others think. We are here to learn more about each other .
 Hinduism is perhaps the oldest of the major religious traditions with ancient roots in prehistoric India more than five million years ago .
 This ancient Indian foundational religion also saw the emergence of Buddhism half a millennium before the birth of Jesus .
 Hinduism does not have the degree of codification of beliefs one finds in a generally accepted creed or formal teachings from religious authorities . Hinduism is deeply set in the cultures of non-Islamic India, with no formal teachings .
 Hinduism is to many, however, more a ‘way of life’ with both cultural and philosophical roots . To many, it is more a way of life, with both culture and philosophy roots .
 Religious tradition is more open to multiple interpretations on metaphysical questions relating to one’s soul or spirit to God and other heavenly figures .
 Many Hindus take a more polytheistic view, perhaps linking Vishnu to two other gods—Brahma and Shiva . Many Hindus believe Vishnu is one of many gods or God in many forms .
 In this three-part formulation are Brahma, the god of creation, Vishnu, the great global spirit, and Shiva . Shiva is seen in one or another interpretation as purifier, transformer, or, perhaps, destroyer of ignorance .
 Different Hindu sects elevate one or another of these gods over the others . The Hindu religion is divided over which gods are worshipped .
 More important for our purposes here, however, are the principles that define the Hindu way of life . More important than that is the principles of Hinduism .
 It is a global, human problem involving peoples identified with all (or, some cases, none) of these religious traditions . It's a global problem involving people identified with each of these traditions .
 In this regard, murder, rape, torture, and other forms of injustice are contrary theologically to all five religious traditions . Murder, rape and torture are contrary to all religious traditions, the author says .
 Many Palestinian Arabs were dispossessed of their lands upon creation of Israel as a Jewish state . Settlement of this issue along with Israeli settlements in lands taken by force In the 1967 Arab-Israell war remains major obstacles in the peace process .
 It is not religion or religious teachings per se, but rather the use of them by people to serve their own purposes that has been so corrosive of the human condition worldwide .
 For many Hindu believers, spiritual development brings the soul into an identity with the godliness of brahma —a heavenly state of nirvana . One achieves through spiritual development, which for many believers brings the . soul into . identity with godliness .
 The term karma captures causeeffect relations linking one's deeds to bearing the consequences of one’s actions . The term ‘karma’ captures cause-effect relations between deeds and consequences of those deeds .
 The religion also provides guidance or suggested methods for attaining lofty ends in one's life . Right conduct in relationships with others, knowledge or wisdom, meditation that develops the mind, and devoted love that links a person to a supreme being .
 Siddh^tha Gautama became the Buddha—^the enlightened or awakened one who set aside human concerns for material things . He discovered in meditations the ways to get beyond human suffering that begins at birth and continues throughout our lives .
 He found the origin of suffering in our cravings that, if set aside, can get us beyond this human travail . He said: 'If you set aside your cravings, you can get past this human suffering'
 Buddhists focus more on how human beings deal with life’s processes than on questions of God and eternity . Buddhists are Buddhists who focus on how humans deal with their own processes .
 Becoming a Buddha means achieving perfect enlightenment that typically occurs over the course of several lifetimes . We seek enlightenment, nirvana — becoming a Buddha is a key to achieving perfection . The Buddha's enlightenment typically occurs in several lifetime .
 One on the way to becoming a Buddha is referred to as bodhisattva . We carry marks of our past lives as we proceed, one says . One of the Buddha's disciples is called bodhisatva .
 A correct understanding—seeing things as they really are, not as they may appear to be 2. 2. The correct understanding -- seeing things as . they really . are . not as . appears to be . 2. a correct understanding .
 Everyday work is a livelihood that causes no harm . Everyday work—a livelihood that cause no harm. Everyday work -- a livelihood . The daily work of daily life is a daily life that's not harmful .
 Monotheism —belief in a single god or creator — is essentially a Western idea found in Egypt during the reign of the pharaoh Akhenaten, who died about 1334 or 1336c.e.
 This radical departure from Egypt's polytheistic tradition was reversed after Akhenaten’s death . The idea was not lost, but the idea was never lost .
 Judaic tradition that preceded both Christianity and Islam is fully developed in Judaic traditions . It was fully developed by the Judaic people before Christianity and Islamic traditions .
 Jews, Christians, and Muslims constitute the grouping of three Western religions that share belief in belief in a single creator . Muslims, Jews and Christians are three of the world's three religions .
 Most historians see Judaism as a recognizable religion three millennia ago . It is difficult to specify precisely when Judaism emerged .
 A matrilineal passing of the Jewish identity is core to the Judaic tradition . Regardless of a father’s religious identity, one is a Jew if one's mother is a Jewish . One is born to a mother who has a Jewish mother .
 Jews generally do not proselytize or try to convert followers . Unlike both Christians and Muslims, Jews generally don't proseize . Jews generally avoid proseizing or trying to convert others .
 Abraham made a covenant with God, who identified them as ‘chosen’ people, Abraham . They believe Abraham made the covenant with Abraham . Abraham named them as "chosen" people .
 Abraham said that henceforth all males would be circumcised as a mark of their standing before God . Abraham concurred that henceforward all males should be circumcised .
 Christianity initially was a sect of Judaism in the 1st century after the death of Jesus . As a monotheistic religion, Christianity was a monothenical monotheism .
 Sacred books of the Judaic tradition were retained as an “Old” Testament . New ones were selected from many that were written to constitute what became a “New’ Testament . The new covenant identified believers and followers of Jesus, displacing the earlier Abrahamic covenant with
 The Nicene Creed was not agreed upon until the 4th century . The new Christian theology articulated in the Nicene creed was finally agreed upon in 4th .
 The document affirmed monotheistic belief in a single God, but one in three divine persons—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit . The document affirms monotheism belief in the single God . It also affirms the existence of the Holy Spirit, the Holy Trinity .
 This most significant departure from the Judaic tradition was the belief in the divinity of Jesus as an integral part of a godly Trinity . Jesus was believed to be a part of the divine Trinity .
 This belief so central to Christians marked a permanent theological breach between Judaism and Christianity . Christianity and Judaism were divided in the Bible's teachings .
 These three Western religions are all monotheistic, but each defined its monotheism separately as each historically took its place on the world stage . These three monotheisms are monotheist, but not monothenistic .
 Islam accepts the holy scriptures of both Judaism and Christianity . Muhammad the last of Allah’s messengers, Muhammad was Muhammad .
 The biblical prophets recognized by Islam start with Adam and end with Jesus and Muhammad . As such, the biblical prophets recognize by Islam begin with Adam .
 Abraham and his son, Ishmael, have a particular place of distinction among Muslims, particularly those with Arab identity . Abraham and Ismael are the two most prominent figures among Muslims .
 Abraham's wife Hagar gave birth to Ishmael, who led his Arab brothers and sisters into the desert where they live to the present day . In the tradition accepted by Jews, Christians, and Muslims, one of Abraham’s wives, Hagar, gave birth . Hag
 Abraham's first wife, Sarah, was born of Abraham’s first wife . Ishmael's half brother, Isaac, is born of Sarah . Abraham's half-brother, Abraham's son, is Abraham's oldest son, Isaac .
 Isaac and, later, his son, Jacob, were the early Jewish patriarchs in a long line of descent from Abraham . Isaac and Jacob were the first to descend from Abraham, Abraham and Isaac .
 As constructivists remind us, human identities often stand on traditions we internalize . The identity of a person can be traced back to a person who has internalized a tradition .
 If one accepts this tradition, Jews and Arabs could see themselves as cousins . Jews and Arab Muslims could see each other as cousins, according to tradition .
 The Koran is at the core of Islam, understood to be the word of God passed by the angel Gabriel to the FIGURE 4 .
 Muslims annually celebrate this enlightenment of Muhammad in the holy days of Ramadan . Muslims celebrate the enlightenment of the Prophet Muhammad in Ramadan .
 Anyone able to read Arabic can experience the poetry and prose of the Koran as a work of great literary art . The Koran's poetry is written in Arabic and the Koran's prose is considered a literary masterpiece .
 The belief that there is only one God named Allah was an Islamic reaction to polytheistic religions then prominent in the Middle East . It was a reaction to the Christian belief of God as a trinity of three divine persons .
 Reciting this statement is the most important obligation in Islam, says Islam's founder . Reciting the Quran is "the most important duty in Islam," he says .
 Of course, such phrases—“God willing, praise be to God, and Almighty God” -- are by no means foreign to many devout Christians and Jews .
 The three religions are cut from the same Western religious cloth . They are deeply grounded in Middle East traditions that extend over several millennia . Three religions are, after all, cut from same Western cloth .
 One is to pray five times a day with head covered, shoes off, and kneeling on a carpet in the direction of the holy city of Mecca where Muhammad was born in 570e.
 In earlier times, many Christians prayed the Angelus, the call to prayer signaled by the ringing of church bells at the beginning of the workday, at noon, and upon leaving the fields or other place of employment at dusk .
 Islamic obligation is to give alms or charitable contributions, thus putting more abstract notions of generosity and humanitarianism routinely into practice . Another Islamic obligation, giving alms, is to contribute to charity .
 Using total wealth rather than annual income as a base often means a much greater sacrifice by the truly wealthy . A tithe based on 10 percent of annual income typically required in some Christian or other religious communities .
 One is to fast in daytime during Ramadan as an act of self-denial during the holy month of Ramadan . One is also to fast during the day during Ramadan .
 Einally, at least once in one of one's life, one should make the Hajj —a pilgrimage to Mecca in Saudia Arabia—if one can . The Hajj is a pilgrimage to the holy city of Mecca in the country's capital, Mecca .
 The Kaabah is a sanctuary or small cubelike structure in the Great Mosque of Mecca . It contains the sacred black stone believed to have been given by God to Abraham, father to both Arabs and Israelites .
 God's guidance and the rules by which one is to live one’s life are to be found not only in the Koran but also in the life of Muhammad in the Hadith and Sunnah of the Prophet . The Koran and Muhammad's life are found in the hadith and
 To be a Muslim is to be “one who submits”—the meaning of Muslim —to the will of God . The meaning of being Muslim is ‘submitting’ to the will .
 As with other religions, culture often matters in defining how Muslims actually practice their religion in daily life . Culture often matters with how Muslims live their religion .
 How the Shariah is interpreted is also subject to cultural variations across the world . Some interpretations differ across the vast Islamic world .
 Islam allows trade and commerce so long as transactions between buyer and seller are just or equitable . Islam not only allows but also encourages trade, commerce . Islam encourages trade but not commerce in the United States .
 Trade was an important vehicle for the rapid spread of Islam to the far reaches of the world in the 7th, 8th, and subsequent centuries . Trade was a vehicle for Islam's rapid spread, along with conquest, conquest .
 In this understanding, so long as one is honest or just, to become wealthy through commerce is a good thing, pleasing to God . So long if one is . honest or . just, it is pleasing to . God . To become rich through commerce, one must be honest and just
 Making money through lending and charging interest is contrary to Islamic teaching . That said, much as in pre-Reformation Christian communities, making money is not allowed in Islamic communities .
 Mobilizing capital for investment through equity shares, joint ventures, or other creative approaches avoids direct loans for which interest would have to be paid . Mobilizing money for investment via equity shares or joint ventures avoids direct loan payments .
 The Koran's opening command that one should read and thus educate the mind exemplifies the very down-to-earth nature of the religion . The Koran’s opening command is that one must read and therefore educate the .
 Islam is concerned with the affairs of day-to-day living, including both work and commercial activities . Islam is a religion concerned with daily life, including work, commercial activities, according to Islam .
 This interest in practicality underscores Islam’s deep, religiously based commitment to knowledge . Euclidian geometry and the writings of Plato, Aristotle, and other Greeks were retained throughout Muslim period in Egypt and elsewhere in Arab world .
 This created a favorable academic environment that no doubt contributed to discovering algebra and the concept of zero in mathematics . It also contributed to perfecting an ability to perform cataract removal and other delicate surgeries unheard of in Europe during the late Middle Ages .
 As with Hinduism, Christianity, and Judaism, Islam also has its sectarian divisions . Islam is one of the major religions in the world .
 Most Muslims are Sunni; however, most in Iran are Shiah, a division that dates from a dispute on succession to the Prophet in the century after Muhammad’s death . Most of Iran's population is Shiah; most are Sunni Muslims .
 Shiah Islam holds that Ali was selected by Muhammad as his successor, a claim disputed by Sunnis . Sunnis believe Ali was chosen by Muhammad to be Muhammad's successor .
 Ali was succeeded in the line of the Prophet by other imams . The twelfth being Muhammad al Mahdi is believed to have disappeared but never died . Ali is understood as a source of guidance to the present-day religious leadership .
 Islamic clergy plays an important role, particularly in Shiite understanding of Islam . Indeed, the Islamic clergy is an important part of the Islamic faith, especially in Shiite Islam .
 Shiites believe Mahdi eventually shall reappear one day to establish a new Islamic golden age . Mahdi is believed to have died in 2003 .
 Although different in details, this belief is similar in some respects to the Judaic belief in the coming of a messiah or the Sunni .
 Most Sunnis accept the second coming of Jesus, although they accept the Shiah belief in the immanent presence of Mahdi as heretical . Most Sunni Muslims reject the idea of the second-coming of Jesus .
 Sunnis also place much less emphasis on the clerical role in daily life . With a few exceptions, Sunnis tend to put more emphasis on clerical roles in everyday life .
 The Wahhabi sect in Saudi Arabia takes a very strict Sunni Islamic fundamentalist view . It disagrees with the Shiah and Sufi (a more mystical approach to Islam)
 Influences from other cultures and what they perceive to be false interpretations of the Koran are to be eliminated . The Koran is to be banned from being read in the Muslim world .
 Religious leaders authorized to do so from time to time when circumstances dictate may issue a decree for religious guidance on various topics . This includes calling for jihad or holy struggle as against infidels .
 The establishment of madrassas, or religious schools, is seen by many faithful as a blessing . Many religious schools have been established across the world .
 A large number of madrassas funded by Saudi Wahhabists in countries such as Pakistan where public schools are poor or nonexistent . Public schools often provide meals for the boys who attend .
 The curriculum essentially emphasizes rote memorization of the Koran and only educates men . The curriculum, however, essentially emphasizes memorization .
 It was out of such madrassas that the leader of the Taliban, Mullah Omar, and a number of his associates emerged . The Taliban was formed out of the Madrassa in Afghanistan .
 Much is made of the potential of conflict between Islam and other faiths . Of equal concern should be the internal struggle within Islam within Islam, he says .
 Muslim fanatics, or jihadists like al-Qaeda, have carried out acts of violence in the name of Islam . Voices have been raised that such persons are threatening to hijack Islam and use it to justify their worldview .
 The role of religion in international politics has only recently been rediscovered . The concepts of nation and state have been at the forefront of studies of global politics for years .
 A certain amount of confusion continues to exist over their meanings and the meanings of related terms . The meanings of some of these terms are still unclear .
 The terms nation and state are frequently used interchangeably as if they were synonyms . The terms state and nation are often used in the context of national politics .
 The term state is a legal concept that refers to a population administered by a government or other administrative authority on a given territory with a claim to sovereignty recognized by other sovereign states . State is a state administered by government or administrative authority in a territory that claims sovereignty .
 A state is depicted as a geographical entity on a map and is an example of physical geography . Therefore a state is shown as a physical geographical entity . State is depicted in a map as a state .
 When a particular state is composed of a single nation or people with a common identity, we enter the realm of human geography . When a state is made up of a nation, it is a state of its people, it becomes a nation of people .
 Nation and state may be coterminous or overlapping, as in the United States where most people consider themselves to be American, notwithstanding the diversity of racial, ethnic, and cultural differences among them . The nation and state are often cotermine or overlapping .
 Compare and contrast the concepts of nation, nationstate, and nationalism, and explain how they can be a source of conflict in global politics . This slideshow depicts two types of geography —physical and human geography .
 Oil, critical to the world economy, was discovered in Saudi Arabia in 1938 . Oil is critical to world economy .
 Saudi reserves were the largest in the world, accounting for one-fifth of the world's total . Until recent claims by Venezuela, the Saudi reserves had been the largest . Venezuela's claims by Saudi Arabia have been disputed by the government .
 The Kaabah in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, is the most sacred site in Islam . The Koran states it was constructed by Abraham and his son Ishmael .
 The concentration of Muslims in various parts of the world such as Indonesia, South Asia, and the Middle East is an example of human geography . A visit to Indonesia is part of the hajj pilgrimage for Muslims .
 The development of long-range missiles by North Korea is of concern to neighbors such as Japan . North Korea continues to develop its missile capabilities . Geography plays an important role in a state's security .
 Whether civil war or a war among states, its ravages can be depicted on a map of the world . Whether a civil war is a war, it can be shown on a world map .
 An anti-Kaddafi rebel examines a military aircraft destroyed by NATO forces prior to Kaddafi's death . NATO forces destroyed the aircraft by Kaddafi forces before his death .
 Although race can be a basis for identity, it is also a problematic basis for establishing unity . Race is a very problematic basis of establishing unity, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Racial distinctions that are used to justify divisiveness, discrimination, or unequal treatment are common enough . Racial distinctions are common in America, but they are not common enough.
 In the extreme, racism can also lead to genocide -- the mass murder of people because of their race or other identity . In extreme cases, racism may lead to mass murder in the U.S.
 Many prefer not to draw racial distinctions among peoples at all . It is better from this perspective to identify only with the human race, he says .
 Focusing on a common humanity avoids the scourge of racism that may come from accentuating separate identities based on physical or other differences, says CNN.com .
 The distinction between a nation and an ethnic group is often difficult to make, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 People define their identities in either national or ethnic terms . One reason is that the terms are subjective . People are the ones who make the choice when they define their identity in national terms .
 The two terms are frequently used interchangeably . Adding to the confusion, the terms are often used in conjunction with other terms .
 In the United States, people tend to identify nationally as Americans while holding other ethnic identities that define them as individuals or groups within society . In the U.S. people tend not to identify as Americans, but as Americans .
 Nationality involves a significant degree of self-definition . It refers to a people with a sense of common identity, if not destiny . Nationality is a key part of a nation's identity .
 This common identity may be the result of such diverse factors as race, ethnicity, religion, culture, culture or shared historical experiences, or some combination of these . It may be a common identity .
 When this common identity has political consequences and serves as a basis for national mobilization, the result is nationalism . The result of a common identity is nationalism, the author says .
 Constructivists remind us that when we consider race, ethnicity, national, or other forms of identity, we are talking about social constructions . Constructivism is a form of identity that can be defined by constructions, constructions of identity .
 These distinctions do not exist in nature, but have become part of a human narrative . These distinctions are not in nature but in the human narrative, say experts .
 When we deconstruct these narratives, as postmodernists are prone to do, we find that physical or other differences are not decisive in drawing discriminatory distinctions . This is the case of postmodernism .
 More often than not, they amount to establishing a community’s own identity by defining an ‘other’ as being somehow different . More often not, it amounts to establishing communities’ own identity .
 “Other’s community” is not only different, but also inferior to the community it has been constructed . Matters get even worse when this ‘other’ community is described as different, inferior to one's own community .
 Different communities view themselves as mutually exclusive, having few links that would bring them together as fellow human beings . Unfortunately, this is not just abstract, but as discussed below, becomes dangerous when different communities see themselves mutually exclusive . This is especially dangerous when communities see each other as mutually exclusive
 Intercommunal violence is often the expected outcome when policymakers foster these mutually exclusive constructions or allow them to simmer for years, perhaps decades or longer . It's often expected to be the result of policies that foster intercommunal tensions .
 The birth of modern nationalism is generally traced back to the 18th century . Nationalism is a modern form of nationalism .
 The French Revolution that began in 1789 was a watershed of political ideas and ideologies . Ideas and ideologies would take root throughout Europe and later spread through colonialism throughout the rest of the world .
 In 15th century, Machiavelli had written in The Prince that the ruler of the city of Florence, Lorenzo de Medici, needed to use his resources to unify Italy and avoid continual warfare among Italian city-states .
 unification of Italy would have to wait until the 1880s . Unification of Italy was first to take place in Italy in the 1870s .
 It was the French in their revolution and its aftermath who first put the notion of nationalism into practical use . The French revolution was first put to practical use of the idea of nationalism .
 In past centuries, French and English kings had raised armies to fight one another . They relied heavily on professionals or mercenaries in their employ .
 Oliver Cromwell’s ‘new model army’ was raised from the general population during the 1640s . The army was raised to fight the king's forces in the English civil war . Cromwell's “new army” was raised in 1640 to fight
 Napoleon's mass armies were used to fill the ranks of Napoleon’s mass armies as they set forth on military campaigns across the European continent . This very successful approach was used in Napoleon's campaigns across Europe .
 The French employed a draft—conscription for national service —as an effective means to raise popular armies . The draft was used to raise armies galvanized in their fervor by nationalism and nationalist appeals .
 It was a model followed in Europe and elsewhere, often with disastrous consequences, throughout the 19th and 20th centuries . It was followed by disastrous consequences throughout the 20th century .
 Nationalism can be a benign force or even make a contribution to peace, as when fostering a common national identity within a geographically bounded state . Nationalism is used to overcome conflicts in an ethnically or racially diverse population .
 Nationalism can be a basis for improving the welfare of the people within a state and society, says David Cameron . Nationalism is the basis of improving the people's welfare, he says .
 It has also been used to unify a people and lead to the formation of a single nation-state . Germany and Italy in the 1870s and 1880s and Israel in 1948 .
 Giuseppe Mazzini and Theodor Herzl are representative of writers in the 19th-century nationalist genre . They are the Italian patriot and revolutionary . The Hungarian Jewish newspaper correspondent Herzl is representative of the Hungarian Jewish .
 He saw “the distinctive nationality of the Jews” as best preserved within a Jewish state . Observing that “no nation on earth has endured such struggles and sufferings,” he said .
 Early 19th-century nationalism in Latin America took the form of independence movements that ended Spanish and Portuguese empires there .
 Nationalist political movements in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s also succeeded in ending European colonial rule in most of Africa and Asia . Nationalist movements in these regions created new states .
 Nationalism, however, can serve darker purposes when it is used at the expense of others . Nationalism contributes to civil strife and warfare and contributes to war .
 In these circumstances, there is a mutual exclusivity or intolerance of differing national and ethnic groups . In the case of the case, there should be a 'mutual exclusivity' or intolerance .
 Extreme nationalism fosters intolerance of others, particularly if they are seen as the oppressors . Extreme nationalism is often expressed by those feeling that their people have been oppressed . It often fosters an intolerance of other people .
 The extreme-nationalist appeal may take the illusory form that the oppressed are actually a superior people who have been downtrodden unjustly by so-called inferiors . In some cases, as in Germany during the 1930s, the appeal may be in the form of an
 Adolf Hitler’s 20th-century ultranationalist and racist supremacy arguments went well beyond those of Johann Eichte and other 18th-and 19th century German nationalist writers . Adolf Hitler's 20th century arguments went beyond that of the 18th and 19th-
 Hitler portrayed Jews, Slavs, Gypsies, and other non-Germanic peoples as racially and culturally inferior . Hitler and his National Socialist movement portrayed Jews as racially inferior .
 Germans were said to be Aryans, a “master race” who deserved to be treated as such and given the territory needed to expand and grow . Germans are said to have been Aryans—a "master race" who deserved the territory .
 In certain regions, this geographic expansion led to the elimination of the indigenous population . In some regions, the expansion of the country led to an elimination of indigenous populations .
 Nationalism pushed to this racist extreme was the rationale used in an attempt to ‘justify’ Germany’s aggression against non-German nation-states in World War II and the Holocaust . More than six million Jews as well as approximately five million Slavs, Gyps
 Beginning in 1894, nearly 200,000 Armenians were slain in two years by Turkish soldiers and police . In 1894 and 1895, Armenians died in Turkey, killing more than 100,000 people .
 In 1909 the renewed massacre of Armenians began again and ended only because of the intervention of outside powers, including the United States . In 1909, Armenians were massacred in a renewed massacre . The renewed massacre only ended only when the U.S. intervened .
 Armenian support for the Allied cause in World War I led to the estimated elimination of one million Armenians . Armenians were killed by the Allied forces during the war .
 Ethnic conflict in Rwanda resulted in the massacre of at least 500,000 Tutsi at the hands of the Hutus . More recently, ethnic conflict in the African state of Rwanda ended in the country's genocide .
 Genocide in the former Yugoslavia has also claimed large numbers of Muslims, Croats, Serbs, and Kosovars as victims .
 Countries that enjoy a strong sense of unity tend to characterize additional identities among peoples as ethnic distinctions rather than seeing them as differences in nationality . U.S. citizens tend to see additional identities as ethnic differences rather than nationalistic differences .
 Native Americans, Hispanics, Jews, and other Americans of European, African, or Asian origin are referred to customarily as ethnic groups . Some Native Americans see themselves as “nations” within the United States .
 Whatever differences, they still identify themselves as Americans . Whatever their differences, Americans still identify them as Americans.
 Members of ethnic groups may speak the same language, share cultural values, or even have physical similarities . However, all of these groups still maintain an overarching or common national identity .
 Although most French are of European origin, many of African or Asian derivation (often from local elites in 19thand 20th-century French colonial populations) consider themselves as French nationals despite racial differences .
 Japan is more homogeneous as a nation-state than either the U.S. or France . More homogeneous than either of the United States or France is Japan . Japan is the most homogeneous country in the world .
 Most of Japan’s population share a common language, history, culture, culture and national identity . With the exception of a small proportion of Korean or other origin, most of Japan's population share common language .
 Things get more confusing when we talk of a state made up of several “countries,” as in the United Kingdom . The United Kingdom is composed of England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland .
 The Irish, Welsh, and Scottish communities are separate from each other . Their Celtic identity differentiates them collectively from the English who descended from Angles and Saxons .
 Scotland and England did not unite as a single state until they finally became a united kingdom in 1707 . Scotland already had established dominance in earlier centuries over Wales and Ireland . England and Scotland had already established dominance over Wales .
 English and Scottish monarchs were almost always at odds and had often been at war with each other . The two monarchs had been at odds for centuries .
 Although the United Kingdom is a single state, frictions and conflicts among the different national or ethnic groups continue to the present day . The United States is a one-state state, but frictions continue to exist .
 Scottish nationalists, a minority within Scotland, see ‘Scottishness’ as much more than a mere ethnic distinction . Scottish nationalists are a minority of the population in Scotland, a majority within Scotland .
 If they had their way, their country would again become a separate state . If they wanted to, they would again be a state, they say .
 The creation of Scottish and Welsh parliaments at the end of the 1990s as well as an Irish Assembly in Belfast to handle many regional affairs . It remains to be seen whether the creation of the Irish Assembly will satisfy nationalist sentiment or spur demands for even greater autonomy .
 Two or more nations exist within the borders of a single state . Binational States are very common in the United States. Binational states are very rare .
 After World War I, the victorious allied powers created a single Czechoslovak state from some of the territory that had been part of the just-defeated Austro-Hungarian empire . Czechoslovakia was one of the most successful states in the world after the war .
 Czechs and Slovaks shared the same language and, although there were some Protestants and Jews in the population, most were Catholics . Most of the population was Catholics .
 Czechs were subject more to Austrian and Slovaks more to Hungarian influences . Slovaks were more likely to be influenced by Hungarian influences than Czechs . Among other factors, Czechs are subject to more Austrian influences than others .
 Czech-Slovak cultural differences were ethnic differences between Bohemian Czechs in the western part of the present-day Czech Republic and Moravians in the eastern part . Complicating reconciliation of these cultural differences was ethnic differences .
 Separate identities between Czechs and Slovaks proved to be more than just ethnic differences, leading in 1993 to the formal breakup of Czechoslovakia into FIGURE 4. Separate identity led to the break-up of the Czech-Slovak Republic .
 Many people think when they use the term ""England"" they are referring to Great Britain or the United Kingdom . The United Kingdom and Ireland are also known as Ireland and Ireland .
 Great Britain is composed of England, Wales, and Scotland . The United Kingdom is also composed of Northern Ireland and Northern Ireland .
 Czechoslovakia is an example of a binational state that has become separate Czech and Slovak nation-states . Czechs are Czechs and Slovaks; Czechs were Czechsoslovakia .
 There are other binational states, by contrast, that thus far have stayed together . There have been a number of binational nations in the world .
 One example is Belgium, with its separate Flemishand French-speaking national groups .
 Some see Flanders to the north with its Flemish-speaking Flemings and Wallonia to the south with its French-speaking Walloons . Some see the Belgian state as being composed of two separate countries or nations . Wallonia is located in the south of Flanders,
 Different language groups in a particular country are an indicator of diverse cultures with different histories and, as a result, separate national identities that tend to be reinforced by being concentrated in different geographic locations .
 Keeping Belgium together as a single state has been a formidable challenge for more than a century and a half . Belgium is one of the most successful states of the world .
 A common religious affiliation (most Belgians are Catholics) has not been enough. A common religion is not enough. It's not enough, it's a common religion, it has to be shared .
 The church in Belgium has come to reflect Flemish-Wallonian cultural differences . Indeed, the church is a reflection of Flemisch-Wallonia culture .
 In such circumstances, choosing a common form of governance proved to be as difficult in the 20th century as in the 19th . In the 20s and 30s, it was difficult to find common governance among those involved .
 Great powers meeting in London brought in a king from one of the German states in an effort to keep the country together . Great powers met in London in the winter of 1830-1831, bringing in a German king .
 The monarchy of Belgium continues its efforts to perform the same national-unity function . The monarchy continues efforts to continue its efforts .
 Belgian government has institutions that deal with education, labor, and other issues of importance to Flemings and Walloons . To accommodate aspirations of the different communities, the government has separate institutions .
 Canada is yet another example of a binational state with its separate Englishand French-speaking national groups . Canada is one of several binational states with separate English and French groups .
 Some Canadians say ‘binational’ is inaccurate because it excludes Canada’s Inuit, Arctic peoples . Many ethnologists call First Nations people in Canada First Nations .
 The extent to which these peoples identify themselves as Canadians or choose to have separate national identities is a crucial distinction if we are to understand the complexity of Canadian society .
 Canadians, notwithstanding considerable national diversity, contribute to keeping the country together . Of course, a feeling of national unity as Canadians contributes to keeping Canada together, says author .
 The Canadian example demonstrates that it is possible to have different levels of national identity . In other words, as Canada's example demonstrates, it is .
 One can be Canadian first and English first and French-speaking Canadian second . One can also be French first or English first .
 Frenchor English-speakers see themselves as separate nations . More troublesome for national unity, however, is when French or English-speaking people think they're separate nations.
 In 1995, a referendum in Quebec to create an independent state was barely defeated . A referendum in 1995, for example, was narrowly defeated in Quebec .
 Switzerland is an example of a relatively successful multinational state composed of German, French-, Italian-, and Romansch-speaking Swiss . The state is composed of German, French, Italian, and Swiss .
 The Swiss confederation allows a considerable degree of local autonomy, while still allowing broad Swiss identification . The confederation is based in Switzerland and allows local autonomy .
 Key to keeping the country together over centuries has been decentralization of as many matters as possible . The country has been in the process of decentralizing as much as possible in recent years .
 There has been agreement to collaborate in such matters as establishing a common currency and to cooperate centrally in other ways to promote commerce .
 Unsuccessful examples of multinational states include the former Soviet Union and former Yugoslavia . Both have broken up into separate states since 1991 .
 National groups in both countries found that most of the obstacles to separatism had been either removed or weakened substantially .
 Use of coercive means to maintain unity failed in both countries . Police and armed forces used coercive means of maintaining unity failed . Use of force failed to achieve unity in both nations .
 Rapid changes in Eastern Europe during the 1980s intensified iong-standing ethnic tensions in the former Yugoslavia .
 In fact, containing peoples with diverse identities within the same borders and establishing geographic boundaries that countered the homogeneity of groups allowed colonial powers to maintain control by capitalizing on differences .
 The boundaries of this former British colony include three separate tribal groups (Ibo, Yoruba, and Hausa-Fulani) that outnumber the populations of many countries .
 Civil war broke out there with fighting among tribal groups continuing into the 1970s . After independence and the departure of British administrators and security forces from Nigeria, civil war began there .
 People continue to identify by tribal group and resent advantages taken by some groups over others . People still identify as tribal groups and resent advantage taken by others .
 Nigeria is more commonly known as a multiethnic or multitribal state . It is referred to more commonly as a multi-nigerian state .
 It is interesting to note that in the case of Africa, it is common to use the terms tribes and tribalism rather than nations and nationalism .
 For some observers tribalism carries negative (if not pejorative) connotations . While nationalism has more positive overtones, tribalism has negative overtones . Some observers say tribalism is more positive than nationalism .
 Much of the slaughter occurring in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s was generally attributed to Serbian or Croatian nationalism . The massacres that occurred in Rwanda in 1994 were ascribed to tribalism rather than tribalism .
 Whether the different use of terms is an accurate reflection of regional or local preferences or instead is indicative of bias on the part of the observer .
 By no means are Nigeria and Rwanda isolated cases in Africa or elsewhere, especially in less-developed areas of the world . Rwanda and Nigeria are not isolated cases of the problem in Africa .
 Divisions by tribe or clan in Africa are often stronger than any pretense of national unity . Divisions are stronger than national unity in Africa, especially in Africa .
 To avoid civil war and other forms of ethnic strife, postcolonial governments have tried with varying degrees of success to manage this diversity . Nigeria, Rwanda, Burundi, Ethiopia, Somalia, Chad, Liberia, and Sudan are examples .
 Group identities in many countries throughout the rest of the developing world are often characterized in terms of ethnicity . Tribalism is associated with Africa, but tribalism is often associated with the continent .
 The potential for (or reality of) ethnic strife persists in Indonesia, Malaysia, and other multiethnic societies in South and Southeast Asia, as well as elsewhere .
 What is characterized as nationalism in Europe is often termed tribalism or ethnicity in other regions . What is called nationalism is often called tribalism in Europe .
 Neocolonialism refers to foreign influence by the former colonial power that persists despite an end to its physical, controlling presence . It is a form of foreign influence that persists even after the end of its physical presence .
 Some unity among elites has been found through their linguistic, cultural, and commercial ties with former colonial powers, particularly in Africa and Asia . Although neocolonialism is sometimes criticized, some unity is found through ties with the former powers .
 To varying degrees they acquired either British, French, Belgian, Dutch, or Portuguese linkages that have been retained in the postcolonial period to the present day .
 The European colonial language provided a means of communication across tribal and linguistic groups, particularly by elites . As a practical matter, the colonial language was used to communicate with elites .
 European social and political values were either blended with or grafted onto local cultures and customs . In addition, aspects of European social, political values are either blending with or blending with local cultures .
 English is the common language of the political, social, and commercial elites in both Indian and Pakistani societies . English, for example, is a common language in both India and Pakistan .
 After World War II, when the British and local nationalists negotiated independence in India in 1947-1948, a decision was made to divide India and Pakistan along Elindu-Muslim lines as separate countries .
 Sikhs’ desire for a separate Punjab nation was rejected by the Sikh community . Sikhs wanted to separate Punjab from Punjab province . This division did not accommodate the Sikhs' desire for an independent nation .
 partition still left India as a very heterogeneous society with many religious and ethnic divisions . Moreover, partition left India itself as a heterogeneous country .
 As noted earlier, it is possible for a nation to exist without being associated with a particular state . Nation-States and Nations without States are possible to exist .
 Irish were a nation without a state until 1922, when nationalists finally established a separate state after several centuries of British rule . The Irish were finally granted a state in 1922 after a series of years of struggle .
 Omitted from the new Irish Republic were six of the nine counties in the northern region known as Ulster . Six counties in Ulster were included in the new Republic, but were not included .
 Protestant majorities in Ulster with their historical ties to Scotland and the English crown remained under British protection as part of the United Kingdom . Protestant majorities remained under the protection of the English Crown in Ulster .
 Northern Ireland is commonly understood as being strife between Catholics and Protestants . However, the conflict is not about religion per se . The conflict is more about religion than religion, rather than religion .
 Religious difference between the two communities is only a surface-level indicator of deeper historical, cultural, and political cleavages underlying recurrent intercommunal strife . Religious difference is only surface level indicator of much deeper cultural, cultural and political .
 Great strides have been made toward peaceful relations between the communities in recent years . Great strides were made toward peace between the two communities .
 Queen Elizabeth made a state visit to Dublin in 2011, a symbolic gesture of goodwill on both sides that would not have occurred just a few years ago . As an indicator of how much better things are, the political climate between London and Dublin is better now .
 Some minority factions identified with the Irish Republican Army remain discontent with any settlement that leaves a British presence in Ulster . Still, from time to time, still resort to violence .
 The late 19thand 20th-century Zionist movement sought a state, or at least a homeland, for Jews in the ancient biblical lands . It sought to create a homeland for Jews .
 The horror of the Elolocaust of the 1930s and 1940s in which some six million Jews died in concentration camps primarily in Germany and occupied Poland contributed to the decision to create a Jewish state in Israel .
 Many ethnic Jews have chosen to retain American or other national identities . Those who wish to make their homes in Israel have been able to emigrate there and formally become Israeli nationals .
 David A Lake and Donald Rothchild argue that many popular explanations for ethnic conflict are incomplete or simply wrong . They argue that nationalism and nationalism are not the only explanation for conflict .
 A tremendous amount of literature has been produced on nationalism . Many theories have been advanced to explain the origin of nationalism and the conditions under which it contributes to international conflict .
 David A Lake and Donald Rothchild have developed a framework and argument concerning the circumstances under which ethnic conflict arises within a state, which may result in civil wars and genocide . Lake and Rothchild argue that ethnic conflict can lead to civil war and genocide in a state .
 Ethnic conflict is not caused directly by intergroup differences, ancient hatreds, or the stresses of modern life caused by the global economy . It's not caused by inter-group differences or ancient hatred, it's caused by modern life .
 Ethnic conflict is most often caused by collective fears of the future . This occurs when states lose their ability to arbitrate between groups or provide credible guarantees of protection for groups .
 In other words, a crisis of confidence in the state or the actual specter of state failure is the key underlying factor they identify for the rise in ethnic conflict, they say . The crisis is a key factor in the rise of ethnic conflict in Syria .
 The effects of international anarchy -- fear and a feeling that self-help is the only option -- take effect at the societal level of analysis . Fear and the fear of anarchy is the result of an international anarchy, the author says .
 Groups may arm out of a sense of fear out of fear, but the result is to stimulate competition among groups, raising the collective fear factor even higher . The result of this is to raise the fear factor among groups even higher, experts say .
 Groups become suspicious of the intentions of other ethnic groups . The security dilemma is at work, says the author of the book .
 State weakness, therefore, is a precondition for violent ethnic conflict within states . The absence of a superordinate authority in the international system of world politics is a permissive cause of war, writes David Cameron .
 Once groups begin to fear for their safety, other factors come to the fore . Groups fear for the safety of their communities .
 Of particular importance is the rise of ethnic activists and political entrepreneurs who build on group fears . The rise in ethnic activists is particularly important in the country's political landscape .
 Political memories and historical symbols are stirred and utilized to whip up nationalist feeling and gain broader support . Political memories are stirred by historical symbols .
 Once political minorities realize they cannot rely on the state for their protection, they usually look outward to the international community for protection . The international community is the main source of protection in the Middle East .
 Lake and Rothchild say the international response has been feeble and unconvincing . They say states are reluctant to intervene to end systematic, statesanctioned, ethnic killing .
 When they do, as in Rwanda in the mid-1990s, it is often after hundreds of thousands of people have already died . Rwanda's Rwandan genocide was the country's first major conflict in the 1990s . Rwanda is still fighting for independence from Rwanda .
 Stephen Van Evera has suggested that four primary attributes of a nationalist movement determine the potential to produce violence . Stephen van Evera suggests that four attributes of nationalist movements determine potential for violence . He suggests that the potential for nationalist movements to be violent is to blame .
 If national self-determination is denied, he argues this raises the risks of war in the international system . He argues that it could raise the risk of war .
 A struggle for national freedom can produce wars of secession, risking the conflict spilling over into the international arena . The conflict could also spill over into international arena, writes David Frum .
 Stateless nationalities total approximately 25. million people, or 10 percent of the former USSR's total population . Such nationalities are estimated to be around 25 million people in the former Soviet Union .
 The seeds of future conflict may be planted if other groups are displaced . Furthermore, even if a nationalist movement successfully creates a new state, the seeds of conflict may also be planted .
 Zionism's displacement of the Palestinian Arabs in 1948 set the stage for later Arab-Israeli wars as well as terrorist activities . For example, the displacement of Palestinians in 1948 led to the creation of the Arab state of Israel .
 Successful nationalist leaders may reject the old ""rules of the game" of interstate politics, creating regional instability . Successful nationalists may reject old rules of the old interstate politics .
 The latter policy has been pursued after World War II by both German and Israeli governments .
 The territorial expansion route was pursued by pre-1914 pan-Germanism and by pan-Serbianism in the 1990s . The territory of Serbia and Montenegro has been the subject of several attempts to expand .
 The obvious examples are interwar Nazi nationalism in Germany, fascist nationalism in Mussolini's Italy, and militarist nationalism in imperial Japan .
 The nationalism of many immigrant nations (such as the U.S. and Canada) tend to be more likely to respect minorities . Many immigrant nations tend to respect minority groups .
 By contrast, nonimmigrant nationalisms tend to discriminate against or suppress or oppress their minorities . For example, Iraqi and Turkish policy against the Kurds, China's actions in Tibet, and Serbian oppression of Slavic Muslim and Albanian minorities contributed to the wars in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990
 According to Van Evera, these four attributes constitute a “danger scale,"" highlighting the level of danger posed by any given nationalism . The scale is a "danger scale" to assess the danger of nationalism .
 If all four attributes are positive or benign, such nationalisms may actually dampen the risk of war . The risk of a war may be lessened if all attributes of nationalisms are positive .
 If all four attributes are negative or malign, the nationalism at issue is bound to clash with others, increasing the risk of war . Conversely, if all four attribute are negative, it could lead to war . If all the attributes of nationalism are malign or negative, war could be
 The U.S. Institute of Peace provides practical tips on how to facilitate compromise and peace among parties in conflict .
 Palestinians and Kurds are two national groups, many of the latter having distinct tribal identities as well, without single states to call their own . Palestinians and the Kurds are both national groups .
 Kurds were promised a state in the peace settlements after World War I . They remained dispersed in and near mountainous areas of Iran, Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Azerbaijan, and elsewhere in the trans-Caucasus region of the former Soviet Union .
 Palestinians, a population with many highly educated people, live in a number of countries including Israel, Jordan, southern Lebanon, Syria, and the Gulf states . Palestinians are highly educated and have a large population of young people .
 Palestinians also remain in the Israeli-occupied territories taken in the June 1967 war . Israel claims the area as the biblical lands of Judea and Samaria . Palestinians also occupy the West Bank of the Jordan River .
 Palestinians often hold highly skilled positions as well as providing clerical, information technology, and other commercial services . One also finds Palestinians in many cities throughout the Middle East, where they often hold skilled positions .
 Palestinians and Kurds, as minorities in the countries in which they live, have suffered from severe forms of discrimination . Palestinians and Kurdish Kurds have suffered forms of persecution .
 Many Palestinians felt dispossessed of their homes and homeland in Palestine when Israel was established as a Jewish state in 1948 . Many Palestinians still feel dispossession of their homeland .
 Governments have conducted military campaigns and other attacks against Kurdish and Palestinian groups .
 The 1990s witnessed a move toward a degree of political autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza strip . At least in the Palestinian case, the 1990s saw a move to a degree .
 Terrorism, however, was continued by Palestinian factions such as Hamas . Terrorism continues to be continued by Hamas .
 Most Palestinians hope self-rule in areas of the West Bank will eventually lead to an independent Palestinian state with worldwide recognition of its sovereignty . The West Bank is one of the most important areas of Palestine's land .
 The principle of national self-determination as a policy option asserts nations have the right to choose their political status, whether that be an autonomous unit within an existing state or a new state .
 This obviously involves some degree of political control over a geographic area . This obviously entails some of the political control of a large area .
 The principle was used as a criterion for determining the geographic boundaries of states in their efforts to redraw the map of Europe . Woodrow Wilson and other leaders after World War I, advocated by American President Wilson and others .
 The aim was to create new nation-states to take the place of the defeated German, Austro-Hungarian, and Turkish empires that had dominated East-Central Europe . The aim of creating a nation-state was to take over the defeated empires .
 At its inception, national-selfdetermination has been abused, says the government . However well intentioned, the principle was at its inception it was abused, he says .
 Hitler claimed in 1938 that the Sudetenland, part of Czechoslovakia, should be a part of Germany . The region was added to the borders after World War I and had a predominantly German population .
 Supporters of the Munich concession could point to the arrangement merely as a line-drawing adjustment to post-World War I maps, an exercise consistent with the principle of national self-determination . After all, and quite apart from German aggressive designs on the territory of Czechoslovakia, supporters
 When political independence movements in the Third World struggled to end colonialism, they were not calling for the partition of a state but for its complete independence from foreign rule .
 Leaders in emerging less-developed states agreed to respect colonial borders . Leaders agreed in principle that colonial borders should be respected .
 Bangladesh (then East Pakistan), with India’s help, shattered the unity of Pakistan at the cost of tens of thousands of deaths and the flight of ten million refugees to India . Still, the one major successful breakup of an existing state during the Cold War occurred in 1971 .
 The British formula in 1948 of creating alongside predominantly Hindu India two Islamic Pakistans had now become two sovereign states, Bangladesh and Pakistan, respectively . Pakistan and Bangladesh are now two sovereign countries .
 This resolution sought to sustain the international stability resulting from reaffirmation of the primacy of the sovereign state over people on its own territory . This resolution seeks to sustain international stability . It sought to reaffirm the . primacy .
 The years since end of the Cold War, however, have seen substantial erosion of this idea . The idea of a Cold War with Russia has been eroded by the rise of the West .
 Self-determination could be achieved even at the expense of the unity of an existing state, says the author of the book . "Self-determination is possible even if it is possible to achieve the same as existing state," he says .
 The former Yugoslavia broke apart in the early 1990s, spawning a series of Balkan wars accompanied by widespread civil strife . What was largely a voluntary and peaceful development in the former Soviet Union, however, played out quite differently in the 1990s .
 During the Cold War both Moscow and Washington as well as former European colonial powers worked to keep their favorite strongmen in control as the two superpowers engaged in fierce global competition . In the case of sub-Saharan Africa, former African strongmen were kept in control .
 In the 1960s and 1970s, China also competed for favor in Africa and elsewhere in the developing world . In the 1970s and '60s, 'China's first major economic success was in Africa .
 With the end of this political and military competition on the African continent, countries such as Zaire or Congo were no longer strategic battlegrounds, and outside powers seemed to lose interest in the fate of many of these ethnically diverse states .
 The exceptions were those states that contained valuable minerals within their geographic borders . The exception was those states with valuable minerals in their borders .
 Several strategies or approaches have been adopted to manage two or more nations within a given state . Maintaining Unity in Binational, Multinational, and Multiethnic States has varying degrees of success .
 Keeping binational and multinational states together in intercommunal peace and mutual acceptance has proven to be a formidable task wherever it has been tried . The U.S. government has been trying to keep binational states together for decades .
 Separating national and ethnic groups into distinct, mutually exclusive communities is at best a short-term approach or coping mechanism as long as they remain within a single state . Separation of national groups into separate communities is not a long-term solution, as well as a coping mechanism
 "It is not by any means a long-term solution to the problem of national and ethnic or racial strife," says President Obama . "It's not a long term solution," says Obama .
 Intercommunal fighting in Lebanon in the 1970s and 1980s could be stopped only by creating what amounted to strict territorial zones for different religious and cultural groups .
 At best, such informal or de facto partition could produce only a very fragile peace, which easily could break down again into intercommunal warfare . At best such a peace could produce a fragile peace but it could also lead to intercommunist warfare .
 Legal division into separate Pakistani and Indian states in 1948 did not resolve differences between Muslim and Hindu communities either . Similarly, de jure or formal, formal, legal divisions into separate states in Pakistan and India did not solve differences between the two communities .
 hostilities (actual warfare or continual threat of warfare) have remained a fairly constant condition in Pakistani-Indian relations . As already noted, hostilities are still a constant condition .
 Conflictual relations have contributed substantially to efforts by both countries to acquire nuclear-weapons capabilities . These conflictual relations, moreover, have contributed to efforts to acquire nukes .
 dividing peoples by national and ethnic identity into separate states in the former Yugoslavia did not promote peace . Similarly, dividing nations by national or ethnic identity in Yugoslavia also not promoting peace . The former Yugoslavia was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 Civil strife became international war as each new state sought to expand or defend its territorial base . Civil strife turned into international war in the early 20th century .
 Some of the worst fighting occurred in Bosnia, the state that was most ethnically diverse . Not surprisingly, some of Bosnia's worst fighting was in Bosnia . Bosnia is one of the countries that has the largest population in the world .
 These examples should give one pause when considering whether partition along religious-sectarian lines in Iraq will bring stability to the country .
 Some of the most vicious fighting is among competing groups within the Shiah community . Furthermore, some of the worst fighting is between competing groups .
 One of the most severe examples of separation policies was the racial division of blacks and whites in South Africa .
 South African apartheid, a policy of strict racial segregation, allowed a white minority to maintain a dominant position over the black majority . The policy was imposed by the South African government under apartheid .
 South Africa became isolated from neighboring black African states, giving the latter incentive to support antigovernment, black-nationalist groups in South Africa . South Africa has become isolated from other African states .
 Ending formal apartheid by the early 1990s did not resolve black-white problems, much less tribal and other differences within the black majority . In the 1990s, South Africa's black majority still had tribal differences .
 Efforts were in fact taken in the 1990s to expose abuses by all parties during the apartheid period in an attempt to achieve reconciliation . Efforts in the 90s were made in the hope of reconciliation .
 As elsewhere, prospects for a long-term peace in South Africa rest on improved economic well-being and greater social tolerance or acceptance across ethnic communities, aspirations always more easily stated than achieved .
 This may mean denying that national differences exist at all or, if they do, deny their legitimacy as separate identities . This may also mean denying the existence of national differences .
 Assimilationist policies were adopted in the Soviet Union during Stalin’s time in an effort to “Russify” non-Russian peoples . Assimilationism was an attempt to "Russify" non-Russians in the USSR .
 The Iraqi government under Saddam Hussein conducted military campaigns to suppress or maintain control over the non-Arab Kurdish population in the northern part of the country .
 Turkish policies denied Kurds a separate identity, referring to them merely as ‘mountain Turks,” are another example of assimilationist policies . Turkish policies mentioned previously that denied Kurds separate identity are another examples of assimilationist policies, writes CNN.com's John Defter
 The United States has tried to assimilate diverse populations, establishing “American” as a common national identity . The U.S. has also tried to integrate diverse populations and establish ‘American’
 Military campaigns were conducted to gain control over Native American populations, later placing them on reservations . Earlier in its history, particularly in the 19th century, military campaigns were .
 Native Americans were encouraged to leave the reservations and become part of the larger American society . This policy of formal exclusion gradually changed, as many Native Americans left the reservations .
 Slavery in the U.S. lasted until the 1860s . Slavery effectively denied African Americans in slave states any degree of autonomy .
 Racial segregation policies that formally separated blacks from whites, particularly in the American South, survived into the 1960s .
 Segregationists did not intend that blacks should ever see themselves as a separate nation as many American Indians did . Segregationist policies were to impose on blacks a separate status within U.S. society .
 Mainstream civil rights reformers opposed separation into different, racially distinct states or societies . Similarly, they opposed the few who advocated separation into separate societies .
 There are those who object to any such hyphenation of the American nationality . They prefer the complete assimilation or unity implied by the single term American .
 Those who want to retain ethnic identities as part of the American fabric tend not to object to hyphenation or ethnic labels . But those who identify as ethnic communities tend to not object .
 Acknowledging explicitly that one is of Japanese, Finnish, Hispanic origin, is still to be very much an American . Thus from this perspective, acknowledge explicitly that . one is . of Japanese or Finnish origin, for example, still to . be very American .
 Adopting a common national identity has not necessarily meant dropping all other identities . Assimilationist policies have been relatively successful in the U.S. and Canada .
 Separate ethnic and racial identities have survived, if not flourished, in the United States . Separate racial identities still thrive in the U.S.
 The common bond is a commitment to the idea of being an American or to the democratic ideals expressed in the national Constitution, not to any single or separate ethnic identity . The bond is not to be a single ethnic identity, but to an American, the author says .
 A commitment to multiculturalism allows for the richness of cultural diversity while still retaining an overarching national identity . The U.S. should be proud of its multiculturalism, says President Obama .
 It is when cultural diversity is interpreted as separatism that controversy ensues . Culture diversity is not a problem, it is a problem when it is seen as a problem in the world .
 One sees this in the United States in the debate over national language . One sees it in the U.S. as an example of how national language is important .
 Most assimilationists in the U.S. acknowledge that different ethnic and cultural groups have a right to speak Spanish, Mandarin or one of the other Chinese dialects .
 They voice opposition to giving other languages equal status with English . On the other hand, they voice opposing to giving them equal status .
 To be bilingual or multilingual is a matter of choice, not a requirement for other Americans who choose to communicate only in English . To be multilingual or to be bilingual is a choice, it's not a necessity for others .
 English is the traditional, spoken language in the U.S. that cuts across different ethnic, cultural, or other identities . English is a language that helps uniting different ethnic or cultural identities, experts say .
 Single nation-states are states with one common or overarching national identity and lacking deep national and ethnic divisions . Almost all countries have at least one or more ethnic minorities in their societies .
 This is the case in France, Japan, the Scandinavian countries, the Republic of Korea, and most nation-states throughout the world . This is not the same case in most of the world, but in France and Japan .
 Unitary states are composed of two or more nations or strong ethnic communities, a consociational model may be the means for maintaining peace and keeping the state together .
 Consociationalism typically allows a maximum of local autonomy for the different communities within binational and multinational states . Through agreements and formal rules that share or divide the powers and positions of government among different national and ethnic groups, consociationalists typically allow maximum local autonomy .
 Strict rules were followed for several decades that allocated positions of political authority and representation among the different Christian and Muslim communities . Rules were used to allocate positions of power to the different Muslim and Christian communities .
 It proved extraordinarily difficult to renegotiate these arrangements, partly because many Christian Lebanese saw their position as undermining their position in favor of increasing the representation of one or another of the Muslim communities .
 Differences among familial and other factions vying for power in the different communities contributed to the complexity of recasting political relationships .
 The interests of outside states as diverse as Syria, Iran, and Israel made the already difficult problem next to impossible to resolve . The situation is difficult to deal with, especially in Syria and Iran .
 Intercommunal bloodshed, direct and indirect interventions by outside powers, and de facto partition of the different communities ensued . The conflict was the result of violence between the two communities .
 Consociationalism can contribute to unity and civility among diverse peoples within a state . But the Lebanese example underscores how fragile these arrangements can be, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Belgian accommodation of different Flemish and Wallonian interests has required continual attention . Belgium has a long history of trying to accommodate Flemans and Wallians in Belgium .
 Establishing duplicate governmental ministries, political parties, and even universities for the separate Flemishand French-speaking communities is an approach consistent with the consociational model . Establishment of duplicate government ministries and political parties would be a good idea .
 A central government has remained in Brussels even as there has been considerable decentralization of political authority to the separate communities . The EU has been the most populous country in the world, with more than 100,000 residents .
 If diverse communities are to stay together within a single state, efforts are required continually over time to refine, modify, correct, and legitimize these power-sharing and power-dividing arrangements . "Diverse communities must stay together"
 Political elites must be dedicated to maintaining the system as opposed to exacerbating ethnic tensions to their particular advantage . For this to work, political elites must maintain the system, not exacerbate tensions .
 Unitary states establish single, centralized governments . Federal and Confederal Approaches are federal and state-based approaches .
 A federal state is one composed of separate state or provincial governments that have important functions to perform independently . By contrast, a federal state must coexist with a strong central government that may well take the upper hand on many matters .
 The United States is an example of a federation, although the reasons for choosing federalism were not related to problems of nationality and ethnicity . The U.S. is one of the world's most populous countries .
 The American rationale for establishing a federated state had more to do with distrust of unchallenged centralized power, geographic distances that were significant in the 18th century . The United States Constitution was written, and a desire to provide for security .
 Federalism provides a vehicle for managing differences between separate French-speaking and English-speaking communities . The rationale for federalism goes beyond such geographic and other concerns, it's said .
 Quebec has some local authority even as it remains part of the Canadian federation . francophone Quebec has a separate distinction and local authority . Quebec is part of Canada's federation .
 Separatists, thus far still still a minority, find present arrangements unsatisfactory . Separatist groups are unhappy with the government's handling of the situation .
 Efforts have been made to accommodate the national and ethnic concerns they represent . Efforts are being made, however, to accommodate their concerns .
 Agreements have been made protecting separate language and cultural identities . Allocating additional funds and more local authority to the different provinces .
 The terms perhaps can be best understood as different points of a continuum . The terms of the two are different points on a continuum, says CNN.com .
 The distinction between federation and confederation is not always clear-cut . It's important to be a federation, not a confederation, a federation or confederation .
 Federations and confederations are both composed of states, republics, provinces, cantons, or other political units with their own separate governments . Federations are also composed of state, republic, provinces and cantons . They are composed of separate governments, federations, or conf
 Confederations, however, have much weaker central governance than federations . Confederations have relatively more political authority at local levels . Federations have less central governance, but have more political power .
 In short, confederalism takes a major step further in the direction of greater local autonomy through decentralization . Confederalism is a form of decentralization that decentralizes local autonomy .
 Decentralized governance has been a key ingredient in Switzerland’s success in keeping its Italian, French, German, and Romansch-speaking peoples together in a single state . Switzerland is a confederation of Italian and French-speaking people .
 Cantons the size of many American counties retain authority over education, health care, law enforcement, and even conveying of citizenship . Cantons retain considerable authority over many issues, including education, law, law .
 Central authorities make common foreign policy, planning for defense against invasion by outside powers . Central authorities also maintain the country’s economic and monetary systems .
 Authorities representing local interests are subject to scrutiny by local authorities . Even the local authorities represent local interests .
 Rather than having a single president of the Swiss Confederation, there is a seven-person presidency that assures representation in national councils of diverse interests among cantons .
 This is in addition to a national legislature to bring representatives together to deal with issues that cannot be dealt with at the local level . The national legislature will also be set up in the U.S.
 Important questions often given to the people to vote on directly in a referendum . Important questions are frequently given to voters directly in the referendum .
 Such direct democracy is consistent with a ‘town meeting’ tradition still practiced, particularly in smaller Swiss cantons .
 Given this experience, breakaway national republics found even confederation too strong a set of ties for their political taste .
 With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the most that could be worked out at the time was agreement on establishing a commonwealth . A loose association of sovereign states was a very loose association . The collapse of Soviet Union was the most workable agreement .
 Three functions have been identified in U.N. efforts to establish and maintain peace in places as diverse as Cyprus, the Sinai, and the Balkans . Three functions were identified in a 50-year United Nations effort .
 Diplomatic efforts to end fighting among the groups is the peacemaking function of the peace process . Diplomatic diplomacy is the key to ending the fighting in the region .
 Peace enforcement is the threat or actual use of force by local or multilateral authorities as when actions taken under United Nations auspices designed to stop the fighting and halt or at least reduce bloodshed among national or ethnic groups . Peace enforcement may be a supplement to diplomatic efforts .
 Peacekeeping is a maintenance function that typically involves monitoring or enforcing in a neutral fashion a cease-fire or peace already agreed to by the contending parties . This may be followed by peacekeeping, a peacekeeping function that may involve monitoring or enforce a peace agreement agreed to .
 The problem with all three, however, is that they are stopgap or short-term measures . They do little to address the underlying causes of intercommunal strife, the authors say .
 From peace theory we learn that prospects for peace are greatest if there at least can be an acceptance or tolerance of people with diverse identities . Peace theory states that peace is greatest if people accept or tolerate people who have diverse identities, rather than oppress others .
 Intercommunal tolerance or acceptance is a minimal condition for maintaining peace over time . Some degree of tolerance is a minimum condition for peace in the U.S. Some tolerance is necessary to maintain peace, author says .
 Of course, no easy remedy can be found to solve problems of national, ethnic, or racial strife . No easy solution can solve problems such as national or ethnic strife, he says .
 In the short term, we may need to draw lines on maps to partition or separate people just to keep them from fighting . In the long-term, this could be the case of partitioning or partitioning people .
 Peace theorists do look to a longer-run transformation of solid lines that divide peoples into dotted or permeable lines that allow for passage across intercommunal boundaries of people, their ideas, and economic resources . Peace theorists look at a longer run of transformation of these solid lines into permeable
 That there can be tolerance or acceptance of diverse peoples has roots in the 17thand 18th-century Enlightenment . The ancient Greco-Roman Stoic Stoic idea that whatever our differences, it is common humanity that unites us is uniting .
 Such tolerance or acceptance of cultural diversity and different identities is a minimum condition for a durable domestic peace . Such tolerance is necessary for domestic peace, says the UK's Foreign Office .
 Intercommunal peace can be strengthened further when social relationships go beyond mere tolerance to a higher level of mutual respect for diverse cultures . Difficult as it may be to achieve, peace can still be strengthened still further when it goes beyond tolerance .
 A durable peace, of course, cannot rest on mere assertion, however pleasing or enlightened cosmopolitanism may sound . Peace cannot rest upon mere assertion or enlightenment, however .
 When it has been achieved it is the outcome of policies pursued patiently over time . When it is achieved it will be the result of a long process of patience, patience .
 Peacekeeping provides security in the short term by stopping the violence and bloodshed of intercommunal strife . It is not enough merely to establish law and order through the use of force or otherwise . Peace enforcement, peace enforcement and peacekeeping provide security in short term .
 Two kinds of development -- social and economic -- are necessary to provide a firm, long-term basis for lasting peace among diverse peoples . Two kind of development— social and . economic -- is necessary for peace in the U.S. to continue .
 Social development means establishing over time a greater degree of mutual acceptance or tolerance among different peoples . Social development is social development, social development means mutual acceptance and tolerance .
 It involves education, cultural exchanges, communications, and other constructive efforts that over decades tend to bring diverse peoples together . Education and cultural exchanges are often used to bring people together .
 Commercial and professional ties, friendships, and marriages that cross intercommunal lines, are indicative of a relatively high level of social development . Commercial ties and friendships are indicated to be high levels of development .
 Education of younger generations, reeducation of older generations, and building new human associations across communal lines are core tasks in social-developmental efforts . Education and reeducation are key tasks for social development efforts .
 This is central to the social-constructivist perspective on identity, which is equally applicable to societal relations as it is to international relations . This is particularly true in society as well as in international relations, says the author .
 Social constructivism emphasizes the ability of people to redefine how they look at the world and hence their conception of how they relate to others . The social constructivist is a form of social constructivism that emphasizes people redefining their view of the world .
 One’s identity is not something one is simply born with, but is the result of interactions with society . The identity of one person can be defined as a person who interacts with society, the author says .
 Identity is a matter of social—that is, shared—construction . Identity is social, that is, social, shared construction . Identity can be defined as a social constructivist .
 Older generations are least likely to change their outlook, particularly if they have experienced the human costs of civil strife or intercommunal warfare . Older generations will be less likely to be changed their outlook in the future .
 Peace practitioners adopt a patient stance, waiting for the eventual passing of older generations . Peace practitioners also hope to foster cosmopolitan values among younger generations .
 There is today an extraordinarily higher degree of tolerance or mutual acceptance than many would have thought possible among the Germans, Erench, British, Belgians, Dutch, Danes and other Scandinavians, Spaniards, Italians, Greeks, and others .
 This Western European achievement did not just happen; it was the result of a decided effort to change the mutual exclusivity of national and ethnic mind-sets . This is not just a Western Europe achievement but a Western European effort .
 The attempt was to go beyond the national and ethnic divisions that contributed to the bloodshed of two major world wars in the first half of the 20th century . In addition to the specific purposes of particular organizations or channels of communication across national borders .
 Economic development that reduces disparities in levels of living among different communities is also essential ingredient . Economic development is also an essential ingredient in reducing disparities in living in different communities .
 It is difficult to have open frontiers when disparate economic levels on different sides of borders result in migration of large numbers of people from poorer countries to richer ones .
 Even the better-off economies of advanced industrial countries have limits on how many immigrants they can absorb before suffering real economic costs . Even the best off economies have limits to how many people they can take on immigrants .
 Attempts to restrict flow of labor from Mexico into the U.S. have been made .
 In Europe during the early post Cold War years, limits were placed on flows of people from Eastern countries moving to Germany and other highly developed Western countries .
 Only when levels of economic development become somewhat less disparate is it conducive to open borders fully with unrestricted movements of peoples . Only when economic development becomes more diverse, open borders will be more open .
 Immigration from the developing world has exacerbated tensions at a time when many economies are in difficulty . In the case of Europe, there is no doubt that immigration from the . developing world have exacerbated tensions .
 No one expects many African states to achieve a level of economic development sufficient to encourage those without economic prospects to stay home . Many African states, for example, are not expected to achieve enough development to encourage people to stay away .
 The problem is that we are talking, some cases, of no less than a long-term international endeavor and commitment to save failed states and their peoples . We are talking ... of no . less than an international endeavor, it is a commitment .
 Some advocates favor an international ‘conservatorship’ to administer critical government functions of “failed states” until the country can govern itself .
 Some may think that relying on social and economic development over time is simply a utopian approach to countries ravaged by ethnic conflict . Some say it is simply an attempt to solve the problem of ethnic conflict over time .
 There is no certainty that social and economic development conducted in a physically secure environment will put national and ethnic strife to rest . The degree of civility among nations that has been achieved in Western Europe supports the view that such policies can be fruitful .
 Without a basic understanding of the earth’s physical and human geography, it is difficult to understand the significance of current international events . CONCLUSION: Without understanding the earth's physical and . human geography .
 Mahmud Mahmud is like many students who have studied overseas in that they develop a much better grasp of the physical and cultural diversity of the world . Mahmud says he has developed a greater understanding of the cultural and physical diversity of living in Europe .
 Growing importance of religion and the relevancy of nationalism are essential aspects of the cultural geography of world politics, yet are also associated with geographic locations . The growing importance of nationalism and religion is essential to world politics .
 Islam plays an important role in Islam in the Middle East . Witness the importance of Saudi Arabian oil fields and the important role it plays in that region .
 While Islam tends to grab headlines in the West, the reality is that aside from Europe many parts of the world have seen an increasing relevancy of religion in the realm of politics .
 Any student who aspires to work in government, business, or international and nongovernmental organizations must grasp the basic dynamics of these phenomena .
 Erom the perspective of many realists, nationalism, or serving the national interest, is perhaps the single biggest reason the state will continue into the indefinite future .
 Crises of authority may cause a state to be torn in two, but the result will be the seceding territory joining a neighboring state or the creation of a newly independent state .
 If a state motivated by extreme nationalism and expansionist ideology successfully conquers a neighbor, the result is simply a larger state . Similarly, if a state . succeeds in conquering a neighbor it will simply be a larger . state. If a . state . conquests a neighbor .
 The point is that whether nationalism helps to keep a current state together or tears it apart, the end result is the same—a state . The end result of nationalism is a state, whether it helps keep it together or tear it apart .
 Nationalists are not interested in transferring power and sovereignty upward to an international organization, let alone a world government, they say . Nationalists want to avoid transferring power upward to a global organization, they claim .
 Younger generations more prone than their parents and grandparents to adopt a European identity first . Younger generations, however, have been somewhat more prone to adopting European identity .
 Liberals recognize that nationalism is a primary cause of conflict in the world . Liberals also recognize that nationalists are a primary source of conflict . Liberals say nationalism is also a cause for conflict .
 They tend to be optimistic about the possibility of taming nationalism . But they tend to think that it could be possible to tame nationalism .
 This will not happen by avoiding or somehow transcending politics; it will happen through politics, hollowing the logic of the social constructivists . People can learn from the past and from past mistakes and internalize new norms, he says .
 International organizations can facilitate the more orderly conduct of interstate relations . International organizations and regimes can facilitate interstate relations, says John Defterios . International Organizations and regimes help facilitate the better conduct of international relations .
 Nongovernmental organizations and the growing global civil society provide other voices for moderation in the relations among peoples . The world's largest civil society provides other voices to moderation .
 The state will not wither away, as predicted by orthodox Marxists and idealistic world federalists, says Julian Zelizer . The state is not withering away, says Zelizer, but it will not, he says .
 The state and people it encompasses within its borders likely will continue to be a major focus of identity . The state's identity will likely be a key part of its identity .
 Nationalism and religion, therefore, are two of the most significant phenomena in world politics . Nationalism, religion and nationalism are the most important issues of world politics.
 The ideological competition between East and West after World War II obscured the ongoing relevancy of religion in other parts of the world . Perhaps the ideological conflict between the two sides obscured the relevance of religion .
 With the end of the Cold War after the events of 1989, the suppressed nationalisms of Central and Eastern Europe (to include the former Soviet Union) burst forth .
 On the one hand, nationalism can be a force for unity and solidarity and be supportive of democracy . On the other hand, it can be used as a force of unity, solidarity and support of democracy.
 Nationalism can buttress existing political authority or be the rallying cry of those who wish to overthrow it . Nationalism is a rallying cry for those who want to overthrow the government .
 It can be a progressive as well as a repressive force, says David Cameron . It can foster unity at home and wars of aggression abroad, he says .
 As we have seen, the constitutive elements of nationalism vary from case to case . We have seen the constitutionality of nationalism varies from case-to-case .
 Despite the importance and the amount of research and thought conducted on the subject, it remains complex, elusive, and often difficult to grasp . Despite its importance, the importance of the subject remains complex and elusive . The subject is complex and difficult to understand .
 Explain the differences between physical and human geography and why a basic understanding of both is necessary when studying international relations and world politics . Use this week's Daily Discussion to help students understand today's current events .
 Physical geography involves the depiction of material manifestations of terrain such as continents, mountains, rivers, lakes, and oceans . Physical geography is a depiction of physical manifestations of the world's most populous areas .
 Human geography involves the visual depiction of human activities overlaid on physical maps . Human geography, on the other hand, involves the depiction of humans on a map .
 The visual depiction of data includes population, religion, wealth, wars, military spending, refugees, human rights abuses, women's rights, health, and the environment . It also includes refugees, refugees and refugees .
 International issues and conflicts since the end of World War II are placed in their geographical contexts through the integration of over one hundred maps . The integration of more than 100 maps shows the impact of the conflict in the region .
 E Evaluate the impact of religion in global politics, particularly with regard to conflict . E evaluate the impact religion has on global politics .
 Observers of international relations almost universally failed to foresee the significant challenge to modern, secular regimes posed by a global resurgence of religious ideas and movements at the end of the 20th century .
 Established transnational religious organizations but also the more extreme elements that preach religious intolerance have taken advantage of modern means of communications . The extreme elements of religious intolerance are taking advantage of the development of transnational identities .
 Realists, liberals, English School theorists, and economic structuralists take different positions on the role of religion in domestic and international politics . Constructivists, feminists, postmodernists and critical theorists see religion through different interpretaries .
 Maps nature, extent, and influence of each of the major religions and shows, country by country, how religions are spread, how they relate to government, laws, and world hunger . Maps the nature of each major religion and shows how it relates to government and laws .
 It locates the origin and sacred places of each of the major religions and provides essential background with a valuable table showing the fundamental beliefs of each major religion .
 Traces the development of Islam from the 6th-century days of the Prophet Muhammad to the present . Argues that picture of Islam as a violent, backward, and insular tradition should be laid to rest .
 Maps show the geographic ebb and flow of Islam . There is also a useful historical timeline and a guide to the key figures .
 Compare and contrast the concepts of nation, nation-state, and nationalism . Explain how they can be a source of conflict in global politics . E. Discuss the concept of nationalism and nationalism in this article .
 The separate identities peoples construct result in nations coterminous with states of which they are a part . Nation-states are nation-states, binational or multinational states, and, some cases, nations without states .
 The liberal idea of national self-determination, if pursued to its logical extreme, would produce many more states than exist today . Creating ever-smaller entities is not always in the interests of the populations who may have more to gain from greater national diversity, larger markets, and greater economic
 One of the best resources for a historical overview of the rise of nationalism . One of best resources to understand the rise in nationalism .
 Despite its publication date, this anthology remains one of the best in unraveling the complexities of nationalism and ethnicity . This anthology remains a best way to unravel the complexity of nationalism .
 The concept of national self-determination refers to the principle that nations have the right to determine their own political status . The concept might include the creation of a new nation-state .
 This principle has clashed with the concept of state sovereignty and can thus potentially result in political violence and even civil wars . This could potentially lead to political violence, even civil war, as well as civil war .
 Ail have their limitations, but pursued effectively in tandem may succeed in reducing intercommunal strife . Ail has their limitations but they may be able to work together .
 An excellent overview of the sources of contemporary conflict and multiple perspectives on how best to prevent, manage, or resolve conflicts around the world . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author .
 Physical geography can deal with the graphic representation of mountains, rivers, oceans, rivers and oceans . The graphic representation is based on the graphic representations of mountains .
 Human geography can deal with the graphic representation of populations. religions. size of economies. population. population . size of economy. population growth. population size of countries. religion. religion . none of the above. all the above .
 Geopolitics involves the politics of geothermal energy . Understanding the national power almost exclusively in terms of physical geography . understanding of geography as a matter of national power is important . understanding how politics influences our understanding of our geography . none of the above .
 Religious conflicts tend for the most part to be about religious doctrine. quarrels among religious leaders. different religious identities and politics. theological differences. different . theological differences .
 At the beginning of the 21st century, religious ideas and movements take second place to political ideology . are basically irrelevant in modern materialistic societies . are constrained by international organizations . have seen a general global resurgence. have seen an international resurgence .
 According to Samuel P Huntington, the clash of states will be replaced by clash of NGOs and the state clash of lOs . None of the above 7.7.7 will be the same as clash of civilizations .
 The term ‘ethnic group’ is often used to refer to a tribe or extended family . People with a separate identity within the nation or society. church organization.
 Nationalism is an ideology that mobilizes national identity. It is the same as ethnicity. inherently dangerous patriotism. patriotism. Nationalism. is a dangerous ideology. patriotism is dangerous. patriotism, it is dangerous to be associated with nationalism. patriotism .
 Nations without states are banned under the Charter of the United Nations . are given voting status in the U.N. General Assembly . are only represented in the European Union . at times have achieved statehood .
 Donald Rothchild and David Lake feel that the main cause of ethnic conflict is fear of the future . David Lake says fear of a future is the main factor in ethnic conflict .
 The social process whereby various ethnic groups are merged under a new identity is called integration. assimilation. consociationalism. cultural genocide. The process. of merging ethnic groups into a single identity is known as integration.assimilation .
 Another term for a state in which all political power and authority come to rest in the institutions of a central government is communism. totalitarianism. dictatorship. unitary state. communism. dictatorship . Communism. dictatorship is communism .
 States composed of two or more nationalities and which through agreements and formal rules share or divide powers and positions of government are said to be mixed. consociational. confederations. decentralized governments. Consociational confederation. decentralized government .
 States in which separate state or provincial governments have important functions to perform independently or share with a central government are called mixed political-economy states . Consociational states are called confederal or confederal states .
 The World Economic Forum is committed to improving the state of the world by engaging business, political, academic, and other leaders of society to shape global, regional, and industry agendas .
 Davos, Switzerland, is a splendid mountain resort tucked away in the Alps . Each year a different theme is emphasized as participants gather in Davos . Davos is a great mountain resort .
 Bono of U-2 fame has addressed the plight of the poor and the deprivations they suffer . Even entertainers like Bono have addressed participants on issues of burning concern to them .
 Agenda deals with key global challenges such as building sustained economic growth, mitigating global risks, promoting health for all, improving social welfare and fostering environmental sustainability .
 This topic was selected to acknowledge that we are living in an increasingly complex and interconnected world . An erosion of common values and principles have come to undermine public trust in leadership, future economic growth, and political stability .
 Speakers included the prime minister of Japan, the chancellor of Germany, the presidents of France and Russia . The U.N. Secretary-General of the United Nations also spoke .
 There were speakers from Transparency International, an anti-corruption NGO, and the former goalkeeper of the German national soccer team . Aung San Suu Kyi of Burma and Bill and Melinda Gates, who pledged $100 million to wipe out polio, were speakers .
 The debates are carried out on YouTube, the photos on Flickr, and key quotes on Twitter . The debates will be carried out in the UK .
 IVI Identify the key economic, social, and cultural aspects of globalization, the role of technology, and assess both positive and negative implications for the human condition . IVI assess the key aspects of the globalization and the role technology plays in the global community .
 Its key aspects will be discussed in turn—economic, social, cultural, and the impact of technology, and political ramifications . The key aspects of the project will include its economic, social and cultural aspects .
 This will be followed by an in-depth look at the historical development of globalization . Most observers consider the hallmark characteristic of globalization—the development and expansion of a capitalist global economy .
 We examine attempts by policymakers and practitioners to develop mechanisms of global governance to deal with globalization in the areas of trade, finance, and investment . We then examine attempts to develop ways of global . governance to cope with globalization . We look at the impact of globalization on the global economy .
 Globalization is a shorthand term for a multifaceted phenomenon . Globalization has been a global phenomenon for more than 30 years .
 Given its complexity, its component elements have to be examined sequentially . Given the complexity of the project, its components must be looked at sequentially, says CNN.com.com .
 We begin with technology as this tends to permeate the economic, social, and cultural aspects of globalization . We start with technology, and this permeates the economic and social aspects of globalization .
 Globalization owes much to great advances in technology, especially in transportation, communications, and related technologies . Technology is a key part of the world's economy .
 Widespread application of these technologies has already transformed the ways in which we do business and interact with each other . The technology is already transforming the way we interact and use it .
 In trade we engage in global marketing, sales, and delivery of goods and services . In finance we transfer large amounts of money instantaneously across the globe . In trade, we engage with global marketing and sales, sales and delivery .
 According to “Moore’s law,” the number of transistors that can be put on a single computer chip doubles roughly every eighteen months . According to Moore's law, the transistors can be added to a computer chip every 18 months . The chip industry has been
 This expansion of computing capacity has enhanced substantially human capability to process and store data, making it available to government, business, and households . The expansion of capacity has made it available for business, business and homes .
 A shift to ‘cloud services’ is underway, making access to computing power more cost-effective and efficient . Amazon’s AWS Cloud, Microsoft's Azure, Google, Rackspace, Apple’�s iCloud are all on the rise .
 These facilities are moving well beyond limited access, expanding the numbers and kinds of applications and data stored in cyberspace . The facilities are expanding beyond the limited access of limited access .
 Document and data archives that can be accessed online are actually located in data centers filled with hundreds of thousands of servers . Such clouds are often located inside data centers full of hundreds of thousand servers . The cloud is a cloud of documents and archives, which can be stored online .
 As processing power has soared, cost has plunged, with availability even to small, private users expanding dramatically . As their processing power . has soared .
 Hackers create security and privacy challenges for government, proprietary, and other sensitive data . Although files stored in a cloud are secured, hackers create important security challenges for sensitive data, experts say .
 For the individual, an investor no longer needs to utilize a broker to buy or sell his or her mutual funds, but can engage in financial transactions via the internet from the comfort of home . An individual can buy and sell mutual funds using the internet .
 We can download to our computers and mobile device ‘apps’ such as those from the Apple Store, which offers more than 300,000 of them . We can now download to . computers and . mobile device "apps" such as . those from Apple Store .
 Users of Facebook install such apps at the rate of twenty million a day . Facebook users install apps at a rate of 20 million per day . Users install apps on the social network at an estimated $1 billion a year .
 Individual entrepreneurs can try out new ideas for online businesses without worrying about brick-and-mortar start-up costs . Home or other relatively small offices may suffice, much less showrooms for display of merchandise now marketed online .
 We use computers in analysis of data and exchange information globally through the internet and other media . We use computer analysis to analyse data and share it with the world .
 Free software called Fladoop allows ordinary PCs to analyze huge quantities of data that before required a supercomputer . Free software lets ordinary PCs analyze huge amounts of data .
 Data are parceled out to numerous computers, which saves time and money . Data is parcelled out to various computers, saving time and saving money .
 Companies such as Wal-Mart can now handle more than one million customer transactions every hour, feeding databases estimated at more than 2.5 million petabytes . The databases are estimated to be at an estimated 2.2 petabytes of data .
 The company’s inventory management system enables suppliers to see the exact number of their products on every shelf of every store, and rate of sale by hour, by day, and over the past year .
 The manipulation of large data sets has other uses such as predicting when machines may break down, allowing for preventive maintenance, and hence saving dollars or Chinese yuan .
 Video teleconferencing allows buyers and manufacturers located on opposite sides of the globe to examine the color of a cloth and even the stitching on a garment .
 The gradual development of new communications technologies began in the mid-19th and early 20th centuries with the development of the telegraph and then the telephone . The development and marketing of black-and-white television was by the late 1930s and 1940s, and by the 1940s
 Transistors and solid-state technologies largely replaced reliance on vacuum tubes in computers and communications applications . The development in the 1960s and 1970s of transistors led to the development of solid state technology that largely replaced vacuum tubes .
 Use of Earth satellites developed since the late 1950s for military and commercial purposes was enhanced by new semiconductor, microchip, and related microelectronic technologies in the 1980s and 1990s . Satellites pushed computers and telecommunications to ever-higher levels .
 New technologies have found their way into vehicles of every sort as well as the navigation and communications machinery of transportation systems on land, at sea, and in the air .
 A far cry from using sextants and other mechanical means, radio, radar, or electronic-based devices for measuring the location of a ship or airplane . Radio, radar and electronic devices can be used to locate ships or planes .
 Earth satellites can now be used with extraordinary accuracy in determining precise geographic position at any point in time . Earth satellites are now being used to determine precise geographic positions at any time .
 Radio, radio, television, and other electronic signals have literally made routine worldwide links of human beings that outside of science fiction were inconceivable to most people just two or three decades ago .
 The internet or World Wide Web emerged for widespread use in the 1980s and 1990s . Sometimes portrayed as an ‘information superhighway,’ the internet emerged for wide use .
 The first truly user-friendly operating system hit the market in 1990, allowing people to use a dial-up modem, connect their 64K computer to their telephones, and send e-mails around the world . It is amazing to realize that the first truly-user-friendly software
 This development allows a great deal of work to be parceled out anywhere in the world, rendering geographical distances irrelevant . It also allows the world to see how far away they are from each other .
 Two professors can work on an international relations textbook with one living in Washington, DC, and one in Colorado and Hawaii . Two professors, for example, can also work on a textbook .
 Most of the limitations on the technology’s bandwidth and speed will be overcome in the next five to ten years . We can expect that most of the . limitations on . the technology's bandwidth . and speed to be overcome . in five to 10 years .
 Netscape, developer of the browser, goes public as a company 4. 1990s: free open-source software such as Apache aids online collaboration; example: Wikipedia . 1990s; developments in telecommunications allow for information outsourcing to call centers in India and elsewhere .
 It was companies in the private sector who took many of the technologies developed by states (World Wide Web, telecommunication satellites) developed applications and enhancements to become drivers of much of the economic and social developments .
 The concept of globalization did not even exist in mainstream literature on international relations and world politics until after the end of the Cold War in 1991 . After all, the concept of globalization did not exist in the mainstream literature about international relations .
 The popular term in the 1970s and 1980s was interdependence . Prior to that time the popular term was interdependency . The term is interdependent .
 For others it is the expansion of the capitalist world economy that is the critical dynamic of the process known as globalization, tracing its origins back to the 16th century . For others, globalization is the creation of the world's capitalist world .
 To us the term globalization may be new, but the development of technology and the construction of a capitalist global economy are multicentury projects that have had, and still continue, enormous political, social, and cultural implications .
 Globalization has done much to blur the distinction between international and domestic contexts . It raises the issue of the salience of territorial borders, writes David Perry .
 It has become increasingly difficult to determine what is meant by an “American” or “French” company when it has a global market and strategy and a truly multinational workforce including top-level managers .
 What matters when it comes to hiring is not one's nationality but rather one's talents and skills . What matters is not nationality but talent and skills, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As a result Americans are competing for jobs with individuals from around the world . Americans compete for jobs in the U.S. as a result of the competition .
 Multilateral trade liberalization has been a major contributor to the world economy’s unprecedented growth over the past half century . Trade liberalization is a major factor in the world's unprecedented growth in recent decades .
 At the same time, regional trade agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement have expanded .
 These are trade arrangements under which member-countries grant one another preferential treatment in trade . These include reducing or eliminating tariffs or quotas on imports and other barriers to trade .
 More than a trillion dollars a day enter and leave the world’s financial institutions . More than $1 trillion a day enters and leaves the world's financial institutions.
 Upward or downward shifts in one stock market have ripple effects with comparable swings in other markets . Upward, downward shifts have ripple effect on other markets, such as Japan and China .
 The United States was the number one destination for investment at $186 billion, while China was number two at $100 billion . The U.S. was the most important investment destination for China .
 This was also the first year in which wealthy countries received less than half of the investment . The Economist, January 20, 2011 .
 European countries found it difficult to insulate themselves from the financial crises of fellow European Union members Greece, Spain, and Ireland in 2010 and 2011 . European countries have been hit hard by the financial crisis of Greece and Spain .
 Multinational corporations have a long history of being major players in global economics . Multinational companies have a history of playing major global economic players .
 During the 1600s, Europe began exploring the world and placing its finances on a sounder footing . Europe established corporations whose stocks traded in the world’s three financial centers .
 When the Napoleonic wars ended in 1815, capital used to fund the wars was allocated to canals, railroads, and governments in Europe and South America .
 Many see 9/11 as at least in part a violent reaction against what some view as the ultimate purveyor of globalization—the United States . Many see the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, as a reaction against globalization . Some see
 To some, globalization is just another word for Americanization . It's an effort by Washington to impose not only its will, but also its values on other parts of the world .
 The United States does not seek to hold territory as was the case in the 19thand 20th-century British, French, Belgian, Dutch, German, Spanish, and Portuguese empires . The U.S. does not hold territory in the same way as the empires of the 19
 When the U.S. does intervene abroad, it does not seek to stay for long, occupying foreign territory only as long as it takes to accomplish humanitarian, security, or other purposes . When the United States does intervene overseas, it doesn't want to stay long .
 Words like imperial or empire to describe present-day American foreign policy or societal influence present a distorted view of what is happening . After all, other countries call upon the United States to help for such purposes .
 The democratic or liberal values being advanced globally are not uniquely American, but rather are the outcome of the 17thand 18th-century Enlightenment period in European history . They are shared by many countries, including the United States .
 If large segments of other societies embrace American pop culture and cuisine, that speaks well of America and says something about what is lacking in other societies . If sodas and hamburgers qualify as cuisine, it's a good example of America, says author .
 American firms market goods and services globally, but it is they who buy them . U.S. firms market their goods, but they sell them to the world, which is who buys them . American firms are in the process of selling their goods globally .
 Even if people can agree on its definition of globalization, there are contentious differences as to the positive or negative effects of globalization . The debate is still raging over whether globalization is good or bad .
 The first major oil reserves were discovered in 1938, but after that the rush was on as the world entered the modern age of oil-dependency and oil-fueled growth .
 Since that point, global commerce and the economic power of multinational corporations have expanded enormously . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful corporations since 2001 .
 Corporate revenues now exceed or are comparable to the size of national economies . Corporate revenues are now exceeding or exceeding national economies, analysts say . Corporate revenue now exceeds or is comparable to size of economies, they say .
 Wal-Mart generated revenues of $405 billion in 2010, ExxonMobil $383 billion . ExxonMobil generated $383billion in 2010 . Wal-mart generated revenues in 2010 and ExxonMobil made $383bn last year .
 Sweden's gross domestic product was $444 billion in 2013, Saudi Arabia's $434 billion . By way of comparison, in the same year Sweden's GDP was $445 billion and Saudi Arabia was $434 .
 Columbite-tantalite is found principally in Australia but also in the war-torn African Democratic Republic of the Congo . Once refined, the mineral becomes a highly heat-resistant metal powder called tantalum . The mineral, found in Australia, once refined, is a highly
 tantalum is a key component in everything from mobile phones made by Nokia and Ericsson, computer chips manufactured by Intel, to Sony stereos and games .
 Violent competition for this ore has helped fuel the war in Congo, where 5. million deaths have occurred since 1998 . Violent competition in Congo has fueled the war, which has seen 5 million deaths since 1998.
 Mining of rare earth and other precious minerals also has adverse environmental impacts . Rules for extracting these materials are nonexistent or not enforced, such as rules for extracting them .
 Social-Cultural Impact of globalization is most important, some observers say . The social-cultural dimension of globalization most important in international relations .
 The amount and velocity of economic transactions have increased over the years, so, too, has there been an intensification of worldwide social relations . The amount of social transactions has also increased, as has the intensity of worldwide relations .
 World markets and world communications have both expanded, and both have been facilitated by the technological developments outlined above . World markets have also expanded, with the help of technological developments .
 To minimize postage cost, letters from Europe or elsewhere abroad were often sent in lightweight, bluepapered aerogrammes . To reduce postage costs, aerogramms were often used in lightweight aerograms .
 If you were hitchhiking or traveling by train, one of the few places to receive mail was at an American Express office . You also could exchange dollars to buy needed local currency .
 If you had an AMEX card, you could cash a hometown check for currency . Debit cards and cash machines had not yet been introduced to the country .
 To call home was prohibitively expensive and required the assistance of an overseas operator . To use the phone, the operator would have to call home and use the operator overseas .
 Staying in touch with new foreign friends upon completion of overseas study required dedication to putting pen to paper and spending money .
 The economic impact of foreign products is easy to address if one has access to corporate annual financial reports . The cost of foreign goods can be much lower than the cost of importing into the U.S.
 In 2010 there were 64 million customers and sales totaled over $16 billion . In 2010, there were over 64 million people with customers . Sales totaled $16billion .
 More difficult to assess is the impact of accompanying corporate values on local social and cultural values . More difficult is to assess whether these values are true to local people .
 The idea is that American consumer culture, including dietary habits, has come to undermine local societal and cultural traditions and values . The idea was that consumer culture is undermining local societal, cultural traditions .
 McDonald's offers beer with burgers in Germany, red wine in Erance, rice and other local specialties in many Asian restaurants .
 The corporation's mainline offerings can be purchased worldwide in the corporation’s customary style of fast-food, standardized fare . Still, its mainline offerings include the Big Mac .
 Greek culture is considered to be the wellspring of values that have spread throughout the Western world and then on to other areas of the globe . Greek culture, for example, is seen to be a wellspring that has spread throughout Europe .
 Under colonialism, Western values were spread in a limited manner in the capital or major city of a colony . Western values are spread only in the capitals or major cities .
 Technological developments have since made cultural transmission more rapid and direct to most individuals around the globe . Technology has since made it easier to transmit cultural messages .
 The supposedly pernicious effect of Western values has been a constant refrain, especially of religious leaders and intellectuals in the developing world . Western values are supposed to be harmful to religious leaders, intellectuals .
 Western materialism is seen as undermining religious faith and turning young people away from the mosque, church, and temple . Western materialistic materialism has been seen as a threat to religious faith .
 United States culture is now penetrating every continent through the growth of mass communications such as music, television, films, and the internet . Just as United States goods flooded world markets in the post-World War II era, U.S. culture now penetrates every continent .
 Hollywood, the music industry, and the power of advertising have resulted in young people adopting at least the outward trappings of American pop culture .
 Europe has made its own contributions to reality television, music, and fashion, to name a few .
 The Chinese government aggressively censors political content online, but it's more lax about cultural matters . Although the Chinese government is aggressive about censoring political content, it's relaxed about cultural issues .
 Yao Jun is one young man who prefers to get his entertainment on the internet . Yao Jun prefers to use the internet to make fun of his friends .
 Yao’s desktop computer with a high-speed internet connection sits in his apartment outside Beijing . Yao's computer is connected to an internet connection in a den on the second floor of his apartment . Yao: "I want to be a big success in China"
 Profound disagreement exists over the implications of the economic component of globalization and particularly who benefits or is hurt by it .
 For some college students, the development of a truly global economy offers the tantalizing prospect of working for a multinational corporation, bank, or other nongovernmental organization . Whether at home or abroad, working for multinational corporations, banks or NGOs, is a dream .
 For workers in manufacturing industries, the global economy is as much a threat as an opportunity, depending on the industry and country . For many workers in the manufacturing industry, it's as much as an economic threat as a threat .
 With the growth of the global economy, states increasingly believe they are unable to exert effective influence, let alone control, over their domestic economies . States increasingly think they are not able to exert influence or control their domestic economy .
 This has resulted in domestic political consequences within states as well as a source of political tension and conflict among states . This has led to domestic and international tensions within states and within states .
 Global competition has led to the collapse of certain industries as cheaper labor is available elsewhere or as companies simply move their production facilities to lower-cost countries .
 The U.S. steel industry lost much of its market to Japan, which, in turn, lost it to South Korea . The American steel industry has also lost its market in South Korea and Japan .
 White-collar computer jobs in North America continue to migrate to Asia . Jobs in the U.S. continue to grow in the region of Asia .
 The resultant anger or discontent of displaced workers is often directed at business executives and government leaders . Government leaders judged to have failed to protect domestic jobs from foreign competition .
 If there is a drop in copper, tin, or rubber prices, the resultant unemployment is not cushioned by such state-supported unemployment programs as exist in many advanced, industrial, high-income countries . In many advanced countries, such programs are not available in the U.S.
 The problem is compounded in those less-developed countries with high birthrates and limited capacity to absorb the youth population into the workforce . Less developed countries have high birth rates and limited ability to absorb youth into workforce .
 Such conditions are ripe for political and social discontent and a loss of government authority, says Julian Zelizer . Such conditions could be ripe for social discontent, he says . Zelizer says .
 The use of social networking technology has also had profound political impact in recent years . Social media has also been used as a political tool in the past .
 Facebook and Twitter were used by young people in Egypt and Tunisia in 2011 to disseminate information on antiregime protests . Cell phone photos were instantly sent around the world .
 Anyone with a high-speed computer can download or upload video clips of political demonstrations on YouTube . Videos can be uploaded to YouTube by anyone with a computer with high speed speeds .
 Such networks allow political dissidents to communicate with the outside world . The internet helps transmit scientific and business information essential to economic development . Such networks also allow political dissenters to communicate .
 Access to the internet and other media for communications locally or globally are a realization of a liberal idea core to civil society . Access to and use of the internet is a real realization of the liberal idea of civil society, he says .
 China, for example, has constructed a ‘great firewall’ that imposes tight controls on internet links with the outside world . China allows the government to monitor traffic and make many sites and services unavailable to their populace .
 Similar efforts have been made by Iran, Cuba, Saudi Arabia, and Vietnam . Similar efforts were made by other nations .
 Governments have monitored Facebook pages of known and suspected dissidents in order to target them for harassment and arrest, sometimes punishment, even torturing some “enemies” of the state . Governments have also monitored Facebook accounts of known or suspected dissidents .
 An interesting example involves the use of Twitter and Facebook by young members of Iran’s Green Movement during the 2009 antiregime protests .
 They uploaded videos of police brutality and announced planned demonstrations . Among other things they uploaded videos to YouTube of officers brutality .
 A 26-year-old hacker in Ohio by the name of Austin Heap developed anticensorship software . Such actions inspired him to develop anti-censorship software, Heap says . Heap: "I'm not afraid of the Internet"
 Iranian opposition leaders began distributing Haystack to opposition leaders in 2010 . He named the program Haystack and in early 2010 began to distribute it to Iran's opposition leaders . Haystack is named Haystack .
 He was named “innovator of the year” by the Guardian and received praise from U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . Hillary Clinton also praised him for his work .
 Haystack suffered from a high level of insecurity, it turned out . Computer experts raised doubts, and, upon investigation, turned out Haystack was insecure . Haystack is a popular online game that was created in 2007 .
 Iranian government computer experts could also locate some users' identities and locations . Not all messages would encrypt properly, but skilled Iranian government experts could locate users’ identities .
 The software was withdrawn in September 2010, but even this failed attempt demonstrated popular solidarity across national borders and cultures . It was a failed attempt, indicative of a still-emerging global civil society .
 A new concern for many states is what has been called cyber-war . In the political-military realm, many states are concerned about the threat posed by cyber-attacks .
 Instead of bombs, the concern is that a “worm’s software that infects industrial control systems may work its way into computer networks . The problem is a piece of software that can infect industrial systems .
 The goal could be to steal information, manipulate the information, or destroy it and render computers useless . The goal of the hackers is to steal and manipulate information .
 The alarmists refer to the possibility of a “digital Pearl Harbor’s” a surprise, highly destructive attack . The alarmist refers to a ‘digital Pearl Harbour’—a surprise attack .
 We may not even know the identity of the perpetrators for some time, if at all . Moreover, should such a cyber attack occur, we may not be even able to identify the culprits .
 By contrast to conventional war, attackers in cyber-war may not readily be identifiable . Cyber-war attackers may not be readily readily identifiable .
 Modern technology has also contributed to the development of computer programs that engage in what is termed social network analysis that has economic as well as political implications .
 SNA involves crunching large quantities of data that place individuals in the context of their social networks to determine their patterns of life . SNA is a form of social network that places individuals in a context of social networks .
 This is used in business for marketing or, for example, as a way to keep customers from defecting from a cell phone plan .
 It is also used to map the influences among larger segments of society to aid in political and social forecasting .
 One program analyzes a wide range of information about the politics, business, and society of Lebanon to predict rocket attacks by the Lebanese Hezbollah militia against Israel . Another program predicts attacks by Hezbollah militia .
 Mapping large social networks may facilitate the spread of democracy by identifying tipping points when ideas go mainstream despite government repression and censorship . The social network may help identify tipping points where ideas are mainstream .
 Other work is designed to enable aid workers and diplomats to understand better which locals are most likely to cooperate with Westerners .
 Feudal political economy concentrated agricultural and other production in small communities, carried out by peasants under the protection of lords or aristocratic landholders . peasants .
 Relatively little need for trade existed in a feudal society, other than for a few spices, silks, or other commodities .
 Feudal markets for exchange of goods and services were marginal or relatively unimportant compared to those that arose under capitalism . Feudic markets were marginal, unimportant and unimportant to those under capitalism, says historian John Sutter .
 Markets emerged as towns sprang up near the castles or estates that had been the centers of feudal life . Markets emerged in towns near castles and estates that were centers of life .
 Townsmen traded goods and services that they and others produced . Townsmen (or burghers, as they were called in the Germanspeaking states) traded goods, services and services .
 They would become the core of a new middle class between the land-owning aristocracy and the peasantry or farm people tied to landed estates in the countryside . They would be part of the new middle-class between the aristocrats and peasants .
 The epicenter of this financiai crisis that threatens the future of the European Union was in Greece . Greece is one of the most important economies in the world . The crisis threatens to destabilize the European economy .
 Greek government faced with defauiting on its ioans unless wiiiing to make drastic cuts in government spending . Demonstrators gathered outside the parliament in Athens .
 Venice and Bruges, in modern-day Italy and Belgium, were early trading cities of the 14th and 15th century . Examples of early urban centers of market activity, including banking, are such 14thand 15th-century trading cities such as Venice .
 Printing presses and other tools and hand-operated machines contributed to production in towns and urban settings . Agricultural production remained centered in the great landed estates of the passing feudal era . Printing presses were the new technologies that contributed to the rise of printing presses .
 We can see evidence of feudal and early capitalist political economies in the castles and well-preserved or restored old centers of late medieval and Renaissance towns and cities throughout modern-day Europe .
 Attributes of emerging capitalism included markets and money, but these were not new . The attributes were identified as the Attributes of Capitalist Political Economy . Markets and money are not new to emerging capitalism .
 Markets and money were the bedrock of ancient forms of political economy to be found, for example, among Phoenicians, Egyptians, Greeks, Persians, and Romans . Markets, money, and markets, were a key part of ancient political economies .
 Money provided a standard of value for buying and selling in markets . Money was a store of value that could be held until needed for spending at a later time . Money is a standard standard for buying, selling in the markets and a store-of-value .
 These functions were essential to commerce in ancient market economies that relied heavily on human, including slave, labor, labor .
 Even the technologies for harnessing animal labor, especially for agricultural production, were late in coming . The technologies would not be fully developed until the feudal period of the Middle Ages .
 What distinguishes capitalism from feudal and ancient political economies is its greater need for investment of capital . Capitalism is a form of democracy that has a greater need to invest in capital, the author says .
 Industrial Revolution began in the United Kingdom in the late 18thand 19th-century Industrial Revolution . Advancing technologies produced the machinery and tools of early preindustrial capitalism .
 This soon spread to Erance, the German states, and elsewhere on the European continent and the Americas, particularly the U.S. It was the first time people in Erance were able to use it .
 The tools and hand-operated machines of early capitalism and industrial capitalism require substantial amounts of capital resulting from savings be put aside for investment in these tools and machinery that are essential to production . The high-tech machinery and computers or artificial intelligence of advanced or postindustrial capitalism all require that substantial
 "If we consumed all that we were capable of producing, there would be nothing left for investment or for the purchase of new plants and machinery," says President Obama .
 An airline that provides transportation of passengers or cargo needs to invest in new airplanes and airport facilities . Airlines need to maintain and eventually replace aging equipment or facilities, airline says .
 An industry producing goods—automobiles, personal computers, other manufactured and agricultural products -- faces the same need to invest in new factories or plants and machinery .
 Some time, effort, and resources or savings had to be put into crafting, purchasing, and maintaining tools and hand-operated machines used in the production of goods and services . So it was in preindustrial capitalism, when some time was spent crafting and purchasing tools and equipment .
 Capital goods have no value to us in themselves in themselves other than their contribution to the production of other goods or services we do value or want to produce for consumption . Capital goods are not capital goods, but they contribute to other goods we do not want to consume .
 A lathe used in cutting or shaping metal or wood in manufacturing, an airplane used to carry passengers or move cargo, a printing press used by a publisher of books or newspapers, and a computer and software used for word processing are examples of capital goods . A computer used to write is
 We put profits from sales, salary, or other income from earlier production into new investments in capital goods for further or future production . We do not consume everything we produce .
 Gross national product is a measure of the aggregate size of a national economy . Two important components of gross national product are annual consumption and investment . Annual consumption is a key component of GDP .
 Capitalist economies that do not invest sufficiently tend to decline or experience a drop in production, consumption, and standard or level of living . Capitalist countries that invest too much tend to experience a decline in production and consumption .
 To maintain or expand present levels of production, consumption, and living standards, capitalist economies require sufficient capital formation . Capital goods for production and consumption must be invested in new and continuing investment in capital goods . Capital capital goods are needed to sustain capitalist growth .
 Max Weber observed how emergence of capitalism was accompanied by a new set of social values supportive of market-oriented trade and monetary activities . Weber also observed how the savings and investment function so essential to capitalism is essential to its success .
 Constructivists can lay claim to Weber as an intellectual precursor to constructivists . Weber's emphasis on the development of new values and the power of ideas can be traced back to Weber .
 Church teachings in the Middle Ages had held that the righteous did not commit the sin of usury . Weury is defined as earning interest from loans or by making profit on sales .
 Religion is so deeply embedded in a society’s culture or set of values that it is often difficult to distinguish between values that have a religious grounding and those that don’t . Religion is embedded in society's culture and culture, it is difficult to separate values from those that
 The anti-market religious orientation of church authorities was perfectly consistent with the feudal political economy, which did not rely heavily on markets anyway . Church authorities were not interested in the market, but in the feudal economy .
 Weber observed how the rise of capitalism was encouraged by a revolution in religious thought on economic matters . Weber observed that the rise in religious thinking encouraged by the revolution in economic thought on matters of religion .
 Mercantil ism was a theory of early capitalism that the wealth of a nation was a function of the amount of gold and other treasure that a nation could accumulate .
 Running trade surpluses while finding new gold in mines or accepting it in payment for goods or services became national economic policy . The country ran a trade surplus in the 1950s, running a trade deficit in gold .
 Adam Smith observed that the wealth of a nation was not to be found in its stock of gold and other treasure . Smith said wealth was found instead in the productive capacity of its economy, that is the total of goods and services produced .
 Gross national product is now a commonly used annual measure that captures the essence of Smith's idea . Smith's original idea was to measure the gross national product of GDP .
 G N P is the total or aggregate of goods and services produced in a state in a given year . It is the aggregate or aggregate amount of goods produced in the state in that year . A state is a state of origin .
 Investment of surplus or savings—additions to the capital stock used for future production 3. Investing of surplus is a form of investment of surplus . Investing in surplus is an investment of savings or savings .
 Gross domestic product is a more refined measure that subtracts national earnings from foreign investments in other countries . Exports of domestic production minus imports of foreign production is a subtraction that also takes account of the contribution of foreign-produced goods and services to domestic production .
 After all, domestically owned capital invested abroad contributes to foreign, not domestic, production . The U.S. can't afford to rely on foreign investment to invest in its own country .
 GNP and GDP are criticized for understating aggregate or total domestic production . Goods and services produced and consumed in a household cannot be measured directly . GDP and GNP are often criticized for overstating total or aggregate production of domestic goods .
 This is particularly acute in developing world economies . Developed world economies have a higher proportion of household production and consumption . This is especially true in developing countries that have higher proportions of consumption .
 globalization trends that accelerated in the 20th century have continued into the 21st century . After all, globalization trends have continued to evolve in modern life .
 Earning a fair profit or a fair return on loans and investments was now legitimate in the new religious teachings . Earning fair profits or return is now legitimate, according to the teachings of the religion .
 As a form of political economy, capitalism has its own ‘culture’ or set of supporting values, writes David Frum . Capitalism has its roots in European feudalism, he says, just as feudalism had .
 Capitalism legitimizes profit-making enterprises and allows for interest on loans and returns on investment that are essential to its functioning . capitalism legitimizes profits and returns, but it also legitimizes interest and returns from loans .
 Some Protestant sects believed worldly success was a mark of one’s membership in the ‘elect,” who were predestined to enjoy eternity in heaven .
 The new commercial ethic oriented members of society in a deeper sense to produce above consumption needs and to accumulate savings, thus increasing wealth available for investment .
 In the secular European and American commercial cultures, religious sources of these ideas may have been forgotten . But the ideas spawned by these religious understandings decidedly were not lost .
 These ideas related to work, savings, and investment were retained in a commercial culture accepted by people of diverse religious identities as well as those claiming no religious preference .
 If capitalist economies are to be maintained and grow, there is a continuing and seemingly never-ending need for more investment in capital goods . The need for capital goods is to be sustained in capitalist economies to maintain and grow .
 Weber identified capitalism’s dependency on a commercial culture that treats market-oriented activities as legitimate, encourages hard work, and promotes a propensity to save and invest . Weber: Capitalism is dependent on its dependency on commercial culture .
 This was as true in preindustrial capitalism as it is in the more advanced forms of industrial and postindustrial capitalism that continue to require enormous amounts of investment in capital goods . This was true in . preindustrial . capitalism as well as in more advanced . forms of . industrial . and post
 The Passing of Feudalism and the New Politics of Capitalism, Mercantilism, and Liberalism . As capitalism gradually displaced feudalism, states were emerging as a new political unit .
 The Western European feudal idea of unity in Christendom survived throughout the Middle Ages . Despite divisions between the Christian Church at Rome and the Orthodox Christian Church in the East at Constantinople, the idea of a unified church in the West survived .
 The 15thand 16th-century Protestant Reformation split Christendom in Western Europe along the new state lines . Warring princes chose either Protestant or Catholic professions of faith .
 Peace of Westphalia that ended the Thirty Years’ War concluded that the religion of the inhabitants would be determined by the prince or temporal authority in any given realm . In Latin, cujus regio ejus religio (the religion . of the . inhabitants of the
 The authority of princes in these new political units called states was indeed supreme if even religious choice could be determined by them . Even religious choice was determined by the authority of the princes .
 States displaced the landed estate or feudal community in the new European political and economic order that emerged . States thus displaced the feudal community or landed estate in Europe's new political order .
 The monarchs in these new states gradually accumulated more and more central authority within their realms . Monarchies in the new states were monarchs who accumulated more than central authority .
 Spanish monarchs acquired vast amounts of gold, precious gems, and other treasure acquired by 16th-, 17th-17th-18th-century monarchs . Toledo is the imperial capital of Spain .
 Mercantilism as an economic policy involved states acquiring gold from running a favorable balance of trade and storing it in national treasuries . In addition to acquiring new gold from mines in New World colonies, states acquired gold from a favorable trade balance .
 Hoards of gold, silver, and other precious metals accrued in national treasuries from the profits or royalties from commercial transactions conducted by statechartered corporations and other traders . Hoard of gold was amassed from state corporations .
 Sometimes such treasures were retained by these national firms as a store of value to finance future purchases required in their business ventures . Sometimes these treasures were kept by these companies as a bank of value .
 The ideal in mercantilism was for traders to sell more than they bought, requiring others to pay for their purchases with gold or silver, which then could then be added to the national treasure . The ideal was to allow the nation to buy more and sell more and buy more than
 Adam Smith took issue with the mercantilist view in An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations . Adam Smith was the Scottish political economist and author of An Inquiry .
 Smith argued national wealth in capitalism was not to be found in the treasure that accrued in treasury vaults . Smith argued that wealth was to be in the productive capacity of economies . Smith said national wealth was found in productive capacity in economies .
 This was increasingly to be found in their capital stock along with labor and land, collectively termed factors of production . The capital stock and labor were found to be the key to their success .
 Smith understood the importance of producing tools, machinery, or other capital goods but still relied on a labor theory of value . Smith believed in the value of what is produced is the result of labor put into the production process .
 Smith argued that efficiency can be enhanced significantly with specialization and division of labor . Smith argues that specialization can be improved significantly with division of work .
 His was also a liberal view of capitalist political economy . He emphasized free markets in which governments took a hands-off or laissez-faire approach to the market .
 State authority or government in European feudalism had been in the hands of land-owning aristocrats . After all, state authority in feudalism was in hands of aristocrats, says historian .
 In many instances, state authority had been used against the bourgeois or commercial interests of the new middle class . In many cases, the state had used state authority against the interests of those in the middle class, he says .
 Smith’s economic liberalism supported the interests of the new middle class by holding that free-market enterprises were far more likely to increase national wealth . Smith's economic liberalism was consistent with the political liberalism of John Locke .
 In serving their own interests, capitalists would have to compete with other self-oriented buyers and sellers in the marketplace . In serving themselves, capitalists must compete with others in the market, he says .
 Competition among free traders would force firms and individuals wanting to stay in business to be more efficient without government interference . Government interference would help supply quality goods and services at lower, more competitive prices .
 Instead of government direction, an invisible hand of market competition would force efficiencies, resulting in greater productivity and wealth for the nation as a whole than could be acquired under mercantilism .
 He complained that aristocrats contributed virtually nothing to capitalist production in exchange for the rents they collected as mere owners of land . He complained .
 Ricardo extended Smith’s analysis, criticizing aristocratic or other landholding interests for restraining international trade through tariffs and other protectionist measures that favored their interests .
 Ricardo argued that free trade allowed for national specialization in accordance with comparative advantage . Ricardo saw that great gains in overall or aggregate production would come from allowing international markets to operate without government interference favoring particular class interests .
 Ricardo became the intellectual forefather of the idea of globalization . Ricardo became an intellectual precursor to the concept of globalization . Ricardo was the founder of Ricardo's work on globalization .
 Ricardo favored agricultural interests and denied firms and individuals the freedom to buy and sell at market prices without restriction across national frontiers . For Ricardo, protectionism (typically in the form of tariffs or taxes on imports) helped agricultural interests .
 Tariffs and other barriers to free trade both protected and encouraged inefficient producers . Tariffs also protected inefficient producers, according to the World Trade Organisation .
 Ricardo argued that international trade free of government interference would have same positive effect on productivity as free trade in domestic political economies . Pushing Adam Smith’s economic liberalism beyond the borders of the state, Ricardo argued .
 Ricardo’s free-trade prescription favored the newly emergent capital-owning class, which put its capital to work in manufacturing and would benefit from free markets in which to sell its products . Ricardo's free trade prescription favors the newly emerging capital-owned class, who would benefit
 Karl Marx accepted the same labor theory of value but focused on what he understood to be the exploitative character of class relations . The Marx theory was consistent with both Smith's and Ricardo’s analyses .
 Smith had referred to classes as various ‘orders’ in society, understanding as did Marx later that classes had played a historic role in the political economy . Smith had called for classes to be an order in society .
 Marx expanded Ricardo’s criticisms of the aristocracy to include capitalist and other classes that have been dominant over the course of human history . Marx expanded his criticisms of aristocrats to include capitalists .
 Marx understood capitalism as a worldwide form of economy with commercial implications on a global scale . Marx believed capitalism was a global form of economic activity . Marx also understood capitalism had commercial implications for the global economy .
 The 17th and 18th centuries marked the first wave of imperial expansion from Europe, focusing on acquiring colonies in the New World of the Americas . The Progressive Globalization of Capitalism .
 The British, French, Dutch, Spanish, and Portuguese were the key players in the World Cup .
 Mercantilist policies dominated the early stage of capitalism . Colonial powers sought trade and commercial advantages over each other .
 In the process of acquiring and maintaining these colonies, settlers and successive generations brought with them European political and economic ideas that took root in the new world . The colonies were acquired by European settlers in the early 1800s .
 As colonies gained their independence in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, new states formed with claims to sovereignty following the European or “Westphalia’s model .
 Along with the state, the elements of market capitalism were also transferred . Along with state, market capitalism was also transferred to the state .
 The same European powers, along with Germany, Belgium, and the United States, established new colonies or other territorial holdings .
 Corporations and banks from imperial countries were transnational actors, which operated globally just as state-chartered firms had done in the first wave of imperial expansion . Corporations from imperial nations operated globally as they did in imperial expansion of the 1930s .
 Colonial empires were constructed to serve the commercial advantage of the colonial power . Colonial empires are motivated primarily by mercantilist policies, writes Julian Zelizer .
 At the same time, European and American administrations and firms transferred their ideas about capitalist political economy throughout the world . At the time, Europe and America transferred ideas about capitalism to the world, the world's capitalism .
 As colonies in Africa, Asia, and the Pacific became independent, their capitalist political economies were often linked by neocolonial ties with the former colonial power .
 The effect of the second wave of imperialism and decolonization that followed was to complete the globalization of capitalism and capitalist political economy . Nevertheless, the effect of second wave imperialism is to be seen as the result of decolonialization .
 Multinational corporations, firms that own and manage economic units in two or more countries, and multinational banks headquartered in the world’s largest economies, operated alongside firms in the markets of these new states . Multinational firms owned and managed economic units .
 Even communist or socialist states in Central and Eastern Europe, China, Cuba, and elsewhere that experienced revolutions led by those seeking to overthrow capitalism were forced to adopt what some political economists refer to as a particular form of state capitalism .
 Instead of privately owned capital being at the core of the domestic political economies of these countries, capital was expropriated in the name of the people from private owners . Private owners are no longer at core of domestic economies .
 It was concentrated in the hands of state authorities in centrally planned or controlled economies . Leninist political design of democratic centralism within a ruling-party apparatus .
 Most people accepted the claims by these regimes that they had rejected capitalism . They established socialism as an intermediate step en route to communism . Most accepted these regimes' claims they rejected capitalism, establishing socialism .
 Leninist regimes succeeded only in overthrowing free-market capitalism in which capital was privately owned, the most common form of capitalism . By contrast, many economic structuralists and other political economists have disagreed, noting that in fact .
 To them, the centrally planned and directed political economies of these Leninist regimes still remained part of a worldwide capitalist political economy . To them they retained in their domestic political economies a capitalist reliance on markets, money, and investment subject to state direction .
 State capitalism is not free-market capitalism, but it bears the marks of capitalism all the same . State capitalism isn't free market capitalism, it's a form of capitalism, says Julian Zelizer .
 The end of the Cold War resulted in the abandonment of Leninist and statecapitalist forms of political economy by most of the world's states and societies . Most of them abandoned Leninist or statecapitalist political economy .
 Experiments with free-market capitalism were undertaken with different forms of capitalism . Some experiments were successful, but not always very successful . Some of the experiments were unsuccessful .
 Others have had little or no government ownership and little provision for social security . Social security is a much less generous provision for the kind of social security taken for granted .
 The underlying cultures in these societies are decisive in determining the degree to which regimes in these states will privatize their economies . The emphasis they will place on achieving social-democratic or welfare-state goals, the author says .
 The globalization of capitalism in the present-day world is one in which money, markets, and investment are central attributes . Money, markets and investment is central attributes of capitalism, says the author .
 As Max Weber understood, an orientation to work, productivity, and a propensity to save and invest remain key cultural values essential to the effective functioning of capitalist political economies anywhere .
 At the same time, beneath the surface of global capitalism is a world of great diversity . Underneath the surface is a great diversity of diversity, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Capitalist political economies differ substantially from country to country . Capitalist economic economies differ from country's political systems .
 There are differences in commercial and political values that affect the way business is conducted and the political, social, and economic choices that are made . There is no easy way to explain the difference in business and politics .
 Switzerland and Sweden have among the most generous welfare states of any of the advanced capitalist political economies . For example, the United States probably has the least generous welfare state .
 Switzerland is much closer to the United States, with most production capital in private hands . On the issue of privatization versus socialization or public ownership of the means of production, Switzerland is closer to socializing .
 State subsidies of private industries and outright public ownership of other firms has been more prevalent in Sweden than in other northern European countries . Public ownership of private firms is more prevalent than in Sweden, as it is in northern Europe .
 To illustrate how commercial culture and the structure of government-private sector relations can vary, we can compare the United States with Japan . The U.S. and Japan are the two countries that have the most successful economies .
 Most of the Japanese economy is in private hands, but the relation between Japanese firms and their government is close-knit . Direct coordination and state subsidies widely accepted as perfectly legitimate within the Japanese commercial culture .
 Ministry of International Trade and Industry has been widely studied for the role it has played in advancing the global competitiveness of Japanese industry . In this regard, the ministry has played a key role in advancing global competitiveness .
 U.S. commercial culture generally views government intervention in the market with skepticism . Government subsidies and partnerships for research and development are government-industry partnerships . The underlying American commercial culture is skeptical of government intervention .
 MITI is an institution for coordinating government-industry relations in the United States . MITI has no U.S. equivalent institution to MITI, which is based in Washington, D.C.
 Suggestions that the United States emulate or copy the Japanese (or, for that matter, French) government-industry, joint-planning approach to market competitiveness have been strongly resisted by many in the U.S. Suggestions are strongly resisted .
 Almost all advanced industrial countries have ministries or agencies concerned with advancing the global competitiveness of their national industries . Nevertheless, by contrast, almost all other advanced industrial nations have ministries .
 The ways in which multinational corporations and banks operate and interact on a global basis reflect the diversity of commercial cultures they represent .
 Some will be more likely to form alliances or cartels with other firms . Some firms are accustomed to doing in their domestic markets . Some will form alliances and cartels with others .
 Other firms, reflecting fiercely competitive and freemarket-oriented values in their domestic commercial cultures, are likely to act in the same way abroad .
 On the other hand, there can also be convergence of multinational corporate orientations across cultures on such issues over time .
 Competition for market share has driven some firms to seek strategic alliances or mergers and acquisitions . Globalization has also meant an increasing concentration of capital .
 American multinationals like United Airlines, now merged with Continental, have organized strategic alliances with other nonUnited States airlines . Air Canada, Japan’s All Nippon Airways, Air China, Asiana, Singapore Airlines, Austrian Air, Croatia Airlines, Swiss International, British Midland
 Delta, American and other major carriers have done much the same thing . Delta and American carriers have also done much of the same .
 U.S. multinational Chrysler merged with German Daimler-Benz to form Daimlers Chrysler . The two later split, and Chrysler was taken over by Fiat, the Italian automaker .
 Swedish Saab and Volvo were purchased by General Motors and Ford, but later sold to Swedish and Chinese automakers . Saab was purchased by GM and Ford but sold to Chinese and Swedish automakers .
 Many very diverse corporate cultures have to grapple with the challenges of building fully collaborative alliances and organizations compatible with their diversity in national perspectives and corporate cultures .
 Explain attempts at global governance in the post-World War 11 era to deal with trade, finance, and investment resulting from rapid globalization . Explain attempts to deal in the world's post-WW11 era to dealing with global governance .
 A knowledge of historical background on the emergence and globalization of capitalism is essential to understanding 20th-century and present-day arguments among economic liberals, mercantilists, post-World War II neomercantilistists, and world-system theorists .
 The period between the two world wars was marked by a revival of mercantilist ideas . Mercantilism was a form of economic liberalism in the late 19th and early 20th centuries .
 As a result, the economic dimension of the globalization process dramatically slowed . The slowdown in the globalization process has also slowed, the author says .
 Countries erected high tariffs and other barriers to trade to protect domestic industries and agricultural sectors from foreign competition . Countries erected the high tariffs to protect their industries and agriculture sectors .
 It was a game all countries could play, and most did as they engaged in successive rounds of competitive devaluations . Most of the world's largest economies have been devalued in recent years .
 The aim was to run a favorable balance of trade—exporting or selling more than was imported or bought from abroad . Regardless of the effects of such policies on foreign producers, such policies were not to be seen .
 As in the mercantilist period, more successful players could be identified by the amount of gold or other monetary assets they accrued from positive trade balances .
 Protectionism and competitive-devaluation policies resulted in an enormous reduction in the volume of trade during the 1930s as each country strove to avoid purchasing other countries’ exports . Referred to by economic liberals as “beggarthy-neighbor” policies, protection
 No country really won in this game; all experienced economic depression and the loss of productivity . No country actually won in the game; no country won in it; all .
 Adam Smith had observed that wealth of nations was not to be found in gold stocks, but rather in their productive capacity . Adam Smith observed that the wealth of countries was found in productive capacity, not gold .
 Any trade that did go on tended to occur in mutually exclusive trade blocs . Germany at the core of Central European trade, Britain within its empire and commonwealth, the United States in North America and the Caribbean, and Japan in its East Asian co-prosperity sphere .
 Post-World War II global economy based on liberal, free-trade principles was widely believed, particularly among British and U.S. policymakers . This was thought to be the result of eliminating or reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade .
 Their objective was to establish an open trading and commercial environment on a global basis, rather than repeat the experience of the interwar period . Their objective is to establish a global trading environment, not a repeat of the experience .
 International economic regimes or sets of rules governing commerce were established . International organizations charged with implementing the three-part grand design . Free or open trade, monetary means for maintaining currency exchange essential to commerce, and capital investment .
 The almost seven decades following World War II were a remarkable period for economic growth, although marked by a number of recessions . The most serious recession began in 2008, the most serious beginning in 2008 .
 A number of newly industrializing countries made remarkable economic gains in the last quarter of the 20th century . The trend continues into the 21st century, continuing into the next century .
 Emerging alongside South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and other Asian ‘tigers” are regional economic giants in several continental locations . Brazil in South America, Russia in Eurasia, India in South Asia, China in East Asia . South Africa, Indonesia, Argentina, and Chile also
 Inflation, high unemployment, and productivity slowdowns in industrialized countries . But these same years also witnessed periods of inflation and high unemployment in industrialized nations .
 The end of the Cold War marked an opportunity to integrate the economies in the east within an expanding European Union . Eor the West Europeans, the East Europeans, saw the chance to integrate .
 We will briefly provide an overview of key developments in post-World War II trade, monetary, and investment issues . We will provide more detail in later chapters .
 Regimes are sets of rules the players in their enlightened self-interest agree to follow . Regimes must be set up in order to ensure the rules are meted out by the players .
 Sustaining and expanding trade and other forms of commerce require generally accepted rules governing buying and selling, importing and exporting . The rules govern buying, selling and importing, importing, exporting .
 In the absence of such rules, the overall volume of trade would shrink dramatically . Trade would shrink with adverse effects on all parties, the authors say .
 There was the possibility that an ITO would become too strong and intervene against corporate or national interests . There was also a possibility that it would be too strong for corporations to intervene .
 The ITO idea failed, but the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was established in 1947 . Although the ITO failed, the idea was used to create an agreement on tariffs and trade .
 GATT negotiation rounds worked painstakingly to reduce tariffs and other barriers to trade . In succeeding decades, GATT negotiations rounds have reduced tariffs, other barriers .
 The GATT has been succeeded in 1995 by the World Trade Organization . The ITO would have been given the task of reducing barriers to trade and fostering as open a trading environment as possible .
 The multilateral trading system developed since World War II has underpinned global prosperity . It is an incredibly important task since the multilateral trade system has underpined global prosperity.
 Further liberalization will not be easy, as evidenced by the collapse of trade talks . Trade talks have been a major stumbling block in recent years .
 In 2001, meetings began seeking to lower trade barriers where freer trade would help poor countries the most, particularly in agriculture . In 2001 in Doha, the capital of Qatar, meetings were held in Qatar .
 Meetings toward this end have been held throughout the world and have been highly contentious . Meetings are held in various countries around the world .
 Agribusiness issues often prove to be the most difficult for small-farmers . Small-farm and corporate interests at stake in agricultural issues are often difficult .
 There is substantial pressure to reach some agreement and thus bring the Doha Round of negotiations finally to a close .
 Even the wealthiest countries can be held accountable in the WTO for violations of trade rules . Subsidizing certain industries or firms in order to get an unfair trade advantage, for example, makes the price of exports less expensive .
 Failure to reach agreement reinforcing growing tendencies to form competing European, American, and Japan-East Asian trade areas, say political economists .
 Chinese and other Asian exports to Europe, Canada, and the United States are massive . Internal trade within North America and within Europe tends to be greater than external trade with other areas .
 Free-trade advocates worry that regional trade blocs could become mutually exclusive . The 1930s trade bloc blocs were once mutually exclusive, as they were in the 1930s . Free trade advocates worry about the possibility of mutually exclusive blocs .
 The WTO and other international organizations concerned with global commerce will be called on to accommodate, to a greater degree than in the past, demands from both labor and environmental interests . At the same time (and responding to public pressures), the WTO and others will be asked to accommodate .
 Trade and investment across national borders depends on the ability to exchange money from one currency to another . The International Monetary Regime is the focus of global-governance arrangements .
 Creating an international monetary regime and the International Monetary Fund for the post-World War II period was much easier than constructing a trade regime . Creating a monetary regime is much more difficult than constructing an international trade regime, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Competitive devaluations, such as those that had occurred during the interwar period, were forbidden . Exchange rates of one currency for another were to be stable . Currency exchange rates were also forbidden .
 Bretton Woods is named for the New Hampshire location where the international agreement was reached in 1944 . This was set forth by the Bretton-Woods regime, named for New Hampshire, New Hampshire .
 IMF was to maintain international liquidity, helping states with insufficient foreign cash reserves by making short-term loans, enabling them to balance their books in the event of a shortfall in foreign currency reserves .
 In the absence of IMF lending or other sources of credit from abroad, a state might be forced to put up trade barriers against further imports, thus cutting off trade to the disadvantage of other countries . IMF lending may be necessary to prevent further imports .
 IMF serves the financial needs of states, namely their treasuries and central banks, and, if necessary, is the lender of last resort to keep countries from going into bankruptcy . The IMF is the world's largest and most powerful bank .
 The international monetary regime changed in the 1970s from relatively fixed exchange rates under Bretton Woods to a regime of ‘managed flexibility”—floating exchange rates subject to currency-market interventions by central banks . Central banks intervene in the currency market .
 IMF, however, remained in place as a monetary lending agency with the purpose and capacity to maintain international liquidity . The IMF is the world's largest lending agency and the IMF is based in New York .
 Central banks and national treasuries may choose to intervene in currency markets unilaterally or, more likely, in concerted, multilateral actions . In a regime in which exchange rates are set, central banks may intervene in these markets unilaterally .
 They intervene in order to buy and sell national currencies so as to affect their price or exchange rate, in turn affecting prices of goods and services . In turn, they also affect the price of goods, services and prices of all goods .
 The prices of a country’s exports are directly affected by even small changes in exchange rates . Even small changes are seen in the value of the country's exports in foreign markets .
 The firm may be less inclined to take its profits out of the United States than before . A $100,000 profit or return on investment at €1.5 per year could be worth less than a $100k profit .
 Exchange rates matter, whether for investment, trade, or merely the cost of traveling abroad next summer, exchange rates matter . Put another way: Whether for investment or trade, it matters .
 There are those who win and those who lose on any exchange-rate change . Because they do, there are winners and losers in exchange rates .
 World Bank was created in 1944, designed to be a source of financial and technical assistance to developing countries around the world . It was established after World War II with the World Bank as its principal agency .
 The formal and original title of the World Bank reflects its original purpose, which was to rebuild post-World War II war-torn economies in Europe and Asia . The original title was the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
 Foreign aid and multilateral lending combined with loans from investment and other private-sector banks resulted in extraordinary success for these previously war-torn countries .
 Organization for European Economic Cooperation was formed in 1948 in Paris in the aftermath of World War II to facilitate capital-investment flows to rebuild European economies . Organization was formed to facilitate investment in European economies after the war .
 Aims at the time were to promote trade and monetary cooperation among member countries . Aims were to foster production and the economic reconstruction of Europe .
 At its origins the OECD had eighteen European members plus the U.S. and Canada . The OECD had 18 European members, including Canada and the United States .
 Admissions no longer confined to Europe, there are now thirty-four member states from around the world committed to market economy, pluralist democracy, and respect for human rights .
 OECD works to expand free or open trade and contribute to economic development not only in advanced-industrial and postindustrial countries but also in developing countries . Often referred to now as the rich countries’ club, the OECD works .
 The gap in technology, capital, and levels of living between advanced-industrial and postindustrial countries of the North and those in the South is a striking characteristic of the present-day global political economy .
 French socialists first started using the expression Third World in the 1960s to denote the most populous category of the world’s peoples . The term third estate in French history and culture refers to the masses of people who at the time of the French Revolution in 1789 were decidedly less well
 The original usage of Third World had a positive connotation because it carried the implication that improvement in life conditions for the world’s masses was still possible, whether by revolution or other means . This original usage had a negative connotation as it carried on to the idea that improvements in
 In more recent years, the term has fallen into disfavor among those who feel it devalues or puts lower-income countries in a third-rate position . The term has become more popular in recent years .
 In this chapter and throughout this volume we use these terms descriptively without any intended connotation . In any event, this chapter, in this . chapter and . throughout this . volume, we use them descriptively . without any intention .
 First World and North are used interchangeably to refer to high-income, capital-richer countries that with a few exceptions lie in the Northern Hemisphere . First World refers to capital-rich countries that lie in Northern Hemisphere.
 Third World or South are also interchangeable terms that reflect that most middleand low-income, capital-poorer countries are in the Southern Hemisphere . Third World and South are interchangeable terms .
 During the Cold War, the term Second World referred to the Soviet Union and other centrally planned, Marxist-Leninist political economies, has much less usage today . As a practical matter, it has little use today as a result .
 Efforts by the World Bank are supplemented by regional development lending banks, such as the Inter-American Development Bank and Asian Development bank .
 The best way for capital-poor countries to borrow for investment purposes is at concessionary rates of interest, if possible, is below market rates from long-term lenders such as the World Bank, other international lending institutions, or foreign governments .
 Loans at concessionary rates for development purposes are really a form of grant or foreign aid . Loans are given to the government at concession rates at a cost of $1.5 billion .
 If they are prudent, borrowing countries will set aside a portion of the concessionary loan, investing it at higher market rates and allowing compound interest over time to produce the funds needed to pay off the loan when due .
 Heavy borrowing in the 1970s and 1980s by capital-poor countries left many of these less-developed countries of the South deeply in debt .
 The heavy interest payments were burdens on their domestic political economies . Heavy interest payments are burdens on the domestic political economy .
 Much of the money borrowed was not spent for development or, when it was, not always allocated to sound projects . Moreover, the money was not always spent on sound projects or development projects .
 Many of the expected economic gains for which the loans were originally requested were not realized either . As a result of the loans, many of the hoped economic gains have not been realized . The loans were not expected to be able to be repaid .
 Lenders offered refinancing and debt relief to borrowers so they could avoid default . The burden was reduced and crisis avoided primarily by the gradual reduction in global interest rates in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Good economic times for capital-rich countries usually mean increased purchases to include imports from developing countries . Capital rich countries usually buy imports from countries such as China .
 Recessions in the North typically result in reduced imports with adverse impact in the South . At the same time, of course, recessions in South typically result of reduced imports .
 The phenomenal economic growth in China and India continued throughout the global recession . High demand for imports of both manufacturers and services was seen throughout the recession .
 ECOSOC or other UN organs deal with economic or commercial matters on a global basis . Other UN organs and specialized agencies also deal with global economic and commercial matters .
 As is immediately apparent, the disparities are enormous, which shows dramatically how human conditions vary . As well as the disparities, the disparity is enormous .
 Life expectancy declines from just over 80 years in very high-development countries to just under 70 and 56 years, respectively, in low-developer countries . Given disease and shortfalls in nutrition as well as high infant mortality, it is hardly surprising .
 High-income countries have remained highly urbanized even as high-tech, capital-intensive, information-based services have displaced many labor-intensive industries . High-tech has displaced labor intensive industries .
 Lowand middle-income countries have also experienced a substantial shift in recent decades from agriculture to urban-centered industry and services . The shift in urban-based industry has also been a major shift in economic growth .
 In pursuit of a better life and responding to the labor demands of new industries, people in lowand middle-income countries have become more urbanized . Many leaving the countryside and their rural way of life behind .
 Rapid urban in-migration has overloaded the capacity of many governments to provide even essential services such as clean water and sanitation . But many, if not most, have not found a better life in the cities .
 Levels of Human Development is based on levels of human development in the United States . Levels of Development are based on the statistics in the rightand left-hand columns . Levels were created in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Across virtually all dimensions there is a staggering gap between the low and high-level countries . The gap is between the developing world and the high level countries .
 In a globalized world with so many interconnections, events and trends on the far side of the globe are not so easily dismissed as irrelevant to our safety, security, and economic well-being . Events and trends are not simply irrelevant to us, they say .
 UNDP, UN Development Report, 2010. the outside world, paralleling the realist perspective of states as the key unit of international relations . UNDP: States are key unit in international relations. UNDP says states are key units in international diplomacy .
 This distinction between national and international economies does seem outdated given the remarkable globalization of trade and financial markets that erodes the ability of states to control their own national economies .
 Parts of the U.S. may be assembled in China, Korea, India, or elsewhere . It's difficult to determine exactly what is an American product since parts frequently come from other countries .
 We may also witness further political fallout from the increase in economic globalization . We will also see further fallout from increased economic globalization, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The best example involves U.S. criticism of China’s domestic economic structure and policies . China aggressively pushes Chinese exports and makes it difficult to import foreign goods and services .
 A key aspect of support for the postwar international economic order has been the domestic social compact between state and society . A key part of the post-war economic order is the domestic compact between society and state, writes David Frum .
 In many countries this means support for an open international market is balanced by domestic programs designed to support workers with unemployment compensation, retraining, and other benefits as part of a social safety net .
 High costs have made it increasingly difficult for governments to live up to their end of the domestic bargain . High and increasing costs have led to increased pressure on governments to meet their promises .
 Regional trade and other economic arrangements run the risk of becoming mutually exclusive camps if members turn inward and away from interdependent relations within broader global markets . Second, even if unilateral protectionism does not come about, regional trade runs at risk of being mutually exclusive .
 The growing North-South economic divide is a challenge to a truly global economy . It is also a threat to an emerging global civil society, says Julian Zelizer .
 Economic and social inequality continues to be an important feature of world politics . The U.S. has seen a rise in inequality as a major factor in world politics since the 1980s .
 If populations continue to grow so rapidly, capitalist political economy will be put to the test . Resource and environmental constraints make sustainable development extraordinarily difficult in many areas of the world .
 Domestic, regional, and international political repercussions could be significant . Domestic and international repercussions could have been significant .
 Maintaining an open global financial and trading environment consistent with liberal or openness principles remains a substantial challenge in coming decades in a world that could just as easily move in the opposite direction .
 We have examined in this toolbox chapter the key components of the globalization phenomenon . We conclude that globalization is the key component of the phenomenon .
 Technology has had a dramatic impact on the social, cultural, and economic aspects of globalization . Technology was given a prominent place in our discussion as a key part of our discussion . We discussed the role of technology in the global community .
 Technology, of course, has impacted these realms throughout history, including the wheel and lever . Technology has influenced these realms through history, whether we’re talking about the wheel or electronic circuitry .
 What is different over the past century, however, is the speed with which the globalization process has occurred, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The speed of the process has changed dramatically in the last century .
 This equation for many has negative connotations and perhaps has some validity in terms of the spread of American popular culture . This equation has some positive connotations, but it may not have some validity .
 It is also factually incorrect to the extent it underplays the contribution of technological contributions made by scientists and engineers in other countries, it says . But it also factically incorrect, it also underplays .
 As for its political impact, globalization is neither simply good nor bad, it's not simply good or bad . As for globalization, globalization has a long history of being good and bad, says President Obama .
 It can help authoritarian regimes keep track of dissidents, but also provide them with a means to rally support and maintain contact with the outside world . It can also provide these individuals with a . means of rallying support and maintaining contact .
 The impact of technology on the development of a global political economy is striking, says David Cameron . The impact on the world's political economy will be striking, he says .
 Economic globalization has worked to undermine the claims of governments that they have the ability to protect national economies from the effects of the larger, global political economy . Furthermore, economic globalization has also undermined the claims that governments can protect their economies .
 The lines between global and state economies are becoming blurry as international economic issues become domestic political issues, vice versa . International economic issues are becoming domestic issues, and vice versa.
 As we have also noted, the benefits of economic globalization are uneven . The benefits are uneven, a point made for years by economic structuralists, liberals interested in international economic cooperation, and protestors .
 As in earlier decades, much of the South continues to be trapped in poverty . The South is still trapped in a state of poverty .
 Many regimes already beset by problems of political legitimacy see their authority further eroded by the global economy . Many such regimes are seen as having highly trained and adaptable workforces with access to technology .
 Effective global governance may help sustain gains, reducing the adverse effects of globalization . The U.S. should be careful to avoid the negative effects of globalization, writes David Frum .
 Adapting trade, monetary, and investment-fordevelopment regimes to changing circumstances is the task before us . Adapting these regimes is the ongoing task for us as we seek to better the human condition both nationally and globally .
 Twenty-first-century challenges for global and national governance include maintaining environmentally sustainable economic growth and eliminating poverty, starvation and malnutrition .
 More than a billion people in more than forty of the least-developed countries are at the bottom of the global heap . Per capita income is less than $800 per year . Basic economic needs have yet to be met adequately for more than one billion people .
 Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at mypoliscilab.com . Identify the key economic, social, and cultural aspects of the globalization, the role of technology, and assess both positive and negative implications .
 The dramatic increase in worldwide economic, social, and cultural Interactions are facilitated by the development of modern communication technologies . This section notes the uneven, asymmetric distribution of gains as well as the resultant political implications of globalization .
 An in-depth, historically grounded examination of how markets and the policies of states determine the way the world economy functions . The book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 The author addresses both the ups and downs of globalization with consideration of remedies for the latter . The author also discusses the downsides of globalization .
 Friedman analyzes key drivers and technological developments that exemplify and reflect globalization . He analyzes the historical emergence and development of capitalism as a worldwide form of political economy . Friedman: Capitalism emerged and developed from the birth of capitalism .
 The economic dimension of globalization is generally recognized as the most salient characteristic of globalization . This section provides a historical overview of the development of the global political economy .
 Markets, money, a set of values, and the prominence of capital as one factor of production over the others—land or resources such as labor— are key elements that help define capitalism as a mode of production or form of political economy . Capital is one of the key factors of production
 The importance of writers such as David Ricardo and Adam Smith are highlighted . Adam Smith was the inspiration for many of the world's most famous thinkers .
 The first three of the five “books"" or parts are the most important . However, his classic reference to the invisible hand is to be found in the fourth book . A foundational reading in classical economics worth pursuing .
 Smith's earlier Theory of Moral Sentiments presents his understandings about how moral values relate to political economy in society . Smith's theory of moral values relates to the political economy of society in society. Smith's Theory of moral Sentiments was published in 1972 .
 Religious ideas that eventually became secularized in modern commercial culture were at least as important as material factors, if not more so, as Marx .
 World War II depicts major changes in international relations and world politics stemming from the spread of global capitalism in the industrial age . The novel was published in 1944 and 1957 .
 Harper and Row, 1942, 1976, assesses different forms of capitalist political economy . Public versus private ownership of the means of production is key to understanding capitalism .
 The extraordinarily uneven distribution of gains and losses of globalization become crystal-clear when one examines the profound difference in the human condition across the spectrum from low to very high levels of development between developing and developed countries . Associated international organizations and regimes are noted, with further discussion reserved for later chapters .
 This liberalinstitutionalist scholar known for his work on international organizations focuses on cooperation . He says cooperation is essential to effective global governance .
 The authors examine global governance from the liberalism perspective . They focus on international organizations broadly conceived and NGOs, NGOs, and global civil society .
 This well-known economist sets his sights high, taking on the global scourge of poverty and possible ways to ameliorate It . He says poverty is a global problem that needs to be addressed .
 Nobel Prizewinning economist relates development to enhancement of individual freedom . Nobel Prize-winning economist views individual freedom as an enabling key to development .
 The expansion of the capitalist world economy is part of the world labor movement . The expansion is also the expansion of communication technologies and international banking . The world's labor movement and communication technologies are expanding .
 The increase of international identities in a globalized world . The decrease of sovereign states within the international system . The increase . of international labor movement between societies . The . increase of trade, commerce, investment between states .
 All politics can be reduced to economics when viewing international relations, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: All politics is reduced to economic terms .
 Economic issues can occupy extremely high places on international agendas . Economic issues are often high places in the world's most powerful political circles .
 Measurements of state-to-state economic or commercial activities will_as globalization continues. increase in importance retain their importance . New measures tend to lose their significance 6.5% of economic activity in the United States .
 In the European feudal period, markets began to develop outside the walls of banks . castles or estates . prisons. prisons. government buildings .
 Provides a standard of value for buying and selling and acts as a store of value . Provides wealth and barterability between commodities . Provides an easily convertible commodity prices . Also acts as wealth distributor 9.
 Decreased government interference would have the same positive effects in international trade as in domestic trade . Decreased interference from the government would have a positive effect on international trade .
 Increasing government interference would create the same positive effects in international trade as in domestic trade . Increasing government intervention would create a positive effect on international trade, he says .
 International trade should be conducted between friendly states in order to be successful, says President Obama . International trade must be conducted with friendly states, he says .
 The amount of capital and the amount of labor are key factors in capital construction . The underlying cultural values of capital construction are also important factors .
 Competitive devaluation refers to the process of states devaluing their currency in order to secure price advantages for domestic producers . states competing with other states to devalue their currency more quickly to receive cheaper imports . creating a global compact against currency devaluations . states devalued their currency . in order
 GATT negotiation rounds were primarily designed to reduce competitive devaluations . GATT negotiations rounds were intended to reduce tariffs and export quotas . Currency controls were designed to prevent competitive devaluation .
 All countries of the world are members regardless of political orientation . All countries are members of the United Nations .
 Main purpose of the IMF is to foster development in developing countries maintain international liquidity. act as a capital investment regime. maintain international price stability . maintain international . stability. maintain global . stability .
 The primary purpose of the World Bank is to act a lender of last resort for states . maintain international liquidity. act as a provider of capital invested for development. be the bank of international travelers. be a bank of global travelers. maintain international .
 According to the UNDP data, high-development countries have a per-capita income _times higher than low-income countries . The UNDP says high-end countries have an income of 5 10 20 more than 50 18 .
 Overloaded their service delivery capacities . Provided a usable labor force Caused riots to break out . Improved the infrastructure in cities 19.5 years ago .
 Differences in domestic political systems differ in the ways domestic economies are structured and operate . Differences in preferential trading arrangements and political parties are key issues .
 Differentiate between the conflicts and dilemmas policymakers must address when establishing a national security framework . Differentiate from the conflicts that policymakers need to address in national security policy .
 Illustrate how the diversity of capabilities impacts the way in which power is measured . Illustrates how diverse capabilities impact the way we measure power . Illustration: The diversity of capability impacts how it's measured .
 The Obama administration’s National Security Strategy explicitly provides an assessment of the overall strategic environment .
 President Obama promised a “new beginning” in relations between the U.S. and the Muslim world in Cairo speech in 2009 .
 Rather than viewing Muslims almost exclusively through the prism of Islamic extremism and terrorism, the administration sought a strategy of global engagement that would encompass such areas of common interest as education, the environment, and the economy .
 This chapter takes up both national power and the interests states pursue or, more concretely, the objectives they wish to achieve that governmental authorities understand to be consistent with those interests . QSJRead arxJ .
 Some states may seek to maximize their power as a national objective . They seek to achieve or sustain superiority over others either regionally or globally . States may also seek to maximise their power .
 We see national power exercised diplomatically, militarily, economically, and culturally as states and their societies interact in an increasingly globalized world . We see the power of states and societies interacting more and more as states interact in a globalized way .
 The role of nonstate actors has been elevated by globalization, but states are still key players . Nonstate actors, including nongovernmental organizations, individuals and groups, are key players in national power, writes Peter Bergen .
 Countering threats and achieving objectives through the exercise of national power remains an essential part of 21st-century international relations and world politics . Grasp how power and national interest are core to national security and foreign policy .
 The realist perspective on international relations and world politics closely matches that of many, if not most, policymakers . As noted in Chapter 2, “Theory,” ‘Theory’ is a realist view of international relations .
 Whether a dictator or a democrat, leaders of states pursue objectives consistent with their separate national interests . Whether dictators or democrats pursue objectives understood to be consistent with national interests, leaders pursue objectives in their own interests .
 A basic or core interest is protection of the physical integrity of a state . For example, a basic interest is protecting the state's physical integrity . A core interest in a state is protecting its physical integrity, a state.
 A more specific objective is to defend against any invasion by a neighboring state might launch . The U.S. military says it has no specific plans to defend itself from any invasion .
 Within the global system, opportunities present themselves that, if handled properly, can help to achieve specific objectives . If handled properly properly, these opportunities can be used to help with specific objectives, experts say .
 Threats emanating from other states have to be dealt with, especially if they interfere with the achievement of national objectives . Similarly, threats emanating from . other states must be dealt . with, particularly if . they interfere . with the . achievement of the . objectives of national . objectives .
 Leaders devise specific policies that employ various elements of national power at their disposal . To exploit these opportunities and to handle these threats, leaders devise policies . Leaders devise strategies to deal with these threats .
 They mobilize national capabilities to exert power constructively to achieve objectives, protect their interests . The U.S. has a history of using military might to protect its interests in the world .
 Power is most closely associated with international relations and world politics, it is power . Power is the most powerful form of power in the world, according to experts .
 Morgenthau: “Whatever the specific objectives policymakers may pursue to achieve and defend a state’s interests, power is required”
 Policymakers explicitly or implicitly think in terms of interests, objectives, threats, and opportunities when conceiving and implementing their policies . The framework has utility not only for policymakers of states, but also for practitioners at international organizations, multinational corporations, and transnational nongovernmental organizations .
 Realists are most explicit in elaborating this power-and-interest formulation, but it is also part of a liberal framework . It also finds a place in English School and economic-structuralist theorizing .
 J Morgenthau: Beyond survival of the state and other national security-related objectives, however, liberals are more likely to be liberals . He says liberals are likely to win the White House .
 I Understanding State Behavior to include human rights and socioeconomic, welfare-oriented goals in the agenda of objectives they see as part of the national interest . I understanding State Behavior includes human rights, socioeconomic goals and socioeconomic goals .
 A skeptic would claim that the national interest of any state is simply what political leaders say it is . It is simply a rhetorical device designed to justify the pursuit of a controversial policy, he says .
 All leaders claim they act in the selfless pursuit of the national interest whether dictator, democrat, or demagogue . There is certainly an element of truth to this—all leaders claim to be selfless .
 There is no disagreement among policymakers that national survival as a state is the minimum objective . There are a few basic national interests that transcend any single type of political leader . These include a state's core security interests and values .
 The exercise of sovereignty is a right claimed by a state to exercise complete jurisdiction, power, or authority internally or within its territory and externally to act independently or autonomously in the conduct of its foreign affairs .
 For all their differences, leaders in the U.S., Israel, Iran, and North Korea all are first and foremost concerned with national survival . Leaders in the United States, Israel, North Korea and Iran all are concerned about national survival.
 A second core interest for states is economic vitality, prosperity . Economic Vitality is the state's economic vitality and prosperity .
 Economic prosperity is not only sought on behalf of citizens of a society, but also it can be an important source of power in international affairs . Economic prosperity can be a source of global power, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 There are despots who assiduously work to plunder their own societies and have little concern for their subjects . But such instances are exceptions to the rule .
 Even dictators realize that without the engine of economic growth their dreams of imperial glory are unlikely to be realized . Even those dictators bent on expansionism realize that economic growth is the key to their success .
 In many Western states, democratic values are key elements of national identity . Democracy is a key part of the West's identity in many countries .
 Some Islamic states and societies view European and American consumer-oriented cultures with their emphasis on materialism and overt sexuality as threats to basic religious and moral values they wish to preserve .
 The core interest of survival for a landlocked state like Poland or Zimbabwe is defense against invasion by neighboring states . The country's survival is defined more specifically as defense against neighboring invasion .
 A state with long coastlines such as the U.S. and Brazil that is dependent on foreign trade might see the protection of sea lanes as an important national objective in order to maintain economic prosperity .
 Beyond defensive concerns, policymakers may also opt for a broad range of other objectives . The U.S. has a long list of potential targets to pursue .
 Some states may wish to conquer others or take territory by force, as occurred in both of the 20th century’s world wars, the Korean War in 1950, the Vietnam War in the 1960s and 1970s, and the Iraq invasion of Kuwait .
 As a practical matter, most national objectives pursued by policymakers are usually more modest than conquest or defense against invasion . As a matter of policy, most policymakers pursue more modest objectives than conquest .
 The scope of these other objectives is really quite broad, covering a wide range of political, social, and economic issues . The scope is quite broad and covers a range of different issues, including political and social issues .
 Policymakers may seek to achieve long-range objectives in order to advance human rights, put a cap on the arms race and reduce the likelihood of war, reduce poverty and increase agricultural productivity .
 Some foreign policy objectives may be more immediate—short term or short range—such as stabilizing the chaotic situation in Afghanistan or handling the latest crisis reported by the media .
 Threats States do not decide to pursue specific objectives in a vacuum . Threats do not happen to be decided in a 'vague' state of mind .
 Objectives are critically influenced by perceived threats emanating from the global system . Objectives will be critical to the success of the U.S. military, says President Obama .
 Prior to 1992, Western European states paid relatively little attention to events in Yugoslavia . Yugoslavia was one of the most troubled countries in the world .
 When the country divided and wars and ethnic cleansing erupted among the Croats, Serbs, and Bosnians, a prime European objective became preventing the spread of the conflict beyond the borders of the former Yugoslavia . The former Yugoslavia was one of the most divided countries in the world .
 The challenge for policymakers is that at any one point in time, a state could be pursuing short-, medium-, and long-term objectives in all three categories at the same time . Categorizing the Foreign Policy Objectives of States is a key strategy for policymakers .
 Iran, as assessed by many intelligence services, is interested in developing a similar nuclear capability . Iran is also believed to be interested in a similar capability .
 Some analysts prefer to limit themselves to detailing the capabilities adversaries and others may have without engaging in assessments of intentions . Some analysts say it is a highly subjective enterprise .
 Others argue that intentions also need to be considered . The focus on capabilities alone may lead to exaggeration of the threat posed by other states .
 They prefer to combine both intentions and capabilities (particularly military assets) possessed by adversaries . The U.S. is basing their overall threat assessment on the best intelligence available available .
 German threat to France today is virtually zero— quite different from 1938 and 1939 just before the outbreak of World War II when German military capabilities were strong .
 Threats, then, are social constructions --understandings held by those in power and in the populations that follow them . Threats are really social constructs, says Julian Zelizer .
 "The effort to find out what is threatening and what is not is highly subjective," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This intersubjective sharing of threat perceptions can spiral, each party feeling increasingly vulnerable . This can spiral into a spiral of vulnerability, each victim feeling vulnerable .
 Arms races may be one by-product of rising tensions leading to armed conflict . Arms races are often followed by rising tensions in the world's most populous countries .
 The security dilemma lies in one party’s increased defense preparations perceived and understood by the other as threatening, Herz says .
 As each takes even legitimate “defense measures, both respond by matching or surpassing steps taken by the other . The net effect is that both parties actually undermine their own and the other’s security . Both parties undermine each other's security .
 Another present-day example is threat analysis on the Korean peninsula . Threat analysis is also being used to analyze threat analysis in Korea .
 A high state of readiness by both South Korean and U.S. military forces rises to an even higher state of alert when the regime in Pyongyang speaks more aggressively than usual or provokes the South .
 If a state has the intent to do harm but has no capability, then the threat is low, says the author . The threat to harm is low if a state does not have the capability to harm, he says .
 If intelligence indicates there is little or no intent to attack, then the threat is also low . Similarly, a state might have the capability, but if intelligence indicates no intent, then there is also a low threat .
 Intelligence may not have as good a handle on enemy intentions as political authorities would like . As those who prefer to focus on capabilities are quick to comment on capabilities, however, threat analysis can be wrong .
 To conservative analysts, that’s precisely what happened before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and other U.S. locations on December 7, 1941 . To these more conservative analysts that's exactly what happened .
 The prevailing view was that the Japanese High Command would not risk attacking the United States territories so far from the Japanese home waters . U.S. intelligence analysts were well aware of Japanese naval capabilities including aircraft carriers and other ships deployed in the Pacific .
 A completely threat-based national security strategy is unsustainable over the long haul, says CNN.com . A final point to keep in mind is that a completely threat based national security .
 No country has the economic capability to lavish untold amounts of their budget on both legitimate threats as well as what could best be called international irritants . No country can afford to spend so much on threats and irritants that it can't afford to ignore .
 Merely assessing the capabilities of other states is an inadequate approach to designing a national security policy . Devising a national national security strategy capabilities capabilities can serve as the basis for power. Devising national security strategies is an important part of the strategy .
 If political authorities do not take intentions into account, they will be fearful of even close allies or coalition partners . Political authorities should be aware of intentions and take them into account .
 Since the 1950s, U.S. administrations have correctly assessed that neither country has an intention to use these weapons against American targets . In fact, the United States has correctly assessed .
 The threat from the British and the French militaries is virtually nonexistent . Hence the threat from Britain and France is practically nonexistent .
 But focusing only on assessed intentions of other states is also too limiting, it is too limiting . It is not the only way to find out what states want to do .
 Cuba may have nothing but negative intentions and feelings toward the U.S., but its military capability is essentially nil . Cuba's military capability to act on these intentions is virtually nil, experts say .
 Cuba's military threat to the U.S. is also low, as is the case with the United Kingdom and France . The U.K. and France also have a low military threat .
 The real concern and the driver of national security priorities are those cases where an adversary has not only intentions to harm, but also a capability to do so . Point: "The real concern" is that an adversary is not only intent to harm but also has capability to harm .
 The result of this situation during the Cold War was that billions of dollars were spent by both countries and allies to deter, defend, and enhance their respective interests .
 Power with multiple ambitious international goals increases the potential for economic bankruptcy . The U.S. government is facing a potential for bankruptcy .
 The former Soviet Union based its Cold War strategy on a model that did not provide the sound economy needed to finance extraordinarily high rates of defense spending seemingly in perpetuity . The Soviet Union did not have a sound economy that could finance such high defense spending .
 Spending by some estimates 35 percent or more of GDP in the country’s military-industrial sector distorted the allocation of capital, labor, and other resources and contributed to economic collapse . Some estimates say 35 percent of GDP was spent in the military sector .
 Economic failures evident in the last years of the Cold War were followed by the unraveling of the Warsaw Pact alliance and the Soviet Union itself in 1991 . In 1992, the Russian Federation and Commonwealth of Independent States emerged in January 1992 .
 Global system presents threats to national interests, but also opportunities to influence foreign policy objectives . The global system presents policymakers with threats and opportunities that may influence the formulation of foreign policy goals .
 As with threats, determining what is an “opportunity’s worth pursuing is also highly subjective . As well as threats, it's difficult to determine what is worth pursuing .
 Pursuit by one country of what its governing authorities think is an opportunity may be taken as a threat by others . Pursuit may be seen as an opportunity by others, says the U.S. government .
 What is or is not a threat or opportunity is always subject to interpretation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 China’s decision to create foreign trade zones in its eastern coastal provinces in the 1980s provided an opportunity for other states to pursue the objective of expanded trade and economic investment with the world's most populous country . Other states are pursuing the objectives of expanding trade and investment with China .
 Even the aftermath of bloody wars provides opportunities for policymakers of the victorious states to reconfigure the international system . Even after bloody wars, policymakers of victorious states can reconfigure international systems .
 This occurred in 19th-century Europe after the defeat of Napoleon and also after World War II . The United States led the way promoting international trade and investment in the United States .
 We ask ourselves what the rational alternatives are from which a statesman may choose ... and which of these rational alternatives this particular statesman, acting under these circumstances, is likely to choose . We put ourselves in the position of a stateman who must meet a certain problem of foreign policy under
 It is the testing of this rational hypothesis against the actual facts and their consequences that gives meaning to the facts of international politics and makes a theory of politics possible . The testing of a rational hypothesis is what makes politics possible, says David Cameron .
 The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1991 was thwarted by a U.S.-led military coalition . It was assumed that he had aggressive intent, but it was assumed he had .
 It is assumed that he believed such weapons would deter the West from attempting to remove him from power as well as deter Iran from reigniting the bloody war between Iran and Iraq that raged from 1980 to 1988 and resulted in over a million casualties .
 Liberal theorists would offer different, yet potentially complementary explanations . Liberal theorists offer different theories of the universe .
 Those who emphasize the role of personality and perception would suggest Saddam Hussein's behavior was the result of a paranoid personality . Those who say Saddam Hussein was paranoid would suggest that .
 The possession of such weapons would help to solidify his domestic political position, says the former president .
 Such explanations are based on factors operating at the individual and domestic level of analysis . Such explanations have less to do with the international environment, experts say .
 Since the end of actual combat in the Korean War in 1952, the country has been ruled by a bizarre cult of personality revolving around the Kim family .
 With an appalling human rights record and a devastated economy that has caused death by starvation of an estimated hundreds of thousands of its citizens in the 1990s alone . Hundreds of thousands have died by starvation in the 90s alone.
 North Korea has one of the worst human rights records of any state . North Korea is the most militarized nation on earth in terms of percentage of its population under arms .
 Kim Jong-un is the current dictator of North Korea . He assumed his position in December 2011 upon the death of his father, Kim Jong Il, who died in 2011 .
 A full general at the age of 28, Kim Jong-un depends upon Army support to sustain his regime . The North Korean leader is a full general and a senior general .
 On March 26, 2010, an explosion tore through the hull of a South Korean naval vessel that was operating in waters near North Korean territory . The explosion happened near North Korea's North Korean border .
 The South Korean government accused the North Korean Navy of deliberately attacking its ship . Forty-six sailors were killed in the attack on the South Korean ship .
 Even if policymakers can agree on basic interests, they may disagree on what constitutes a threat, an opportunity, or a worthwhile foreign policy objective . You Are a Strategic Analyst"" at mypoliscilab.com .
 In the mid-1980s Western political leaders across the board viewed Mikhail Gorbachev as simply the latest in a long line of Soviet leaders hostile to the West . Western leaders in the 1980s viewed Gorbachachev as a 'hostile' leader .
 In the early 1990s, then German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher came to view Gorbachev as an opportunity to be seized to achieve a dramatic improvement in East-West relations . Reagan administration only belatedly accepted the position in the 1990s . Reagan
 Some members of the U.S. government continued to treat Gorbachev as a threat, believing that his reassuring words concerning East-West rapprochement and nuclear disarmament were little more than a sophisticated deception campaign .
 These controversies are not always confined to government officials . Moreover, these controversies have not always been confined to officials .
 If we shift the analysis to the societal level, to democracies in particular, interest groups and the general public may hold quite different points of view . Interest groups may hold very different views of view, says David Frum .
 In 2011, the weakening of Europe’s economic and financial position and debt crises in Portugal, Spain, Greece, Greece and Ireland even triggered public discussion of moving away from the euro as the European Union's currency .
 Government authorities often use the national interest to legitimize their more specific foreign policy objectives .
 The U.S. government is supposed to be in the national interest, but it's not in the interest of the U.N., it says . The White House has been accused of being in violation of the Constitution .
 As with threats and opportunities, constructivists remind us that national objectives are not objective truths government officials discover . National objectives are subjectively understood, constructions determined typically by those in authority .
 Both regime types have difficulties setting objectives and then holding agendas . Both regimes have difficulty setting objectives, then holding their agendas .
 Similarly, elites in or out of power and the general public can have a substantial impact in democracies . The public can also have a significant influence in democracies, say experts .
 Americans disenchantment with the situation in Vietnam in the late 1960s and early 1970s contributed to shifts in policy and in election outcomes .
 Although democracies are constituted to take popular views or public opinion into account, the distinction between democracies and authoritarian regimes in terms of popular influences is often overdrawn . The distinction between authoritarian regimes and democratic ones is often overblown .
 The authoritarian shah of Iran was overthrown in 1979 by an Islamic and student revolution . The shah was an important U.S. and Western ally of the shah .
 Once East European communist regimes lost the security guarantee of the former Soviet Union, they found they could not deal with public demands from their emerging civil societies, and began in 1989 they collapsed like dominos .
 Resolving controversies on interests and objectives by governmental decision is common in democracies as well in democracies, particularly those with strong cultural tradition in deference to authorities in matters of state like foreign policy .
 Mand Mandates are difficult to sustain in the United States for very long without public support . By contrast, given the strong American political tradition that allows for challenges to all policies, domestic or foreign .
 separation of powers gives substantial authority to the legislature, both houses but particularly the Senate . The executive branch has the lead in foreign policy matters, but the legislature has substantial authority in such matters . The U.S. style of presidential government gives the legislature substantial authority .
 U.S. president and members of Congress are often at loggerheads in determining interests, objectives, and appropriate actions . Indeed, the United States president and . members of the Congress often are at loggerhead in determining . interests and objectives .
 The head of government is also the leader of the majority party or coalition in the legislature . By contrast, in the more common parliamentary government, heads of government are also the leaders of majority parties or coalition .
 Parliamentary regimes such as those in the UK, Germany, and Japan need to reach consensus only within the majority party or governing coalition, not across separate, independent branches of government .
 Foreign policy will encounter opposition if not enough support from or deference by the general public . Still, their foreign policies will face opposition if there is not sufficient support from the public .
 Leaders of a state have agreed on the objectives they wish to pursue . Prioritizing Objectives should be prioritized by state leaders . Leaders of states should prioritise their objectives in order to achieve success .
 Foreign policy objectives of any given state, or international and transnational organization, may conflict and, thus, not be entirely compatible . The next problem they face is that foreign policy objectives may conflict with each other .
 A state’s objective of promoting human rights may well conflict with the objective of maintaining good relations or reduced tensions with countries thought to be in violation of human rights . For example, a state might be trying to promote human rights to maintain good relations .
 A corporation may want to get early returns on investments in various countries but not be as aggressive or exploitative as to expose itself to foreign complaints that would put its longer-term business position in jeopardy .
 Rank ordering is often difficult to accomplish, such rank ordering is difficult to do .
 Sometimes objectives conflict, which makes it even more difficult to rank order . Sometimes objectives are conflicting, and sometimes objectives conflict .
 The United States and Europe are critical of Moscow’s shutting down much of the independent press in Russia and violating human rights in the bloody war in the Republic of Chechnya . The U.S. and Europe have criticized Moscow's shutting down many of Russia's independent press .
 European countries are heavily dependent on Russian natural gas and oil for industrial purposes as well as to heat homes and fuel cars . Yet European nations are reluctant to be critical of Moscow because of their dependence on Russia .
 As Russia has risen from the depths of economic collapse at the end of the Cold War, there is also interest in Western capitals to cultivate Moscow . Western capitals are assuring if they can that Russia will remain nonthreatening . Russia is more connected to political, economic, and cultural life in
 For its part, the United States also seeks to maintain good relations with both China and Taiwan . The U.S. wants to keep Taipei from provoking Beijing unnecessarily and the latter from threatening Taiwan .
 Competing Domestic and Foreign Policy Objectives . Accept that policymakers have decided upon basic foreign policy objectives, but find it difficult to establish their relative priority . Competing domestic and foreign policy goals are difficult to define .
 Foreign policy objectives may be consistent with some, but conflict with others sought by policymakers . Policy objectives may also conflict with other objectives, such as foreign policy objectives .
 By allowing U.S. military bases on its soil, Japan has gained defense support and facilitated projection of United States forces in the region . Japan has provided inexpensive imports until the 1960s, and has been welcomed as a member of the “club” of fellow democratic states .
 The United States has been a major proponent of an open international trading system . The reduction of tariffs on imports is a key foreign policy objective for the U.S.
 U.S.-Japanese relations have had their ups and downs, principally due to Japan’s tremendous economic success and the consequent competitive challenge to American producers . Over the years, however, U.K. and Japan have had some ups and down .
 Until overtaken by concerns with China, the U.S.-Japanese trade imbalance had been a political issue as presidents . The imbalance has been a major political issue in the United States for decades .
 Congress, and the public worried about Japanese imports putting U.S. manufacturers out of business . Japanese imports could be putting United States manufacturers in business .
 There is usually considerable disagreement among individuals, interest groups, corporate leaders, and agency officials as to what foreign policy objectives should be . Even if senior policymakers are able to sort out conflicting foreign and domestic objectives and prioritize them, there is considerable disagreement .
 The U.S. Department of Agriculture and privately owned agribusinesses may favor increasing grain exports . Increased sales of grain could be beneficial to American farmers, the author says .
 U.S. wheat farmers want to maintain or improve relations with countries wanting to import American wheat . The White House says it wants to maintain trade relations with those who want to buy American wheat from the wheat .
 The Department of Commerce and the Treasury Department may both be inclined to favor such sales because of the favorable impact increased exports will have on the American trade and payments balances . For their parts, the Commerce .
 Consumer groups may fear that grain exports will reduce domestic supplies of wheat, driving up prices of bread and other products made from grain . On the other hand, consumer groups fear that exports will drive up prices for bread .
 Balance of power has also been criticized for leading to war as opposed to preventing it, serving as a poor guide to political leaders, and functioning as a propaganda tool to justify defense spending and foreign adventures . Balance of Power is also criticized for being used to justify foreign adventures and military spending .
 Balance of power remains a central part of the realist vocabulary . Despite criticism and reformulations of its meaning, balance of power is still a central feature of realist theory . Balance of Power is a central component of the theory of power .
 Henry Kissinger emphasizes a voluntarism perspective to the question of whether balances of power are automatic or created . Henry Kissinger is a former U.S. Secretary of State . Kissinger: "Vitarism" is a form of free-thinking .
 The balance of power is a foreign policy creation or construction of political leaders; it doesn't just occur automatically . Balance of power isn't just created automatically, it's created by political leaders, author says .
 Makers of foreign policy do not act as prisoners severely constrained by the balance of power, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Foreign policy makers are not prisoners of balance, he says .
 Kenneth Waltz sees the balance of power as an attribute of the system of states that will occur whether it is willed or not . Waltz: Balance of power is attribute of system, not willed, to be willed .
 States inevitably interact and conflict in the competitive environment of international politics . The outcome of state actions and interactions is a tendency toward equilibrium or balance of power . The realist assumptions that the state is a rational and unitary actor are false .
 From this point of view, balance of power is a systemic tendency that occurs whether or not states seek to establish it . Balance of power can be traced back to the origins of the U.S. state of power, he says .
 David Singer and Karl Deutsch argue that in a multipolar system, war is less likely to occur because as the number of major actors increases, decision makers must deal with more information . They believe that uncertainty breeds caution in the making of policy .
 Kenneth Waltz believes that uncertainty makes it more likely a decision maker will misjudge the intentions and actions of a potential foe . Waltz: "Uncertainty is more likely to make a mistake than it would be a mistake"
 A multipolar system, given its association with higher levels of uncertainty, is less desirable than a bipolar system . A bipolar system means uncertainty is at a low level when each state can focus its attention on only one rival .
 The ERS-1 satellite is mapping the earth's atmosphere and surface . It is the first time the satellite has been able to map the Earth's atmosphere .
 A country's political culture and values can also be a source of strength or weakness domestically as well as internationally . The U.S. should be aware of its political culture, culture, and values, experts say . It's important to know how a country reacts to foreign policy decisions .
 The United Kingdom was able to project global power for several centuries . Despite its relatively small geographic size, the United Kingdom has long been able to gain global power .
 Private interests, members of Congress, and various executive-branch departments and agencies weigh in on the different sides of what may have seemed to be a simple issue .
 For policymakers selecting and rank ordering foreign policy objectives is not as easy as it might first seem, particularly when domestic goals are taken into account .
 Determining foreign policy objectives is a rather complex matter when one understands that a country’s foreign and domestic objectives often conflict . The U.S. should be careful not to rely on foreign policy as much as foreign policy .
 In the final analysis, these conflicting interests and competing objectives are usually resolved either through some form of compromise, concession by one or more interested parties, or decision by the chief executive .
 At this point a government may move from debating what is hoped to be achieved to specifically how they are to be pursued, the policies pursued .
 It is all well and good, for example, to say that the U.S. is interested in achieving a lasting and just Middle East peace settlement, but then specific policies have to be devised and implemented . The United States has to devise and implement specific policies to achieve peace in the
 In sum, policymakers may disagree among themselves about what is appropriate objectives to pursue and what their relative priority should be .
 There also may be conflicts between foreign policy and domestic objectives . Foreign policy and foreign policy may also be a problem in Washington .
 States must contend with other international actors that have their own objectives that might conflict with those of any particular state . States must also contend with international actors such as Russia, Ukraine and Syria, Russia .
 What may help decide the outcome of such a confrontation, however, is the relative power of the actors involved, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Policymakers can talk all they want about the need to formulate and rank order specific foreign policy objectives based upon fundamental national interests and threats and opportunities emanating from abroad . Policymakers must rank order of foreign policy objective based on fundamental national interest and threats .
 But such an exercise is academic unless a state has the capabilities or power to pursue those objectives . Such a state is not capable of pursuing those objectives, the author says .
 This last part of the policymaking framework is, therefore, perhaps, perhaps the most important . This is, however, the last bit of policymaking, is perhaps the biggest .
 The relation between capabilities and power, however, is difficult to specify because little consensus on the precise meanings of the terms exists in the social sciences, let alone the literature on international relations .
 For some policymakers power is equated with capabilities; the terms are used interchangeably . The terms of power and capabilities are equated to power .
 France has a large military compared to Switzerland, but a small one compared to the United States . France's military is smaller than Switzerland's, but smaller than the U.S.'s .
 A third and related perspective is that the power of a state is evident only when placed in the broader context of multiple states . The power of states should be placed in a broader context, such as multiple states, experts say .
 Academic proponents believe that simply knowing the distribution of capabilities allows us to predict basic patterns of behavior in international politics . Academic proponents of this perspective believe that . simply knowing . how many capabilities can predict patterns of . behavior in world politics, they say .
 In a bipolar system, alliances will coalesce around the two major states . Such alliances tend to be stable, in equilibrium, with few member-state defections .
 In multipolar systems such as in the 19th and 20th centuries before World War II, different combinations of states can ally with one another at different times . Conversely, in a multipolar system such as those before WWII, such a state can ally against one another . In a multip
 Many observers see the 21st century moving from unipolarity with the U.S. as dominant power to multipolarity . The United States, Japan, perhaps a more united Europe, and a united Europe . The “BRIC” countries— Brazil, Russia, India
 There will no doubt be a lot of jockeying for position now and in forthcoming decades .
 Power transition theorists tell us to watch out as historically such shifts have been dangerous times marked by war and other disturbances . Power transitions theorists say we should watch out .
 The authors join you in waiting to see what actually happens . Whether we’ve learned anything from the past and can navigate successfully through what may be very troubled waters .
 Maybe as a practitioner you’ll be able to participate and add constructively in the process of transition, assuming that's what’s happening . Maybe you can help in the transition process of transitioning .
 The overall distribution of capabilities will also influence other states that are not major players, such as China .
 Even if a major state is not directly attempting to exert influence on such states, the mere existence of its large, imposing capabilities will influence how states with modest capabilities will react .
 For example, the Cold War era was a bipolar system between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, then termed superpowers . The Cold War period was a "duopoly"
 The political fallout of Soviet-American competition could affect Sweden and India directly . Even if less powerful states like Sweden or India were ignored by Moscow and Washington, the former did not have the luxury of similar indifference .
 As noted earlier by Hans Morgenthau, power can be viewed as a means to an end, however different those ultimate objectives may be from the perspective of political leaders .
 States accumulate capabilities in an absolute sense that at some point can be brought to bear on other states or actors . The U.S. State of the Union says it has a long history of acquiring capabilities .
 As such, power is a potential means of influence, not an end in itself, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Power is not the end of itself," says Sutter.
 A state may seek as a national objective to increase or sustain its influence internationally by accumulating more power . A state will seek to increase its power position relative to other countries or other actors . A country may not be so motivated .
 The typical reason for taking such measures is the knowledge that power is necessary in an anarchic world without central authority if a state is to achieve its ends . But the typical reason is that such measures are necessary to achieve their ends .
 The power or power position a state achieves ultimately remains means to other ends or objectives on the national agenda . Put another way, even when enhancing or sustaining a state’s power position is the objective, the objective is the state's power .
 The United States and its inability to curb North Korean and Iranian nuclear ambitions comes to mind . The U.S. and Iran have been unable to curb their ambitions .
 Even the most powerful states are constrained by limits to what their capabilities can accomplish . The U.S. is constrained by limitations on what it can achieve in the world .
 The power of a state or other actor depends not just on the apparent reality of having certain capabilities, but also on the perception held by other actors of the state’s willingness to employ its capabilities for various purposes . Moreover, the power of such a state depends on perception that it
 Unless a state can make others believe in its willingness to use its capabilities, its actual influence will tend to diminish . The U.S. should use its influence to make it more attractive to other nations .
 In short, credibility is an important element in power calculations . Credibility is determined as much by the understandings others may have in relation to what one says or does . credibility is a social construction determined by the understanding of others .
 Power can be viewed as an effect, meaning that influence is actually achieved in a particular situation . Power can also be seen as a result of influence, meaning influence is achieved in particular situations .
 Two mechanisms through which military capabilities are transformed into effective or actualized military power . Victory in war and a change in state behavior due to threats are two ways to transform military capabilities .
 Victory in war involves taking one’s capabilities and applying them in a coercive manner either single-handedly or in coalition with other states so that a rival is physically defeated or punished to the point at which it surrenders . Victory is taking one's capabilities in a way that they
 An effective threat of force may also be sufficient to change the behavior of another state, experts say . But an effective threat is not always enough to change behavior, they say .
 In either case power has been achieved over a rival—the net effect is to the advantage of one party or side over the other . The net effect of the net effect has been to the benefit of either side or the other, say experts .
 The United States and its allies achieved victory over Germany and Japan at the end of World War II in 1945 . The U.S. presided over the reconstruction and reconstitution of its defeated enemies .
 During the Cold War, NATO kept the Soviet Union from invading or encroaching further on Western Europe . NATO alliance kept Soviet Union and its allies from invading Western Europe during Cold War .
 The threat of force kept the West from rolling back post-World War II gains made by the Soviet Union in its Eastern European sphere of influence . Eor their part was the threat of the Warsaw Pact allies .
 After Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1991, a coalition of some 40 countries defeated Iraq militarily and forced it to withdraw its forces back to its own country . More recently, the U.S. defeated Iraq in Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in the 1990s .
 Power is defined as the means by which a state or other actor wields or can assert actual or potential influence or coercion relative to other states and nonstate actors . Eor our purposes, then, power is defined by how a state wields its power .
 Power is essentially a means; even if its enhancement is pursued as an end, the state does so instrumentally as a means to enable or facilitate its attainment of other ends . The state is not pursuing power as an ends but as instruments to achieve other ends, it is a tool to
 Once capabilities are mobilized, their utilization is expressed in the attempt or actual ability to influence, such as by diplomacy, or to coerce . This includes the use of military force, the behavior of another state, coalition, alliance, or nonstate actor .
 We will now discuss key capabilities that policymakers may wish to create or enhance . We will also discuss what policymakers may want to create, enhance .
 When we discuss political capabilities as a contribution to or constraint on national power, our focus is on states and their societies . Political Capabilities are considered a contribution or constraint to national power . Political capabilities are considered as contributions to or constraints on power .
 Some or all of these factors can dramatically influence the effectiveness of the application of material capabilities . Some of the factors can affect the effectiveness and efficiency of materials capabilities .
 Some states, due to their larger population size and higher education levels, have greater diplomatic and bureaucratic resources that contribute to their political capabilities . Some states have larger populations, higher education and greater diplomatic resources .
 Experienced diplomats and other representatives of the state, backed up by competent bureaucratic staffs at home and abroad, certainly enhance the capacity of decision makers to establish policies .
 Some states are unable to find, recruit, train, and assign enough people competent to carry out diplomatic, bureaucratic, and other tasks effectively . Some states, by contrast, are not able to find and train enough people to carry on diplomatic and bureaucratic tasks .
 Government bureaucracies are often bloated and staffed with individuals whose loyalty is to the current ruler . Of course this is often the case with lower-income, developing countries .
 Leaders in developing countries often have to conduct their foreign policies with diminished political capabilities compared to those states and societies having a larger pool of educated individuals and adequate money to train them .
 One should not ignore technology’s contribution to political capabilities, particularly communications technology . Communications Technology is a key component of the U.S. government .
 Not all states can afford the advantages provided by advanced telecommunications and related technologies . The technology can be used to coordinate and direct the efforts of diplomats and other representatives .
 These resources facilitate communication of a country’s point of view and justification for its policies to the public at home and abroad . These resources also facilitate the communication .
 Most countries have propaganda ministries or information services . Some are more effective than others in targeting and reaching their intended audiences .
 Some states have better technology at their disposal in addition to their human resources . Some states are using technology at the disposal of better technology .
 Only a few states have the necessary means to collect and analyze such information on even a regional, much less a global, scale .
 Use of aircraft, ships, electronic ground stations, satellites, and other technical devices is prohibitively expensive for most countries . Even if technologies are available, widespread use of aircraft and ships is expensive .
 Diplomats with access to top-notch intelligence that can be disseminated to them rapidly have an obvious advantage when engaging or negotiating with their counterparts . Diplomats have access to the intelligence they need to be able to disseminate rapidly .
 Third, the reputation and prestige of a state should not be underestimated as a capability. Reputation is also a state's prestige and prestige .
 If a state, for example, has a reputation of meeting its security commitments in terms of its allies, other states may hesitate to engage in any action that may be viewed as a threat to those allies . The U.S. should not engage in military action that could be seen as
 A state's reputation might convince another state to join with it in an alliance, knowing security guarantees made to it will be met . Similarly, a state’s reputation might . convince another . state to . join with them, knowing that security guarantees will be made to them .
 Former Eastern European states were desirous of joining NATO alliance as a hedge against possible Russian aggression . This is undoubtedly why after the Cold War so many former Eastern European countries joined the U.S.-led NATO alliance .
 The political capabilities available to policymakers are also related to the nature of the state’s political culture, how its political system is structured, and how it functions . The capabilities of policymakers are related to how the state's political culture is .
 The processes of politics are influenced or constrained by both cultural and structural aspects of a given political system . The process of politics is made and how well they serve or respond to national interests or objectives .
 The ability of policymakers to reach decisions that can be implemented effectively in a timely fashion varies from country to country . Policymaking in the United States varies from countries to countries .
 Niccolo Machiavelli’s argument that the power of the state rests in part on popular consent holds as true today as it did in his time during the early 16th century . The state's power is dependent upon popular consent .
 When governing officials or the regime lose legitimacy, the ability of these policymakers to carry out either domestic or foreign policy is markedly weakened . This is when they lose legitimacy in the eyes of the citizenry .
 Democracy by its nature sometimes enjoys greater popular support than authoritarian regimes . In this respect, democracies by the very nature sometimes enjoy greater public support . Democracy by the nature of democracy, democracy is more popular than authoritarianism .
 Democracies may also be more responsive to public opposition to certain policies, changing course or modifying them consistent with public opinion . Democracies are responsive to their opposition to some policies .
 This is often frustrating to policymakers and other ‘experts’ who have their own views on what are usually very complex issues, not always well understood by the general public . This is especially frustrating to "experts" who have opinions on complex issues .
 Nevertheless, treating public opinion as an important consideration may pay off in the long run . The government has been criticized by some for its lack of transparency .
 Political capabilities are enhanced when policies, domestic or foreign, enjoy widespread support, says President Barack Obama . Obama's administration has a history of success in foreign policy .
 Building a consensus through public discussion of issues can be a source of enormous strength in democracies . Building a broad consensus through discussion of ideas can be an enormous strength for democracies, says David Cameron .
 Speed and relative efficiency of decision making are sacrificed in exchange for policies informed by a greater number of alternative views and accompanied by greater prospects for forging a consensus . Speed is sacrificed in favour of policies informed of a greater variety of alternatives to the government .
 Of course, maintaining a public-support base for policies over time is a continuing challenge for political leaders . Political leaders face a challenge to maintain a public support base .
 Democracies such as Japan and most European countries have a parliamentary government in a unitary state . Most of the world's most successful democracies have parliamentary government .
 The prime minister, foreign secretary, defense secretary, chancellor of the exchequer, and other cabinet ministers are themselves members of parliament . In the United Kingdom, the executives are members of the parliament . They include prime minister and foreign secretary .
 In the United Kingdom and other countries with parliamentary governments, executive and legislative authority is effectively fused instead of being separated into distinct legislative and executive branches . Each with its different bases for authority and power, as in the American form of presidential government, each has its own separate bases .
 Considerable debate and compromise still remain within and outside the majority party or coalition in states with parliamentary governments . But not usually to the same degree as in presidential governments, in which political power and authority are dispersed or more fragmented .
 Compromises on foreign policy as in other political matters in parliamentary governments need only be made among legislators within the majority party or coalition of governing parties . Compromise on foreign . policy as well as other political . matters in . parliamentary governments must only be agreed among legislators in the majority
 Table 6. Although concurrence by opposition parties can be helpful by providing a TABLE 6.5 . Table 6 is a table of six political parties' positions .
 An ongoing debate has been whether presidential or parliamentary forms of government are more efficient in making national security and foreign policy decisions . The debate is ongoing over whether presidential and parliamentary forms are more effective .
 Real question is not efficiency, but effectiveness in terms of achieving national objectives and safeguarding interests . The real question is efficiency, rather than effectiveness, says David Cameron .
 Federal states are those that concentrate all political authority or power in one government in its capital city . Most states are of this kind . Unitary states are the most common type of state .
 Unitary states are less common than unitary states . They divide all political authority or power between central government and additional state or provincial governments . Unitary state is a form of state-based government .
 Those that fuse the executive and legislative functions into a single branch of government are the most common form of democratic governance . Japan, United Kingdom, France, Italy, Argentina, China, Australia, Canada, Germany, Russia, Australia .
 The judiciary is usually independent, in some cases with authority to exercise judicial review to assure the constitutionality of governmental acts . Kingdom, Italy, Sweden, Sweden and Italy are examples of judicial review .
 In some countries there is no political authority higher than an act of parliament . Germany is one of those countries with the highest authority in the world .
 Governments legislative, and judicial function into separate branches of government . Relative strength of branches varies, with the executive clearly stronger in some countries . France, Indonesia and France have separate branches .
 In others there may be more of a contest between the legislature and the executive . In some cases, the legislature may be in a contest with the executive. In others, it may not be a contest .
 In some countries authority for judicial review to interpret and assure constitutionality of laws and executive acts is common . Judges in some countries have authority to interpret laws and assure the constitutionality .
 The executive is in fact part of the legislature in parliamentary regimes . There is no need to compromise in the consensus-building process across branches of government .
 States with parliamentary governments tend to be somewhat more decisive and often have more comprehensive and coherent foreign policies than those with presidential governments . As a result, states with a parliamentary government tend to have a more comprehensive foreign policy .
 There are many more potentially influential voices on foreign policy matters in the U.S. compared to most other countries . By contrast, there is many more potential influential voices in the United States than other nations .
 Given a federal division of powers between central and state and local governments, there is a fragmentation of authority and a proliferation of points of access for individuals and interest groups . Given a separation of power between executive and legislature in all of these governments .
 With so many incremental compromises required before decisions are taken, these governments tend to be slower in reaching decisions . With so much incremental compromises, these government officials tend to reach decisions, they say .
 When decisions are made, they tend to be step-by-step, incremental choices in which short-term factors often dominate . Short-term decisions are often made by people who want to make the right decision .
 It is difficult in the United States to develop comprehensive, logically coherent policies that take midrange and long-term considerations seriously into account .
 This does not necessarily mean U.S. policy is less effective in defending its interests and achieving its objectives compared to a parliamentary system . However, this does not mean United States policy is more effective than parliamentary system.
 The political capabilities policymakers can draw upon are also affected by political culture . Culture is those norms, values, and orientations of a society’s culture that are politically relevant. Culture is a key part of the political process .
 Many societies have a tradition of deferring, for the most part, to political authorities in such matters of state as foreign policy . This is not the case in the U.S. It is a matter of national security .
 In some societies, by contrast, there is a greater tendency for people to become involved . In some countries, people are more likely to get involved in politics than in others .
 Americans are not prone to defer entirely to political authorities on either domestic or foreign policy . Americans readily let their views be known, whether the issue is United States involvement in Iraq or some other country .
 In some democracies with consensus-oriented political cultures such as Japan, Switzerland, or Sweden, there may be a greater tendency to seek a broader basis of support for policies than is constitutionally required .
 In other democracies, such as the United Kingdom, Germany, or the United States, a narrow majority of 50 percent plus one vote will do . In the U.S. and UK, conflict-oriented politics prevail as part of their political cultures, it says .
 Wider margins may be desirable but are by no means required in such countries either by law or expectation within the prevailing political culture . Wider margin is desirable but is not required in many countries, such as Germany .
 Social cohesion of a society has a direct impact on its power position . Social and Cultural Capabilities are key to power . Social cohesion is a key to a society's success .
 States torn apart by cultural differences can hardly allow policymakers to act effectively in the international arena . States suffering from crises of authority and being torn apart can hardly be effective in international politics .
 Culturally and socially homogeneous states like Japan or the Scandinavian countries tend to be less divided at home . Homogeneous states are more effective at pursuing their international objectives than countries torn by internal divisions .
 Countries are able to maintain influence over other countries through common language, religion, ethnic or racial identity, or legal and political tradition . Another important aspect of cultural capabilities is the extent of cultural influence over countries .
 The French and British have maintained fairly close ties with the elites of many of their former colonies . The French, British, have maintained a fairly close relationship with many of them .
 In spite of political differences, elites in these former colonies speak the language of the former colonial power .
 In some instances, these cultural ties have been buttressed or reinforced by continuing military, trade, financial, and other commercial relations .
 Critics refer to such ties as a manifestation of neocolonialism . Critics say it is a new form of long-established patterns of dominance by former colonial powers .
 The education levels, distribution of skills, and value systems that characterize different societies often have substantial impact on the roles countries play in world politics .
 Market-oriented cultures, in which entrepreneurial skills are valued, provide an environment within which individuals and businesses can thrive . Entrepreneurship is a key component of a market-oriented culture .
 A highly skilled and educated population oriented toward productivity makes economic success possible . The U.S. needs to have a highly skilled population that can make economic prosperity possible .
 Societies lacking sufficient human resources are hardpressed to compete successfully in global markets . Societies without sufficient numbers of such human resources will struggle to compete in global market .
 Social appeal from the perspective of the rest of the world can also be a significant source of a state’s power . Social and cultural appeal is also a source of power for a state, writes Andrew Hammond .
 For example, United States military capabilities are a source of “hard” power . The U.S. military is a major source of "hard’s" power .
 The cultural appeal of the United States in terms of movies, music, fashion, and most importantly its professed political ideals could be viewed as a form of soft power .
 Flowever resented the United States may be by some peoples abroad due to its exercise of military power . American culture and ideals are appealing to many individuals in foreign lands, even though leaders of certain regimes see these values as a threat .
 American popular culture is embraced by large segments of the expanding younger population while it is viewed as a threat to the religious and political authorities who run the regime .
 Geography, defined in terms of natural resources, obviously has an important impact on state capabilities . Geography is a key part of the state's ability to develop its own natural resources .
 Whatever power the petroleum-producing countries may have stems in large part from the fact that most industrial countries remain dependent on them for oil and natural gas supplies . Most industrial countries are dependent on their oil and gas supplies from the countries they are producing .
 In cases such as Iran and Saudi Arabia, petrodollars from the West help keep authoritarian leaders in power . The West can provide goods and services for the local populations .
 More than half of American consumption is from foreign sources . The United States is somewhat less dependent on foreign sources than Japan and most European countries .
 The United States imports the bulk of its tin, bauxite, chromium, cobalt, manganese, nickel, and zinc . The U.S. also has vast supplies of lumber, coal, iron, and other raw materials .
 Japan remains dependent on foreign sources for most of its raw materials . By contrast, Japan is at the other extreme and remains dependent upon foreign sources . Japan's economy is at a sharp contrast to its reliance on foreign suppliers .
 The United States is also the world’s largest consumer of natural resources . Putting this into perspective, however, the comparative advantage of the resource-rich U.S. is reduced somewhat by the fact that the country is the world's largest consumer .
 These are measures of the total dollar value of all goods and services produced in a given year .
 Economic productivity stems from the efficient use of capital as well as human and natural resources, experts say . Economic productivity is an important part of economic prosperity, says economist John Defterios .
 Third after the United States and China in national economic output is natural resource poor Japan . Natural resourcepoor Japan has demonstrated its ability to organize its economy into one of the world's most productive .
 A number of other advanced industrial countries have smaller economies but often higher standards or levels of living than some of the countries with larger economies . The United States is one of the world's largest economies .
 Others have joined the pack—Vietnam, Indonesia, and South Africa prominent among them .
 Agrarian societies with less developed industrial economies like Ukraine are heavily dependent on agricultural production . By contrast, less developed countries like Ukraine rely heavily on agriculture for their own consumption .
 These countries rely more heavily on labor to sustain their economies . They are usually less efficient even in agricultural production than advanced industrial countries such as the United States .
 Advanced industrial countries that are also endowed with good soil and a favorable climate have made heavy capital investments in machinery used by the large agribusinesses and smaller, cooperative farm arrangements .
 Technology-intensive agriculture in the United States has made it the world’s largest exporter of food products . The U.S. is also the world's largest export market for agricultural products .
 Vulnerability to price fluctuations in the international market is most severe for those countries dependent on export of one or a few crops, minerals, or other raw materials . Vulnerability is greatest to those countries that are dependent on exports of one of the crops or minerals, say experts .
 Attempts to form producer cartels for other minerals and for agricultural products have not been very successful .
 U.S. outpaces all other countries in size of the world's largest economies . Comparing the size of Selected Economies is striking in the United States .
 Large-scale substitution of other energy sources for oil in oil-dependent industrial countries is not easily accomplished, at least not in the short run . By contrast, large-scale replacement of oil by other sources could not be achieved .
 In some countries the armed forces perform a domestic order maintenance function similar to that performed by police . The armed forces are used to maintain order in some countries .
 In authoritarian regimes the military's primary function is not to protect the country, but to protect its own citizens . Indeed, in some authoritarian regimes, the military’s primary role is to protect citizens from its own people .
 Examples of government use of military forces against its own people occurred in Libya, Bahrain, Yemen, and Syria . Examples of military use of forces against people were in Libya and Bahrain .
 The ability to maintain stability or order within the state has an important impact on the state’s relative power position . But the external capacity of its military forces is perhaps even more important, the author says .
 The continued development of nuclear weapons since World War II added a new dimension to military capabilities . Conventional or nonnuclear military forces remain a vital part of the calculus of a state’s military capabilities, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The United States is the world’s biggest military spender with a worldwide military capability greater than that of any other country . The U.S. is clearly the world's biggest .
 The U.S. has the world's largest market share in arms exports to other countries . Its corporations also have the world’s biggest market share .
 The rapid advancement of military technology, particularly in nuclear weaponry, has served to constrain those states possessing such capabilities . Paradoxically, the rapid advancement in military technology has led to constraining those states with such capabilities, especially in nuclear weapons .
 Use of such weapons can invite retaliation by one’s adversary with unacceptable destructive consequences . Indeed, use of such a weapon is unacceptable, says President Obama .
 Often states not possessing such weapons have been able to assert far more leverage than one would expect, given their apparently inferior military capabilities . The U.S. has been accused of using its inferior capabilities to gain leverage in the Middle East .
 As a practical matter, since the end of World War II, the world’s nuclear powers have been reluctant to use such weapons to achieve objectives at the expense of nonnuclear states . The world's nuclear powers are reluctant .
 States tend to believe that the possession of nuclear weapons enhances the state’s international reputation and prestige . Nevertheless, states tend to think that possessing a nuclear weapon enhances their international reputation .
 India and Pakistan are recent examples of recent examples . Both also had security-based reasons for acquiring them . Pakistan sees India as a threat and India sees both Pakistan and China as threats .
 It is easy to overstate the importance of the military component of national power relative to other factors, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It's important to remember that the U.S. has a strong military presence in the world .
 Prudent decision makers will take seriously any existing or potential military capability that could be threatening in order to assure that they have enough military capability to offset potential threats .
 Military capabilities depend on the strength of the underlying economy as a source of personnel and for the economic means to procure military equipment and supplies . Yet, military capabilities do depend on a strong economy as well .
 Economic capabilities may define the limits of the military capabilities policymakers may choose to develop . In this regard, economic capability may define limits of military capabilities, experts say .
 It is exceedingly difficult to produce a single measure for ranking states in order of their power positions . Illustrate how the diversity of capabilities impacts the way in which power is measured . Issue area is military, economic, and political issues in which different types of power are most relevant .
 There is no agreement on the weighting or relative importance of the capabilities outlined, but also it is virtually impossible to quantify such factors as cultural and social capabilities in any meaningful fashion .
 At best, one can only construct indicators—indirect measures—of these diverse capabilities that collectively, we say, define the power a state has at its disposal . We say, at best, these indicators are indicators of the state's diverse capabilities .
 Some realists, as well as scholars working in the liberal tradition, claim that to talk of power as an integrated concept is not particularly useful . Moreover, some realists argue that such a concept of power is not useful .
 Different capabilities have different degrees of importance, say experts . They argue that in different issue areas different capabilities are more important .
 From this point of view, military capabilities have considerable salience in strategic or security matters, but do not have great weight in trade, investment, and other economic issues . Military capabilities have some salience, but not great weight on trade and investment .
 European states benefited from the security umbrella provided by the United States . From this perspective, especially during the Cold War, the U.S. provided the European states with the support .
 Military capabilities are at least as important as economic capabilities in determining the power of states in economic issue areas . Thus, one can argue that military capabilities are important to states .
 The U.S. derives some economic leverage in its relations with EU members and other European states . America’s contribution to NATO alliance and overall European security depends on its contribution to the NATO alliance .
 Realists note that in the 1970s a great deal of attention was given to OPEC, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries . Similarly, realists note how much attention was focused on OPEC in the 70s and 80s .
 With headquarters in Vienna, this international organization is composed of both Arab and non-Arab oilexporting countries . The organization is based in Vienna .
 OPEC was a relatively inconsequential organization in the 1960s . Its members had considerable success in the 1970s raising the world price of petroleum . OPEC members improved their collective power position .
 The oil-exporting countries were, in effect, displacing the multinational oil companies from the price-setting role . The MNCs had previously performed the price setting role .
 OPEC assumed this price-setting function by regulating the supply of oil to world markets . OPEC has been in charge of setting the price of oil prices since 1973 .
 For the first time, these industrially less developed countries were able to assert very real financial leverage on the industrialized countries . The first time they have been able to exert real financial leverage on the industrialized world .
 OPEC member nations have become major international players, observers say . Almost overnight, some observers proclaimed, the OPEC members had become major players in the world .
 The price increase ‘oil shocks’ of the 1970s led industrialized countries to take domestic measures with varying levels of success in an attempt to reduce their dependence on oil and natural gas . The price rise “Oil shocks” of the 70s, however, led industrialized nations
 These countries have also invested in longer-term research and development projects in nuclear, solar, wind, geothermal, and other energy sources .
 OPEC cartel and decisions by Saudi Arabia and other major producers to maintain an adequate supply of petroleum to world markets until recently precluded major price increases comparable to those in the 1970s .
 The U.S. took measures designed to assure the security of the principal oil supplier, Saudi Arabia, in exchange for at least a tacit assurance of continuing flow of oil to the global market .
 Saudi Arabia proved to be a one-dimensional power as evidenced by its reliance on the military prowess of the United States and other powers, such as France and the United Kingdom, to deter Iraqi aggression following the 1990 invasion of Kuwait . The point is that from a realist perspective Saudi Arabia
 Little or no consensus exists among analysts as to whether one should treat power as a single, integrated concept . Analysts are divided on whether to disaggregate power into its separate component capabilities .
 Perhaps one can differentiate between “hard’s power” and “soft” power, the other components we’ve discussed . The U.S. should be able to use its economic and military might to shape the world's future .
 Stanley Hoffmann also disaggregated power into component units, some more applicable to some issues than others . The metaphor he used to capture this diversity of issues policymakers face, he said .
 They may do this through domestic or internal measures, such as taking actions to strengthen the national economy or improve the capabilities of the armed forces, they say .
 External measures designed to increase state power include forming alliances, influencing members of already existing alliances to increase contributions, and arming allies .
 It was noted at the outset of this chapter that each American administration issues a National Security Strategy document . V*—Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at mypolisdlab.com .
 It may appear to be rather straightforward in terms of the described interests, objectives, threats, and opportunities . However, the difficulties, complexities, and trade-offs required for its actual implementation .
 Policymakers may disagree among themselves or with opposition politicians and the media about what is an opportunity or a threat . The prioritization of agreed-upon foreign policy objectives should be prioritized .
 To complicate matters, foreign policy objectives may be undercut by domestic events . The U.S. has been hit hard by domestic issues .
 In the summer of 2010, a Florida Christian minister threatened to burn the Koran to protest the establishment of an Islamic religious and cultural center near the site of Ground Zero where the World Trade Center Twin Towers were destroyed .
 The expected reaction from throughout the Islamic world only made White House global engagement efforts that much more difficult, particularly in the Arab and Muslim worlds . The White House is trying to engage with the Muslim world .
 Merely possessing capabilities or power potential does not make a state effective in world politics unless it has the will to use these capabilities in pursuing its objectives . Mere simply possessing capabilities will not make an effective state effective unless it uses these capabilities to pursue its objectives, he says .
 It will face opposition from both states and nonstate actors forwarding their own interests, objectives, and agendas . It will also face opposition to its own interests and objectives .
 A country’s sensitivity to public opinion, international legal considerations, and domestic politics as well as perceptions of its resolve, may constrain the use of its capabilities . The U.S. should also be mindful of its degree of international prestige, the author says .
 There is no agreement on whether power should be treated as a single, integrated concept, or whether it should be separated into separate components .
 Military capabilities are obviously important in times of war, but the salience of economic capabilities is of equal importance in day-to-day interstate relations . Economic capabilities are equally important in interstate relations, as are military capabilities .
 “Hard power” assets are the political or bureaucratic, diplomatic, intelligence, social, and cultural components that collectively constitute the “soft power’s” policymakers may use to implement policies .
 In the following chapter we turn to statecraft and foreign policy—how policymakers actually put power or capabilities to work through diplomacy, the use of force, and other mechanisms available to achieve objectives and serve interests . In the next chapter, we discuss how policymakers use diplomacy, force and other tools
 We continue our focus on state policymakers in this section of the book . While the objectives, capabilities, and power of international and transnational organizations remain important .
 For practitioners to navigate through international relations and world politics, a basic roadmap is essential . For practitioners, the road map is essential for them to navigate international relations .
 In this chapter we propose that it is necessary for policymakers to take into account the basic national interests to be defended, the threats to those interests, opportunities sought, and the capabilities available to defend or secure interests .
 Interests as they are understood by policymakers typically take the form of specific objectives on the national agenda . Interests in the country's national interests are understood in the shape of national interests .
 The classic work on power and interest on the one hand and ideals or moral values on the other is a classic work of power and interests .
 First published in 1948 and reprinted or revised in subsequent editions, this is the most famous American realist work on power from the 1950s through the 1970s .
 Waltz says the distribution of capabilities or power among states is directly influencing the behavior or conduct of states . Waltz: The distribution of power in a state can influence the behavior of states and behavior of those states .
 E Differentiate between the conflicts and dilemmas policymakers must address when establishing a national security framework . Differentiate from the conflicts that policymakers need to address in national security policy .
 Even if policymakers can agree on basic interests, they may disagree on what constitutes a threat, an opportunity, or a worthwhile foreign policy objective . This is further complicated if interest groups and the general public have different views .
 Even the distinction between democracies and authoritarian regimes in terms of popular influences on policy decisions is often overdrawn . The distinction between authoritarian regimes and democratic democracies is often over-referred .
 Separation of powers in such countries as the U.S. can limit unilateral actions by policymakers . Separation powers can limit the power of policymakers to take action .
 The head of the government is also the leader of the majority party or coalition in the legislature . This is less of a problem in parliamentary forms of government where the head is also a coalition leader .
 Knorr provides an excellent discussion of the elements of power from a classical realist perspective . Knorr discusses the elements and power in his book "The Elements of Power"
 A more recent overview of the role of power in the age of globalization. A more . recent overview . of the . role of . power in . the age . of globalization .
 The relation between capabilities and power, however, is subject to debate . Capabilities and power are essential in order to protect state interests and achieve objectives .
 For others, power is best expressed as the relative distribution of capabilities among states—a comparative or relational perspective . For others it's best expressed in terms of the relative power among states .
 We conclude that power is the means by which a state or other actor wields or can assert actual or potential Influence or coercion relative to other states and nonstate actors . The U.S. State Department says power is a state's ability to influence or coerce others .
 It is exceedingly difficult to produce a single measure for rank ordering states' power positions relative to one another . Given the diversity of possible capabilities a state may have at its disposal, it is difficult to put together a measure .
 This is because it is hard to determine how much weight should be given to any one type of capability . The U.S. military says it's hard to say how much of a given capability is given to each type .
 Some scholars believe that we should talk about the varying importance of different types of capabilities based upon the issue area under discussion . That is why some scholars say that we need to talk about .
 This book is an influential work within the field written by two scholars who integrate the concepts of power and interdependence and popularized the concept of issue areas . The book is a work of two scholars .
 The term that best refers to the types of resources a state may have in order to serve its interests and achieve its objectives is threats. capabilities capabilities. opportunities. economic assets. The term is best used to refer to threats. assets.
 The right of a state to exercise complete jurisdiction, power, or authority internally or within its borders defines its legitimacy . sovereignty. power. national interest. sovereignty. sovereignty .
 Compared to national interests, national objectives are more broadly defined. more narrowly defined. always identical with national interests. less important. . More narrowly defined . less important . .
 Policymakers need to consider short-range objectives. middle-range . long-term objectives. all of the above . Policymakers must also consider short and long term objectives.
 Policymakers are faced with the challenge of determining what actually constitutes a threat or opportunity . balancing competing domestic and foreign policy objectives . balancing domestic and international objectives balancing balancing . all of the above . .
 Public opinion most likely influences authoritarian regimes . democratic republics and monarchies most likely to be authoritarian .
 Parliamentary governments are more likely than presidential governments to fail to devise coherent foreign policies than those of the public .
 Power is often referred to as the same as capabilities evident when compared to other states or nonstate actors. has an effect on outcomes. all of the above. has a role in outcomes .
 11.5 years established as a sovereign state . Social, cultural, and political arrangements . Economic and financial strength . Technological and military resources .
 A state’s political culture is its tradition of patronage of the arts, which support the identity of the nation-state . The arts are important to a state's political culture, which is important to its identity .
 A single measure of power capturing all of the capabilities discussed above is the goal of most realist theorists . The goal of both realists and liberals is to capture all of these capabilities . The ultimate goal is to be a single measure-of-power .
 The best single measure of power in international relations and world politics is bureaucratic capabilities, social capabilities . Social capabilities. social capabilities. political capabilitites. none of the above. none .
 The idea of applying power to issue areas is applicable to military competition among states . The idea is also applicable to economic, political and economic competition in states .
 Nothing he can say can do very much good, and almost anything he may say may do a great deal of harm . Nothing can be said, but almost anything could do great harm, he says .
 Anything he says that is not obvious is dangerous, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Whatever is not trite is risky is risky," he says . Sutter says .
 Defense Secretary Robert Gates initially indicated reluctance to intervene in Iraq and Afghanistan . President Obama's national security adviser, Thomas Donilon, also expressed a similar view .
 Secretary Gates also received cautionary counsel from his personal adviser . Secretary Gates received advice from Gates' personal adviser in the wake of the crisis .
 President Obama initially was reluctant to commit to yet another intervention . Obama indicated that if he did decide finally to do so that it must be a multilateral event in which other countries assumed leading, not just symbolic roles .
 A foreign policy debate at the highest levels of the Obama administration also took French, British, Arab, and other countries’ positions into account . The Obama administration took into account the views of France, Britain, Arab nations .
 The secretary of state, diplomats in the State Department, at the UN, and in U.S. embassies in these countries worked toward an international consensus on what to do and why . Secretary of state: Diplomats in the United States worked toward a consensus .
 The French recognized the anti-Kaddafi forces in Benghazi as constituting the legitimate government of Libya . For their part, the French recognized anti-Libya forces located in and around the city of Benghazi in eastern Libya .
 The al-Kaddafi regime was an aspiration held in common by many, but the international consensus ultimately supported intervention only on humanitarian grounds . Kaddafi’s forces were put in jeopardy by Kaddafi forces .
 Diplomacy is an essential tool in foreign policymaker's and practitioner's tool kit . The toppling of the Kaddafi regime was a major diplomatic achievement, quite apart from the outcome of the intervention, the toppling the regime is a major achievement .
 Achieving goals and serving the national interest require communicating not only with allies and coalition partners, but also with adversaries and those charting a more independent course . The U.S. needs to communicate with allies, coalition partners and adversaries .
 Presidents or prime ministers, secretaries of state or foreign ministers, and their ambassadors and other diplomats have the principal responsibility for the foreign policies of the countries they represent .
 In the United States the president is often referred to as commander-in-chief of the armed forces . In the U.S. he is also the nation's chief diplomat .
 President designated as principal for both security and foreign policy . Article II of the U.S. Constitution states that the president is responsible for national security . The president is designated principal for foreign policy and security .
 We take up in this chapter how foreign policy decisions are made and diplomatic actions are taken to advance what government leaders understand to be in their national interest .
 Sometimes the approach involves persuasion and accommodation, as evident in arms control negotiations . The approach is evident in this chapter, and we will examine it in detail .
 At other times the use of force, or the threat of doing so, may be the form diplomacy takes . At other . times, the use . of force or the . threat of using force, may . be the . form diplomacy .
 Diplomacy is an important part of diplomatic practice in the U.S. The task of maintaining good relations with other countries may not receive much publicity, but it is important .
 Diplomacy is management of international relations by communications, including negotiations at times leading to a bargain or agreement treaty a written agreement or contract between two or more states pledging adherence to any number of commitments . Executive agreement is a agreement made between leaders of two .
 The emphasis on negotiation is viewed by most people as the essence of diplomacy . Negotiating a treaty, reaching an executive agreement, or bargaining with another state over the terms of a proposed agreement is seen as diplomacy .
 The emphasis on the state as key diplomatic actor is consistent with a realist perspective on diplomacy . It's consistent with the state's role in international organizations and alliances .
 Liberals are prone to considering officials and staffs of both international and nongovernmental organizations as important players that ought not to be overlooked . Liberals also understand the importance of states, of course .
 Less publicized is day-to-day diplomacy aimed at maintaining or improving relations between countries and diplomats that represent them . Less publicized diplomacy is more commonplace interactions aimed at improving relations .
 Former U.S. secretary of state, George Shultz, described this kind of diplomacy as tending to the garden, keeping relations on track . Shultz: Diplomacy is tending the garden .
 Explain the relation between foreign policy and diplomacy by identifying the roles played by both state and non-state actors in the foreign policy decision-making process .
 In ordinary conversation, the words diplomacy and diplomat usually have a positive connotation . In ordinary conversations, diplomacy and diplomacy usually have positive connotations . But diplomacy is not always a good word and diplomacy has a negative connotation, it's a bad word .
 To say someone was “very diplomatic in dealing with the problem” is a compliment that implies that the person is a good communicator . One who possesses understanding, sensitivity, and effective interpersonal skills, it says .
 Professional diplomats who have developed this ability to communicate effectively often become respected members of their foreign policy establishments . Professional diplomats often have to communicate with each other to be respected .
 They are able to represent their governments or international organizations even when they convey the messages they convey are not always positive . They can represent their countries or organizations quite well, even though they convey positive messages . They're able to .
 Diplomats are advocates of national or international organizational interests and positions on any number of issues . As diplomats, they are advocates for national, international organizations . Diplomats can advocate for national and international interests in the United States .
 Diplomats craft a demarche, a statement to a foreign government, usually making a formal proposal in the expectation of a formal response . Diplomats may craft a statement, for example, which is a statement of intent .
 Proposals to foreign governments can be expressed in positive, cooperative language or in more forceful language . It is possible to make a proposal to the foreign governments in positive language .
 Even when a country wishes to make an ultimatum —“do this or else” — it normally uses language that customarily conforms to diplomatic standards for such communications . The U.S. should not use such language when it makes such a decision, it says .
 The diplomat's task is to represent the foreign policy position as well as he or she can . Whether the diplomat personally agrees with or opposes a particular policy position, it is the diplomat’s task to represent it .
 Lawyers for plaintiff and defense in a civil court case are by necessity in opposition to one another . Each can at the same time respect the competency and honesty of the other, the lawyer says .
 Diplomats develop international reputations for the degree of competency or trustworthiness they exhibit in representing their countries or international organizations . So it is with diplomats, who develop their reputations . Diplomats' reputations are based on their ability to represent their countries .
 Such work is not restricted to a state’s ambassador assigned and accredited to a foreign country or an international organization such as the United Nations . Such work can be done by an ambassador assigned or accredited .
 Diplomacy may be done by heads of state during a summit meeting, foreign ministers and other government officials, or by a specially designated diplomat or envoy as in one who seeks to secure peace between warring parties .
 These negotiations can be conducted with the full knowledge of the world or in secret . The negotiations are often conducted in secret or with the world's full knowledge .
 Negotiations can be conducted on a bilateral basis, between two states, or on a multilateral basis, involving three or more states . The negotiations can take place in a bilateral, multilateral or multilateral deal .
 Diplomats are often in a position to play a constructive role in managing conflicts and assisting parties in the negotiations process . The secretary-general and other diplomats of the U.N. and other international organizations often play a useful role .
 Diplomacy among states includes a wide range of both positive and negative approaches, including the use of force . Diplomacy includes both incentives and disincentives, such as using force, as well as positive or negative .
 In Chapter 9, we focus more specifically on the actual use of force in international politics . Chapter 9 focuses on the fact that force is used in international affairs .
 Diplomacy can be viewed more broadly as a means by which states attempt to harness their capabilities, military, and other forms of power, for the purpose of achieving their objectives and securing their interests . Diplomacy is a means of harnessing capabilities to achieve their objectives .
 Realists generally share this power-based understanding of how diplomacy best serves national interests . Realists believe that diplomacy best serve national interests pursued by those who make foreign policy .
 Non-coercive diplomacy will play a major role in achieving a mutually beneficial accommodation, says David Cameron . Diplomatic diplomacy is key to reconciling states' preferences or interests, he says .
 The European Union has created and sustained economic growth through trade and investment . One example is the development of the European Union over recent decades .
 The North American Eree Trade Agreement brings the United States, Mexico, and Canada to the task of reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade among them . Another is the North American Trade Agreement that brings the U.S., Mexico, Canada and Mexico to reduce tariff barriers .
 All governments believe they have a common interest in seeing an agreement reached . On a number of indexes, the capabilities will differ among the states involved .
 Japan and the U.S. were major European states in the late 1930s and Japan . The situation began with the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 .
 Diplomats are often in the forefront of negotiations to prevent war . At the risk of oversimplifying, diplomats are often involved in negotiations to avoid war .
 If they fail, the military takes over and does what it's trained to do—fight wars . The military is trained to fight wars, and it will take over if they fail .
 Diplomatic diplomacy plays an important role in any peace negotiations or settlement . Once force has defeated or demoralized one of the participants, diplomacy plays a key role in negotiations .
 Some threats are designed to get another state or state to do what they would not otherwise do . Threats are often designed to compel them to take particular actions . The threat is designed to make states take action against each other .
 coercive diplomacy may include selective application of actual military force to get a foe to accede to one’s wishes . This is often referred to as coercive diplomacy and may include the selective application . The use of military force is often called coercive diplomacy .
 Threat of force can be an aspect of deterrence — a way to persuade states from doing what they intend or might like to do . Alternatively, threats of force may be an element of deterrence . Threats can be a way of persuading states to take action against each other .
 Following Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in June 1990, Iraq was threatened not only with economic sanctions, but also with military action unless it withdrew its forces . This is a prime example of the use of coercive diplomacy, writes David Frum .
 The Libyan agents were tried at an international court in The Hague, Netherlands, and one was convicted . One of the Libyan agents was convicted at the international court, The Hague .
 International economic sanctions were also imposed for many years against South Africa in an attempt to change its racial apartheid or segregation policies . South Africa was also known for its racial segregation or segregation .
 Interstate relations can be played out anywhere along this continuum, moving back and forth depending on the issues in dispute, and the time period . Interstate relations are a continuum of sorts, moving between countries involved and countries involved .
 In the next section, we define and provide a brief overview of what is meant by diplomacy . The next section will provide an overview of diplomacy .
 Second, we discuss the historical development of diplomacy, drawing on examples from the international systems outlined in Chapter 3 . We discuss the history of diplomacy in this chapter .
 We examine the nuts and bolts of how states use diplomacy to further their interests and objectives . Finally, we examine in some detail diplomatic structure and process .
 We also discuss how in recent years nongovernment organizations have come to play diplomatic roles . We discuss how they have come into prominence in the Middle East .
 Diplomacy has traditionally been the almost exclusive domain of official representatives of states and international organizations composed of states . Diplomacy is traditionally reserved for state representatives, not international organizations .
 Diplomacy has traditionally referred to authoritative communications in international relations . The term diplomacy has traditionally been used to describe authoritative communications .
 Modern diplomacy, by contrast, is often less restrictive, sometimes including private citizens and nongovernmental organizations . Modern diplomacy often involves private citizens, sometimes private citizens. Modern diplomacy is less restrictive .
 Individuals acting in their private capacities have certainly made a difference, particularly when their diplomatic initiatives were sanctioned by a government . Individuals acting on their own capacity have made a significant difference, especially when they are not sanctioned by the government .
 President Kennedy sent Dean Acheson to represent American policy to Charles de Gaulle . The former secretary of state was in France to represent U.S. policy .
 He was selected in large part because of his positive reputation as a former secretary of state and diplomat .
 He was more likely than most others to be able to convey the rationale for American policy to the French, thus securing their support . As a result of this, he was able to secure the French support for U.S. policy .
 Former president Jimmy Carter has been asked as a private citizen to perform diplomatic functions in the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America .
 On some occasions he engaged in diplomatic activities as a formal representative of the United States . On some of these occasions he was a formal representation of the US .
 Former secretary of state James Baker was enlisted by the Bush administration to encourage a number of states to forgive the debt incurred by Iraq after the former regime was overthrown in 2003 .
 At other times, individuals have entered the diplomatic world without invitation . At times, such as in the past, they have been invited to the U.S. State Department .
 Private actors sometimes have worked at cross-purposes with policies advocated by their own governments . Much to the dismay of state officials, these private actors sometimes work against state policies .
 Sometimes they have performed supportive though still independent roles . Sometimes they perform supportive but independent roles. Sometimes they are still independent .
 As a practical matter most diplomacy is conducted by government-employed diplomats . However, individuals as private citizens play a significant role in diplomacy . The roles of private citizens can be significant .
 The official positions taken by diplomats are the result of a state's foreign policy decision-making process . Diplomats take official positions as a result of foreign policy decisions made by a state .
 Scholars focus on foreign policy decision-making processes from a liberal perspective . They say that entities known as the ""United States"" or ""Canada"" do not make decisions; individuals do .
 A particular bureaucratic entity termed the ""State Department"" or ""Foreign Office"" is composed of individuals . Similarly, a state department or foreign office is made up of individuals, such as individuals .
 Study of individuals and small groups has been a primary focus of analysis for a number of scholars . It is therefore not surprising that the study of individuals is a focus of study .
 Scholars focus on how psychological stress arising out of difficult, emotion-laden situations affects rational calculations . Scholars say stress arising from difficult situations can affect rational calculation .
 Irving L Janis has examined the tendency for social pressure to enforce conformity and consensus in cohesive decision-making groups . The work of Irving L. Janis is an example of this perspective .
 He calls this tendency groupthink, a mode of thinking that people engage in when they are deeply involved in a cohesive in-group, when the members' strivings for unanimity override their motivation to appraise alternative options .
 He has applied this concept to a number of case studies, including the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, to the 1962 crisis .
 International relations scholars have conducted case studies to determine how psychological processes influence decision making during times of crisis . The tendency for individuals to strive for consistency is particularly evident in crisis situations .
 Tolerance for ambiguity is reduced, policy options are restricted and opposing actors and their motives are stereotyped . As a result, there is a general erosion of cognitive capabilities, says author .
 By the mid-1980s there was an evident decline in the amount of literature devoted to the role of cognition in international relations . The decline in literature dedicated to cognition was evident in the mid 1980s .
 It was seemingly not as fashionable at the time to study the broader role of ideas in international relations . Indeed, it was seemingly fashionable to study international relations in 1930s .
 The late 1980s witnessed a revival of interest in the role and causal importance of ideas, a focus that continued throughout the 1990s and into the present period as constructivist perspectives on international relations became more popular .
 Judith Goldstein argues that in order to understand U.S. trade policies over the years, considering only system-level factors or domestic economic interests is insufficient . Goldstein: The importance of ideas on policymaking is important to understand the United States trade policies .
 One must also take into account actors' causal beliefs as to which economic policies can best achieve preferred interests . Rather, one must also consider actors' views on which policies can be best economic policies .
 She and Robert Keohane see worldviews, principled beliefs, and causal understandings as ideas that become embedded in institutions and impact diplomacy and the making of foreign policy by acting as cognitive road maps .
 No one would deny that the study of individuals is important if we wish to improve our understanding of international relations . The study is important for us to understand international relations, says David Cameron .
 Realist Hans Morgenthau observed that in order to understand how a political leader reached a particular decision, we speculate how we would respond in similar circumstances . The realist said that in need of understanding how a politician reached a decision, people speculate how they would respond to it .
 In other words, by keeping the decision-making environment constant, we could hypothesize that any rational individual would have acted in the same manner . In other . words, any rational person would have reacted the same way if the environment was constant .
 The structure of the situation encourages diplomats and decision makers to respond in a similar fashion . Despite a diversity of backgrounds or temperaments, the structure encourages diplomats to respond to the situation .
 Studies applying the concept of groupthink and other social-psychological concepts rely heavily on memoirs and interviews with participants .
 International conferences addressing economic and social issues are often accompanied by parallel discussions among interested nongovernmental actors who try to influence the process during the planning phase and in the international conference itself .
 Building a consensus for agreements that goes beyond governments is an increasingly important diplomatic function . Building consensus is a diplomatic function performed by nongovernmental organizations and key individuals . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 At least since the 1995 conference held in China on the global state of women, for example, official delegations were joined by unofficial delegations that came to influence the conference as well as public debate . Unofficial delegations have come to influence public debate since 1995 .
 In 2007, scientists negotiated with government representatives on the final statements published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . In 2011 telecommunications experts began renegotiating the distribution and use of frequencies .
 This active role for nongovernmental organizations has become commonplace, particularly in association with UN-sponsored conferences . Nongovernment organizations have become commonplace in recent years .
 Annual and other periodic meetings of specialized agencies such as the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, and the World Trade Organization have also become opportunities for diverse interest groups and advocates of policy change .
 This focus on the importance of nonstate actors is consistent with a liberal or pluralist perspective on world politics . The focus on nonstate agents is consistent in a liberal perspective of world politics, says Julian Zelizer .
 In a world of increasing complexity, diplomacy will continue to play an important role . Diplomacy in all of its manifestations will play a vital role in the world, says David Cameron .
 The formalization of diplomatic practices, however, has taken centuries . Diplomats have been formalizing diplomatic practices for centuries .
 Operational NGOs serve in the field, working directly with the recipients of humanitarian aid and economic development projects . Operational organizations work directly with humanitarian aid recipients and economic projects .
 Traditionally, humanitarian-relief NGOs have worked assiduously to maintain a strict policy of neutrality . NGOs have left diplomacy and conflict-resolution functions to government diplomats .
 This policy has caused a great deal of discussion and debate as to whether NGOs should do more than provide medical care, food, and water to populations suffering from the ravages of war . This policy is changing and has caused great debate .
 Equally important is the development of further coordination among the different types of operational NGOs and between the NGO community and other actors involved in complex emergency interventions . The NGO community should also be encouraged to work together to coordinate with each other .
 It is more than apparent that NGOs of all varieties are grappling with issues raised by working in situations of conflict in Darfur and elsewhere in Africa, the Middle East, Central Asia and other parts of the world .
 There is widespread recognition that NGOs might unwittingly become a party to conflict in the course of their humanitarian relief work . On the one hand, there is widespread . There is a widespread recognition .
 This would understandably increase the likelihood of physical harm to employees . This would be the first time a company has been forced to close its doors .
 NGO actions could be part of a coordinated effort involving governments, international and regional organizations, and private groups to avert or resolve conflict . On the other hand, NGO actions should be coordinated, coordinated, with governments and international organizations .
 They have the ability to provide early warning and shore up the political will of governments to act . They also have the . ability both to . provide early . warning and to shore up political will to act, experts say .
 They can encourage community building and the development of civil societies in countries decimated by war . Finally, they can give guidance to policymakers in their own countries . They can also give advice on how to develop civil societies .
 The work of NGOs forms an important part of the entire repertoire of intervention strategies for dealing with conflict in the post-Cold War era . The NGOs' work is important part part of an entire repertoire for dealing in conflict in post-cold war era .
 NGOs are playing increasingly important diplomatic roles in global politics . Whether due to circumstances or design, NGOs are becoming more important diplomatic players .
 L recorded history, warring clans and tribes must have found it useful to negotiate with one another, even if this was simply to recover their dead after a battle .
 In the self-interest of all the warring parties, such envoys were undoubtedly granted different treatment from warriors . Such envoys had a special status that allowed them to return unharmed to their own people to convey the demands of the enemy .
 The modalities of diplomacy epitomize the process of the purposeful creation of language, norms, and rules of behavior, which in turn become part of the structure of international relations and hence influence future diplomatic interactions . From the social constructivist perspective, diplomacy is a process of purposeful
 Heralds required a good memory and a strong voice so they could accurately repeat the views of their leaders . The leader of the party required a strong memory and strong voice .
 The heralds were placed under the tutelage of the god Hermes . Hermes symbolized charm, cunning, and trickery, as Hermes symbolizes charm .
 The Greek independent state system experienced increased commercial interdependence, and political relations became more complex in the 6th century .
 The city-states chose their finest orators to plead their city’s case before foreign assemblies . As a result of the city-state's choice of orators, they chose their best orators for their city's case . The city's finest orator was chosen to plead
 The Romans acquired the Greek diplomatic traditions, but an expanding empire has scant need for negotiating talents when it is crushing all those before it . The Roman empire acquired the . Greek diplomatic tradition .
 Roman contributions to international law, however, certainly had diplomatic implications . Roman law was written in the Roman Empire .
 The Roman emphasis on the fulfillment of contracts, for example, applied to their view of treaties . The Roman focus on contracts was to fulfill contracts, according to the Roman law .
 Their work on ;us gentium, law applied not just to Romans, but to all peoples whether citizens or foreigners, and jus naturale, law whose principles are discovered by reason and thus common to all humanity no matter one’s race, creed, or color .
 Romans developed trained archivists who became specialists in diplomatic procedures . Finally, the Romans also developed trained historians who were specialists in diplomacy .
 During the latter years of the Roman Empire, a need arose for trained negotiators . The Roman Empire needed trained negotiators during the time of the Empire .
 Constantinople realized force alone could not keep the barbarians at bay . The Eastern Byzantine hub of the empire in Constantinople realized that force alone was needed .
 Diplomats were critical players in a three-part diplomatic strategy to foster rivalry among the ‘barbarians,’ secure the friendship of frontier tribes and peoples by flattery and money . Diplomats also tried to convert as many of the “heathens to Christianity as possible
 Emperor Justinian’s ability to extend Byzantine influence as far south as Sudan helped him keep at arm's length the warrior tribes of the Black Sea and Caucasus . Such a strategy helps to account for Justinian's ability to . extend . influence .
 In order to implement the strategy, diplomats had to be more than heralds or orators . They also needed to be perceptive political observers who could accurately assess the strengths and weaknesses of neighboring despots .
 This emphasis on astute observations and sound judgment has become a hallmark of the best professional diplomats down through history . It has become an important part of the world's most successful diplomats .
 The collapse of the western half of the Roman Empire led in the Middle Ages to an end of the political and administrative rationality imposed by Rome . Rome's collapse of western half led to the end of political rationality .
 Political authority was fragmented among a wide variety of local and regional rulers and the Church in Rome, which claimed universal moral authority, in Rome .
 As communication and civil authority broke down, commerce suffered . commerce suffered, as did contact throughout feudal Europe . As communication, civil authority and contact broke down .
 It was often dangerous to pass from town to town or castle to castle . Indeed, it was often extremely dangerous to . pass from towns to castles .
 No established system of international contacts existed, resulting in little advancement in diplomatic practices and conventions . As a result, there were no established international contacts in the 1930s .
 Italian city-states resembled the Greek independent state system . Common cultural and commercial interests racked by intense political and military competition . Essentially standing outside the rest of feudal Europe, the city-state system was formed in Italy .
 Out of this turmoil came such ambassador-scholars as Dante, Petrarch, and Machiavelli . It was not surprising that out of this chaos came such ambassadors-scholar-scholists as Dante and Petrarch .
 The first recorded diplomatic mission was established in Genoa in 1455 by the Duke of Milan . The mission was set up by the Italian city of Genoa, Genoa .
 First, the era of the Concert of Europe could be characterized as a multipolar state system . First, it was characterized as an era of Europe's multipolar states system . Second, it would be a democracy in Europe .
 It is not an exaggeration to observe that ministers, political leaders, and diplomats of the day deserved credit for establishing an international system that mitigated the worst aspects of anarchy among states .
 France was restored and diplomats constructed a balance among the European great powers . Britain offshore and, on the European continent, France in the west, Russia in the east, and Austria and Prussia in between the two in central Europe .
 International conferences were held in succeeding decades to make necessary adjustments to the European order . The balance of interests and power was supportive of stability that also contributed to the avoidance of war .
 Small wars occurred over the next half century, but each was contained, and none posed a substantial challenge to the overall order that had been established .
 The Concert of Europe as a formal diplomatic mechanism fell apart after several decades . The underlying order and expectations established by diplomacy at Vienna in 1815 contributed to preserving Europe from another outbreak of general war until 1914 .
 Scholars in the English School of thought often speak of a society of states in Europe existing through much of the 19th century .
 It was not until the Congress of Vienna that a truly organized system of diplomatic practices and norms emerged . Second, it is not until after the Congress that it emerged that diplomatic practices had been established .
 The follow-on Congress of Aix-laChapelle agreed on a hierarchy of diplomatic representation . The Congress agreed on the hierarchy of representation in France .
 Diplomats' status was not a function of who represented the most powerful country, but rather who had held the diplomatic post the longest . Within each category diplomatic precedence and status was based on who held the post longest .
 By 1815 diplomatic services came to be viewed as distinct branches of each government . Diplomatic services were viewed as separate branches of the two governments .
 Diplomacy is increasingly professionalized, with common rules, norms, and expectations . Diplomacy has become more professionalized in recent years, with rules and norms .
 A certain etiquette, for example, is maintained even between enemies preparing for war . The etiquette is maintained between enemies and enemies, even if they prepare for war.
 After Pearl Harbor, U.S. declared war on Japan, diplomatic relations were terminated . Diplomatic relations between the United States and Japan were terminated in 1941 .
 Diplomats were quickly given safe passage out of both countries . Consistent with international law, diplomats were quickly allowed to leave the country .
 Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular Relations in 1961 codified in 1961 . Rules of diplomatic immunity long established in customary international law were codified . Diplomatic immunity is a key part of international law .
 The Congress of Vienna is a classic example of successful multilateral diplomacy . It is a number of countries communicating and negotiating, often over the most contentious of issues . The Congress is worth studying because it is an example of a successful multi-party diplomacy .
 Successful multilateral diplomacy depends on accommodating the interests and specific objectives of not only two states, as in bilateral diplomacy, but rather a number of participants . The United States, Russia and China are among the most powerful countries in the world .
 International organizations and settlements or agreements that prove to be durable over time derive from a broad consensus . Agreement can be modified or adapted as conditions and objectives change, experts say . International organizations or settlements can be adapted to suit suitors' needs and needs .
 Bureaucratic rigidity or an inability to adapt to changing circumstances will reduce the utility or functionality of international institutions in multilateral diplomacy, leading perhaps to their ultimate collapse . Bureaucracidity or a lack of adaptability or adaptability will reduce international institutions' utility, he says .
 Versailles Treaty and other multilateral settlements following World War I pale in comparison to the successes of the Congress of Vienna . The Congress was held in Vienna, Austria, Germany and Austria .
 World War 11 was the cataclysmic finale of the war . Drop of atomic bombs on two Japanese cities was the final act of war . Bombing was the first atomic bomb to be dropped on Japanese soil .
 multilateral diplomacy following World War II proved to be somewhat more successful . The succeeding half century was also marked by periods of high tension that threatened mass destruction on a truly global scale, thanks to East-West competition .
 multilateral diplomacy has assumed an increasingly important role in world politics since 1945 . Multilateral diplomacy in international conferences and within international organizations has become increasingly important . International diplomacy has become more important in the world since 1945.
 Recent examples of multilateral diplomacy dealing with demographic, environmental, economic development, and humanitarian issues discussed elsewhere in the book .
 Ambassadors, their country teams, and other emissaries relate to leaders and ministries or offices of other governments, their embassies and consulates, and international and nongovernmental organizations . Ambassadors relate to the leaders and . ministries of other . governments . and their embassies .
 A sovereign state comes into existence under international law when a population living in a defined territory that is administered by a government is recognized by other sovereign states . Other sovereign states recognize a sovereign state as a result of recognition by other countries .
 Recognition of a state’s sovereignty amounts to an acceptance of its present and future claims to two rights, one internal and the other external . Recognition amounts to acceptance of the state's sovereignty, one of which is internal, the other of external rights .
 The internal claim is to a right as a sovereign state to exercise complete jurisdiction over its own territory free of interference by other states in its domestic affairs . The claim was made in defence of the sovereignty of the country .
 There is an external claim to a right to be independent or autonomous in its foreign affairs, not subordinated to any other state in the conduct of its international relations . At the same time, there is an internal claim to an outside claim to be autonomous in foreign affairs .
 As a practical matter, of course, states do not always respect the sovereign claims of other states, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Diplomatic protest note or public declaration may be a response to the same effect . When they choose to interfere in the domestic affairs of another state, the response may well be a diplomatic protest note .
 During the Cold War, the U.S. condemned Soviet policies that violated the human rights of its citizens, particularly Jews, who were not permitted to leave the country . The United States privately and on occasion publicly condemned the policies .
 Soviet emigration policy, in Moscow’s view, was a domestic matter, not the business of the U.S. The emigrants were not allowed to leave the Soviet Union . The emigration issue was a matter of national security, not a matter to the United States,
 The Soviet Union had obligations under international law to respect the human rights of all peoples, including its own citizens . The American position was that the Soviet Union should not try to exempt itself from international scrutiny .
 More serious, of course, is when a state commits aggression against another state, says CNN.com . More serious is when an aggressor commits aggression on another state .
 They claimed rights to their neutrality in foreign policy and to their continued administration of their own countries . They said they were not allowed to engage in foreign affairs .
 European states that were successfully invaded ceased exercising their sovereignty over their territories for several years . However, violation of sovereignty did not extinguish their legal claims to sovereignty . The European states who were successful invasions ceased exercising sovereignty .
 invaded states maintained governments in exile located in other friendly countries such as the United Kingdom that were willing to recognize them as the legitimate governments of their invaded countries then under foreign occupation .
 These governments in exile maintained their claims to sovereignty throughout the war . These governments were in exile throughout the conflict .
 Upon liberation of their territories, they were able to reestablish actual control of their territory .
 When an invading power establishes a so-called puppet government, diplomatic recognition is sometimes withheld . Diplomats sometimes withhold diplomatic recognition from the puppet government .
 The Vichy regime was installed in France following the German invasion in 1940 . A good example involves the French regime installed in 1940 following the invasion of Germany .
 International recognition went to the French government in exile based in Fondon . The French government was based in exile in London .
 Even if no government in exile exists, recognition of a regime perceived as illegitimate might still be withheld . Recognition of an illegitimate regime might still still withhold recognition of it .
 The former German Democratic Republic was isolated by other states for many years . This was the case with other states as well as being denied seats in such international organizations .
 In some cases decades may pass before diplomatic recognition is fully achieved . Diplomatic recognition may not be fully achieved for decades .
 The United States and many other states did not recognize the Soviet annexation in 1940 of the Baltic republics .
 Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian and Estonian claims to sovereignty were kept alive for half a century through governments in exile that maintained diplomatic ties with foreign governments . Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia claim sovereignty through their governments .
 At the end of the Cold War, when for political reasons Moscow was willing to relinquish control of the Baltic republics, they reemerged on the world stage as independent and sovereign states .
 States continue to be recognized as legitimate entities even when governments change . States will be recognized in the United States as a legitimate entity even if they change .
 After the communist takeover in China in 1949, the U.S. and other like-minded countries chose to deny recognition to the new government in Beijing under Mao Zedong even though, as a factual matter, it had control of all of China .
 These countries continued to recognize the nationalist, noncommunist government under Chiang Kai-shek on the island of Taiwan . Instead, they recognized the government under the nationalist government .
 Chiang's government maintained that it would one day regain control of all of China . Chiang’s government said it would eventually regain control over China .
 For more than two decades the U.S. and other foreign governments that were friendly to Taiwan and opposed to communism supported the legal fiction of Taiwanese legitimacy as the government of all of China . Because they saw it in their interest to do so, foreign governments supported it .
 In 1971 and 1972, the United States finally reversed its long-standing policy and recognized the Beijing government as the legitimate government of China . The U.S. recognized Beijing in 1972 and 1973 .
 Diplomats withdrawn from Taiwan and diplomatic relations established between Beijing and Washington . Diplomatic relations were established between Washington and Beijing .
 Diplomats from Beijing replaced those from Taiwan in the Chinese embassy in Washington . Diplomats are now from Beijing instead of Taiwan .
 Commercial, cultural, and other nongovernmental ties with Taiwan were maintained as Taiwan remained formally part of the same Chinese state . Taiwan's commercial and cultural ties with China were maintained in the 1980s .
 Government recognition changed, but all the territories recognized as part of China were the same . Government recognition of the territories changed in China .
 As a practical matter, the government on Taiwan has remained in control there, although without much of the international recognition it had depended on for its legitimacy . The government is still in charge of Taiwan, although it has remained largely in control .
 Taiwan is still an integral part of the People’s Republic of China . For its part, the government in Beijing continues to refer to Taiwan as a renegade province .
 Recognition is at times a function of how outside powers view a particular conflict, such as a war between states or a civil war . Recognition of a war is a function, and it is often a matter of how it is viewed by outside powers .
 U.S. presented itself as helping a victimized state against communist aggression, as it had been asked to do . Coming to the aid of a state victimized by aggression by request of the legitimate government is allowable under international law, the author says .
 Critics of the U.S. policy in Vietnam claimed that there were not two Vietnamese states, one committing aggression against each other . Critics said that there was not two states committing aggression .
 Critics argued that the Vietnam War was a civil war between contending governments in the same state . Rather, these critics argued, the war was a war of civil war . The U.S. government was defeated in Vietnam .
 If so, then no outside state had a right to intervene militarily or otherwise in what was really a domestic matter within Vietnam . Vietnam is a very small part of the world, and Vietnam is not an isolated state, it is said .
 The United States recognized the government in Saigon as the legitimate government of a South Vietnamese state under attack by North Vietnam and its Vietcong insurgents . The U.S. government rejected the notion that the conflict was a civil war .
 Henry Kissinger, national security adviser and later secretary of state in the Nixon and Ford administrations, admitted that the Vietnam War really had aspects of both a war between states and a civil war .
 Gaining acceptance in the international community through recognition of state and government is an important prize to those seeking such status . Gaining international recognition is important for those seeking recognition .
 Recognition of Israel as a new state was granted in 1948 by many countries, including the Soviet Union, but to this day many Middle Eastern states continue to withhold recognition .
 Palestinians also seek the same recognition of a territorial state of their own . Many have been dispossessed of their homes and property in the newly created Israeli state . Palestinians are also seeking the same .
 For more than six decades Palestinians have been confronted by Israeli security forces . Progress toward a peaceful solution was made in the 1990s, but progress was made .
 Aspirations of Palestinians and many other national groups for the creation of new nation-states remain unfulfilled . Palestinians and others have aspirations for a nation-state .
 Suppression of these nationalist movements by existing state authorities is common . Suppression is common in Russia and China .
 Historical claims to a separate national identity by Chechens in the Transcaucasus region of the Russian Federation has been resisted by Russian authorities . Russian authorities have resisted Chechens' claims to an independent identity .
 A Chechen secessionist uprising has faced confrontation by the military since the mid-1990s . Large numbers of casualties on both sides have been reported in the past .
 Outside states have accepted Russian claims to sovereignty in the region, effectively treating the Chechen uprising as an internal matter within the Russian Federation . Significantly, outside states for the most part accepted Russia's claims .
 In the final analysis, recognition of governments and states is a political choice left to other sovereign states and their governments . Recognition of nations and states should be left to sovereign states, the BBC says .
 Another approach is to grant recognition based on a second criterion, which is the perceived desirability of a particular state or government . Another approach may be based on the perceived desire of a government to be recognised .
 The United States denied recognition of the Soviet Union and its government from 1917 until 1934, when diplomatic relations finally were established . Diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Russia were finally established .
 Recognition of the Chinese government in Beijing was denied from 1949 until the 1970s . Normalization of relations with China began to take place in 1970s, when normalization of ties began .
 Diplomatic Immunities and Protections while living and doing business in the host country . All diplomats on the diplomatic list are immune from arrest or prosecution by local authorities .
 Diplomats cannot even be prosecuted for traffic and parking violations, which is very frustrating to national or local governments . Diplomats can't even even charge traffic or parking violations for traffic violations .
 Diplomatic immunity is a reciprocal privilege that extends to all diplomats in all of their activities . Nevertheless, diplomatic immunity is an important privilege that is reciprocal . Diplomats are protected by diplomatic immunity in all their activities, not just activities .
 Private citizens traveling abroad do not have immunity from local laws and law-enforcement measures . Private citizens are not immune from local law and law enforcement measures .
 The reciprocity that assures the mutual safety of diplomats is absolutely essential if countries are to maintain contact and conduct business with one another . Diplomats need to be able to make sure they are safe, diplomats say .
 Not only would it be unseemly to arrest diplomats of other countries, it could lead to reprisals against one’s own diplomats . Arresting diplomats of others countries would be a bad move for the U.S. It could also lead to retaliatory attacks against one
 The only legal remedies for the host country for unacceptable conduct on the part of a foreign diplomat are to ignore or overlook such transgressions, to protest these activities to the host government, or to declare the diplomat unwelcome, forcing his or her removal .
 Diplomatic misconduct can ruin a diplomatic career when it causes one to be declared persona non grata . Depending on the circumstances, misconduct can also ruin the career .
 On the other hand, some diplomats may face expulsion for reasons unrelated to their personal behavior . Diplomats may also face expulsion if they are found guilty of misconduct .
 If relations sour between the diplomat’s country and the host country, he or she may be subject to recall by his or her own country or expulsion through the persona non grata declaration . Diplomats can be recalled by their own countries or expelled by their country .
 Recalling one’s own diplomats or expelling the diplomats of foreign countries is one way of signaling displeasure with the policies of those countries . It may have nothing to do with the actual conduct of individual diplomats, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Diplomatic conventions, although legally binding as treaties, do not always assure in practice that diplomats will be treated correctly . Diplomatic convention, however, does not always guarantee that diplomats are treated properly .
 Iranian revolutionaries held American diplomats as hostages in 1979 . In 1979, American diplomats were held hostage by Iranian revolutionaries as hostages .
 The revolutionaries’ takeover of the American embassy and confiscation of its files also violated the same Vienna diplomatic convention as well as customary international law that protects embassy property even in wartime . U.S. embassy property is protected in wartime even though it is not in the country’s
 When countries break diplomatic relations, the embassy and its grounds are placed in caretaker status . It is sometimes under the daily control of a third country mutually acceptable to both countries .
 This is because of the legal fiction of extraterritoriality, which assumes that an embassy and the ground it stands on are part of the sovereign territory and property of the foreign country . This is due to the fact that the embassy is located in a foreign country's territory .
 The urge to take reprisals in kind is understandable, but any such action was avoided . The urge was understandable but it was not followed by any reprisal action .
 The embassies are viewed as the property of the foreign country and thus not legally subject to host-country intrusion . The embassies provide for their own security .
 The United States Marine Corps has traditionally been assigned the task of guarding American embassies in conjunction with State Department security officers . The U.S. Marine Corps is traditionally assigned to guard embassies .
 Host-country police or other security personnel also have the responsibility of protecting embassies by supplementing efforts of the embassy itself . Host country police also have a role in protecting embassies .
 Embassies sometimes serve as places of asylum for host-country citizens or others seeking protection . Embassies are often used as places for asylum seekers or those seeking protection from host countries .
 The political decision to grant asylum is up to embassy officials . It usually is limited or reserved as a humanitarian gesture to those whose political or other rights have been violated .
 Roman Catholic cardinal Mindzenty, an opponent of the communist takeover in Hungary after World War II, was one of the more celebrated recipients of American asylum .
 Once asylum has been granted, host-country officials may not legally force entry to the embassy or its grounds to remove those who have found shelter there . The host country may protest the granting of asylum or even try to prevent individuals from entering embassy grounds .
 Organization of Diplomatic Missions Emissaries of states bear different titles . Emissary of states have different titles. Diplomats of states are called ambassadors .
 Ambassador is the highest-ranking position and chief of mission in any given mission . Ambassador is an ambassador to the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 Mission is a term that refers to an embassy, including consular section in the same embassy, consulates located elsewhere in a foreign country . Mission is also a diplomatic mission to an international organization, or a delegation to a conference. Mission is the name of an embassy or a consular
 In the absence of an ambassador as chief of mission, the mission may be left under another person in charge . That person is a charge d’affaires or, more simply, a charge .
 Consul or consul general is usually the title of the official in charge of a consulate in the capital and in one or another of the major cities outside of the host country’s capital . Consul General is usually a title of a consul in the country's capital and
 Consuls or consuls general work directly for the ambassador, whose residence is in the capital city near or on the embassy grounds . Consuls general are appointed by the ambassador in the country's capital city .
 A consulate coordinates the issue of passports to its own citizens, issues visas to citizens in the local country, and performs related administrative tasks . A consulate is a consulate that provides passports and visas for its citizens .
 Consulates are also a focal point for promoting trade and cultural exchange in areas of the host country outside of the capital city . Consulates also promote trade, cultural exchange between host countries and host countries . Consulate embassies are also focal points for promoting cultural exchange .
 They report to the embassy or home country directly on political, economic, and other developments they observe . They report directly to their home country .
 The level of representation that a state sends to a host country is politically significant . The state's representation is a key part of the country's political strategy .
 When relations are fully developed or "normal" countries typically are represented at the ambassadorial level . Countries typically represent each other at the ambassador's level .
 When conflict has resulted in a breach of diplomatic relations between two countries, restoration of relations is sometimes implemented in a gradual normalization process .
 Organization of a United States Diplomatic Mission* *Also known as Office of Defense Cooperation , Office of Military Cooperation . Also known as Military Assistance and Advisory group .
 Later the embassy may be reopened with a lower-ranking diplomat serving as charge d’affaires . The embassy may also be re-opened later this year .
 Eventually a full embassy with a serving ambassador is established, perhaps with consulates in other important cities . Eventually the embassy will be established with a full Embassy with serving ambassador, perhaps .
 A typical embassy is headed by an ambassador as chief of mission and a DCM as second in charge . The embassy is divided into a number of functional sections, such as the embassy's chief of staff .
 Most countries staff their embassies to perform various political, economic and commercial, consular, administrative, military, and intelligence functions . Most embassies perform diplomatic, economic, commercial, and military functions .
 Missions to international organizations or international negotiations usually have specific tasks to perform and are staffed accordingly . Missions to the U.S. should be staffed accordingly, such as a diplomatic mission .
 embassies and other missions usually mirror the structural and cultural approaches to policy of their home countries . Not surprisingly, embassies and embassies often mirror the cultural and structural approaches of their own countries .
 Chief of Mission at the U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C., has been in charge of the embassy since 2009 . He is the first chief of mission to lead the embassy staff in the United States .
 Members of the country team meet as a group at least once a week to review the embassy’s collective work .
 Ambassador or DCM can make a country team that can work together well, ironing out differences as they arise . Sometimes, particularly in smaller missions, personalities can be brought together under an effective ambassador .
 American embassy officials are often divided among themselves as are their respective agencies and agency heads in Washington . American embassies are often as divided as are those of their counterparts in Washington, D.C. embassy officials .
 The reality is that any president has difficulty controlling government agencies, whether engaged in domestic or foreign policy . An ambassador and the DCM face similar challenges on a much smaller scale, writes CNN.
 Diplomatic Incentives and Disincentives are important to diplomats . Diplomats depend on leverage they can bring to their negotiations and less formal discussions . Diplomatic incentives are key to diplomacy .
 Depending on the issue involved, economic or military resources may play an important role . Economic and military resources will play a key role in the outcome .
 Such incentives or carrots may be very helpful, but one should always understand them for what they are—incentives . Such incentives are very helpful to people, but they are not always helpful to others .
 The firmer foundation on which lasting agreements are based is based is one in which the mutual interests and objectives of the parties are also accommodated . The firmer foundation is based on mutual interests, rather than just the parties' objectives .
 An example of the use of diplomatic carrots is the 1978 accord reached at Camp David, Maryland, between Sadat and Begin that normalized relations between Israel and Egypt .
 The Sinai Desert land taken forcibly from Egypt by Israel in 1967 was returned in exchange for recognition by Egypt of Israel’s sovereignty or right to exist as a state . The land was returned to Israel in return for recognition .
 In addition to the positive influence he was able to assert because of personal skills and the high stature of his office .
 President Carter was able to cement the agreement with promises of substantial military and economic aid to both negotiating parties . The agreement was cemented by promising substantial military, economic and military aid .
 Effective diplomacy is markedly easier to achieve when the parties have an established record of positive accomplishments over decades or longer . The parties should have a long-standing record of achievement over decades to achieve success .
 Mutual trust is a very important asset in diplomatic exchanges, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com .
 Lack of trust, by contrast, poses a significant obstacle or challenge to diplomats, diplomats say . Lack of a record of broken obligations or other conflicts may pose a significant challenge for diplomats .
 The Camp David Accords proved to be only the first major step in a continuing peace process filled with some gains but also setbacks and disappointments . The peace process is filled with gains and setbacks .
 Diplomacy, of course, is not simply about economic and military aid, it says . Diplomacy is not just about economic, but it's also about political inducements, it adds .
 Diplomacy, as we have noted, can also be coercive—a stick forcing another country to do what it would not otherwise do . Diplomacy can be coercive, but it can be used to force countries to take action .
 In adversarial relations, veiled or explicit threats of economic sanctions or military action can influence or coerce diplomats and policymakers in other states . Threats can influence diplomatic and economic sanctions can be used to coerce other states, such as Russia .
 If the punishing state has been giving aid or other assistance, it can be reduced or cut off entirely . The punishing state can also reduce or cut it back entirely if it is giving aid .
 A boycott against the other country’s exports or an embargo or prohibition against selling or engaging in other commercial transactions can be imposed . A boycott or embargo can also be imposed against other countries .
 These are legal restrictions preventing the sale or purchase of any goods or services to or from that country . The restrictions prevent the sale of goods or . services to and from the country . These restrictions apply to all goods and services from the UK .
 The aim is to get the embargoed state to change its policy or comply with the wishes of the state imposing the embargo . The aim of the government is to change the policy of embargoed states .
 Economic sanctions are not always very effective in achieving their purposes, say experts . Sanctions are often more effective than they are used to achieve their objectives, they say .
 When a state’s exports are boycotted by one country, it may simply find other markets for its goods . When a country is boycotting its exports, it will find other ways to get its goods into markets .
 Other states will continue to sell their products to the embargoed state or engage in other commercial activities . Notwithstanding legal prohibitions, it may also find other states willing to avoid or evade an embargo .
 A multilateral boycott or embargo imposed by a coalition of states may be more effective by bringing greater collective pressure . A multi-state boycott or an embargo may more effective than a boycott of China . A boycott of the Chinese economy could be effective in China .
 The multilateral embargo against South Africa, for example, took many years to have noticeable effect . South Africa is one of the world's most isolated countries .
 In the early 1990s, the apartheid policy that had segregated the races was abandoned . Nelson Mandela's regime led by Nelson Mandela finally was put in place .
 A more serious stick is a blockade, a more intense form of economic warfare, in which warships or ground forces are used physically to prevent commerce going into or coming out of a country . A blockade is a more serious form of warfare, with warships and ground forces being used physically .
 Imposition of a blockade is an act of war that can escalate into an armed conflict . Imposition . of a . blockade is a blockade that can . escalate into a armed conflict that can be . armed conflict. Imposition is a 'act of war' that can escalated into an
 If two states have a perceived conflict of interest and neither backs down, events can produce a crisis . A crisis can be triggered if two states are at odds over who wins the right to stand alone .
 Each side feels it must do whatever is needed to advance or protect its interests . But at the same time recognizes that it must avoid taking actions that could escalate the crisis to the point that it gets out of control .
 Crisis diplomacy usually entails objectives that are both urgent and extremely important . Crisis diplomacy often involves objectives both urgent or extremely important. Crisis diplomacy is a form of diplomacy that is very difficult to achieve .
 It requires the greatest care in finding common ground as well as the appropriate combination of carrots and sticks . It requires care to find common ground and find the right combination of carrot and stick .
 American intelligence sources discovered in October 1962 that Soviet offensive missiles with nuclear warheads had been deployed to Cuba . American decision makers sought to have the missiles removed while, at the same time, attempting to avoid an escalation of the conflict into a major war .
 A keen awareness of the importance and urgency of accomplishing both of these shortterm objectives clearly influenced deliberations on the various policy options open to the United States .
 How the Soviets would respond to U.S. military actions was a matter of grave concern to President Kennedy and his advisers .
 Soviet commanders in Cuba already had authority from Moscow to use battlefield nuclear weapons in the event of an American invasion . U.S. decision makers did not know it then, but did not .
 Had the American response been any more provocative than it was, nuclear war might well have occurred . Had the U.S. response been more provocative, it might have been more likely to occur .
 Some officials in the U.S. administration preferred to call it a quarantine of Cuba, which seemed to them a less provocative term . The blockade has been dubbed a "quarantine" of Cuba .
 Using the metaphor “quarantine” cast the blockade less as an act of war and more as a temporary measure . The blockade would be lifted as soon as “health” was restored, he says .
 Choosing a less provocative term was a war-avoidance measure, one calculated to allow an adversary to seek a peaceful resolution of the dispute . Choosing the term "war-avoiding term" was a peace-avoidable measure .
 The Soviets were successful in getting the Soviets to withdraw the missiles without armed conflict between the two states .
 Kennedy wisely provided a carrot to the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev, which was to promise to remove U.S. Jupiter missiles based in Turkey and aimed at the Soviet Union . The missiles would be removed .
 U.S. and Soviet Union had come to the brink of nuclear war . Arms control agenda aimed at reducing tensions and building a foundation for better communications between the two .
 If threats are not credible, a threatened state may choose to ignore them . If threatened state chooses to ignore threats, they may ignore them, experts say .
 States on a collision course may well wind up in armed conflict . High stakes and time pressure may undercut a reasoned, rational discussion of policy options .
 Traditional practice is to sever diplomatic relations entirely, when communications are most necessary . Paradoxically, this is when diplomatic relations are at their most vulnerable .
 As the 19th-century Prussian writer Clausewitz observed, war is merely state policy conducted by other means . War is merely war, says Clausewitz, as well as state policy, he says .
 Inevitably, if cease-fires are to be arranged and peaceful settlements made, diplomacy must play a primary role . Diplomacy must also play a major role in the end of the conflict, says David Cameron .
 There is also a place for diplomatic communications in wartime, sometimes facilitated by third parties . Third parties assist in getting the parties to communicate and cease hostilities .
 This is the diplomatic peacemaking role as in the Middle East and elsewhere that aims toward a settlement through negotiations, mediation or arbitration, judicial settlement, or other means .
 In most cases, the conflicts that led parties to war in the first place are extraordinarily difficult to resolve . In most of the world's conflicts, the conflict is extremely difficult to solve, experts say .
 Divisions deepen as each party suffers the scourge that is the human cost of war . Each party's divisions deepen as they suffer the scourge of war, says CNN.com .
 If one side wins or prevails on the battlefield, it may be in a position to dictate the terms of the settlement . Of course, if one side prevails, it could dictate the settlement terms .
 The losing party in such circumstances can take some solace in the outcome of the Congress of Vienna .
 Even without military or economic leverage, a losing party --Erance -- contributed to constructing a settlement that accommodated the diverse and often conflicting interests of the parties, he says .
 Diplomatic miracles of this sort are usually few and far between, with vindictive and punishing terms for the loser of a war— such as Germany after World War I—a distinct possibility . Unfortunately, this sort of diplomatic miracles are rare .
 Diplomacy as a means of communications between or among governments has many sides . Diplomacy is a diplomatic means of communication between governments and individuals .
 As noted, in the extreme one can play hardball and issue threats or an ultimatum to one’s adversary . In the extreme, this can be used as a way of dealing with an adversary .
 Graham Allison and his colleagues studied U.S.-Soviet crisis diplomacy in the late 1960s . The two countries came to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 over Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba . Allison: Crisis Diplomacy and Foreign Policy .
 Allison is relaxed from the organizational process and bureaucratic politics perspectives adopted by Allison . Both the unitary and rational assumptions associated with realism are relaxed from organizational process .
 The organizational-process model of foreign policy decision making views organizational routines and procedures as determining some and influencing other foreign policy decisions and outcomes . The model is based on the organizational process model of decision-making .
 Allison notes that where a given bureaucratic actor or diplomat stands on a given issue is often determined by where he or she sits . Allison: "One's view of alternative courses of action is highly colored by the perspective of the organization to which one belongs or the role one plays"
 Allison's model of foreign poiicy decision making involves forming coalitions and countercoalitions among diverse bureaucratic actors in a competitive environment . Allison: "Bureaucratic politics is a model for foreign policy"
 The focus is on specific individuals in positions at the top of organizations and on pulling and hauling among them . This is in contrast to the more routine, preprogrammed activity of the organizational-process model .
 Foreign policy decisions at times may be the result of which individual or which coalition of individuals can muster the most political power . Hence, foreign policy decisions may be made by which individuals have the most power .
 What may be best for an individual or his or her bureaucracy in terms of increased prestige and relative standing within the government may lead to less than the best foreign policy for the state as a whole .
 Parochial, personal, and bureaucratic interests may reign over any expressed concern for the national interest . The nation's national interest is at stake in national security, says President Obama .
 Robert Keohane, Joseph S Nye, Jr., and others have taken the liberal image of foreign policy a major step forward . They argue that the state may not be able to confine bureaucratic actors operating in its name .
 Organizations, whether private or governmental, may transcend the boundaries of states, forming coalitions with their foreign counterparts . Organizations may form coalitions, forming alliances with foreign counterparts, in order to achieve success .
 Such transnational actors even may be working at cross-purposes with government leaders in their home states . They possess the formal authority to make binding decisions, experts say . They say .
 Foreign Office may see a given issue similarly to its American State Department counterpart . For example, the British Foreign Office sees the same issues as its State Department counterparts .
 The British Defence Ministry and the United States Defense Department may share a common view contrary to that of both diplomatic organizations . On the other hand, the British Defense Ministry and U.S. Defense Dept. may share common views .
 Nongovernmental interest groups in both countries may form coalitions supportive of one or another coalition .
 Realists focus on the state as the principal, rational, purposive actor would seem to be misdirected . If it is typically the way foreign policy is made, the focus by realists on state is misdirected, he says .
 From the liberal perspective, more attention should be given to organizational process and bureaucratic politics as well as transnational actors and their interactions, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: More attention should also be paid to organizations and bureaucracy .
 Realists argue that the disaggregation of the state into its component parts overlooks the fact that when all is said and done, a state still speaks authoritatively with one voice . This is especially in a crisis situation, and indeed, this is what occurred in the Cuban missile crisis .
 The state retains its prerogatives when important foreign policy interests are at stake, precluding circumvention by bureaucratic or transnational actors . From the realist perspective, the state has prerogative prerogates when it comes to foreign policy .
 It's more likely that in cases where national security is not at stake, the liberal perspective provides the more convincing explanation . The liberal perspective is more convincing in cases of less importance to realists .
 On the role of transnational actors in world politics, the now-classic study is Robert 0. 0. Robert 0: 0.0 . Robert 0 is a classic study on transnational politics .
 For more detail, including access to Soviet data that became available to Western scholars in the post-Cold War period, see Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow, .
 Some communications are merely informational transfers not designed to produce any particular outcome . Informational transfers are not intended to produce a specific outcome . We are happy to clarify this .
 Government agencies as departments of foreign affairs, defense, commerce, or their diplomatic representatives in embassies throughout the world .
 The U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration inform government counterparts, scientists, and the general public about shuttle launches into space .
 Other informational communications may have a purpose that goes beyond merely transmitting facts . "Other informational communications" may also have a greater purpose .
 Government agencies may communicate directly to foreign publics or work through centralized agencies or ministries of information . Government agencies are allowed to communicate directly with foreign governments .
 State Department wants to convey to foreign publics the rationale for U.S. policies . State Department also wants to explain United States understanding of and approaches to world events . The State Department says it's trying to convey the United States rationale for policies .
 Most countries have similar information ministries with established press contacts for access to radio, television, and print media . Most of the world's information ministries are based in the United States .
 Mailing lists and government sites on the internet are also used to present a country’s point of view .
 More recently, countries have enlisted Facebook pages and Twitter feeds . Countries have also enlisted social media feeds and Facebook pages .
 Information ministries in democratic countries may well be restricted from disseminating their communications to citizens within their own countries . Because such communications are expected by design to be one-sided advocacy of a country’s policy positions, such communications may be restricted .
 The target audience of information ministries in democratic countries is foreign publics . Lest they be accused of propagandizing their own citizens .
 Symbolic communications are symbolic, usually designed to reinforce positive aspects of relations between two countries . Symbolic other communications are designed to reinform positive relations between countries .
 U.S. officials reciprocate by attending a similar Bastille Day celebration hosted by the French embassy in Washington .
 Neither country has ever gone to war with each other, and both countries share long-established commitments to democratic values .
 Another example of symbolic communications is to demonstrate respect by presidents and senior government officials or their representatives, ambassadors, and other diplomats attending important state events such as coronation of a monarch .
 The level of representation at such events is carefully considered, usually to avoid any insult to the host country . It is usually considered to avoid insulting the host countries .
 President Kennedy, Sadat, Hussein, Reagan and Reagan all attended funerals following their deaths . The funerals of presidents and prime ministers from all over the world have been held in recent years .
 The wedding of Prince William, heir to the British throne, to Kate Middleton in 2011 resulted in a much lower level of foreign representation . The wedding was held in 2011, but the wedding of William and Kate resulted in much lower representation .
 Political statements can also be made by not negotiating . Conflict Avoidance is also a form of avoiding conflict .
 One approach to a conflict is to sidestep, avoid, or ignore it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "One approach is to ignore it," says Sutter. "I don't like it, I like it. Indeed, it's a good thing to
 Sometimes the issues dividing the parties are inconsequential or relatively unimportant and thus not worth any bother . Raising such issues may worsen relations without accomplishing much, if anything, if nothing .
 At other times, however, there may be important issues at stake that one or more of the parties may wish to defer to a later time . Perhaps realizing that the issues are not likely to be resolved satisfactorily any time soon, perhaps .
 This may require some fancy diplomatic footwork, leaving matters to rest as they are, unresolved, and without yielding anything in principle to the other side . This may need some fancy diplomacy .
 The real challenges in diplomatic negotiations occur when the parties are deeply in conflict . The real challenge in diplomatic talks is to find a way to reach an agreement .
 Sometimes one or both parties do not really want to reach agreement at all . Sometimes both parties see some value in the negotiating process, at least in appearing to negotiate . Sometimes one party wants to reach an agreement but see value in negotiating process .
 The objective may be merely to delay taking any action on the conflict at issue . The objective of this may be to delay action on any action against the conflict .
 In this mode, one or both sides may set forth a maximum position that neither expects the other side to accept . Neither side will accept the maximum position they expect the other to accept, but neither does .
 Iranian government has been doing this for years in terms of negotiations over its nuclear development program . From the perspective of the West, this is what the West is doing for years, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Similar doubts about the sincerity of the North Korean regime in terms of nuclear arms negotiations have also been expressed .
 Negotiation is often that what one side gains, the other loses . Negotiation strategies are often that one side loses . The mentality in negotiations is that what is good for one side is bad for the other .
 Game theorists refer to this as zero-sum — the pluses one side gains come at the expense of the minuses the other side loses . Game theorists call it a "zero-sum" - the plus one side loses comes at the cost of the other .
 Give and take, pulling and hauling by opposing parties are tactics often used to forge compromise agreements when interests and related objectives are in conflict .
 Each side gains something but also gives up something . Sometimes this is the best that can be achieved, but it's not always the best .
 Each side achieves some points of satisfaction but is also left with some disappointments . Each side may have had to give up in order to get concessions from the other side .
 A potentially far more productive approach to durable agreements is to use negotiations as a means to search for common ground among parties, forging a positive-sum outcome based on mutual gains .
 Such agreements may involve some compromises but rest more fundamentally on satisfying the parties’ multiple interests . Such agreements must be satisfied with satisfying multiple interests, some shared, some not .
 The Harvard negotiation project has identified several principles or guidelines for “getting to yes” An essentially positive-sum approach to use when parties are in conflict .
 The methodology was developed for diverse negotiation settings, but for our purposes it has direct application to diplomatic communications aimed at achieving win-win outcomes .
 "Negotiations are about issues, not personalities," says John Defterios . "People's orientations matter in how negotiators relate to one another," he says . Negotiators need to focus on the issues, he says, rather than personalities .
 In focusing on issues, the parties avoid digging in their heels and taking hard-and-fast positions . The parties avoided digging their heels, avoiding digging in with hard and fast .
 CNN.com will feature iReporters in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery on CNN iReport.com . Please submit your best shots of the White House for next week’s gallery of snapshots .
 Interests are of two kinds, those related to substance of what is being negotiated and those related . Those related to preserving and improving relationships in the negotiations among the parties .
 There also needs to be room for creative approaches to finding common ground, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: There must be creative approaches for common ground .
 "Objective criteria or standards for measuring what has been agreed, accompanied by fair procedures, are essential to effective implementation of any agreement," says David Cameron . "They should not be content to rest agreements merely on the will of the parties"
 Getting-to-yes method is don’t bargain over positions; separate the people from the problem; focus on interests, not positions; invent options for mutual gain; and insist on using objective criteria . In point-by-point summary form, the method is in point-
 Focusing on the interests of all of the parties is not just confined to the substantive issues at hand, but also extends to the relationships among those engaging in the negotiations . Focusing is not only confined to substantive issues but also to relationships among the parties involved .
 Maintaining respectful, professional relationships may contribute to getting to yes . Maintain respectful relationships with your partner .
 We turn now to a discussion of arms control and disarmament negotiations . We focus on those that have taken place over more than half a century .
 Diplomatic diplomacy in both bilateral and multilateral negotiations can lead to important disarmament and arms control outcomes . We use this important national security issue to illustrate how diplomacy can be used in arms control .
 Getting to yes has been far more than a matter of carrots and sticks or compromises, says Obama administration . "Getting to yes" is not just a simple matter of carrot-and-stick negotiations, says White House .
 Satisfying the interests of the negotiating parties has been the key ingredient to successful, positive-sum outcomes . Satisfying a negotiating party's interests is the key to successful outcomes, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 Durable agreements are grounded in the interests of the parties, even when some gain more than others . Durable agreement is grounded on the interests the parties secure, even though some gain .
 We often hear presidents, prime ministers, and other national leaders calling for disarmament or, at least, the ongoing pursuit of arms control as remedies for interstate warfare . However distant achievement of such a goal may seem, however, we often hear .
 Critics say focus should be on conflicts and ways of resolving or managing them, not on weaponry . Weapons are not the cause of the problem, they say .
 Dealing with weapons in national arsenals is hardly a new problem confronting humanity in the 21st century . The U.S. government has been forced to deal with the problem of stockpiling weapons in arsenals .
 Over the years people have joined together to protest the development and use of all types of weapons . Nevertheless, over the years, people have protested the development of weapons and weapons .
 It is assumed that the elimination of major weapons systems would, if not eliminate war, at least reduce its destructive capacity . The elimination of such weapons systems is assumed to reduce the capacity of war .
 Although great schemes have been drawn up for general and complete disarmament, this approach appears to have been too ambitious . The approach to disarmament appears to be too ambitious, says David Cameron .
 Diplomatic attempts to achieve disarmament have succeeded only when directed toward certain categories of weaponry such as agreed prohibitions against chemical and biological agents . As a practical matter, disarmament has succeeded only if directed toward specific categories of weapons such as biological and chemical agents .
 The 1987 U.S.-Soviet Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces treaty removed from Europe and destroyed an entire category of weaponry . All intermediate-range missiles capable of carrying nuclear weapons were destroyed in 1987 .
 The elimination of certain categories of weapons has become a central focus of nongovernmental organizations as well . Elimination of certain weapons is also a key issue in the U.S.
 Land mines placed during wars kill and wound soldiers but also maim children and adult noncombatants who stumble on them long after wars have ended . Land mines also kill and injure children and adults long after war has ended .
 More than one thousand NGOs in more than seventy-five countries joined forces in the 1990s in an international campaign to ban land mines . Given this example of global civil society at work involved one thousand local and international NGOs in over 70 countries .
 British princess Diana was among the many individual advocates of a treaty banning land mines . Princess Diana was one of the leading campaigners for the treaty .
 The treaty went into force in 1999; however, the United States and Russia are among the countries not signing the accord . The U.S. and Russia will not sign the accord because of their continuing reliance on these weapons .
 If signed and ratified, the treaty requires signatories to destroy all mines in national arsenals within four years . It also requires removing and destroying all the mines already in the ground within ten years .
 Statecraft based on possessing weaponry and fielding armed forces, however, historically has been the more common norm . Statecraft is more common in the U.S. than in the past .
 Far from viewing weapons as a cause of war, weapons can serve a positive function in terms of protecting a state’s national security and maintaining the peace . Weapons can be used to protect national security but also maintain the peace, says David Cameron . Weapons should not be viewed as a
 The United States president and the head of the Soviet Union signed the agreements . As was usually the case with such major agreements, the agreements were signed by the U.S. president .
 President Richard Nixon shakes hands with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev . Nixon shook hands with the Soviet leader at the height of his presidency .
 Conventional weapons, however, are found in the arsenals of all countries . Curbing Weapons Proliferation is a key part of the U.S. strategy .
 During the deadly Iran-Iraq war C1980-1988), for example, conventional weapons and also the use of chemical weapons on the part of Iraq led to a half million civilian and military deaths and untold numbers of maimed and injured .
 Khan admitted to being involved in an international proliferation network that smuggled nuclear technology to Libya, Iran, and North Korea . Khan, a Pakistani scientist, admitted to smuggling nuclear technology . Khan was also involved in smuggling technology to Iran, North Korea and Libya .
 If a state is relatively strong militarily, such strength in principle will deter or dissuade others who might be prone to attack, it will dissuade them from attacking, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Disarmament advocates are quick to point out that such thinking, coupled with technological advances in weaponry, is in fact responsible for the carnage in two world wars that alone made the 20th the bloodiest century in human history . The 20th century was the deadliest century in history .
 Advances in nuclear, chemical, and biological weaponry also threaten global destruction . Transnational terrorist organizations are key concern on the 21st century’s global agenda .
 From this perspective, military strength is hardly a reliable source of security, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com . "From this perspective of military strength ... it is hardly an effective security tool," he says .
 Arms races in which states compete to achieve security through acquisition of armaments and strengthened armed forces only worsen the global security problem . Arms races also worsen the problem, particularly if such weapons escape their control, writes Peter Bergen .
 That more spending on weapons may actually worsen or undermine security is at the core of the security dilemma facing states and international and nongovernmental organizations .
 multilateral arms control agreements constitute international security regimes . Once instituted after intensive diplomatic negotiation, these agreements are known as arms control regimes . Arms control agreements are often accompanied by arms control measures .
 Measures offer rules and structure to development, acquisition, deployment, and use of armaments . Somewhat more modest in scope than general and complete disarmament, these measures still offer rules .
 Curb arms-race competition; achieve economic savings from reduced military expenditures; lessen the risk of war; reduce damage should war occur; and enhance regional and global security . Curb Arms-Race competition; . achieve economic . savings from reducing military expenditures, . lessen the . risk of
 Diplomats can and do make a difference when it comes to enhanced security through arms control, diplomats say . Put another way, diplomats can and indeed, they can make an important difference, they say .
 Critics note that states may see arms control as a way of gaining strategic advantage over other states . Critics say states may also see it as way of getting them to agree to provisions that disadvantage them in the arms-race competition .
 Arms-control regimes can also provide rules states voluntarily agree to follow in their security relations with each other, lending some degree of order and providing greater security to an otherwise anarchical world lacking central authority or governance . Arms control regimes can provide rules that state and country agree to abide by each
 Arms-control agreements have been reached since the late 1950s . Understanding the meaning and significance of what has been accomplished to date can be difficult .
 Quantitative and qualitative limitations on armaments and armed forces . 2.2.3.4.5.5 . Quantitative limitations of armaments, armed forces. 2.3 .
 Table 7. Functional mechanisms—communications and other confidence-building measures . Table 7: Security measures include communications and security mechanisms . Table 8: Security mechanisms are functional and security measures .
 Functional approaches to controlling or managing conflicts include establishing and sustaining CSBMs that increase trust and reduce threat perceptions as well as maintaining effective communications even in wartime .
 Peacekeeping missions under UN or other auspices may also contribute functionally as controls on the use of armed forces and armaments in conflict situations . Multilateral peacekeeping missions also contribute to peacekeeping efforts .
 Communications as an arms-control function has been a major focus of armscontrol efforts . The 1962 Cuban missile crisis brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war .
 Clear communications would have been helpful at such a dangerous time . Clear, direct communications would've been helpful, he says .
 Government leaders in Washington and Moscow had to rely on exchanging notes by cable . Many hours were lost in the process of transmission and translation .
 Even at that time, telecommunications technology had more to offer than the systems governments were then using . Even at the time, the technology was far more advanced than what governments were using .
 The hotline agreement established a direct communications link between the White Elouse and the Kremlin . It would be expanded and modernized over the years as new telecommunications technologies became available .
 Approaching arms and conflict control through communications and agreed procedures for managing crises to avoid their escalation to armed conflict have also been the inspiration for a set of nuclear accidents .
 We deal in this chapter with arms control as an example of how states have used bilateral and multilateral diplomacy as a means to achieving national security, other objectives . The chapter ends with a look at the use of diplomacy to achieve national security .
 Many arms-control treaties and agreements address questions of verification and compliance . Arms-control treaty and agreement address questions about verification of compliance . The U.S. has signed a number of disarmament treaties since 1973 .
 It’s one thing to make agreements; it's another to live up to them . North Korean attempts to deceive international inspectors concerning their development of nuclear material violate the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
 Verification of compliance with treaties or agreements is achieved in a number of ways, such as open admission of violations, on-site inspection by other parties, or reports by reliable human-intelligence sources .
 These means include advanced technical-intelligence capabilities on ground stations, aircraft, ships, and satellites or other space vehicles . These capabilities can be used by ground stations and aircraft .
 Alleged violations are presented in diplomatic exchanges in the expectation of bringing violators into compliance . Alleged violation is presented in diplomacy in the hope of bringing violations into compliance.
 verification or knowing what other countries are actually doing can be understood as the first phase, to be followed by what amounts to an enforcement phase in which compliance is sought . If any of the parties is thought to be in violation of a treaty or agreement, compliance will be sought, if any
 Even during the height of the Cold War, adversaries met formally to discuss and debate allegations of noncompliance .
 The Standing Consultative Commission (SCC) was an important mechanism for airing differences, if not always working them out very quickly . It was a U.S.-Soviet bilateral forum located in Geneva .
 The SCC was a means for managing superpower disputes and maintaining the strategic-arms security regime . As such, it was meant to manage superpower disputes .
 Weapons Proliferation has dominated every arms-control diplomatic agenda in the post-Cold War era . The issue of weapons proliferation has dominated the debate in the past few decades .
 Nuclear weapons and materiel, however, have dominated international debate and discussion . Nuclear weapons have dominated world's nuclear weapons debate, however .
 The startling collapse in 1991 of the Soviet Union with its 33,000 nuclear warheads set governments, think tanks, and academe scrambling . The collapse set governments and think tanks scrambling .
 There was concern over the future of the nuclear arsenals and related technologies possessed by the Russian Federation and former Soviet republics . Concerns were raised over future of nuclear weapons possessed by Russia and ex-Soviet Republics .
 All three republics agreed to relinquish control over nuclear warheads on their respective territories to Russia . U.S. and other countries worked closely with Russia to make this happen . Ukraine initially demonstrated some reluctance, but all three agreed to hand over nuclear weapons .
 The physical security of weapons in Russia and the former republics continues to be a problem, raising the frightening specter of weapons and materiel being stolen and sold for private gain on the black market .
 The 1967 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is the linchpin of the international nonproliferation regime . The five declared nuclear powers at the time pledged not to export to nonnuclear states either nuclear weapons or nuclear weapons components .
 Other signatories agreed, as nonnuclear states, not to try to acquire a nuclear weapons capability in exchange for a commitment by the nuclear powers to negotiate in good faith on cessation of the nuclear arms race .
 All parties that have signed the treaty agreed to safeguards and inspections of nuclear power plants and other nuclear facilities used for peaceful purposes . The Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency monitors nuclear facilities .
 The goal of these provisions is to reassure states that their neighbors are not secretly building nuclear weapons capabilities . The goal is to persuade states to forgo pursuing weapons programs of their own .
 Testing of nuclear weapons by India and Pakistan in 1998 added two more members to the nuclear club . Testing of nukes by the two countries added to the club's nuclear arsenal .
 South Africa developed these capabilities but chose to disarm itself of them after a significant change of regime took place in the 1990s . South Africa's capabilities were developed in the 1980s .
 Brazil and Argentina have moved away from developing nuclear weapons capabilities . Argentina and Brazil have also moved towards developing nuclear capabilities .
 As possession of nuclear weapons spreads, the possibility of inadvertent use increases . New nuclear states are not likely to have as secure command and control over these weapons as did major powers during the height of the Cold War .
 In a crisis, a state may be more likely to launch nuclear weapons against a neighbor . The state may believe it must get in the first strike before its rival .
 One approach is on the supply side —prevention of the further spread of nuclear weapons or nuclear weapons technologies by prohibiting such exports by states already possessing these capabilities . Another approach is to prevent further spread by prohibiting export of these technologies .
 On the demand side, the aim is to improve regional security conditions so that states will be less likely to feel a need to acquire such weapons . The aim is also to improve security conditions in the region so states will not feel the need for weapons .
 Diplomatic efforts to persuade would-be nuclear powers from pursuing the acquisition of nuclear weapons or weapons technologies are demand-side measures . The U.S. has been involved in a nuclear arms deal with North Korea .
 The term supply side refers to countries already in possession of a particular weapon, weapons system, or related technologies . Demand side is used to refer to countries wanting to acquire any weapons, weapons systems, or technologies .
 India and Pakistan never signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . It resulted in unilateral efforts by other states to deny certain technologies to these countries . No doubt signaling their future intentions, the two countries never signed a treaty .
 At most, the treaty merely slowed India’s drive for nuclear weapons capability . It merely slowed the two countries’ drives for nuclear arms capability . The treaty was signed in 1998 .
 The NPT does not prohibit a state from conducting research and development of civilian nuclear-power programs intended for peaceful, electric power . Iran says it is doing what it says is what it is trying to do to develop nuclear weapons .
 The obvious problem is that such a program also can be used in developing expertise that can then be applied toward a weapons development program . Such a program can also be used to generate plutonium and other products used in constructing nuclear weapons, experts say .
 North Korea announced in 1993 its intent to withdraw from the NPT regime in order to avoid an impending IAEA inspection of a suspect site . Efforts by North Korea to develop its own nuclear weapons became apparent when it announced its intent in 1993 that it would withdraw .
 International pressure kept North Korea formally within the NPT regime for several years . International pressure and subsequent negotiations kept the North Korean regime in the North Korea fold .
 North Korea announced it was withdrawing from the NPT regime, resumed its nuclear weapons program in 2009 . North Korea's second nuclear test took place in 2009, four years after withdrawing from NPT, North Korea said it was quitting .
 The U.S. is developing ballistic and “air-breathing” cruise missiles as a means of delivering these weapons to overseas targets . Coupled with its development of both ballistic and . ‘Air-breath’ cruise missiles, it has also been developing
 North Korea’s growing arsenal is threatening to Japan, other countries in the region, and even the U.S. It is also threatening to Alaska, Alaska and Hawaii, Hawaii in particular .
 Diplomatic efforts by the U.S. and other countries to bring North Korea back into the NPT regime have been highly problematic . North Korean military threats and hostile actions directed primarily toward South Korea have been accompanied by threats .
 Multilateral six-party talks with the United States, China, Japan, Russia, Russia and both North and South Korea finally resumed in 2007 .
 North Korea did agree to allow technical teams to survey some of its nuclear facilities . North Korea has agreed to allow teams to inspect some of the facilities .
 Ambassador Christopher Hill was a central player in the six-party talks . Ambassador Hill was then an assistant secretary of state .
 He also met bilaterally with authorities in both North Korea and China . The latter potentially has the most influence of the five on the political leadership in North Korea .
 Bush administration initially opposed direct contact between the U.S. and North Korea . Bilateral diplomacy typically accompanies multilateral efforts, but given their distrust of North Korea’s leaders, it was initially opposed .
 Ambassador Hill was finally given a green light to meet one-on-one with North Korea as Clinton administration had done in the 1990s . Ambassador Hill is now allowed to meet with North Korean officials .
 Beyond immediate concerns about proliferation of nuclear weapons, concerns are concerns about the vast global armaments market . The world's largest arms market is thought to be the world's biggest market .
 Both legal and illegal sales of armaments by and to states and nonstate actors continue on a truly massive scale . The sales continue to be illegal on both sides of the debate . The U.S. State Department says it is investigating the situation .
 Critics observe that arms purchases deplete national resources that might otherwise be spent more productively on investment for economic development or other purposes . Critics say arms purchases are a waste of resources .
 Acquiring armaments beyond realistic defense needs fuels arms races that diminish the security of states and societies in a region . Acquiring arms arms arms races fuels arms wars that diminish security of countries and societies, states say . Acquircy arms races fuel arms races in the region .
 The arms trade is a profitable business for many who engage in it . It has proven to be extremely difficult to agree on rules to limit or constrain it .
 Suppliers of arms are merely responding to legitimate national security needs for weaponry, they say . On the other hand, from their perspective, suppliers of arms say they are responding to security needs .
 Demand for weaponry continues to be very strong, and there is no shortage of suppliers willing and able to meet it . Indeed, demand for weaponry is very strong .
 Arms-producing corporations and states can realize greater economies of scale when they have large export markets, which reduce the per-unit cost to producers of tanks, aircraft, or other expensive military hardware . Arms-producing corporations and . states can . realize greater . economies of . scale when
 In short, the interests that favor a continuing and expanding global arms trade have proven far stronger politically than those arms controllers . Arms controllers want to build regimes that put limits on the kinds of arms that are traded globally and regionally .
 It was noted at the outset of this chapter that diplomats have to take into account allies as well as domestic audiences when engaged in diplomacy .
 Contemporary diplomatic practices seem to be increasingly subject to various trends associated with globalization, such as globalization .
 The takeover of the American embassy in Tehran in 1979 by radical students established a dangerous precedent because the revolutionary Islamic regime sanctioned the action . Over the years, missions certainly have been attacked by mobs .
 By 1980 diplomats had become major targets for terrorism . They had good reason to be, because by 1980 diplomats were targets of terrorism .
 The Iranian and Libyan regimes used their overseas missions to plan and support terrorist acts on foreign soil . Furthermore, the Iranian and Libyans used their missions to planning and support terrorism, according to the report .
 Life for diplomats and their families is a long way from the popular image of champagne-and-caviar embassy parties . Add to the rise in crime in urban areas throughout the world, significant health risks, and increasing social anarchy in a number of developing countries .
 The nature of diplomatic communication between governments has evolved. Second, the nature of diplomacy has evolved, it has evolved .
 Resident ambassador has been the key communications link with the host government . Historically the resident ambassador has presented his or her state’s views and reporting back those of the government .
 Diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the world's most powerful leaders are no longer diplomatic posts . The ambassador's role has diminished in the role of the embassy in Washington .
 The result can be to bypass the professional diplomatic circuit . Even in those situations, the ambassador has direct access to top host government officials .
 The end of the Cold War reduced the importance of Western embassies in the former Eastern bloc as sources of information for policymakers . Third, the use of embassies in former eastern bloc countries was reduced to less important .
 It is not unusual for policymakers to find important insights in quality online newspapers and magazines, blogs, and research institutes with a focus on international relations .
 The worldwide communications revolution has also reduced the importance of diplomatic reporting . Fourth, the world's most important diplomatic reporting has also been reduced to less important .
 The first sources of information on breaking events are often television networks, the internet, and radio reports, with diplomatic and intelligence reporting lagging behind . Satellites are often the first to receive information from satellite imagery .
 Key offices throughout the State Department feature television sets that are tuned to news channels throughout the day . State Department offices feature news programs tuned to the news channels .
 CNN and other networks are also a staple for operations centers located in various government agencies that deal with foreign policy and national security issues . CNN and others are also staple for twenty-four-hour operations centers .
 Satellite transmissions allow government intelligence analysts as well as regular citizens to watch live news broadcasts from foreign television stations covering local events .
 Facebook, Twitter, and other social networks have enabled citizens to organize themselves politically from rallies during election campaigns to movements seeking regime change . The social network has enabled citizens in the U.S. to organize politically .
 Governments and intelligence agencies also follow these social networks closely . Not surprisingly, governments and their intelligence agencies follow these networks closely.
 One drawback to relying on live broadcasts and internet postings is that the information viewers receive does not provide the broader, interpretive context that characterizes diplomatic and intelligence reporting .
 Social network postings and live broadcasts to millions of people may force the pace of events or sensationalize issues, putting pressure on policymakers to make a decision before diplomats can meet .
 Diplomats of today and tomorrow have to be familiar with complex social, technological, and environmental trends . Fifth, in an increasingly globalized and interdependent world, members of the diplomatic corps must be more familiar with social and technological trends .
 U.S. diplomats have to engage not just foreign governments, but also foreign civil societies . As Secretary of State Hillary Clinton remarked during the upheaval in the Middle East and North Africa in early 2011 that witnessed the overthrow of a number of authoritarian regimes, Hillary Clinton .
 The U.S. foreign policy establishment has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years . President Obama's administration has been accused of overreaching foreign policy .
 Diplomats have to be informed on a wide variety of issues of international concern, including the impact of ozone depletion and the cutting down of the Amazon rain forests, the social impact of exploding birth rates .
 It is highly debatable whether the diplomatic corps of most countries are adequately recruiting, training, and retaining persons with expertise in such areas .
 Without such personnel, it is unlikely that a state will be able to resolve the sorts of challenges and conflicts that are discussed later in this book . Yet without such personnel they must also be skilled in negotiating .
 “field diplomacy” on the part of nongovernmental relief and aid organizations may become increasingly the norm . ‘Field diplomacy’ may become the norm, especially in the case of humanitarian disasters .
 Nonstate actors may play a key or supporting role in conflict mitigation or even conflict resolution . Often attuned to local politics and knowledge of key players, these nonstate actors can play a role in local politics .
 As we continue to experience the impact of globalization, diplomacy as a means by which foreign policy is implemented continues to play an enormously important role . Diplomacy continues to be an important part of foreign policy in the United States .
 Explain the relation between foreign policy and diplomacy by identifying the roles played by both state and non-state actors in the foreign policy decision-making process . Use this article to help students understand the relationship between diplomacy and diplomacy .
 Diplomacy in the broadest sense captures the full range of interstate communication that is core to the making and implementation of foreign poiicy . Diplomacy is a form of communication that's core to making and implementing of foreign policy .
 Diplomacy can be conducted not only by diplomats, but also heads of state and special envoys who may be private citizens . Diplomacy is conducted by diplomats and heads of states, not only diplomats .
 Nongovernmental organizations have played an Increasingly important role, especially in United Nationssponsored conferences . N.Nongovernment organizations play an important role in the U.N. conferences .
 Diplomatic strategies run the spectrum from positive inducements to threats as well as the search ideally for common ground or overlapping interests, sometimes settling on compromise . Diplomacy includes formal and informal negotiations, but diplomatic strategies run from positive to negative . In support of foreign policy goals, diplomacy includes formal
 A major summary of his thoughts on diplomacy by a former U.S. secretary of state . The former Secretary of State George W. Bush says diplomacy is a key to diplomacy .
 A conceptual framework to understand the factors that account for foreign policy decisions . The framework is a conceptual framework for understanding foreign policy .
 As suggested by the title, this is a historical overview of the development of diplomatic practices . The history of diplomatic relations is shown below .
 A short introduction on how what policymakers think affects the making and implementation of U.S. foreign policy . A short explanation on how policymakers think about foreign policy.
 Identify the high points of the Congress of Vienna and explain how it helped shape the practices of present-day communications among governments of states . E Identify how it shaped the practice of government communications among states .
 Diplomacy and foreign policy (externally directed decisions and actions) have a long history over the millennia, well before states were constructed and became principal actors in international relations . Diplomacy, foreign policy and international relations have a very long history of diplomacy .
 The ancient Greeks engaged in what we would call diplomatic practices, and the Romans expanded upon these traditions . Ancient Greeks and Romans engaged in diplomatic practices .
 Roman contributions to international law expanded diplomatic norms and protocols . Roman law was a major source of international law in the Roman empire .
 Modern diplomacy dates from the 13th and 14th centuries in Italy . The Congress of Vienna was a high point that exhibited the importance of diplomatic skills . Modern diplomacy began in Italy in the 14th century .
 The Concert of Europe was a multipolar state system . The Congress accelerated the organization of diplomatic practices and norms . It is a prime example of successful multilateral diplomacy .
 Although a Cold War emerged after post-World War II settlements, there was no return to general war waged on a global scale . The U.S. was not involved in the Cold War in the 1950s and 1960s .
 A classic work by one of America's foremost Cold War diplomats and historians . The book is published by Robert Defterios, a Cold War diplomat .
 A magisterial overview of modern history, . reminding us that . no one power maintains supremacy forever . No one power will maintain supremacy forever.
 An analysis of the personalities and factors that made the Congress of Vienna a diplomatic success . The Congress was held in Vienna, Austria, in March 18th 1911 .
 A memoir by a former secretary of state who witnessed and participated in momentous events at the end of World War II and the beginning of the Cold War . The memoir is published by former Secretary of State Richard Nixon .
 For a state to engage in diplomacy, it must be recognized as a sovereign entity by other states . For a nation's sovereignty, it can be recognized by other nations as sovereign .
 Widespread recognition of a state's sovereignty does not, however, preclude a state being invaded, destroyed, or even denied sovereign status by some other states . Some other states may even deny sovereignty status by denying it .
 Diplomatic reciprocity and immunities are justified as necessary for diplomats to represent their countries in foreign lands . Diplomatic immunities and reciprocity are justified in diplomatic relations .
 An embassy is headed by an ambassador and usually consists of representatives from varying government agencies concerned with foreign policy matters . An ambassador is usually a representative from the United States and the United Kingdom .
 Effective diplomacy requires a judicious mix of carrots and sticks combined with a search for settlements that satisfy the interests of the negotiating parties . Diplomacy requires a balance of carrots, sticks and carrots to achieve a settlement that satisfies both sides .
 Case studies on how presidents have handled crises and decisions to take their country into war . Case studies of how presidents dealt with crises .
 A useful collection of essays that take small countries and their foreign policies as the center of analysis . The essays focus on small countries' foreign policies .
 A useful collection of often hard-to-find documents of U.S. foreign policy that identifies the conceptual and historical underpinnings of American foreign policy . The documents are often hard to find, but often useful to Americans .
 A major focus of foreign policy for many states has been the disarmament or elimination of certain types of weapons . The disarmament of weapons is a major focus for many countries .
 Agreements seek to curb arms-race competition, achieve economic savings, lessen the risk of war, reduce damage should war occur, and enhance regional and global security . Agreements are aimed at curbing arms race competition and achieving economic savings .
 Specific agreements have placed quantitative and qualitative limitations on armaments and armed forces, geographical and spatial deployment, and improved communication and confidence-building measures .
 Verification is an important element of many agreements, but it is often difficult to achieve . Verification of agreements is often hard to achieve, especially in the U.S.
 Ongoing concerns include nuclear and radiological, chemical, biological, ballistic missile, and advanced conventional weapons proliferation . Ongoing concern is nuclear and biological, chemical and biological weapons proliferation.
 Essays on how arms control can facilitate and reflect cooperative security relations among states . Arms control can be a model for cooperative security cooperation among states, authors say .
 A useful compendium of documents relating to the historical evolution of arms control . Includes a useful guide to the history of the arms control era .
 Economic sanctions are considered EXCEPT highly coercive . for the most part it is noncoercive. moderately coercive . it may include use of threats and other noncoerive. forms of coercion .
 Diplomacy may be accomplished by heads of state. accredited diplomats. private citizens sent as emissaries. all of the above . Diplomacy is accomplished by . accredited diplomats .
 The establishment of the first recorded diplomatic mission was by the Greeks . The establishment was established by the Ancient Greeks in 1883 .
 The Byzantines used diplomats to foster rivalry among barbarians . secure friendship of frontier tribes. convert the “heathens.” all of the above. secure friendship with frontier tribes .
 A truly organized system of diplomatic practices and norms emerged from the Roman legal system . Roman law was the basis for a truly organized diplomatic practice .
 A classic example of successful multilateral diplomacy that endured decades was the Athens-Sparta agreement of 404c.e. the Congress of Vienna . The Versailles Treaty was all of the above, i.E. the Athens and Sparta .
 The highest ranking position in a diplomatic mission is that of ambassador. consul general . Consul general. chief of mission is the highest ranking post in diplomatic missions .
 The idea that an embassy and the ground it stands on are a part of the sovereign territory of the foreign country is that of asylum . The idea of asylum in a foreign country being extended to extend its diplomatic immunity is the idea of extraterritoriality .
 When the relations between two countries are considered normal, they are each represented at the level of ambassador. consul general. charge d’affaires first secretary. first secretary first secretary . When the two countries have normal relations, each is represented as ambassador .
 Diplomatic incentives, or carrots, may take the form of all of the following EXCEPT foreign aid . increased compensation for diplomats. debt forgiveness. increased compensation . increased trade preferences. increased recognition for diplomats .
 If two states have a perceived conflict of interest about an important security matter and neither backs down, events may produce an immediate stalemate . Diplomatic incident may result in a diplomatic crisis .
 International security regimes include all of the following EXCEPT arms reductions agreements . quantitative and qualitative limits on armaments . geographic prohibitions on where arms may be deployed or used . efforts to reduce poverty, thus improving human security, are included .
 Qualitative restrictions as part of arms control regimes include all of the following EXCEPT the numbers of weapons systems in a country’s military arsenal . Restrictions on research and development, testing and evaluation of weapons are limited .
 Implementation and enforcement Agreement and procedures Capabilities and political will . Size and scope of implementation and scope 16.
 Two approaches can be taken to combat nuclear proliferation and weapons proliferation in general . The U.S. should take steps to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons .
 The problem of determining whether states live up to what they have promised is the problem of certification. verification verification. verification. transparency. The problem is the fact that states have not lived up to their promises, the government has said .
 Problems associated with arms transfers include inability to control end use . Money spent on arms cannot be spent on national development . They contribute to regional arms races . They reduce profits to defense-industry arms exporters .
 A major concern continues to be proliferation to nonnuclear states and disaffected groups of nuclear weapons or weapons technologies from the Republic of South Africa . The Russian Eederation and former Soviet republics. the Russian E Federation and the former Soviet Republics.
 The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty has NOT been signed by the United States . The nuclear non-proliferation treaty was signed by U.S. nuclear powers .
 Describe how the development of international law in global civil society was and is impacted by matters of war and peace, economics, human rights, the environment, and criminal accountability . Describe your role in shaping international law as an example of how it affects international law .
 International law and organizations influence decisions by state authorities to use force . Q Evaluate how international law and international organizations influence state authorities' decisions by using force .
 State authorities seek allies or coalition partners to enhance the security of their states and societies . Evaluate the reasons why state authorities are seeking allies or allies to enhance security .
 The World Health Organization brought the case before the International Court of Justice in 1993 . The case was first brought by the World Health Organisation in 1993, the World's first nuclear weapons case .
 The ICJ did not take the case, ruling that the WHO did not have the standing to bring such a case of import primarily to states . The WHO was a nonstate actor, the ICJ said .
 As with most courts, justices on the ICJ tend to avoid getting in the middle of political controversies . The ICJ is not likely to get involved in political controversies unless requested .
 The mandate came a year later in 1994, when member states of the UN General Assembly requested a judgment on the question . That mandate was requested by the UN .
 In many respects this indecisiveness reflected very real political and legal quarrels among the parties themselves . States seeing these weapons of mass destruction as contrary to their security interests on the one hand, on the other .
 ICJ agreed in 1996 that any use of nuclear weapons must be compatible with provisions of the UN Charter on the use of force . The ICJ did agree unanimously in 1996 in its July 1996 ruling .
 International organizations perform substantial political, military, economic, commercial, and other social roles in global civil society . So are international organizations that perform significant social roles, such as those of U.S. and Europe .
 Though lOs were created by and for states, liberals in particular note the degree to which they have become significant actors in their own right .
 We fully recognize that such a process is far from complete, has developed at a painfully slow pace, and is fragile and subject to setbacks . The process is "far from complete" and "subject to setbacks," we say .
 Changes must be highlighted to provide a complete and balanced picture of international relations and world politics . Yet such changes must also be highlighted, according to the author of the book .
 Use of the term civil society in ‘domestic’ societies within states implies that behavior of people within these societies is subject to the rule of law . Civil society is used in domestic societies in states within states and within those states .
 We examine the emergence in the last five hundred years of developments that contributed to the rise of states . We examine these developments that have provided early glimpses of a stillemerging global civil society .
 The rise of states is in part a function of the multicentury, gradual globalization of international relations and world politics . Civil society is an aspiration as a reality, as much as a result of the rise in states .
 Global society becomes a truly civil society to the extent that values or norms gain legitimacy and become widely accepted, some even acquiring the force of international law . In essence, global society becomes an increasingly civil society .
 This doesn't mean that the rules --legally binding or not --always will be followed . This doesn’t mean, of course, that . The rules will always be followed, however, .
 Means available for international law enforcement of international law are weak compared to the power and authority that governments usually have for such purposes on the territories within their states over which they have jurisdiction . Means available are weak .
 Breaking laws and agreed rules or norms that have legitimacy, accepted as binding, may result in costs for those who break them . Nevertheless, breaking laws and norms that are accepted by the world may result with costs for breaking them .
 When a state invades another without just cause or legal basis or its authorities orchestrate genocide, such acts are likely to draw condemnation by other states and wider publics . Such acts may also draw economic sanctions and, perhaps, the use of force by other countries acting to counter the aggression
 These regimes and institutions evolved or are the outcome of human design efforts intended to provide an authoritative basis for regulating or at least influencing the behavior of both state and nonstate actors . The author argues that these regimes are intended to regulate or influence behavior .
 The development of global society is a constructivist enterprise. So understood, the development of . global society . society is constructivist . It is the world's most complex and complex constructivist society .
 Social constructivists portray self-help, power politics, and similar concepts as having been socially constructed under the anarchy of international relations and world politics . The key point is that international relations do not have an independent existence; they are what people make of them .
 Ideas, culture, and norms matter, and can influence behavior, including the creation of multilateral institutions . Ideas and culture matter, says U.S. President Barack Obama . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton: "It's important to think about the future of the world
 The ideational focus in constructivist accounts gives less attention to, if it does not ignore, power . The material realities that drive international politics are the material realities, the author argues .
 By the 15th and 16th centuries, increased commerce associated with advancing transportation technologies at sea raised questions concerning rights of navigation through the coastal waters of different states as well as trade .
 Holland had already emerged as a major sea-based commercial center by the 16th and 17th centuries . Holland was a rather small state, but it was already a major commercial center .
 Holland has a history of international law or law among nations . With its "head" turned toward the sea and its "back" toward the rest of Europe, it is not surprising that the idea of law among countries is prominent in Holland .
 Hugo Grotius was both a scholar and a very practical man living in the Dutch commercial town of Delft . He turned his attention to these concerns of governments, trading companies, and businesses of newly formed states in his day .
 Grotius was influenced by the legacy of the Roman imperial jus gentium, a law to govern relations among diverse peoples in the ancient Roman empire, as well as natural law thinking . One can see the influence of the law on relations between people in the Roman empire .
 Natural Law is a philosophical view that claims there are laws inherent in nature that transcend any laws made by mere mortals . Natural law is a belief that there are natural laws that transcend the laws of mere mortals. Natural law claims to be based on nature .
 Such thinking is closely tied to the writings of Augustine, Aquinas, and other Christian writers of the late Roman Empire and Middle Ages . Augustine and Aquinas were among those thinkers .
 Grotius also knew how to make general principles and customary practice central to his constructions of legal rules of the road for states in a newly emerging, state-based European society . He was also known for his work on the European legal system .
 The colonial and imperial extension of European states in the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries would move closer toward a global society of peoples within states . This would eventually move closer to a global world of peoples in states .
 The territorial sea was defined by a three-mile limit extending from the shoreline of the coastal state . Eor example, following Grotius, the territorial sea came to be defined as a 3-mile zone .
 The range of a cannonball was limited to three miles, the practical distance that any country could expect to defend from the shore without actually going to sea . The reason three miles was chosen was that artillery technology of the time limited the range of the .
 Principles of just war, limits on conduct of and in warfare developed by Cicero, Augustine, Aquinas, Gentili, Suarez, and other philosophers . Now matters of international law, not just moral preachings .
 Ideas concerning mutual respect for the welfare of foreign diplomats and their embassies and consulates became legal obligations based on the customary practice of states .
 As certain values and norms of proper conduct have gained legitimacy and acceptance on a global scale, many of these have also acquired legal status .
 World War II has motivated efforts to construct and expand international law on human rights . Eor example, understanding, acceptance, acceptance to such ethical principles as respect for life, human dignity, and justice as global norms .
 Treaties or conventions are the most concrete forms of international law . Treaties, conventions are most concrete form of law, and are often followed by international treaties .
 Governments sign and ratify treaties or international conventions to be bound by mutual agreement to the terms of these documents . Governments, as agents of the sovereign states they represent, contract when they sign .
 The ancient idea from Roman times that treaties are binding, pacta sunt servanda in Latin, finds practical application in global civil society in the construction of international law on human rights, defining civil and criminal jurisdictions of legal accountability .
 As a result, security has come to be viewed by a number of scholars and international activists not only in terms of national security and the use of force, but also human security, they say . Security is viewed as a matter of security, not only national security, but as human security
 customary international law often becomes codified later in treaties or conventions . Over time such customary international laws often become codified .
 General principles inform our understandings of international law, particularly for those who turn to a natural law tradition . Natural law tradition sees universal principles of law as discoverable by applying human reason .
 We rely on the writings of jurists—justices and judges—whose legal opinions in cases before international as well as domestic courts . This brings all of these sources into sharper focus, including those of the jurists .
 Legal precedents are important in establishing wider legitimacy and acceptance of the rule of law on an increasing number and diversity of issues in international relations and world politics . Legal precedent is important for international relations, world politics and international relations .
 Some ideas or norms in global civil society over time may become institutionalized as the legitimate and accepted ways and means of conduct in international relations and world politics . Some ideas may be institutionalized in the future as they become accepted as acceptable ways and ways of conduct .
 multilateralism has become the preferred way of dealing with many issues on the global agenda . Multilateralism is a preferred way to deal with many of the world's most pressing issues, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Rather than resorting to unilateral actions by individual states, these issues are thought to be addressed more properly in the international organizations .
 These settings are increasingly open not only to states but also to nongovernmental organizations, groups, and even individuals . These settings will be increasingly open to groups and individuals .
 The idea of global civil society is thus an ever-more cosmopolitan vision of the ways and means of conducting international relations and world politics, writes David Frum . The idea is an ever more cosmopolitan idea of conducting world politics and international relations .
 Ideas become institutionalized, accepted as the appropriate or legitimate ways in which states and nonstate actors expect to behave . These ideas often become embedded in both international and nongovernmental organizations, such as international organizations .
 The newest and less developed fields are human rights, the environment, and international accountability for criminal acts . Human rights and the environment are just as important as human rights .
 The emergence of sovereign states in 15th-, 16thand 17th-century Europe resulted in an outpouring of speculation as to the implications of this development, not unlike the literature addressing globalization today .
 Attention was focused on ways and means of diplomacy or communications among states, security concerns, and conduct of relations among them in both war and peace . Attention focused on the ways and ways of diplomacy .
 Describe how the development of international law in global civil society was impacted by matters of war and peace, economics, human rights, the environment, and criminal accountability .
 sovereign states enjoy legal equality as members of the United Nations and other international organizations . Although they are unequal in power and position in international relations, sovereign states are equal in power . Sovereign states enjoy equality as they are members of U.N.
 Routines and procedures for diplomatic representation became established practice over time and thus served as a customary basis for international law . Routines were established practice in the early 1900s .
 States came to accept as a matter of international law the immunity from arrest or prosecution of foreign diplomats . The extraterritorial idea or legal fiction that the small parcel of land on which an embassy, consulate, or other diplomatic mission was located was to be secured and respected as subject to the
 Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular Relations were established in 1961 and 1963 . Rules governing diplomacy were specified formally as treaty obligations in 1961 . Diplomatic rules governing diplomacy finally became formalized in 1963 and 1961 .
 Diplomats and war and peace matters are primarily the domain of states and international organizations made up of states . Nongovernmental organizations, other groups, and individuals can influence decision making and implementation of foreign and national security policies .
 Grotius also wrote about war and peace, drawing from the moral tradition of Western thought . Grotusius also drew on moral tradition in Western thought, drawing on moral traditions .
 Use of force in war must be justified, and states engaged in warfare are obligated to observe limits and practice right conduct (jus in hello) Thus acquired legal in addition to moral standing through the work of Grotius and other writers .
 Efforts began in the late 19th century to codify and expand upon these principles, which resulted in The Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 . Conventions specified certain legal obligations as well as illegal conduct in warfare in warfare .
 Signatories of the League of Nations tried to find alternatives to war and the use of force in international relations . World War I had devastated Europe between 1914 and 1918, signatories of League Covenant found alternatives .
 Pooling state resources to take appropriate action against any lawbreaking aggressor state was one suggestion . Pooling resources was also suggested .
 The Pact of Paris or General Treaty for the Renunciation of War declared that resorting to war was an illegal activity in 1928 . The treaty was the first to declare resorting war to war illegal .
 This legal approach to security and matters of war and peace failed to prevent acts of aggression in the 1920s and 1930s, as well as the onset of a second world war in 1939 . However, this well intended, this legal approach failed to .
 After World War II, UN Charter retained collective law enforcement but supplemented it by recognizing the inherent right of sovereign states to use force to provide for their individual or (joining with other states in alliances or coalitions) their collective self-defense . UN Charter recognizes sovereign states' inherent right to
 Security issues have also been a major growth area in global civil society since World War II . Arms control agreements and treaties emerged from exhaustive diplomatic efforts over the last half of the 20th century .
 A culture in global society dealing with economic or commercial matters also has deep roots . Economic and commercial matters have deep roots in a global society's culture .
 Grotius and other contributors made commerce a core focus in developing rules to govern trade . Grotusius and others focused on commerce in developing trade rules .
 Early rules that acquired legal standing under international law were that ships carrying cargoes were free to transit the high seas without interference . The rules were first established in the 1930s .
 piracy threatening international commerce was understood as a crime against the law of nations, punishable by any state . Piracy was understood to be understood as an act of piracy against international commerce .
 Rules that emerged in customary practice governing the responsibilities of exporters to deliver and importers to pay for the goods they buy reduced to a routine how commercial traders would conduct their business . Rules emerged from customary practice .
 Most-favored nation status was developed as a diplomatic measure, granting other countries a right to sell their products at the same low level of tariff or tax as was imposed on imports from their mostfavored trading partners .
 International law came to require nondiscriminatory treatment of foreign investments . Similarly, international law came into force in the 1980s, when international law was passed .
 Such properties may be expropriated or taken by a host country’s government only for some legitimate public purpose . Such properties are expropriations or taken only for legitimate public purposes .
 Ecuador plans to put in a new highway across Guayaquil, one of the country’s coastal cities, as part of its economic development plan .
 This will require the government to nationalize or take for public use all private properties in the path of the proposed highway . The owners will be compensated for their losses, typically the market values of properties seized .
 International law also requires the government to give fair or just compensation to foreign property owners as well . International law requires that the government give fair compensation .
 Since the end of World War II, international law on economic and commercial issues has continued to grow . International law has grown in the wake of the Second World War .
 States belonging to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade —now the World Trade Organization —located in Geneva have reduced taxes and quotas or limitations on imports as well as other barriers to trade in treaties .
 Other international organizations and UN specialized agencies such as the World Bank and International Monetary Eund, both located in Washington, DC, follow legal procedures and processes .
 Another UN specialized agency, the International Telecommunication Union in Geneva, has regulatory authority on international use of telecommunications frequencies .
 Anti-Bribery Treaty negotiated within the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . Treaty is an example of continued growth in international law concerning economic or commercial matters .
 The treaty obligates its signatories to pass laws prohibiting corporations seeking contracts from paying bribes to government officials . Corporations seeking contracts must not pay bribes from government officials, it says .
 Intellectual property law is yet another expanding area of international law in the economic and commercial sector, particularly given the development of ever-new technologies needing protection .
 International law dealt primarily with security, diplomatic, and economic or commercial matters . Prior to World War II, international law dealt mainly with security and diplomatic matters .
 As indicated in the previous two sections, these domains have continued to expand substantially .
 Rights and the environment are the new growth areas for extending international law within global civil society . Eluman rights and environment, however, are the key areas of international law .
 These topics will be discussed in greater detail in later chapters . Some basic background is appropriate at this point .
 The Elolocaust in Germany and other areas in Europe under the National Socialist regime’s influence or control in the 1930s and 1940s cost some six million Jews their lives . Millions more were forced to flee their homes, leave their property behind, suffer extreme trauma, and sustain
 Additional millions of Slavs, Gypsies, homosexuals, regime opponents, and others deemed undesirable by the regime were also sent to labor or concentration camps where many were exterminated .
 Also stirring the human conscience were reports of atrocities in Asia and the Pacific . The Japanese military conducted atrocities against Chinese and other Asian peoples .
 All the losses were in addition to the tens of millions killed in the war itself . Moreover, all of these losses were added to the loss of millions in Iraq .
 Reflection on these horrific human losses led to calls for action to prevent any such occurrence from ever happening again . Reflection led to a call for action in the wake of the tragedy .
 One immediate response was to hold perpetrators accountable in the Nuremberg and Tokyo war crimes trials held in 1945 and 1946 . The trials were held in Japan and Germany respectively, and were held at Nuremb and Tokyo .
 The trials were criticized by some as merely a case of the victorious holding the vanquished accountable . The trials did set an important precedent by holding individuals internationally accountable for criminal acts .
 A growing consensus in global civil society on the universal norms that should guide human conduct and protect human rights no matter where one resides or travels . What they do represent, however, is a growing consensus on human conduct .
 A growth area in the construction of international law for global civil society is the physical environment within which human beings, plants, and animals live . The physical environment of human beings and plants is a key part of the international law .
 Pollution and other forms of environmental degradation as well as depletion of nonrenewable resources and global warming are global concerns on a planet of more than six billion people . Many of whom suffer from poverty, malnutrition, and little or no access to adequate health care . Pollution, other
 At the same time, populations continue to grow, and demands for better levels of living continue to rise . At the time, the demand for better living conditions continues to grow .
 Pressures on the environment are enormous as we try to sustain the economic development that is so necessary for improving the welfare of human beings and other forms of life on Earth . Pressures are enormous to sustain economic development .
 Efforts to construct international law on such matters have been extremely difficult . Despite the high aspirations of environmental advocates, efforts to build international law have been difficult .
 World's uneven development and distribution of wealth and income creates diverse interests and purposes, says U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
 Poorer countries want to be able to pursue economic development plans with as few environmental obstacles as possible . Poorer nations want to pursue their economic plans with little environmental obstacles .
 For their part, richer countries already consume a disproportionate share of resources . The high levels of production they sustain contribute substantially to resource depletion and environmental degradation .
 Scientific efforts to find remedies or viable approaches to reducing environmental degradation have been clouded by uncertainties as to both cause and effect . Not only are interests divergent, but scientific efforts are clouded in uncertainty as to how to reduce environmental degradation .
 Montreal Protocol put limits on CFC emissions in an effort to phase them out . Agreement was reached in 1987 in a bid to phase out CFC use in refrigerators .
 The parties have continued to address the matter, updating the protocol by amendments agreed at multilateral meetings throughout the world . The parties continue to discuss the matter .
 The original 1987 protocol now enjoys universal ratification of all UN members . Many countries have yet to ratify all of these amendments . The last adherents finally joined in 2009 .
 The consensus on curbing CFC emissions is an important, foundational norm for the legally binding requirements to which state authorities have agreed . Indeed, the consensus is important, and it is a cornerstone of the law .
 There is now scientific consensus that a principal cause of global warming is continued emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases produced in particular by industrial and other burning of fossil fuels .
 Greenhouse gases work in effect as an atmospheric blanket that retains heat from the sun’s rays . These greenhouse gases are thought to work as an atmosphere blanket that keeps heat from sun .
 Even an increase of a degree or two in the Earth’s temperature has substantial climatic effects indicated, for example, by increased turbulence and severity of storms and melting icecaps in Arctic regions .
 Naysayers who challenge the global-warming thesis may be particularly vocal when experiencing an extremely cold winter . But defenders of the claim point out that temperature extremes outside of the norm in any season are precisely what one can expect .
 Kyoto Protocol pledged to reduce production of such gases by the year 2012 by 5.5 percent compared to 1990 emissions levels . Kyoto Protocol pledges to reduce their production by 5 percent . Signatories of the Kyoto Protocol said they would reduce emissions by 5% .
 The United States is among the few countries that chose not to be bound by restrictions on the use of fossil fuels . The U.S. is one of those countries not bound by these restrictions on fossil fuel use .
 2007 reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change solidified the international consensus that global warming is a real and growing threat to the planet . We need to take actions to slow, if not stop, the report says .
 The December 2009 ‘Copenhagen Summit’ was unable to break the logjam on specifying further reductions of CO 2 emissions . December 2009 was the United Nations Climate Change Conference .
 Less-developed countries wanting to increase industrial production have relied on burning more carbon-based fossil fuels like oil, gas, and coal as core to reaching economic-development goals . Less developed countries want to increase their industrial production .
 Transition to non-fossil fuels likely taking decades to accomplish, transition likely to take decades . Advanced industrial and postindustrial countries with highly developed economies also find reductions difficult .
 Copenhagen Summit did produce a statement that specified the desire to keep the average global temperature from increasing by any more than 2 °C . It did not specify how this would be accomplished other than acknowledging the importance of reducing CO 2 emissions .
 Even if this goal were reached somehow, atmospheric scientists warn, substantial climatic and environmental changes will occur . Scientists warn that substantial climate changes would occur if the goal was reached .
 What we need, they say, is time to adapt to changes by markedly slowing the increase in global temperatures . The scientists say we need to be more prepared to cope with the climate change .
 More easily said than done, particularly given the lack of consensus on allowable CO 2 emissions . "There is no consensus on what to do with the emissions of CO 2 in the United States"
 No one country can resolve the global-warming issue single-handedly, it is clearly a challenge that can only be dealt with effectively multilaterally . The global warming challenge is a global problem that can't be resolved single-handed, it says .
 International organizations and conferences they sponsor, followed closely and supported by NGOs, become pivotal in dealing with this 21st-century challenge . International organizations are key to dealing with the challenges of the world's 21st century .
 The International Court of Justice is a principal organ of the UN and successor to the World Court in the League of Nations formed after World War I . When states try to enforce the law against persons within their territorial jurisdictions, they typically use their own courts .
 The United States has done this in trials of alleged terrorists at its base at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba . The U.S. has established special military commissions there as a alternative venue to federal civilian courts .
 Genocide in recent decades occurring in places as far apart as Cambodia, central Africa, Yugoslavia, and elsewhere . The absence of international mechanisms for holding perpetrators to account for war crimes, genocide, and other crimes against humanity .
 An international conference in Rome in 1998 formulated a treaty for signature and ratification of a new statute for an International Criminal Court with global jurisdiction, complementary to national courts, for such crimes .
 ICC is a permanent war crimes court with jurisdiction limited to specific conflicts . Unlike previous war crimes courts, the ICC is permanent institution . ICC is based in Rome and has jurisdiction of the Netherlands .
 Clinton administration favored its creation, but Bush administration opposed it . Bush administration that followed shifted the U.S. course and opposed it.
 Three countries openly stated they would not vote for the establishment of the ICC . U.S., Israel, China, Israel, and China would not support the organization .
 United States negotiators claimed they feared American soldiers and peacekeepers abroad could be brought before the court on politically motivated charges . The U.S. negotiators said they feared they feared the charges would be politically motivated .
 President George W Bush informed the United Nations that the United States would not ratify the agreement, raising questions about the court’s legitimacy .
 For the most part, civil law remains the domain of states exercising jurisdiction within their territorial boundaries . Civil law is the domain for the most of the world's most populous states .
 The United Nations System is composed of the principal organs plus other international organizations or agencies affiliated or linked to one of these organs . The U.N. system consists of principal organs, plus other organizations or groups affiliated with one of them .
 When states become members of the United Nations, they agree to accept the obligations of the UN Charter, an international treaty . The UN Charter is a treaty that covers the whole of the world's membership .
 Some critics charge the United Nations has done a poor job in achieving these aims . Others charge the UN is doing too much and is a threat to the sovereign power of member states .
 If the decision involves important matters involving peace and security, a two-thirds majority is required . If the UN decides to admit new members, the UN budget, or the budget for peacekeeping is also required .
 The United Nations views Assembiy recommendations as an indication of world opinion . The Assembly cannot force any state to take an action, but the U.N. views the recommendations as a statement of opinion .
 When it is not meeting, the UN's work is carried out by its six main committees and the UN Secretariat .
 The Security Council is given the main responsibiiity for maintaining international peace and security and hence may meet at any time . There are fifteen Council members, with five —China, France, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United States .
 In recent years there have been discussions about changing the composition of the Security Councii .
 When there is a threat to international peace, the Council generally explores ways to settle the dispute peacefully, such as undertaking mediation efforts . The Council generally first explores how to settle disputes peacefully .
 If fighting has broken out, the Council may try to secure a cease-fire . If fighting breaks out, it could try to stop the fighting .
 If a truce or cessation of hostilities occurs, the Council may send in an international peacekeeping force to keep the opposing forces apart . The Council may also send in peacekeeping forces if a truce occurs .
 Councii can also take measures to enforce its decisions, such as imposing economic sanctions or ordering an arms embargo .
 The Economic and Social Council coordinates the economic and social work of the U.N. The council is the body of the United Nations .
 It is the central forum for discussing international economic and social issues and formuiating policy recommendations . The U.N. forum is a forum for discussion of international issues .
 The Council receives input from numerous nongovernmentai organizations that engage in lobbying and informational efforts .
 The Trusteeship Council was originally established to provide international supervision of eleven trust territories administered by seven member states . I Continued: The Trusteship Council is originally established .
 The Council's goal was to help these territories prepare for self-government or independence . The Council was formed in response to the threat of terrorism in the Middle East .
 The International Court of Justice is located in The Hague, Netherlands, and is the main judicial organ of the United Nations . The court is based in the Netherlands and is located across the globe .
 The Court decides disputes among member states, but participation in the proceedings is voluntary . It consists of fifteen judges elected by the General Assembly and the Security Council .
 If a state agrees to participate, it is obligated to comply with the Court's decision . If, however, it will comply, the decision will be made by the state .
 Hope was placed in world peace through law through law in a system of collective security under the League of Nations . Hope was put in world .
 As such, collective security is different from collective defense —alliances or coalitions that rely ultimately on armed defense or military power rather than law . Collective security differs from military or alliance alliances that rely on armed power, not law .
 The League of Nations tried to substitute law-abiding behavior for individual and collective-defense relations based on power, balance of power, and military might . The League's first attempt was to replace law abiding behavior with military might, but it was never successful .
 Law-abiding states under collective-security arrangements enforce international law against law-breaking states . Law abiding states enforce international security arrangements against countries breaking international law .
 The League of Nations seemed powerless to counter aggressive actions such as French intervention in Germany and the Italian capture of the Mediterranean island of Corfu . World War II in 1939 was the start of the first World War I in 1939 .
 UN Security Council authorized to maintain or restore international peace and security . 3. Multilaterally when authorized by the Security Council “to maintain . international peace or restore . security’s .
 Intervention, especially armed intervention, in the domestic affairs of another state is normally prohibited under international law . In a world of sovereign states, intervention, especially . armed . intervention, including armed intervention in the . domestic affairs . of another . state is a violation of international law.
 States that have suffered violation of their legal rights may choose arbitration, mediation, or a judicial remedy as offered by the International Court of Justice or an appropriate regional or national court . States can choose arbitration or mediation .
 The critical weakness, however, is that these tribunals do not have enforcement powers, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The critical weakness is that they don't have enforce powers"
 As a practical matter, therefore, force remains very much a part of international relations . Force is still very much an important part of the world's most powerful force, says the Russian Foreign Ministry .
 In an anarchic world that lacks a central government or other governing authority with the power to enforce international law, sovereign states do not always comply with such legal authorizations and restrictions . sovereign states often do not comply with international law .
 States sometimes choose to violate or ignore their obligations under international law . States often choose to ignore or ignore international law, says U.S. State Department .
 Collective security arrangements provide a legal alternative to the exercise of raw power one finds in interstate warfare . At other times, political leaders and diplomats have proven to be quite capable of interpreting or manipulating legal principles to justify what they already have done or plan to do in any event . Collective Security as
 The essential idea of collective security is “all against one” as in a common law-enforcement or police action against an aggressor state . The idea is to be “collective security’s” in the United States .
 In a way, the idea of collective security is like the posse of law-abiding citizens, popularized in the American West, who pooled their talents and other resources under the command of state authorities to pursue lawbreakers .
 Unlike an alliance that is directed against an external threat, collective security is regionally or globally oriented . Collective security is not directed against external threats, it is aimed at global threats .
 The purpose is to dissuade any state from breaking international law and committing aggression, it says . The purpose of the mission is to discourage any state breaking law and commit aggression .
 Under collective security arrangements, states are pledged to confront any aggressor not with equal power, but with a preponderant or overwhelming collective use of force for international law-enforcement purposes . Under the arrangement, states retain ultimate control over their foreign policies .
 The threat of using preponderant force as a means of law enforcement is viewed as a much more effective means to stop aggression and enforce international law than relying on a balance of power among competing states .
 The success of collective security arrangements is in mitigating the rivalry and hostility of an anarchic world . Over time, security arrangements have been successful in mitigating hostility of sovereign, independent, and often competitive states .
 The emphasis in collective security, then, is on international law enforcement against aggressive or other illegal acts committed by states . The emphasis is on protecting nations from aggressive or otherwise illegal acts .
 It is understood as an alternative to alliance-against-alliance or balance-of-power mechanisms . As such, it is understood to be a form of alternative to alliances against each other .
 Josip Broz Tito was a World War 11 anti-German guerrilla commander, leader of the postwar nonaligned movement, and perhaps most importantly, the chief architect of multiethnic Yugoslavia . Instead of one power coalition against another, collective security was the key to Yugoslavia's multieth
 After his death in 1980, the country began to disintegrate politically, and in 1991 it descended into a series of civil wars . In 1991, the nation descended into civil wars, and the civil war broke out .
 Serbian paramilitaries are shown taking down a Muslim flag . This particular group, the Arkan Tigers, was responsible for a large part of the ‘ethnic cleansing” and destruction .
 The year 1992 marked the beginning of direct international organization involvement in the civil wars . The year was marked by the start of the civil war in Afghanistan .
 NATO carried out bombing missions against Serbian targets . But as mass killings continued, UN forces came under attack .
 International organizations played an important role once the wars ended in late 1995 . UN peacekeepers, diplomatic efforts, and the use of NATO military power were used in the end of the conflict .
 Former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic appeared at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia . He was accused of Yugoslavia's atrocities in the 1990s and beyond .
 The five-year-long trial ended without a verdict, but Milosevic died in prison in 2006 . The former Yugoslavia leader was convicted of war crimes in Serbia .
 The actual scope of collective security cooperation varies along a continuum . It is unclear how much of this cooperation will take place in the United States .
 At one end are arrangements involving all states and covering all regions of the globe— universal arrangements . At the other end are agreements involving all countries and covering regions of globe .
 Members agree to respond collectively to aggression wherever it occurs . Members of the U.S. military will respond to aggression in the future .
 At the other end of the continuum is a concert of the great powers of the day . The concert will be held in New York City, New York .
 Their interest in peace may be global in scope or limited to particular regions . They may be interested in peace in particular regions or in particular countries .
 Unlike many alliances, there is no binding, ironclad commitment to collective action . Unlike other alliances, the alliance is not a binding binding commitment, it is not an alliance .
 Decisions often made through negotiations and the emergence of a consensus . Decisions are often made by negotiations, and the result is often made in advance of consensus .
 A concert requires that its members share essentially compatible views on the desired nature of the international order . Power politics and competition among member states still occur among the concert members .
 In order to make the distinctions between the universal and concert approaches to collective security clearer, we will discuss several historical examples . We will discuss some historical examples of collective security approaches .
 In keeping with the Concert approach, minor states were not members of the select circle . The geographic interest of the members was limited to Europe . Minor states were also not members .
 Disputes outside Europe stemmed from the often competing colonial ambitions of the major powers . Disputes in Europe were often centered on colonial ambitions .
 The critical, underlying consensus was that all members would abide by the territorial settlement of 1815 . All members of the British Parliament agreed to abide by that settlement .
 If collective action were to be taken, it would be done through informal diplomatic negotiations, not by some formal mechanism such as those stipulated by the League of Nations Covenant .
 Some observers believe this informality accounts for the nearly four decades of peace among the major European powers in the first half of the 19th century .
 Collective management of relations could be achieved by invoking universally accepted legal principles and norms, some thought . The European Concert system could be used to manage relations under European law .
 Concert diplomacy can be understood as an early expression of collective security . Concert diplomacy is an expression of the collective security of the world, the author says .
 That there are lawbreaking states that commit aggression or otherwise infringe on the sovereign prerogatives of other states was well understood . That is well understood, but it was not well understood by the British government . The British government has been accused of breaking international law .
 Law-abiding states, faced by aggression against any one of them, could band together to stop the violation of the law . The law-abiding nations could band band together in order to stop aggression .
 Any state could find security in the collective assurance that other states would come to its rescue . Any state would find security if other states were able to come to their rescue .
 In sum, the Concert of Europe is an example of an international regime, one with rules of organization and norms of behavior . In addition to rules and norms, it is also a model of international organization, author says .
 The League was an attempt to institutionalize multilateral efforts toward maintenance of peace and prevention of the awful carnage that had just been experienced . The League of Peace and Prevention was created in response to the terrible carnage in Iraq .
 Napoleon had lost the war, and France had good reason to fear the results of the peace conference held in Vienna beginning in 1814 . The Congress of Vienna began in Vienna, Austria, Austria and Russia .
 Count Talleyrand faced a seemingly impossible task to rescue his country from the vengeance of its wartime adversaries . The French emissary faced the task of rescuing his country . He faced an impossible task .
 Napoleon's armies had moved deliberately across Europe, forcibly conscripting troops along the way, overthrowing uncooperative princes, and leaving a trail of devastation in their wake . During Napoleon's wars, French armies had forcibly conscriptioned troops .
 The anger and bitterness they left behind them promised little chance for a charitable outcome . Now that the tables are turned, the tables were turned .
 As a bishop of the Catholic Church, Talleyrand had been part of the ancien regime, the old order under the Bourbon dynasty that had been overthrown in the revolution that began in 1789 . As a Catholic Church bishop, he was a member of the old regime .
 Always a political survivor, Talleyrand was extraordinarily flexible, jettisoning his clerical identity and navigating through the revolutionary turmoil virtually unscathed . Always a politician, he navigated through the revolution unscathed and survived .
 Fie emerged in 1815 as part of a restoration movement designed to reestablish the prerevolutionary order in Europe as a whole .
 Talleyrand had to face France's now-formidable adversaries without any military or economic leverage to support his negotiating position . The French president's negotiating position was left with no military, economic leverage .
 The victims of French aggression now had the opportunity to carve up France, dividing it among themselves or separating it into such small pieces that it could no longer be a threat . The victims had the chance to split up France or divide it among them .
 The most important delegations at Vienna were those representing the interests of the four great powers that prevailed following the defeat of France .
 Prince IVIetternich of Austria was known historically for his intelligence, cleverness, and diplomatic acumen . He was a man extremely adept at serving Austria's imperial interests .
 Tsar Alexander of Russia, Viscount Castlereagh of Britain, and Prince von Flardenberg of Prussia. Playing lesser but still very important roles in constructing the settlement at Vienna .
 In the final analysis, Talleyrand was able to save France, but not through any charity felt by its erstwhile enemies . In the end, he saved France, not through charity felt in the way by the French .
 France was restored in 1789 only because it was in the interest of all of the great powers to do so . Instead, France was only slightly larger than it had been when it was restored to France .
 The French Revolution threatened the institution of monarchy in continental countries that had never previously experienced such challenges . The Revolution had transformed politics in France; it had also threatened monarchism in continental nations .
 European monarchies as legitimate institutions in the post-Napoleonic period meant returning the Bourbons to their ""rightful"" positions in France as well . From this perspective, strengthening Europe's monarchies meant returning them to their "rightful" positions in the French state .
 A restored France contributed substantially to maintaining what the British had long favored as a centerpiece of foreign policy . A balance of power on the European continent would keep any one country from becoming too strong .
 The settlement also served Russian interests by maintaining a balance to its west, not just between Prussia and Austria, but also between both of them and France .
 Even though he lacked the military and other tangible resources to strengthen his negotiating position, Talleyrand accomplished his short-term goal . The French president is expected to make a deal with the West .
 Napoleon restored France to legitimate standing in Europe as a great power, much as it had been for centuries preceding the defeat of Napoleon's empire . He restored France's position as a legitimate power in Europe, much of the time .
 A restored France came to be understood as being in the interest of all of the great powers . He was able to accomplish this because, in the course of negotiations, a restored France was understood to be in the interests of all the world .
 More important for Europe as a whole, however, was the lasting influence of the Vienna settlement . Vienna settlement was the first settlement settlement in Europe in 1883 .
 It was the basis for a long peace that (with a few interruptions) would last for some ninety-nine years . The peace treaty was signed in 1903, ending the hostilities in 1918 .
 Maintaining peace and security required international organization, a loose, but effective institutional arrangement based on generally accepted principles . The realist balance of power coupled with a liberal commitment to diplomatic engagement .
 "It was meant to include all countries and to resist aggression everywhere," says President Obama . "It's meant to be universal in scope. It was meant for all countries," says Obama .
 Thirty-two states attended the initial meeting that established the League . Thirty-32 states attended that meeting .
 All states were represented in the General Assembly, but the League Council was an inner circle consisting of great-power permanent members and several smaller powers that served on a rotating basis . The League Council is a permanent circle of permanent members .
 All states were required to impose collective economic and diplomatic sanctions against the aggressor . The sanctions were imposed by the West in response to the incident .
 The use of military action, however, was to be decided upon by the Council, which would recommend what each member should contribute to the military force .
 As a practical matter, there were technical difficulties in defining aggression with sufficient legal precision or clarity to be sufficient grounds for collective action in particular cases .
 All Council recommendations had to be agreed on unanimously, so both temporary as well as permanent members in effect had veto power . Council members had to agree on unanimously .
 States unwilling or unable for one reason or another to take collective action could hide behind these legal ambiguities . States were able to hide behind this legal ambiguity . States unwilling to take action could (and did) hide behind such ambiguaries .
 League members' commitment to collective security fell short. Genuine commitment by League members was not enough . League members failed to commit sufficient security, League says .
 The League’s inability to deal with the aggression of the Axis powers in the 1930s led ultimately to the demise of the League of Nations . World War II in 1939 led to the outbreak of World War I in Europe .
 The United States did not even join the League and was not a participant in the collective security system . The U.S. was not even a member of the League . The League did not join the league .
 Woodrow Wilson had asserted extraordinary influence in the post-World War I settlements that led to enshrining collective security within the new League of Nations . The United States Senate failed to ratify the League Covenant . The League Covenant enshrined collective security in the new treaty .
 As events would demonstrate, the League and its collective security system failed to keep the peace . "As events would finally demonstrate, [the League] failed to stop the peace," says Peter Bergen . Bergen: The League failed to protect the peace.
 World war began again in 1939, some twenty years after the first world war had ended . World war in 1939 was the first to begin again . World War II began in 1939 .
 During World War II, diplomats charged with constructing the postwar international system drew lessons from earlier failures . The United Nations was created after the war in 1945 .
 The UN Charter was drawn up by representatives of fifty countries at the United Nations Conference on International Organizations, which met in San Francisco in 1945 . The Charter was signed by representatives from fifty countries .
 Delegates deliberated on proposals worked out by representatives of China, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States .
 The United Nations officially came into existence on October 24, 1945 . Charter was ratified by the United States, China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and by a majority of other signatories .
 UN membership was to be universal in scope, all states participating in the General Assembly . As with the League, UN membership would be universal, universal .
 UN Charter granted the Security Council the power to initiate collective military action . Article 42 of the UN Charter grants the UN power to take action . The UN Charter was established by the UN in 1982 .
 As a practical matter, military force or other sanctions could never be directed under UN Security Council auspices against any of these five major powers . Any resolution to that effect certainly would be vetoed by the major power affected .
 The United Nations did not abandon collective security as a concept, it was supplemented by preventive diplomacy and collective defense . The U.N. says collective security was replaced with preventive diplomacy .
 Preventive diplomacy seeks to prevent fighting from occurring in the first place . Preventive diplomatic aims to prevent it from happening in Syria and Iraq .
 The UN Security Council was granted legal and political authority to facilitate dialogue and negotiation between disputants . The UN has been granted legal authority to negotiate between the parties .
 As a form of international law enforcement, collective security seeks to dissuade states from committing aggression, which may involve taking offensive military operations against the designated aggressor . Collective defense rests primarily on power and balance of power considerations .
 Alliances are formed to assure defense through mutual or collective efforts . Alliances form alliances that assure defense of nations .
 If collective security and respect for international law fail to prevent aggression, states can still rely on their own power and that of their allies to provide defense . The U.S. should not rely on its own power to protect itself from aggression, it says .
 The new United Nations retained the League’s collective security or collective law-enforcement commitment but did not place exclusive reliance on it for assuring international security . The central point is that the new United .
 States would retain sovereign rights to individual or collective defense in collaboration with other states in alliances or other power-based coalitions . States also would retain their sovereign right to individual, collective defense .
 UN supporters contend that this significant modification of the League system has contributed substantially to the absence of world war since 1945 . UN supporters say it has contributed to a significant reduction in the risk of war in the world .
 In times of high tension during the Cold War, the Security Council could not reach consensus on many issues . The Security Council was unable to agree on many of the issues during that time .
 In these circumstances, states could still rely on their respective collective defense alliances . The situation is unclear, but states can still rely heavily on each other .
 Soviet delegation walked out of meeting and not present to veto a U.S.-sponsored resolution that committed troops to turning back communist forces that had entered southern Korea in June 1950 . This came about only because the Soviet delegation left out of the meeting .
 Even in the most difficult Cold War times, there was at least sufficient consensus in the Security Council to authorize a number of peacekeeping missions to the Middle East, the Mediterranean and Africa, where core interests of Security Council members were not at stake .
 Nothing in the UN Charter forbids a state to help itself when Security Council measures fail to have the desired effect . The UN Charter does not prohibit a state from helping itself when it fails to achieve the desired result .
 Universal and concert approaches to collective security suffer from at least six problems, including security . Universal, concert and concert security are among those that need to be protected .
 Both the League of Nations and the United Nations were created after exhausting, devastating wars . In other words, both of them were created in response to exhausting wars . The U.N. was created in the aftermath of an exhausting war .
 These times of postwar positive expectations did not last very long, and the usefulness of such organizations should be judged on how they perform in difficult times .
 When fascism reared its ugly head in the 1930s in Europe and Asia, the League ultimately failed . The League failed to find a solution to the problem of fascism in Asia and Europe .
 When the Cold War began in the late 1940s, many realists argued that the United Nations had become more of an arena for Soviet-American competition than an ameliorating factor .
 Second is a gap between states’ expressed commitments to collective security and their actions . Third is the gap between state’s expressed commitments and its actions. Second is the gulf between state security commitments and actions .
 For a number of reasons, states are sometimes reluctant to fulfill their international commitments even when the act of aggression seems blatant . For example, the U.S. is reluctant to act on its international commitments, even when it appears to be blatant .
 International reaction to Iraq’s invasion of neighboring Kuwait in 1991 led to international outrage . The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait was the first of its kind in Kuwait, a Kuwaiti invasion .
 This would seem to have been an easy test for the efficacy of collective security . But it was a flagrant aggression by a dictatorial state against a country with significant oil reserves . This is a test for security, and it would be a test of the efficacy .
 There was a great deal of hand-wringing in capitals around the world, and it took U.S. leadership and some arm-twisting to put the coalition together . Yet, there was a lot of hand wagglers in capitals .
 Collective security efforts do not have established elements such as an identified enemy, war plans, and joint training . Unlike an alliance, collective security efforts don't have these established elements, they have no established enemy .
 The first Gulf War against Iraq required six months of training and planning before Operation Desert Storm was launched . The Gulf War needed six months before it was launched, but the Gulf War was launched in 1991 .
 Even Operation Enduring Freedom, the second war against Iraq, took months of planning and preparation . The second war, launched in 2003, was launched in response to the fall of Saddam Hussein .
 The point is that putting together a coalition, deciding on who contributes what, and devising a strategy take time . It may lead to some cases to a belated military response, which may lead some cases .
 Fourth, by relying on collective security’s multilateralist response, there is always the possibility that the virtues of unilateralism will be overlooked . The virtues of collective security will always be overlooked by the U.S.
 While a collective security effort offers the greatest amount of pooled or collective power, it does so at the expense of flexibility . The U.S. has been in the process of securing the world's largest cyber-security systems .
 A unilateral response may provide less power but greater flexibility in terms of planning and implementation . The U.S. has a unilateral response to the situation in the world .
 An international coalition was formed under the leadership of the United States in the 1991 Gulf War . Perhaps the best combination was evident in the Gulf War, in which an international coalition formed .
 The United States put the powerful coalition together and was in the driver-seat in planning the military strategy for the campaign . U.S. was in driver's seat in planning military strategy and actual deployment of coalition forces .
 By 2003, efforts to overthrow Saddam Hussein were stymied by contending assessments of the degree of threat posed by Iraq, the status of its weapons of mass destruction program and the potential for success on the part of UN inspectors .
 The U.S. had supreme military power plus flexibility in planning and implementing the invasion of Iraq . The United States had, from its point of view, the best of all worlds—supreme military power .
 Fifth, as collective-security obligations typically call for some response, it is possible that a minor war could escalate into a major war .
 A small war between two states in Africa might not draw a great deal of international attention . For example, a small war in Africa could not draw great attention to the international community .
 The possibility exists that with greater international involvement a small brushfire war might expand or escalate to become a larger regional or even global conflict . If there were an automatic collective-security mechanism in operation that demanded a response to any breach of the peace, the possibility exists .
 When questions of justice are ignored and blame is not assigned, there is a good chance that the collective security mechanism might break down due to disagreements among states on the legitimacy of the cause . When questions are ignored, blame will not be assigned, writes CNN.com .
 Peacekeeping can be understood as an extension of collective security thinking to cover conflicts that threaten international peace and security, particularly in the regions where these conflicts are being played out . Peacekeeping is a tool to manage and control these conflicts, especially in the region where they are playing out .
 Resolving conflicts involving states and nongovernmental parties are often decades-long projects at best . Territorial issues are linked to competing national, ethnic, or tribal claims . Resolving these conflicts are often years-long .
 Sometimes the most that can be achieved is to contain and keep them from becoming violent . Sometimes, the most can be managed is to manage these conflicts, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Since the end of World War II, even at the height of Cold War tensions, important efforts have been undertaken to keep the peace by stationing multinational UN forces, so-called Blue Helmets, or other national and multinational contingents .
 The goal is to provide a buffer or separation between conflicting parties and perform other functions necessary for the security and welfare of populations and the conflicting parties . The goal of providing a buffer is providing a separation between parties .
 Peacekeepers in Cyprus, Sinai desert, sub-Saharan Africa, Balkan area of southeastern Europe, central Asia and Cambodia . East Timor in Southeast Asia, Cambodia, and the Sinai desert in Southeast Africa .
 They have usually been relatively small, lightly armed contingents, capable of modest defense of their own positions if they come under attack by any party . Accordingly, they have . usually . been relatively . small and lightly armed .
 During the Cold War, peacekeepers were drawn from the national militaries of neutral or nonaligned states . Peacekeepers were often drawn from NATO and Warsaw Pact members .
 Their purpose was to capitalize on the moral authority drawn from their position as peacekeepers accepted in principle by all contending parties . The peacekeepers' moral authority was used to make the peacekeepers work in peacekeeping .
 As such, they were not to intervene in these conflicts, much less take sides . They were not allowed to take sides, even if they were involved in the conflict .
 They were only to monitor the peace and to provide a necessary presence to dissuade the parties from resorting to force against each other . The presence was only to prevent the parties using force .
 Peacekeeping has worked best in these circumstances . Peacekeeping is never without problems, but peacekeeping is best in the world .
 This occurred in Somalia in 1993 when the regime collapsed and domestic disorder broke out . This is the first time since Somalia was overthrown in 1993 .
 An international operation organized by the United States was initially dispatched to ensure the delivery of food supplies . The international operation was initially sent to help with relief efforts .
 Somalia is not a unified state but rather a collection of warring clans . Permission was not requested as Somalia was not a united state . Somalia is now Somalia .
 The relief effort gave way to an attempt to enforce peace, a substantial expansion of the original humanitarian mission . The relief efforts gave way way to a larger effort to help enforce peace .
 Long-term civil unrest in East Timor came to a head in 1999 when residents voted to become independent of Indonesia in a referendum watched by UN observers . The former Portuguese colony was taken by Indonesia in 1975 and taken by Portugal in 1975 .
 Indonesian security forces cracked down on the East Timorese population, murdering residents and committing other human rights violations . Opposed to the outcome, elements of the Indonesian security force killed residents and committed other violations .
 A multinational coalition led by Australia intervened to restore order in Indonesia . UN backed and concurrence of Indonesian government in Jakarta .
 The Somalia and East Timor cases typify the sorts of challenges the international community continues to face . The Somalia case typifies the sort of challenges we face in dealing with the issue of human rights .
 Efforts have been undertaken to expand beyond the more limited peacekeeping or peace-monitoring roles to include peace enforcement and even peacemaking . Efforts are being made to include the role of peace enforcement, rather than peace enforcement .
 The UN Blue Helmets lacked the military capability to perform these tasks, which are less peace-oriented than they sound . They really amount to using force to “make the peace” or enforce it, they say .
 "Performance of these collective security tasks has evolved well beyond the original, more limited understanding of peacekeeping and the forces detailed for that purpose," says U.N. peacekeeping chief .
 The UN Security Council has been reluctant to authorize or provide necessary resources for humanitarian interventions in places as diverse as Rwanda in central Africa and Darfur in Sudan .
 A formal alliance or less formal coalition with like-minded states may decide to participate in multilateral collective security or peacekeeping actions under UN auspices . State authorities seek allies or coalition partners to enhance the security of their states and societies . A formal agreement between two or more states to cooperate
 Alliances are coalitions of states, usually involving formal, long-term commitments . However, not all coalitions are alliances, at least not in the formal usage of the term .
 Bush organized a coalition of some 40 states under UN auspices to drive Iraq’s military forces out of Kuwait . The coalition was meant to deter any further Iraqi aggression against other states in the region, particularly Saudi Arabia .
 NATO is an example of an alliance that has been around for more than 60 years . NATO is one of the world's largest and most successful military powers .
 NATO is also an international or intergovernmental organization with established institutions, bureaucratic processes and routines, and command structures that facilitate the performance of its activities . More than an alliance, NATO also has established institutions and processes that facilitate its activities, NATO says . NATO is a powerful and powerful organization,
 Alliances or coalitions can be offensive in character, as in World War II when Germany allied with Italy and Japan to form the Axis powers . Alliances and coalitions may be offensive, like those in WWII .
 Offensive alliances seek to upset the existing order or balance of power . Defensive alliances typically aim to maintain it, usually opting for the status quo—keeping things more or less the way .
 This pooling of resources has the obvious advantage of spreading the burden of the costs of defense . This pool of resources will spread the cost of defense across the United States .
 Realists say if states confront each other with relatively equal military capability, a balance of power exists, and aggression is less likely to occur . According to realists, if states face each other without equal military power, it will be more likely to avoid aggression . The U.S.
 NATO was created in 1949 to deter Soviet aggression during what had become a “cold” war . It was created to incorporate the new Federal Republic of Germany into a security framework . Germany's aggressive behavior in two 20th-century world wars would not be repeated .
 Allies and friendly states often have differences among themselves, but alliances and coalitions provide arenas for cooperative and collaborative activities . The alliances and other coalitions they form provide arenas or forums for cooperation .
 Greece and Turkey are both members of NATO . NATO often manages major disputes between allies, such as Turkey and Greece . Even major disputes with allies are usually managed within the alliance framework .
 Cooperation even in assisting allies to manage or settle conflicts, therefore, is to be found primarily within an alliance or other coalition . Cooperation in managing or settling conflicts is found primarily in an alliance . Cooperation is found only in alliance or coalition .
 Allies or coalition partners work together to strengthen their individual and collective positions in competition with other states and opposing alliances or coalitions . Allies and coalition partners strengthen their positions with each other and with opposing alliances and coalitions.
 Cooperation within an alliance and competition between an alliance or coalition and its adversaries typically characterize these relations . In other words, cooperation within a coalition and competition against its adversaries is a key factor .
 The close relations that the U.S. has maintained with Israel stop short of being a formal alliance . The close ties that the United States has with Israel include an agreement to cooperate on security matters .
 In large part, the United States has avoided formally allying with Israel . The U.S. fears that doing so would undercut its ability to work with and influence Arab states .
 Israeli need for U.S. support and commitment to the survival of Israel have kept the bilateral coalition intact . Israeli need to be strong in Israel has kept the coalition intact, says Israel's ambassador to Washington .
 Other coalitions formed to exercise security functions under the UN Charter do not qualify as formal alliances . The United Nations does not have formal alliances with Arab nations .
 The multinational coalition formed in 1990 and 1991 to liberate Kuwait from occupation by Iraqi forces is an example . The coalition was formed in the wake of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1991 .
 The purpose was to enforce a legal, collective security mandate under UN Security Council auspices . Although balance-of-power, collective-defense considerations played a central role, the purpose was also to enforce the mandate .
 NATO is a formal or informal grouping of actors that share some common purpose or purposes . NATO now has twenty-eight members . The much less robust coalition led by the United States in 2003 to overthrow the Saddam Hussein regime was also blessed by a UN Security Council resolution .
 NATO expansion eastward by NATO was originally quite controversial to the extent that such extensions were seen as threatening by the Russian Lederation or other successor republics to the Soviet Union, which broke up at the end of 1991 . NATO has expanded eastward since the break-up of the Soviet
 NATO is a regional international organization that performs collective defense functions consistent with Article 51 of the UN Charter . NATO’s geographic scope was originally limited to the European and North Atlantic area .
 The U.S. did not want to be placed in the position of defending against attacks on British, Erench, Dutch, Portuguese, or Belgian colonies in Asia, Africa, or Latin America .
 The North Atlantic Treaty provides for consultation by the allies if any member is threatened . There is no provision for an automatic use of force in the event of such an attack .
 NATO proved a substantial bulwark for maintaining peace in Europe during and after the Cold War . NATO alliance proved to be a significant bulwark in maintaining peace . NATO was routinizing collaboration among its members on security matters .
 Article 5 invoked after the terrorist attack on September 11, 2001 . Article 5 was invoked after 9/11 attacks on the U.S. and invoked after terrorist attack .
 NATO’s principal adversary during the Cold War was the Soviet Union and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was formed in 1955 and composed of Soviet Union, the German Democratic Republic, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria .
 The long Cold War struggle over more than four decades was marked by crises and years of high tension interspersed with periods of detente .
 At the end of the Cold War, the Warsaw Pact was dismantled as the Soviet Union itself dissolved into the Russian Eederation and other new states formed from its component republics . NATO survived .
 In the classic case of those who finance or build a lighthouse on a seacoast, the lighthouse provides a benefit to ships or ships that have not paid for the light they are using to guide themselves at night .
 Access to the light from a lighthouse cannot effectively be limited only to those who have paid for it . Access is universal to any ship or boat passing by . Access to a lighthouse's light is not limited to those paying for it, it's universal to all .
 Security providers pay the costs for security that benefits others who pay nothing or pay less than they otherwise would have to pay (referred to here as reduced-fare riders) for this publicor .
 In principle, all members should pay a share of the costs proportionate to their economic capabilities . This would avoid the free-rider problem and reduce resentment on the part of the state .
 In practical terms, some countries such as the United States pay far more than others for the security that NATO provides . NATO provides security that some countries like the U.S. pay for .
 Leaders in these organizations are instrumental in providing security as a collective good . But they are actually doing so in their own self-interest, not out of charity for others .
 Leader states may try to have others contribute more, but they need not expect all to comply with these demands . Thus, these leader states may . But they must not expect others .
 Such an asymmetric distribution of costs is typical in most forms of multilateral cooperation, whether in an alliance or other international organization, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 This scenario and question arose in the early 1990s with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the disintegration of its Warsaw Pact alliance .
 NATO’s well-developed organizational infrastructure facilitated carrying out military operations in the Balkans . NATO's organizational infrastructure helped carry out operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo .
 NATO established a new precedent in 2003 by taking command of the international peacekeeping force in Afghanistan . In the post-9/11 era, NATO took command in 2003 . NATO has been involved in the Afghanistan conflict since 2001 .
 NATO’s headquarters is in Brussels, and its military arm is located near Mons in the French-speaking part of Belgium, south of Brussels . NATO's headquarters is located in Brussels .
 The military arm is headed by an American four-star general who holds the title of Supreme Allied Commander Europe . He also is the senior commander of United States forces in Europe .
 The position of secretary general at NATO headquarters in Brussels is a civilian post held historically by European members of the alliance . By contrast, the position at NATO HQ is held by European countries .
 NATO may also be called on under UN mandate to perform collective security and other security and peacekeeping tasks . NATO is a collective defense alliance with the United States and other allies .
 The United States maintains bilateral alliances with Japan and the Republic of Korea . The U.S. maintains important bilateral alliances .
 Both Canada and the United States also belong to NATO, with its twentyeight member states . Canada and U.S. both belong to the organization .
 A key political question in alliances is who will pay—and how much, for the collective good . A key question is who pays who will be willing to pay, and how much .
 Members of alliances differ in capabilities, their contributions cannot be equal . Because of their capabilities, the alliance cannot be compared to each other .
 Countries such as the United States, which assume leading roles in alliances such as NATO, often pay proportionately more than countries playing less of a leading role .
 Some member countries pay a premium, more than their fair share . Others pay less, a reduced-fare price for the security provided by an alliance or coalition .
 Politics within alliances have often focused on burden sharing and the free-rider problem . NATO and other coalitions have often adjusted the distribution of costs among members of the alliance .
 The conditions that gave rise to NATO and sustained it for forty Cold War years— the Soviet or communist threat—no longer exist . NATO is now based in Washington, D.C. and the United States .
 The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, and its own military alliance involving Eastern European states, the Warsaw Pact, also dissolved . The Warsaw Pact also dissolved in 1991 .
 Cold War fears had encouraged cooperation in the West . European members of NATO defer to broader U.S. foreign policy objectives . NATO has a history of mistrust between the West and Russia .
 Under the umbrella of U.S. security guarantees that Western European economic recovery and development occurred, it was under the United States .
 It was initially thought that ‘political instability’ might be an appropriate rallying cry . But now, it has been revealed that the situation is far more complicated .
 NATO’s inability to come to grips initially with the war in the former Yugoslavia was disappointing, some observers say . NATO's inability to deal with the conflict was disappointing for some observers .
 NATO launched combined operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo in the last half of the 1990s . Despite differences among NATO allies, the organization eventually launched operations in the Balkans .
 NATO must continue in effect as an insurance policy against any significant change of regime or orientation in Russia that in the future might pose new threats to other states in Europe and the North Atlantic area . Others have been wary about the future of democracy in Russia .
 NATO allies in NATO rallied quickly, invoking Article 5 for the first time in NATO’s history . NATO allies rallied quickly and supported the U.S. war effort in Afghanistan against terrorist bases and Taliban regime .
 Support for the United States took various forms, including Germany’s assumption of some U.S. air patrol responsibilities in North Atlantic air space . The United States Air Force reallocated these aircraft to the war effort .
 NATO members have also played an important role in providing peacekeeping forces in Afghanistan . NATO has also provided peacekeepers in the country .
 The British, Spanish, and Italian governments were among those that supported the U.S. decision to go to war against Iraq . French, Germans, and others were adamant that strengthening the UN weapons inspection teams was the way to go .
 "National positions within alliances and in other coalitions shift, of course, in different times and of different contingencies," he says . National positions in alliances and alliances shift, he says, "different times"
 The UN Security Council concurred in a unanimous 10-0 vote to authorize the use of force by the coalition to relieve pressure on Libyans under siege by Kaddafi’s air and ground units . Five abstentions including Russia, China, Germany, India, and Brazil
 The French already recognized the rebels in eastern Libya as the legitimate government of the entire country . The three coalition partners worked out differences among them as to what should be done by whom, when, and how .
 Working together, the three Cold War ‘western allies’ found common ground and persuaded naysayers on the Security Council not to vote against the resolution authorizing the use of force . Russia and China worked together to secure the resolution, which passed unanimously .
 We noted that the International Court of Justice will only accept cases referred to it by states . We noted at the beginning of this chapter that the IJ will not accept the case referred to the court by state .
 Even when it accepts a case, the verdict could be nonconclusive . The verdict could reflect divisions among states themselves, perhaps reflecting divisions among nations .
 This was evident in the question of whether the threat or use of nuclear weapons is contrary to the rules of international law . This is evident in this case, the question was whether the use of nukes contrary to international law, the author says .
 The expansion of global civil society, based on the rule of law and international organizations, remains a work in progress . This example makes the point that the expansion of civil society in the world is still in its infancy .
 International law and international organizations were created by and for states as noted in the case of commercial interests . Commercial interests explain the 16th-century expansion of international law .
 The concept of just war was developed in part because it was in the interest of states . Similarly, the concept of war was also developed because of states' interests .
 The same logic has been applied in more recent years to the growth in international law as applied to human rights and the environment .
 NATO was originally designed to protect the most basic core security interests of its member states . The best example of state interests driving the establishment of international organizations involves collective security arrangements such as NATO .
 At times, such alliances may also become the basis for peacekeeping missions with justification based upon a combination of security interests and international legal norms . The U.N. Security Council may also be able to make peacekeeping decisions based on security interests .
 State interests will limit the extent to which international law and international organizations can place constraints on state actions . It is to be expected, therefore, that state interests will limited the extent of international law, international organizations .
 The globalization project, facilitated by telecommunications, transportation, and other technologies, has reached the far corners of the Earth . The project is facilitated by the use of telecommunications, transport and other technology .
 International law and less-formal rules or customary practices intended to serve the enlightened self-interests of both state and nonstate actors has accompanied this ever-expanding globalization and global governance .
 On global governance and the roles international and nongovernmental organizations play. Global governance is a key part of the global community .
 Author addresses international criminal accountability of individuals responsible for genocide, war crimes, and other crimes against humanity . The author addresses international . accountability for individuals responsible . for genocide and war crimes .
 Earlier development of legal rules for diplomacy, war, and international commerce have expanded to cover human rights, the environment, and individual accountability before international tribunals .
 The rule of law is central to global governance and the idea of a global civil society . Rule of law has been a key part of global governance for decades, says David Cameron .
 One of a large number of books providing an overview of international law . One of many books providing overview of the law .
 Global governance related to Interstate conflict includes relying on preventive diplomacy, collective security, and collective-defense arrangements . States coming together multilaterally in international organizations if possible to keep war from occurring .
 International and nongovernmental organizations participate alongside states in reconstruction efforts . When wars have ended, international organizations participate in reconstruction and development efforts .
 Both volumes cover the role of the UN in maintaining international peace and security . Both volumes are published by the UN .
 The balance of power with the rule of law and law enforcement against aggression . Evaluate the reasons why state authorities seek allies or coalition partners to enhance the security of their states .
 The power of a state acting alone rarely is sufficient to provide security, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The power of the state alone rarely ... provides security," he says . Sutter says .
 States often look to other states in coalitions or alliances to provide assurances, give their support, and share their capabilities . As a result, states frequently look to each other to give assurances and support .
 International law began gaining prominence in Holland because of increased international commerce . Increased international commerce associated with advancing sea transportation technologies . increased military tension between Holland and Denmark . increased political interaction between Holland, Russia, and England . decreased transaction costs associated with sea transportation. increased transaction costs .
 Norms and Customary Law Judicial Briefs and Treaties Conventions and Norms Treaties and Conventions 3.0.0 . The Constitution of the U.S. Supreme Court has been declared unconstitutional .
 Were not signed by the United States. were never codified . Did not address intrastate war . did not protect soldiers in prison camps. did not . protect soldiers from prison camps . failed to address intrestate war. were not signed . were not codified by the U
 Anti-Bribery Treaty Anti-Lobbying Treaty non-negotiable trade compacts . Most Lavored Nation inclusive trading pacts 8.6-8.2 . Anti-bribery treaty anti-lobbying treaty . Treaty also anti-corruption treaty .
 UN Genocide Convention Convention on the Elimination of All Lorms of Discrimination Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment 9. International Convention on Suppression and the Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid Convention against Torture . UN genocide Convention on Genocide Convention
 The Hague The UN Security Council The International Criminal Court The European Court of Human Rights The Hague . The International Court of Justice The Hague
 Article 2 of the UN Charter commits UN member states to refrain . from the threat or use of force any state . participate collectively in all UN programs . provide logistical support UN peacekeeping missions . Article 2 commits UN states to . refrain from the . threat or . use of . force any
 Every nation for itself All against one All against all Peace at all costs 13. Peace against all costs . Peace against one is peace against all . Peace is peace. peace is peace .
 The UN placed more of the burden on individual states to maintain order within their territorial boundaries . The UN said individual states should be responsible for maintaining order in their territories .
 The UN did not place exclusive reliance on collective security as the sole mechanism to maintain international peace . The UN says collective security is not the only mechanism to keep international peace in peace .
 The UN included members states that were fundamentally opposed to the idea of war . The UN was founded by countries that were opposed to war .
 UN excluded any and all states that were hostile to the great powers of the time . The UN excluded all nations that were opposed to the UN . UN excluded many of the countries that fought for independence from the Soviet Union .
 UN will make it difficult for individual states to create their own national armies . UN will also make it hard for individual countries to create own armies . The UN will not make it easy to create a national army .
 Once the purpose of an alliance is accomplished, it should be dissolved, he says . Once that's accomplished, the alliance should be disbanded .
 Military alliances should always act in a unanimous manner or risk dissolving, says President Obama . Military alliances must always be unanimous, says Obama administration .
 Sun Tzu: ‘It is mandatory that it be thoroughly studied’ – The Art of War, 500c.e.i.
 Illustrate how the international system, the individual and group, and the state and societal levels of analysis help to understand the causes of interstate conflicts . Illustrates how the individual, group and state level of analysis helps to understand what caused interstate conflicts. Illustrate .
 Illustrate how military force-employment doctrines of deterrence, defense, and warfighting apply not only to great-power strategic nuclear arsenals, but also to states with smaller arsenals . Evaluate the concept of war as an instrument of policy by linking military and other capabilities to national goals
 Describe the diverse purposes that motivate states and the criteria state authorities use to decide whether or not to intervene militarily in another country . Describe some of the reasons that motivate state authorities to intervene .
 Many citizens of another north African country, Libya, hoped for the same outcome . The peaceful overthrow of authoritarian leaders in Tunisia and Egypt in early 2011 led to the overthrow of dictators .
 Leaders from Western Europe and North America were unsure how to respond to Vladimir Putin's rise in Russia . Putin has vowed brutal retribution against those who rose up against him .
 The last thing the Obama administration wanted was to become engaged in a war involving another Muslim country at a time when it was trying to extricate itself from Iraq and Afghanistan . The Obama administration wants to avoid a repeat of the war in Syria .
 Nicolas Sarkozy was adamant that the West needed to respond militarily to support the rebels once threats directed at the Libyan leader failed to work . The Erench president, however, said that the U.S. needed to back the rebels .
 U.S. secretary of state Hillary Clinton assiduously worked to get at least a few African and Middle Eastern states to publicly support the use of NATO military forces .
 Western diplomats hope limited use of force against Kaddafi’s military would provide protection for the rebels, who lacked training and weapons, and encourage Kaddafi to leave the country . The hope of the Western diplomats was that the limited force would not only provide protection .
 NATO airstrikes on military targets were followed by the introduction of small teams of Special Eorces to train the ragtag rebel army . Laser-guided missiles were employed as the extent of NATO engagement expanded . U.S. drone attacks and NATO airstrikes were used to train rebels .
 The allied discussion became one on the application of force . That failed, and hence the discussion became a discussion of force. That failed. The discussion was one on force .
 Obama administration feared even limited military action was the beginning of a slippery slope that could result in a military stalemate on the ground, the partition of Libya, and a dictator remaining in power . The fear of the Obama administration was that even limited . military action could end in a stalemate
 The challenge for policymakers is that it is impossible to clearly foresee how what might begin as a relatively small-scale interstate conflict with the limited application of military force could evolve into a full-scale state war .
 Kaddafi was taken alive, beaten, and then killed by opposition Libyan forces . Warplanes attacked his convoy on October 20th, 2011 .
 The enormous human costs of war have not prevented countless repetitions of the phenomenon throughout human history in all parts of the world . War is not the first time that war has been repeated in the history of war .
 The great American Civil War of 1861-1865 resulted in more American deaths than all other wars fought by Americans from 1776 to the present, combined, combined .
 Observers of international relations are primarily interested in understanding patterns of conflict and cooperation among various types of political units . They have studied their history from the ancient Greek city-states of the fifth century to modern nationstates .
 War and peace can be viewed as opposite sides of the same coin . Indeed, war and peace are the same side of the coin . War is not peace, but war is peace, peace is peace .
 The term could be applied to interstate disputes on such matters as trade or monetary policy .
 interstate conflict ranges from the threat of use of force to the actual application of force . For our purposes, however, interstate conflict includes the threat to use force to its actual application . The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that interstate conflict is interstate conflict .
 Threats could involve the potential use of conventional weapons all the way up to nuclear weapons . Threats include conventional weapons, nuclear weapons, conventional weapons and nuclear arms .
 The application of force in Libya could be limited to armed intervention . The application could be, as indicated in the case of Libya, limited to the use of armed intervention.
 It could involve a full-scale war between states such as occurred in World Wars I and 11 . Or it could involve war between nations such as Germany and Japan .
 The reality is that the use of force has proven to be an important option in the practitioner’s toolbox . Use of force is a key option in a practitioner's toolbox, says Dr. John Sutter .
 For all the death and destruction caused by wars and the apparent irrationalities of warfare notwithstanding, the actual decision to go to war is often the result of rational choice . War is often a weighing of costs and benefits in relation to objectives sought, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The devastation caused by interstate conflicts and the very real human and economic costs involved may well be viewed as irrational by outside observers . The decisions to use force or go to war rarely are irrational, but not in the minds of those who make them, experts say .
 In fact, they are usually made based on maximizing expected gains or minimizing expected losses consistent with the objectives and the interests of the parties making the decision .
 Simply because policymakers decide to go to war, which then ends in disaster and defeat, does not necessarily mean the original decision was irrational . The U.S. has been in the midst of a major crisis in the Middle East since 2001 .
 This perspective on war as rational choice is most closely associated with realists . But the rationality assumption is also key to much work in the liberal perspective on world politics . This is key to the liberal view of war as a rational choice .
 Deciding which objectives (or expected gains) to pursue and which losses are acceptable may vary depending on who is making the decision . Deciding whether to pursue or not pursue the objectives of your own interests may vary .
 Adolf Hitler’s decision to invade the Soviet Union in 1940, for example, might not have been taken had a different leader been in power in Germany at the time . Adolf Hitler was in power at the beginning of the Second World War . He was in charge of the German government
 A disinterested observer may estimate costs and benefits but cannot be sure that those actually making the decisions will see them this way . The cost and benefit of the decisions are not always known to be the same to the people making decisions .
 The value or weight they place on various criteria may be influenced by past experiences and highly subjective perspectives or points of view . The value of a person's selection of criteria should be taken into account .
 "Decisions may have to be made without complete information under conditions of uncertainty or under time and other pressures," the government says .
 Misperceptions and miscalculations further complicate the decision-making process . The U.S. government has been in touch with the U.N. since 2001 .
 Decision decisions in practice may be suboptimal in the process of being made as well as in hindsight . As a result, decisions may be less than the best, in practice or in retrospect .
 Use of force as part of the policymaker’s tool kit is an understanding that gives legitimacy to going to war . The use of force is not just an adjunct to diplomacy, but an integral part of it . It is a way to legitimize war, but it gives legitimacy
 Outside of law and norms, states have agreed or come to accept, in the final analysis, that there is nothing to stop states bent on using force except other states willing and able to employ diplomatic, economic, and, if necessary, military means .
 interstate conflict remains part of international politics, however devastating its consequences for humankind . It is not surprising, then, that interstate conflict is still part of the world's politics . It's not surprising that interstate war is still a part of world politics .
 Policymakers need an understanding of the causes of war if they are to be effective in discovering and applying remedies to reduce the use of force and the incidence of interstate conflict .
 If proposing arms control as an alternative to an arms race that might lead to war, it would be helpful to the policymaker if a connection can be drawn between this proposal and the underlying or proximate causes of the conflict it seeks to remedy, he says .
 In this section we examine some of the most important causes of war, which shape the ultimate decision to resort to the use of force . This section includes the most significant causes of conflict, such as the causes of the war itself .
 International relations practitioners use the rationality assumption to determine when it is in their interest to use force . Explain how they use this assumption to decide when it's in the interest of using force .
 These causes can be categorized according to our four basic levels of analysis . They include the international system, state and society, group, and individual . anarchy ■ The absence of political authority is one of the causes of anarchy .
 International politics or the international system is said to be anarchic as there is no world governmentno central or superordinate authority over states, which retain their sovereign rights . Civil war ■ war within a state and society as two or more factions compete for governmental power and authority .
 In such a world, some states may choose to use force to achieve their objectives . Some states may use force against the will of the world to achieve objectives .
 When these actions confront other states, armed conflict may be the result . Armed conflict may also be possible in the region, experts say .
 Realists note there was no central authority, for example, among city-states in ancient Greece . Realists say there were no central authorities in ancient Greek cities .
 Fear in Sparta about the rising power of Athens was the underlying cause of the Peloponnesian War, according to the writer Thucydides .
 The Spartans’ perception of a change in the distribution of power upset existing security calculations, making them more fearful . The Spartans are more fearful of an increase in the power of the government .
 Sparta took measures to counter Athenian power before it became too strong . These steps contributed to the onset of war . Sparta's actions contributed to war .
 There was no authority higher than these city-states to intervene, assure both sides of their security, and preclude them from going to war . Above all, there was no . authority higher . than these . city states to intervene .
 For realists, it is this anarchy or absence of any central authority or government in the ancient world, or in the present one, that is the underlying or permissive cause of war . Realists say that anarchy in ancient world or in present world is the cause of conflict .
 It is a self-help system in which states seek to attain their objectives or serve their own interests . It is also a self help system for states to achieve their objectives, serve their interests .
 International relations have a permissive quality, posing no governmental or other authoritative obstacles to countries wishing to use force to achieve their objectives by such means . International relations pose no governmental obstacles to nations wishing to force force, author says .
 A number of constructivists, however, have taken issue with this perspective . Constructivists say it is not necessary to build on the site .
 While anarchy may exist, the response does not have to be self-help or power politics, say the authors . They argue that while anarchy might exist, it does not need to be a response to it .
 The supposed imperative of self-help is not a given or a fact of nature, but rather a human convention . Self help is not an imperative of nature but a convention of human convention, he says .
 International systems do not have an independent existence, but are what states make them, they are socially constructed . International systems are not independent, but social constructions of them are social constructed .
 In any event, the government also lacks the necessary coercive power to maintain domestic law and order . The U.S. government lacks such power, it also lacks a coercive power .
 Competing governments in the same state and society may emerge, perhaps identified with different national, ethnic, or other identities, may emerge . Competing government may emerge as governments in same state or society, perhaps identifying with different identities .
 In such circumstances, outside states may intervene to support one side or another, creating the possibility of an interstate war . The possibility of a civil war turning into a interstate war could happen .
 Intervention can take a number of forms—diplomatic action, aid to one or another of the parties, or other forms of interference, including the use of armed force or armed intervention . Intervention can be taken in the form of diplomacy, aid, aid or military intervention .
 Other systemic-level explanations of war involve such phenomena as conflicts between alliances or global security competitions that produce arms races . The theory of war is that alliances and global security competition produce arms race .
 Alliances and counteralliances said to have caused World War I . Secret treaties and war clauses committing states to defend one another if injured or attacked resulted in a chain reaction . As one party mobilized for war, others followed suit .
 The 1914 assassination in Sarajevo of the Austrian archduke Franz Ferdinand by an anarchist was merely the spark or catalyst that set into motion a series of actions and reactions among alliance members that resulted in world war .
 Many who accepted this explanation for World War I argued strenuously for a world in which the use of force for aggressive purposes was outlawed . Many of those who accepted it would argue strenuously against the idea .
 A collectivesecurity system of ‘law-abiding” states was finally established after the war in the League of Nations . Rather than the power and balance-of-power politics of alliances, alliances were instead of alliances .
 President Woodrow Wilson was a principal advocate of such a league . Wilson argued for a world of open covenants or treaties among states .
 As a legal system of obligations, collective security within the League of Nations failed to stop aggression or eliminate the use of force by states acting unilaterally, says the UN . As a result, the UN has been accused of failing to provide security to the region .
 That arms races contribute to the onset of war is another systemic-level hypothesis . Arms races are thought to have contributed to the start of war .
 Richardson’s arms-race differential equations are sometimes used to explain the relations among variables affecting arms race behaviors that can lead to war . Richardson's equations can be used to help explain how arms race behavior can affect war behavior .
 Psychological and social-psychological factors of individuals or small groups may affect such calculations . Psychological factors may affect the calculations .
 Some argue that human beings are by nature aggressive, or that the personality of an individual leader is a critical factor in a country’s decision to go to war . Others argue that the personalities of a nation's leaders are critical factors in its decision to fight .
 Some argue that the mind-set or frustration of groups or individuals in group settings can lead to aggressive behavior that, in turn, leads to conflict . Rather than focusing just on individual leaders, some argue that individual leaders can be responsible for conflict .
 The result is that information that contradicts the group’s devoutly held beliefs and prejudices is ignored . Information that contradicts those beliefs is ignored is ignored by the group, the author says .
 Critics of the U.S. decision to invade Iraq in 2003 noted the prevalence of high-level officials who had served together in the Bush administration and shared more militant, neoconservative orientations .
 For others, it is the nature of a state or society that is critical in explaining the outbreak of war and the propensity of a country to use force . State and Societal Levels of Analysis: State and society levels of analysis . For others it is critical to explain the outbreak and the
 Woodrow Wilson and those who shared his views argued that dictators and those within their ruling elite are more prone to choose war than those democratically elected to office and held responsible to the people . In his administration, President Wilson argued .
 Wilson's hypothesis was that dictatorships like ‘the Prussian autocracy’ in Germany produce war, but democracies produce peace . In short, the Wilsonian hypothesis was to say dictatorships produced war, not democracies .
 The Russian revolutionary leader Vladimir Ilyich Lenin expressed a different view on what type of state or society was more likely to encourage international peace . Lenin came to power in 1917 and came to prominence in Russia .
 Socialist states supposedly representing the interests of the working classes would be inclined to avoid war . Socialist states are traditionally forced to do the fighting and dying in wars, such as in Iraq and Syria .
 Lenin argued that capitalist states and societies tend to become imperialist as they compete with each other for markets throughout the world . In leading the revolution that overthrew the tsarist regime in Russia, he argued that capitalism tends to be imperialist .
 Lenin viewed World War I as a war among imperial powers, and the new socialist workers regime he headed would have no part of it . Lenin viewed the conflict as an imperial war, and would not want to participate in it .
 The capitalists who own this productive capacity, their real interest is in protecting and expanding capital, not destroying it . Because it is the owners of this capacity, the capitalists are in their interest in protecting it, not destruction it .
 Peace is served by the spread of capitalism and commercial values that displace heroism, gallantry, glory, glory and other obsolete, war-oriented values of an earlier precapitalist or feudal period . According to this reasoning, peace is best served by capitalism, commercial values displace
 It is the nature of state and society or the political and economic regime that is responsible for increasing or decreasing the likelihood of war . State and society are responsible for increased or decreased the likelihood that war will break out .
 Wilson, Lenin, or Schumpeter can be applied in broader terms than merely describing the relative likelihood of one or another kind of state or society to engage in war . We can apply the observations to broader terms, such as the likelihood of war, they say .
 Worldwide democracy as in a universal concert or partnership of democratic regimes, worldwide socialism, or worldwide capitalism are alternative, international system-level outcomes that, if achieved, might affect the likelihood of war . If achieved, these outcomes might affect war .
 A combination of causes at individual and smallgroup, state and society, and international system levels undoubtedly accounts for the outbreak of any particular war . The key point is that a combination of . causes at the individual, smallgroup and state, and state and . society levels, is undoubtedly accounts
 The difficult challenge is to determine which ones are salient in any given case, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Realist observers of world politics and war would claim that it is the underlying anarchy of the system that allows wars to happen regardless of the specific cause or set of causes of a particular war . Realists would say that anarchy is the cause or cause of war, not just the specific causes
 Those who want to eliminate war need to change the underlying world order . Consistent with this logic, those who want a world order must change the world order, writes Peter Bergen .
 Most ambitious world federalists would replace anarchy with some form of world government . The most ambitious would replace international anarchy with a form of government .
 They would vest a central authority with enough power (including armed forces and police units) to keep component states and societies from going to war . A central authority would have enough power to keep parts of society from going on war .
 Jean-Jacques Rousseau was responding to plans to end war in Europe by constructing a confederation of states . Rousseau did not fault the logic of such schemes so much as their impracticality . He said they would eliminate the anarchy of international relations through world governance .
 World federalists are quick to respond that the very act of defining world government as an impossibility makes it so . World federalistists say that the fact that world government is impossible is because it is so .
 We are not likely to achieve or even try to achieve what we have defined as an impossibility . We will not attempt to achieve, even try, what we've defined as a impossibility .
 Even if world government were the solution to interstate conflict, many would find it undesirable . World government would be undesirable for interstate conflict in the U.S.
 Different peoples in different societies value their independence in a world of sovereign states and prefer to hold on to a national identity . Different people in different countries value independence and prefer their independence .
 One explanation is that it was essentially a rational choice on the part of the Bush administration . It was a calculation of expected costs and benefits related to achieving national objectives through the use of force .
 Iraq was said to be a threat to national and international security as it possessed chemical and biological weapons capabilities . Iraq was also said to have chemical, biological and nuclear arms capabilities .
 Iraq also understood to be developing nuclear weapons of mass destruction . Iraq also believed to have been developing nuclear arms of mass mass destruction.
 Iraq was controlled by a dictator who in the 1980s used chemical weapons against Iraqi Kurds and Iranians in the IranIraq War, 1980-1988 .
 In short, removing Saddam Hussein from power would eliminate the threat his regime posed to the United States and to international peace and stability . The U.S. should remove Saddam Hussein's regime from power .
 President George W Bush, Vice President Richard Cheney, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, Undersecretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz, and Secretary of State Colin Powell, among others . Condoleezza Rice, National Security Adviser Condoleazza Rice and Colin Powell were among those
 Underneath the publicly stated view that Iraq was a threat, some saw President Bush as personally holding the same ideological worldview or neoconservative perspective of some of his key advisers . Bush argued for striking first by taking preemptive military action .
 President Bush's tour of liberated Kuwait may also have been part of his calculation to go to war in 2003 . Bush toured liberated Kuwait on his tour of the liberated country .
 Some see it as contributory to other arguments for going to war . Even if not decisive, some say it could be a good argument for war .
 Documentary evidence for this ""revenge"" hypothesis is slim at best . In any event, documentary evidence is slim .
 The president and his advisers apparently did perceive Saddam Hussein as unsavory, if not diabolical, is easier to document . On the other hand, that Saddam Hussein was viewed as a bad man, is less clear .
 Psychological factors influenced the way perception was interpreted by decision makers . We see the importance of psychological factors in the decision-making process .
 A second level of analysis emphasizes the collective role of a small group of policymakers and their trusted advisers and subordinates in the White House and the Office of the Secretary of Defense . A neoconservative decision-making elite formed a coalition favoring preemptive military intervention against Iraq as the best way to serve
 Neoconservatives also saw American purposes served by spreading democracy to ""rogue states" such as Iraq . Neoconervatives saw Iraq as a democratic model for all of the Middle East to emulate .
 By changing the regime in Iraq, a major threat to Israel also would be removed, Israel says . By changing Iraq's regime, Israel would also remove a threat from Israel, says Israel expert .
 A third level of analysis emphasizes the overall power structure of the international system of states . The analysis is focused on the power of states in the world .
 The United States was the most important power in a unipolar international system in which just one superpower holds so dominant a position . The U.S. is the most powerful power in the unipolar world .
 With no effective balance to block its power, the U.S. was able to act at will against Iraq . The United States acted at will in Iraq, leaving the United States unable to block it .
 The United Nations ended up acquiescing to the U.S. invasion of Iraq . The U.N. ended up succumbing to the United States invasion .
 Great powers facing no effective obstacles tend to act this way—doing whatever they want (or see as being in their interest) to do . Great powers face no real obstacles to stop doing what they want .
 He had practical experience serving both Russia and his native Prussia in wars against the French that ended with the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 .
 Clausewitz accepted an important position in 1818 as director of the German War School, which allowed him time to think, research, and write . Clausewitz became famous for his work in the German army in the early 1800s .
 His incomplete work On War was published in 1832, a year after his death .
 The book has had an enormous influence on how states use force to achieve their purposes . It has had a huge influence on the use of force in policing .
 To Clausewitz, war was merely one means states might employ to achieve objectives set by political authorities . Clausewitz: War was merely a means of war to achieve political objectives .
 Wars were merely rational means to accomplish objectives, not ends in themselves . As such, wars were merely a rational means of achieving objectives . War was merely a means of accomplishing objectives and not ends .
 Clausewitz established that war should be a rational instrument of state policy . Armed forces are subordinated to political authorities of the state . Clausewitz specifies the way in which any battle or war is won .
 The military aim is to destroy or substantially weaken an enemy’s warfighting or warmaking capability . The aim is always the same, says the U.S. military .
 You Are a Military Commander"" at mypoliscilab.com strategy ■ plan that connects capabilities to ends or objectives sought tactics ■ the methods or way in which one takes actions or conducts operations . Wm^JUlvinnalyzing Interstate War .
 Adolf Hitler exemplifies the power of individuals to contribute to the outbreak of wars . Hitler exemplified how individuals can contribute to an outbreak of war . Adolf Hitler was the only person who contributed to war .
 IR theorists would argue that war and particular applications of the use or threat of force are often carefully calculated decisions . IR theorists who utilize rationai choice theory say war and application of force decisions are often calculated .
 The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 involved the U.S. and the Soviet Union . One popular case study is a case study of the Cuban crisis .
 The Kennedy administration considered the pros and cons of attacking Cuba via air and sea, but ultimately settled on a naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba . Determined not to allow the Soviets to deploy missiles that could reach the United States .
 Actions taken in war for this purpose, and this purpose alone, constitute military necessity . The actions taken in this war are considered military necessity by the U.S. government .
 The commander searches for, finds, and attacks the enemy’s center of gravity or focal point, which, if successful, disrupts the enemy's forces, facilitating their destruction . If successful, the commander finds, he disrupts, and then attacks, disrupting enemy forces .
 Clausewitz does not develop or use the concept of deterrence, there is a suggestion of it in his observation that if there is an equilibrium in conflict relations between two states, we can expect peace to be maintained for the time being .
 In its modern formulation, which owes much to Clausewitz, deterrence is a psychological concept . The modern formulation of deterrence is based on the psychological concept of deterrence . deterrence is the result of deterrence, Clausewitz said .
 One state makes a credible threat to use military capabilities if another state commits aggression or undertakes some other action the deterring state considers undesirable . One state threatens to use its military capabilities against another state if it commits aggression .
 The deterred state perceives the deterring state’s military capabilities and will to use them in armed conflict . Deterred state is dissuaded from committing aggression or other offense . Deterred state sees deterring states’ military capabilities .
 If either of these two factors weakens, deterrence becomes unstable or tends to break down . "Deterioration" is unstable or breaks down . If deterrence is unstable, deterrence will become unstable or break down.
 In the extreme cases when either capabilities or credibility approaches zero, deterrence also goes to zero—it fails . "Deterioration is a failure, and deterrence is not a success, it's a failure," says U.S. President Obama .
 Success in war also depends on military leadership with strong mental and organizational capabilities . Success depends on strong mental, organizational capabilities, military officials say .
 This is particularly important because of the complexities and uncertainties commanders face in war . This is especially important for commanders to be able to deal with the complexities of war .
 In physics or mechanics, we calculate the forces we expect to operate on an object in an ideal situation . In physics, this is the force force that we expect when an object is in ideal circumstances .
 We try to predict its motion—its velocity or speed and direction, perhaps drawing a diagram specifying the forces with vectors or arrows . We also try to make a diagram of the forces of a moving object .
 In the real world the motion of objects is impeded or slowed by friction, which is often difficult to measure in advance . As a practical matter, of course, we learn that in real world, friction is often hard to measure . The motion of an object can be slowed or slowed
 We can get a sense of how much friction is involved through experimental trials . We may decide to take corrective measures to reduce friction by lubricating the surface or streamlining the object .
 So it is with plans for war drawn up in peacetime or in an office setting . Plans for war can be drawn up during peacetime, or in office settings .
 According to Clausewitz, a great gap exists between the conception of war and its execution . Clausewitz: War is not a war that can be won and not a victory is achieved .
 At best one can conduct military exercises or experimental trials to try to identify and correct major sources of friction . At best, military exercises can be conducted to try and correct problems, such as friction .
 Through such measures one may be able to reduce the friction that comes from taking war plans off the shelf and putting them into practice . But one cannot eliminate the effect entirely, one says .
 Clausewitz called the fog of war — the sum of all uncertainties and unpredictable occurrences that can happen so rapidly in war . Compounding the effects of friction and contributing to it is what Clausewitz said was the fog . Clausewitz: "Fog of war" is a form of uncertainty
 More than a century before the nuclear age, Clausewitz expressed his concerns about circumstances when general or total war is the expected outcome . Clausewitz wrote about the dangers of total war .
 American-British collaboration contributed in the development of nuclear weapons used by the U.S. in 1945 to bomb two Japanese cities, Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The Manhattan Project was part of the Manhattan Project and the gathering of other European physicists .
 The Soviet Union conducted its first nuclear weapon test in 1949 . The Cold War soon underway, the Soviet Union tested its first nuke test .
 Preventing the outbreak of such a war by threatening to retaliate and thus punish any enemy that tried to do such a thing became the focus of Cold War strategic theory .
 Strategists committed to national security in the nuclear age focused on theories of deterrence, defense, and warfighting . Put another way, strategists focused on theory of deterrence and defense .
 Deterrence relations among the great powers that possess nuclear weapons seem relatively less important these days compared to during the Cold War . The U.S. and Russia are the two countries that have nuclear weapons .
 An improved climate of greatpower relations and a wide array of strategic arms-control achievements in the last half of the 20th century have contributed substantially to international security and a reduced risk of general war .
 By 2002 the parties had some 6,000 warheads each, both agreed to continue reductions to some 1,700 to 2,200 warheads each by the year 2012 . The parties agreed to reduce the number of warheads by 2012 .
 The START agreement entered into force in 2011 drops the maximum number of strategic warheads to 1,550 . The drawdown is over a seven-year period beginning in 2011 . The United States and Russia continue the nuclear disarmament process .
 Arms controllers still have a significant challenge to find ways to reduce nuclear arms below still high levels . Arms controllers must find ways of reducing nuclear arms without destabilizing deterrence relations and endangering international peace and security .
 Deterrence, defense, and warfighting theories or doctrines dominated U.S. security concerns during the Cold War .
 The continuing 21st-century importance of the topic is due to nuclear weapons remaining on the armscontrol agendas of the major powers possessing them . India, Pakistan, Israel, North Korea, and other countries have acquired (or may yet acquire) nuclear weapons capabilities .
 Despite efforts to avoid further spread of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, proliferation seems likely to continue . proliferation of such weapons and weapons-related technologies seems likely, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Doctrines concerning deterrence, defense, and warfighting involve either the threat or actual use of force . Doctrine concerning deterrence and defense involves the threat of force, or the use of actual force .
 In deterrence, the effort is merely to dissuade another state, through the threat of force, from doing something it has not yet undertaken . It is not actually required to change a course of action, but it is not required to do so .
 This also may involve extended deterrence —threats designed to protect allies . The U.S. may also use extended deterrence against allies . This may also involve extended threats to the West .
 If deterrence fails, defense involves the use of military force to repel an attack . The U.S. could use military force against an attack if deterrence fails . The United States is the only nation in the world to rely on deterrence .
 Warfighting is an active use of force for defense or to achieve other political-military goals . Warfighting involves the use of military force to achieve political or military goals .
 In the absence of change in doctrinal and strategic understandings and commitments, these national requirements also define the needs and limits of concessions that realistically can be made by negotiators in any arms control talks .
 With only a few nuclear weapons, a country cannot realistically choose to engage in actual nuclear warfighting against another nuclear power . A larger arsenal with a full array of nuclear and nonnuclear offensive and defensive capabilities would require a much larger arsenal .
 Understanding minimum or finite deterrence is particularly relevant in the present period of nuclear proliferation when a larger number of countries may acquire relatively small nuclear arsenals . Understanding minimum deterrence is important in the current period, especially in nuclear proliferation .
 A minimum-deterrence country has only a relatively few nuclear weapons . Its nuclear forces can be used only to threaten attack against an adversary, typically against population centers or countervalue targets .
 In a minimum-deterrence situation, there are not enough weapons to direct attacks at large number of military or counterforce targets that would need to be struck if a country were trying to destroy or substantially weaken an enemy’s warfighting capability .
 Minimum or finite deterrence can realistically be based only on a threat of punishment primarily to enemy populations . Deterrence can be based on the threat to punish the enemy population if another country undertakes aggression .
 Aiming weaponry at population centers raises obvious moral questions . Even if the genuine purpose is to deter war by such threats, it raises questions about morality .
 A moral paradox is inherent in the sincere effort of arms-control negotiators to reduce nuclear arsenals to minimum levels, says Peter Bergen . He says it is a moral paradox in the effort to reduce arsenals .
 A breakdown of deterrence in these circumstances could maximize the human cost of nuclear war . A breakdown in deterrence in such circumstances could maximise the human costs of war .
 Large arsenals do allow for counterforce targeting as a way of reducing unnecessary death and destruction . By contrast, larger arsenals allow for smaller arsenals to target smaller targets .
 The irony is that fewer weapons, as in a minimumdeterrence posture, may be even more problematic morally than larger nuclear arsenals that can be directed more effectively against larger military or counterforce targets, thus avoiding population centers whenever possible .
 Critics are quick to point out that such distinctions have little if any meaning when weapons of mass destruction are involved . They say distinction between civilian and military targets is difficult, if not impossible, to make when the destructiveness of such weapons can so easily spill over from military targets to nearby cities
 A doctrine in which a state maintains a relatively small number of nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction for use in making deterrence threats is a doctrine . The doctrine is called a "minimum or finite deterrence"
 The key conclusions to be drawn from this table are to be seen by comparing the top and the bottom . Different strategic doctrines have different implications for the possibility of achieving arms control agreements .
 What makes matters doubly difficult is if states have different strategic nuclear doctrines, which might be a function of technological capabilities, perception of the threat, national security objectives, and geography .
 None required None required Some Robust, fully developed B Passive (radars) B Passive Passive (Radar technology)
 The horrendous blast, radiation, and thermal effects of nuclear weapons blur the distinction between counterforce and countervalue targets . Nuclear weapons are the result of the horrendous blast and radiation effects of the weapons .
 Even if a state focuses on using nuclear weapons only against military or counterforce targets, massive collateral damage is still not avoided . Civil populations and property still cannot be avoided, experts say .
 Compared to the enormous size of U.S. and Soviet nuclear arsenals during the Cold War, the UK, France, and China's nuclear weapons now seem minimal .
 Strategists have raised serious questions about the viability of such small national-deterrent capabilities and the stability of deterrence relations based on them . Strategists raise serious questions concerning the viability .
 These problems are compounded for India, Pakistan, North Korea, and other countries newly acquiring nuclear weapons and related technologies . They typically have been involved in interstate conflicts in which they've been involved .
 If nuclear weapons continue to proliferate in coming years, countries acquiring them likely will have only relatively small arsenals to which minimumdeterrence concepts apply . The countries acquiring nuclear weapons likely will likely have only little arsenals of their own .
 An effective antiballistic missile system is not attainable or affordable . Nor is an effective anti-missile missile system either attainable, affordable or attainable .
 Fearing that virtually all of the country’s retaliatory forces might be destroyed by an enemy before they can be launched in retaliation may lead a minimum-deterrence country to launch on warning without having time to verify that an attack is actually underway .
 Some critics argue that smaller numbers undermine an adversary’s perception that a deterring country could deliver a retaliatory strike . Some critics of minimum deterrence argue that such a minimum-deterrent state's will to resort to nuclear strikes is also questioned .
 Critics worry about the stability of minimum deterrence when both capability and credibility can so easily be drawn into question .
 Arms control advocates feel so strongly about maintaining and expanding the nuclear nonproproliferation security regime . This is because it forbids the transfer or acquisition of nuclear weapons and weapons technologies to nonnuclear countries . The U.S. should not be allowed to acquire nuclear weapons or weapons technologies from
 Many critics of minimum deterrence then and now have preferred a larger number of offensive nuclear-deterrence forces .
 The superpowers established and maintained a capability for second-strike assured destruction, the U.S. military says .
 In these circumstances, neither side would be foolish enough to attack first . Neither side would have attacked first, and neither would have been foolish enough for it .
 Mutual assured destruction exists if both parties in a bilateral deterrence relation have a second-strike, assured-destruction capability against the other . Mutual assured destroyed exists if the two countries have a capability against each other .
 The threat of punishment or destruction presumably is enough to deter both parties from launching a first strike . If they do, the threat of destruction or destruction would be enough .
 Even at reduced levels of strategic nuclear weapons in the Russian and U.S. inventories, there still are sufficient numbers to maintain second-strike capabilities .
 Deterrence based strictly on assured destruction (or mutual assured destruction) requires a strong offense accompanied, as in minimum deterrence, by passive defenses . Passive defenses for the earliest possible warning of attack and a viable command-and-control system .
 A stable deterrence under these circumstances depends, paradoxly, on maintaining a condition of mutual vulnerability to a first strike, coupled with the assurance that comes from having sufficient survivable secondstrike forces . The U.S. needs to be able to maintain a balance of vulnerability to the first strike
 The logic is that neither party would undertake a first strike against the other with the knowledge that doing so would invite unwanted retaliatory destruction . The logic would be that neither side would undertake first strikes against each other . Neither party would do so in fear of reprisals .
 The SALT accords in the 1970s between the U.S. and the Soviet Union were based on the threat of mutual assured destruction . SALT was based on deterrence by this threat of mutually assured destruction, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Caps were placed on strategic offense, specifying maximum numbers and types of missiles and bombers each side could have . Caps were put on strategic defense, specifying the number and type of missiles each side had .
 At the same time, severe restrictions were placed on strategic defenses, limiting deployment of antiballistic missiles . Restrictions were also placed on space-based testing of strategic-defense components .
 Limitations on strategic defense were intended not only to curb the arms race but also to maintain the mutual vulnerability central to deterrence by mutual, assured destruction . Limitations were intended to curb arms race and maintain vulnerability . The U.S. has been involved in a major arms race since the
 Termination of the ABM Treaty in 2002 cleared away a substantial obstacle to deployment of missile defenses . Termination was a controversial decision taken by the Bush administration .
 The end of the Cold War and good relations with Russia made the ABM Treaty obsolete . Argued that the Treaty was obsolete and that good relations between Russia and the U.S. were obsolete .
 President Bush carried forward the defensive program begun under President Clinton . He saw missile defenses as important lest the U.S. be attacked by smaller nuclear powers .
 Developing missile defenses is still on the national agenda as a means of countering potential threats from North Korea . North Korea already has nuclear weapons and Iran, should it acquire them, would it acquire it .
 Hardened blast and fallout shelters could be part of a passive civildefense plan . The U.S. military says it has no plans to use the technology to defend itself .
 Active defenses that could destroy incoming bombers and missiles would be used to reduce or limit damage . Active defenses could be used in reducing or limiting damage to aircraft .
 The discussion of using active defenses or even offensive forces to limit damage made defense sound more and more like nuclear warfighting .
 In fact, damage limitation involved acquiring effective area and point defenses offered by antiballistic missile or space-based systems, as well as robust offensive systems .
 There is a danger that one side may think its offensive and defensive damage limitation forces are strong enough to make a first strike against the other a feasible option . There is also a risk that both sides may think they have enough firepower to make first strike feasible .
 A credible first-strike capability includes a capacity to strike first, nullify or reduce the ability of an adversary to retaliate in kind . The U.S. should have a credible first strike capability, the authors say .
 To be able to absorb a first-strike attack and still launch a counterattack means a state has a second-strike capability . The state must also have a second strike capability to counterattack first .
 If either side perceived the other were on the verge of acquiring one, it might lead the disadvantaged party to act preemptively, starting a war before the other side achieved any strategic advantage . Even if neither side in fact has such a credible first-strike capability, it could lead to a
 In short, pursuing the development of damage-limitation forces is seen by many as potentially destabilizing . The development of such forces could destabilize the U.S.
 Even extensive civil-defense networks can be misinterpreted by an adversary as secret plans to develop a credible first-strike or warfighting capability . Civil-defense systems are designed to protect or defend populations in the event of war .
 Developing or extending even passive defenses can be destabilizing, especially when such actions are accompanied by existing active defenses and strong offensive capabilities . Thus, developing or extending such defenses can destabilize, especially in the U.S.
 In SALT negotiations, arms control was used as one means of preventing the development of effective strategic defenses . The SALT talks were used as a way to prevent development of strategic defenses that could be seen by an adversary as part of an effective warfighting arsenal .
 Credible nuclear warfighting capabilities were seen by some as another form of deterrence or dissuasion . Some believed it was a form of dissuasion or deterrence .
 Although punishment would no doubt be involved, the primary focus would instead be on denial . "Denial" would be focused on denial, not punishment .
 Erom says no would-be adversary would ever take on a country with nuclear superiority or at least an ability to fight and prevail in nuclear warfighting . Erom: "No nation would take on such a nation with such a nuclear superiority"
 The point of talking credibly about fighting and prevailing in a nuclear war is the belief that in so doing, that particular horrible possibility will never come about . The point is to be confident that the worst thing is that it will never happen .
 Some prefer to call this dissuasion dissuasion so as not to confuse it with threat of punishment . Although we call this deterrence by denial of anything to be gained by escalating to nuclear warfare, we call it deterrence .
 French nuclear forces were introduced in 1958 as a force de dissuasion to capture the idea that even though they were less in numbers and capabilities than the United States and the Soviet Union had already deployed, any country that might consider attacking France with nuclear weapons would suffer great losses .
 Force posture for effective nuclear warfighting capabilities is the least conducive to constructing arms-control regimes . Force posture is not conducive to building arms control regimes, writes Peter Bergen .
 As in all warfighting, the aim of such a denial doctrine is to destroy or substantially weaken an enemy’s warmaking capability . The aim of the denial doctrine would be to destroy, substantially weaken, the author says .
 Arms-control restraints on numbers, types, locations, and locations are an impediment to developing and deploying large numbers of offensive forces . Arms control restraints are an obstacle to developing offensive forces able to penetrate enemy territory and air space .
 Strategic offenses must also be accompanied by well-developed and extensive active and passive defenses . This is incompatible with most arms-control agendas. Strategic offense must be accompanied with well developed and extensive defenses .
 Research, development, test, and evaluation, as well as acquisition of substantial offensive and defensive nuclear warfighting capabilities, were upsetting to the general population . Moreover, research, development .
 The public suffered understandably from Cold War nuclear anxieties, made worse by saber rattling and other strong rhetoric between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet high command feared the U.S. was trying to achieve a credible first-strike capability . Perhaps even more important were anxieties in the Soviet military high command that the United States had a technological superiority .
 If this were so, Soviet second-strike forces were now potentially in jeopardy . If this was so, the Soviet second strike forces were potentially in danger .
 Soviet command-and-control authorities considered shifting to a posture of launch on warning rather than waiting to confirm an attack until it was too late to retaliate . The Soviet Union considered shifting its posture to launch launches on warning .
 The danger of false alarm (due to radar, computer, or other equipment malfunction) is less when time for command-and-control decisions is increased .
 The attitudes of Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin in the late 1980s and 1990s signaled a change for the better . The international climate more conducive to arms-control agreements of all kinds, authors say .
 Such agreements had implications for both defense and warfighting doctrines . Such agreements were important to the U.S. military .
 New arms-control limitations and a U.S. decision at the time to accept a strict interpretation of the ABM treaty that prohibited space-based testing of strategic defense components effectively put a lid on the nuclear arms race . Proponents of deploying an effective national missile defense called for renegoti
 Bush administration consulted with Russia and gave six-month notice for treaty termination in 2002 . The Bush administration gave the required six months notice for termination of the treaty .
 The move away from planning to fight and prevail in nuclear warfare was a notable shift back to an earlier force posture compatible with the mutual assured destruction doctrine .
 Russia and U.S. put their strategic nuclear forces on less of a war footing, reducing alert and readiness levels . The Russian Federation and United States agreed to reduce alert levels in a period of lower threat and risk of war .
 Former Soviet republics also agreed to disarm themselves of nuclear weaponry they inherited after the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1992 . Under heavy diplomatic pressures, the ex-Soviet republics agreed to do the same .
 The risk of general war among great powers has remained relatively low . With a strategic regime of quantitative and qualitative restrictions in place, deterrence relations among the major powers are more stable .
 The nuclear weapons reduction process continues between the two countries . The two countries are still working on nuclear disarmament .
 Renewal of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty in December 2010 will bring projected numbers of American and CASE & POINT I Technology . The information revolution is a result of advances in computerized information and telecommunications technologies .
 The New Face of War: How War Will Be Fought in the 21st Century, and Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict in the . Future War will be the first of its kind in the world, with the rise of robotics .
 Remote-controlled Predator drones flown by armchair pilots in Las Vegas, Nevada, bomb terrorists in Afghanistan and Pakistan . The number of unmanned systems on the ground in Iraq has gone from zero to 12,000 over the last five years .
 This technological revolution promises only to increase in speed and innovation . This technology revolution will only increase in the future, says the BBC .
 There is even the distinct possibility that weapons systems will develop to the point where the decision calculus as to whether a target is a friend or foe will be made by a machine and not a human being .
 The development and deployment of advanced technologies raises important questions concerning the laws of war, morality, ethics, and accountability . The development of advanced technology is not just a military issue but also raises questions about morality, morality and ethics .
 Reading military doctrinal statements can be chilling experience for many people . Reading military doctrine statements is a chilling experience . The U.S. military says it is committed to upholding the principle of deterrence .
 A possible nuclear exchange between states is unsettling, particularly when they describe a possible exchange . Often written in a straightforward, technical manner, they are unsettling .
 Other critics of deterrence, defense, and warfighting theories or doctrines make several salient points .
 First, what is known as the usability paradox lies at the heart of U.S. nuclear weapons policy . First, the usability of the nuclear weapons system is a key part of the U.N. policy .
 Two key objectives of U.S. policy are to deter aggression against the United States and its allies, and prevent accidental war . United States nuclear forces must be usable, but not too usable, as well as not too soon .
 For deterrence to work, nuclear forces must be usable enough that an adversary is convinced that a U.S. nuclear response would be forthcoming if the United States or its vital interests were attacked . In other words, for deterrence work, for an adversary to believe that a United States nuclear response
 U.S. weapons must not be so usable that they could conceivably be launched by computer error or insane missile silo operators . On the other hand, to prevent an accidental nuclear war, the United States must not launch such a weapon .
 Studies suggest leaders in both Moscow and Washington misperceived each other’s motivations and intentions, making for much more dangerous situations than we had realized previously . The Middle East, Cuba and Cuba were the most dangerous Cold War crises .
 Theories of deterrence, it is argued, may give leaders false confidence that they can calibrate carefully their actions to those of an adversary, thus effectively communicating their intentions .
 Third, there are major areas of concern involving nuclear weapons and the developing world . Fourth, there is a major concern involving the development of nuclear weapons in the world .
 The key question is whether the logic of deterrence as outlined here is equally applicable to Indian-Pakistani relations or to present-day U.S.-Russian relations .
 There is also concern over China’s views on limited deterrence and the fact that Beijing is bent on expanding and modernizing its nuclear arsenal in the years ahead .
 Without China as a full player, both the nuclear nonproliferation and comprehensive test ban regimes are decidedly of less value . Without China, the non-nuclear nonprosproprosiferation and test bans regimes are less of value, experts say .
 The United States continues to endorse obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty . Failure by the United States Senate to ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and talk of nuclear modernization make it more difficult to keep these parties in compliance with arms-control regimes .
 Fourth, there has been growing recognition that the mass destruction likely to be suffered from use of nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons makes them of very limited, if any, value outside of their use as a deterrent to warfare .
 Non-nuclear weapons and weapons systems can be deployed and used, if doing so is compatible with national interests . Much more useful are conventional weapons and systems that can be used, such as conventional weapons, say experts .
 North Korea and Iran not to acquire nuclear weapons has been a hard sell . Israel, India, and Pakistan were not dissuaded from acquiring them . North Korea, Iran and Israel have not been dissuaded by nuclear weapons .
 Nuclear weapons would be as much or more devastating to members of the original nuclear “club” of great powers that emerged in the 1950s and 1960s would experience were they to use them in armed conflict . Battlefield use of such weapons would also be devastating to them as members of
 Nuclear weapons raise a country’s ‘status’ and the degree to which it must be taken more seriously by its adversaries . Still, nuclear weapons for those who seek them do raise a nation's “status” and take it more seriously .
 Since 1945 countries that acquire these weapons have so far avoided using them in armed conflicts . Fortunately, however, since 1945 countries have avoided using these weapons in armed conflict .
 U.S. risks a devastating retaliatory response whether with nuclear or conventional attacks . Doing so risks a . devastating retaliated response . It is a strong antidote to reckless behavior .
 The fear of retaliatory attack or invasion tends to induce a greater degree of caution after acquiring these weapons than typically might have been the case beforehand . Fear of retaliation or invasion tend to induce greater caution .
 U.S. acquiring weapons and using them against other countries is potentially suicidal . Acquiring weapons is not an enhancement of the country’s security, it says .
 This security dilemma remains: Acquiring nuclear weapons actually tends to undermine, rather than enhance, a country’s security . Acquiring nukes may actually undermine, not enhance, the author says . The U.S. has a national security dilemma: acquiring nukes might be a
 Pacifism is a philosophical position that rejects all forms of war and any use of force as legitimate means for attaining objectives, resolving conflicts, or any other purpose . It is a position that in its purest sense rejects the use of violence in war .
 A bellicose orientation or bellicism either sees value in war itself or sees war as so essential a part of world politics that it cannot be avoided . Its opposite, a bellicocicism, is a belief that war is so essential that it can't be avoided by world politics
 Bellicists tend to discount the human costs of armed conflict . War also produces people willing to make sacrifices, who exhibit courage and bravery in the face of danger . Bellicistists say war also produces courage and outright bravery .
 Taken to the absurd extreme, war is seen to be a ‘purifying bath of blood and iron,”^ presumably a therapeutic effect for society as a whole .
 Pacifism or commitment to nonviolence is a perfectly defensible philosophical or moral position . Pacifistism is not a moral position, but it is a philosophical or ethical position . Nonviolence is not an excuse for violence in the United States .
 The same cannot be said for bellicism, which sees positive value in violence and the use of force . Bellicism is a form of bellicism that says violence is necessary to protect society .
 Just because we live in a world prone to violence does not mean that violence is morally right or good in itself . Not in an age when war can lead to mass destruction on an unprecedented scale, he says .
 The principal challenge to pacifism is also the question of its practicality in an anarchic world, in which states and even nonstate actors may use force to attain their objectives . The main challenge is the practicality of pacifism in a world of anarchic society .
 Immanuel Kant, the 18th-century philosopher, argued that the best way to ensure progress toward peace is to encourage the growth of democratic republics . Those types of political systems are more peaceful than authoritarian states, he says .
 President Woodrow Wilson represented World War I as the war to end all wars . Wilson eliminated dictatorships to make the world safe for democracy . Wilson represented the end of the war by eliminating dictatorships . Wilson: "World War I ended all wars"
 If countries became republics, war in principle could be eliminated, says Kant . War in principle can be eliminated if republics become representative democracies, he says .
 If allowed to have a democratic political voice, there would be little, if any, enthusiasm for the use of armed force . After all, it is people who fight and die in wars so, if allowed to be a democratic .
 Michael Doyle has observed that democracies, while quite capable of using force or going to war, tend not to go to war with each other . Among others, Michael Doyle noted that democracies tend to avoid using force in their own country .
 To many realists it is national interest and cost-benefit calculations in relation to using force to achieve their objectives that matters . Not the type of regime, it is the national interest that matters, not the type .
 The answer to the question of whether democracies are more peaceful in relation to one another is not merely of academic interest; it has significant foreign policy implications .
 State support of democratic movements around the world can be justified on the grounds of enhancing the prospects of peaceful relations among states . State support for democratic movements can also be justified in the interests of peace among states, says David Cameron .
 George W Bush administration claimed a peaceful and democratic Iraq would be a model for authoritarian regimes in the Middle East, transforming them into democracies . The Bush administration made this argument in 2003, claiming a peaceful Iraq would have a positive ripple effect .
 On the other hand, some are highly suspicious of such pronouncements, reasoning that the idea of a democratic peace can be used to justify interventions in the domestic affairs of other states . Some are suspicious of the idea that a peace deal can be justified by intervening in domestic affairs .
 In 2011, popular challenges to authoritarian regimes occurred across the Arab world —initially in Tunisia and Egypt, later in Bahrain, Yemen, Libya, and Syria . The Arab Spring began in Tunisia, Egypt, and Egypt .
 Although antiregime movements enjoyed widespread support, there was no assurance that new, democratic regimes would emerge throughout the region, much less that this would be conducive to peace in our time . In the 1980s and 1990s, anti-government movements were seen as the most popular in
 Just-war theory is an example of normative theory that prescribes right conduct—how states and their agents ought to act . L bellicism is an idea that war and war preparations have positive value to society .
 International law concerning war rests on treaty obligations, customary practice, writings of jurists, and general principles closely linked to just-war theory . The law of armed conflicts is based on treaties and customary practice .
 This theory adopts a position between the pacifist and bellicist positions . It seeks to avoid war or, failing that, to limit its destructive consequences . The theory is somewhat closer to the pacifists pole because it seeks to limit war .
 Augustine presented pacifism as an alternative to pacifism that had been dominant in the early Christian Church . Augustine's pacifism was presented as alternative to the pacifism dominant in early Christian church . Augustine, who presented it as a pacifism, said it was an alternative .
 Aquinas, Vitoria, Suarez, Gentili and other writers contributed further to establishing just-war concepts . Just-war concept is a more formal philosophical or moral foundation upon which international law concerning war would come to rest .
 Hugo Grotius incorporated much of just-war thinking in his writings on international law . The Dutch policy-oriented scholar was influenced by the work of Suarez and Gentili .
 His Law of War and Peace took just-war theory from its moral or theological base to develop what would become legally binding principles . He took just war theory from moral, theological grounds to develop legal principles .
 As with other international law, the law of war has been drawn from general principles, customary practice, formal treaties, court cases, and the writings of jurists . The law is based on general principles .
 The Hague Conventions and Regulations (1899 and 1907) represent a formalization or codification of the modern-day law of war . The Geneva Conventions (1919) and (1921) are the most formalized or codified war laws . The Hague and Geneva Con
 The jus ad bellum, or right to go to war, depends first and foremost upon having a just cause, such as when a country comes under attack by an aggressor state . The right to war depends first on having just a cause, like when a nation is attacked by
 Second, the decision to go to war cannot be made by anyone; it must be decided by the legitimate authority within the state . The decision is made by a legitimate authority in the state, the author of the constitution .
 Determining which is the legitimate authority is not always an easy matter, especially in civil wars within a state . Each side contends that it is a legitimate authority .
 Just-war theory dictates that resort to armed force as an option must be proportionate to the provocation, not a disproportionate response to a relatively minor cause . The U.S. should use proportionate force to respond to provocation, the author says .
 Fourth, there also must be some chance of success, or resort to war would be a futile enterprise wasting lives and property unnecessarily . War would also be wasting lives, property unnecessarily, or waste lives and lives unnecessarily .
 The decision to use armed force should be delayed whenever possible until every reasonable peaceful means for settling the dispute has been exhausted . Armed forces should not be used against any peaceful means, says David Cameron .
 If decision makers are not committed to doing the right thing, no set of moral or legal principles can be effective . If you're not committed, you can't be effective, says the author .
 Clever political leaders and diplomats can always find ways to skirt any set of rules, perhaps even manipulating them in an elaborate rationalization of their conduct . Clever politicians and diplomats often find ways of getting around the world to skirt rules .
 The historical record suggests to them that more often . not the practitioners of statecraft have manipulated just-war principles to justify some rather unjust causes . Just-war . principles have been manipulated by statecraft to justify unjust causes, they say .
 It is more a criticism of the orientation and conduct of many leaders and diplomats than it is an effective assault on the logic of the justwar position . Even if this is so, it is more of a criticism .
 Defenders of just-war theory use this same evidence to underscore the need for greater compliance with a practical mechanism for avoiding war, especially in an age when the mass-destructive consequences of war are so great . Just-war theorists use this as an example of how to avoid war,
 They clearly are skewed in the direction of avoiding war if at all possible . They clearly aim to avoid war if it is possible .
 As such, they stand much closer to the pacifist than to the bellicist pole . As such they stand closer to pacifism than to bellicist .
 Just-war theory does not confine itself merely to whether one has a right to use armed force or resort to war in international relations . Conduct during war is not just a matter of whether you have a right or not to use force, but it is a question of conduct .
 It goes beyond the jus ad helium to raise questions of right conduct in war once armed conflict breaks out . It raises questions about the right conduct of conduct in conflict .
 Another set of principles governs right conduct in war . Whether or not the decision to go to war was just, it's a matter of principle .
 Very real limits are set in an effort to limit or confine the death and destruction of warfare to what is militarily necessary, thus reducing war’s barbarity . War's barbarity can be reduced by limiting the death, destruction of war to what it is necessary .
 The principle of military necessity can be construed so broadly as to allow almost any conduct in war, if political authorities or military commanders do not approach the use of force with a spirit consistent with the human-cost-reduction purpose of just-war theory .
 Mark Twain's War Prayer is a fictional account of a prayer delivered by a holy man addressing a church congregation . It is a narrow construction of military necessity that is Mark Twain’s War Prayer Case Case .
 "With them, in spirit, we also go forth from the sweet peace of our beloved firesides to smite the foe," says the author .
 We ask it, in the spirit of love, of Him Who is the Source of Love, and who is the ever-faithful refuge and friend of all that are sore beset and seek His aid .
 War is highly destructive, barbaric in its implications for the human condition, says POINT POINT War . War is 'highly destructive' and 'barbaric' in implications for human condition .
 People still see it as a legitimate remedy for resolving human conflicts . Yet, it still has legitimacy among people who see it still have legitimacy . It's still being used as a way to resolve human conflicts, experts say .
 Armed force is used only to destroy or substantially weaken an enemy’s warmaking capability, Clausewitz said . Armed force should only be used to destroy, substantially weaken, according to Clausewitz's theory of war .
 Destroying an enemy’s warmaking capability focuses destructive efforts on an adversary's armed forces . Only those parts of the society’�s infrastructure that directly contribute to its warmaking effort . Destroying a warmaking ability focuses efforts on the armed forces of an adversary’
 It is not a call to destroy an entire society, its population, or anything else of material or cultural value . It's not to destroy society, it's to destroy anything else that has value .
 People will still be killed and property destroyed, but probably far less collateral damage will be sustained when the principle of military necessity is narrowly interpreted . The destructiveness of war should be limited to what is absolutely necessary for military purposes, says Julian Zelizer .
 At the time, many defenders of this strategy saw these raids as undermining societal morale in enemy countries, thus weakening an enemy’s will to resist . Many defenders of the strategy saw this strategy as undermining society morale in .
 postwar evaluation of strategic bombing and other uses of air power raised a serious challenge to this rationale . Post-war evaluation of bombing raises serious questions about the rationale of bombing .
 Rage among survivors contributed in many cases to an increased will to resist rather than submit, says survivor's lawyer . Rage also contributed to the rise in resistance among survivors, he says .
 If so, obliteration bombing proved to be counterproductive or dysfunctional, even militarily speaking . The U.S. has not been able to obliterate any of its bases in Iraq .
 There can be no moral justification under just-war doctrine for such mass death and destruction, writes John Avlon . Just war doctrine does not serve legitimate military purposes, he says .
 Just because military purposes are served, not enough to justify any conduct in war . Just because . military purposes . served, of course, is not enough, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Additional conditions need to be met to satisfy jus in jus obligations . Additional conditions must be met .
 An effort must be made to spare noncombatants and other defenseless persons . Noncombatants must be spared, says the U.S. president .
 Noncombatants are not the proper object of warfare . Civilian populations should not be the subject of warfare, author says .
 Even captured enemy soldiers are now defenseless persons who may be taken prisoner but may not be executed just because they are prisoners . The U.S. government may not execute prisoners simply because they're prisoners .
 Prisoners of war have rights, and these have been made part of international law . Prisoner of war prisoners of war are entitled to rights, according to the UN .
 This is why the establishment of the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by the U.S. has been so controversial . The prison is located in Guantanamo Bay and is located near Cuba's Guantanamo Bay .
 The prison was established following the overthrow of the Taliban in Afghanistan in the fall of 2001 . It was established to hold suspected terrorists after the Taliban's overthrow in 2001 .
 Prisoners could not invoke the international legal rights associated with prisoners of war . As a result, they were not able to invoke those rights . That's disputed by critics of American prison policies in Cuba and elsewhere .
 A distinction is often drawn between counterforce and countervalue targets . Counterforce is often used to be used to target terrorists in the U.S.
 Counterforce targets include military headquarters, troop or tank formations, combat aircraft, ships, ships and other military installations . The destruction of these would directly weaken an enemy’s warmaking capability .
 Countervalue targets are factories, rail junctions, civilian airports, and power plants in or near cities that contribute to an enemy’s warmaking capability or overall war effort . The list of countervalue targets includes factories, airports, power plants, factories, and rail networks .
 Interstate Conflict countervalue targets usually produces more civilian casualties than counterforce targeting . Counterforce targets usually produce more civilian, noncombatant casualties . Countervalue targets are more likely to be targeted by counterforce than countervalue targeting .
 The means used to accomplish military purposes need to be proportional to the goal . Moreover, the means used in military purposes must be proportionate to the end of the war .
 Navy warships may disable propeller so they can board and search cargo instead of sinking an enemy merchant ship .
 Some just-war theorists invoke the dual or double-effect principle in dealing with the moral problem of killing noncombatants and producing collateral damage in warfare . Just-war theory: Killers are killed in war, not killed in combat, are collateral damage .
 If the intent is to destroy a legitimate target that contributes to an enemy’s warmaking capability or overall war effort, then every reasonable effort must be made to avoid unnecessary casualties or other destruction .
 Dropping bombs, sending missiles, landing artillery shells, or firing on such a target may also have unintended human and material consequences . The bad effect may also be the bad effect of dropping bombs or sending missiles .
 Just-war theorists argue that killing noncombatants or destroying civilian property may be morally justifiable when both effects occur simultaneously or the good effect precedes the bad . The good effect of destroying noncombatant or killing civilian property can be justifiable .
 It is accepted that a few workers may still be killed when the factory is destroyed . For example, targeting an armaments factory at night when most workers were expected to be at home .
 A bomb may go astray and kill some people in a residential area next to the factory, even though efforts were made to avoid this unfortunate outcome . Or a bomb may kill some of the people in the residential area .
 Just-war theory puts emphasis on avoiding war in the first place . Bad things happen in war, which is why just war theory puts so much emphasis on avoid war .
 If warriors intend the bad effect or if it precedes the good, such conduct does not satisfy the principle of double effect and is therefore morally wrong . Such conduct is morally wrong, says the author of the book .
 The problem is that this good effect depends upon achieving the bad effect first . "Good effect" depends on achieving the good effect first, says CNN.com .
 If factory production must be halted, then the factory itself should be targeted . As many workers as possible can be spared, as many workers should be spared . It's hoped that as many as possible as many people could be spared in the strike .
 Any weapon can be used immorally, but some could not be used morally even if one intended to do so . Some weapons could be used moral even if they were intended to be used in the wrong way .
 Immoral weapons are those that are indiscriminate or cause needless suffering . Immoral weapon is those that cause unnecessary suffering or indiscriminate harm .
 A rifle is not immoral in itself; if used properly it can be used with discrimination, sparing noncombatants . If used properly, a rifle is used to protect noncombatant civilians . A rifle can also be used to discriminate against people in the military .
 If used improperly to murder noncombatants, for example, it is the action and not the weapon that is immoral . It is not the action but the weapon is the weapon .
 The same is true for most conventional bombs delivered accurately by airplanes or missiles, such as missiles . The bombs are delivered by airplanes and missiles .
 There has been interest in a third category of just-war principles, jus post bellum . What should be done after the shooting stops to create a just and stable peace? Just-War Principles .
 One suggestion is ""no witch hunts"" or stripping the vanquished of all their rights . This seems to be increasingly important in those cases where a Western power stays on for a number of years after major combat operations have ended .
 "The more accurate the better is true from both a military and a moral position. The more accurate, the better, the more accurate you can be, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Destruction of a legitimate military target is more likely, and collateral or unnecessary death and destruction can be avoided .
 By contrast, wildly inaccurate weapons eliminate the distinction between combatant and noncombatant . Weapons include chemical or biological agents such as germ warfare agents .
 Such weapons usually not useful militarily, as winds disperse chemical agents indiscriminately, and diseases can spread to both sides of the battlefield . Such weapons can be used in a war, but not militarily .
 The international consensus that led to these chemical and biological conventions rests on this moral argument . The international . consensus that . led to . these chemical . conventions rests upon this moral . argument .
 These weapons fail another moral test by causing needless suffering . Not only are indiscriminate, they fail to meet moral standards by killing innocent people .
 Rifle bullets or other antipersonnel weapons designed to prolong or otherwise increase agony also fail this moral test . Rifle bullets also fail the moral test. They should not be used as weapons that prolong or increase agony .
 Weapons that are intended to enhance rather than reduce human suffering have also been defined in treaties as illegal . Most categories of weapons that are aimed at enhancing rather than reducing human suffering are also illegal .
 The two atomic bombs were dropped on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 . The bombings were justified by many on the utilitarian grounds that the bombings would shorten the war . The U.S. dropped the bombs on Japan in 1945.
 The Japanese had fought tenaciously to defend islands in the Pacific such as Iwo Jima and Guam . It was believed they would fight even greater determination to defend their homeland .
 Others questioned the morality of bombing people even for this purpose, suggesting that if the bombs were to be used, they should have been directed toward strictly military targets .
 Decision makers responded that the Japanese leaders could take the blame, as they made the decision to locate military-related plants where they did . Decision makers said that the decision was made to locate the plants where the plants were .
 Each of the weapons dropped on Japan was less than 20 kilotons in yield . Each weapon dropped on the Japanese island was under 20 kiloton in yield.
 Many nuclear weapons today have a much larger megaton or multimegaton yield, with such heat, blast, and radiation effects that they cannot be used with discrimination . So these weapons fail on human-suffering grounds as well as human-suffering grounds .
 Some argue that lower-yield, tactical nuclear weapons can be used with discrimination and need not cause unnecessary suffering . On the other hand, some have argued that such weapons need not be used unnecessarily .
 Unlike chemical and biological agents, nuclear weapons have not yet been declared illegal, however ill advised or immoral their use might be . Indicative of the lack of consensus on these issues, they have yet to be declared illegal . Nuclear weapons are not yet considered illegal, but they have not been
 Describe the diverse purposes that motivate states and the criteria state authorities use to decide whether or not to intervene militarily in another country . The question of when to use force in armed interventions is an important national security matter .
 Some argue that the sole criterion should be national interest, particularly if a vital interest is at stake . Others say national interest should be the national interest .
 Domestic critics challenged post-Cold War interventions by the U.S. in Somalia, Rwanda, Haiti and Bosnia .
 U.S. and NATO intervention in Libya in 2011 raised similar concerns . Libya's intervention in 2011 was similar to that in Libya .
 Critics questioned whether sufficient U.S. interests were involved to bear the costs or risks involved . Some of these ventures might have seemed to justify justifying them on purely humanitarian grounds . Others questioned if sufficient United States interests were .
 When national interests or objectives are compelling, legal restrictions are often overlooked . Legal restrictions often often overlooked or stretched to justify national purposes .
 French term raison d’etat refers to the rationale of justifying state policy only by the state’s own security interests or objectives . Raison d'etat is a French term for justifying state policies only by state's own security objectives .
 In 1914 Germany justified its invasion of Belgium on precisely these grounds . In 1914, Germany invaded Belgium on the same grounds .
 Belgium claimed a right to be neutral in the dispute between France and Germany . Germany had no particular quarrel with Belgium, which was neutral in dispute with France .
 German chancellor apologizes for violating Belgium's neutrality, but says it was necessary to protect Germany from an attack by France . In a rare diplomatic admission in such circumstances, the German chancellor apologized for violating Belgian neutrality and thus its sovereignty .
 The Belgian experience is reminiscent of the plight of the people on the Aegean island of Melos off the Greek coast when confronted by Athens . Melos is a Greek island off the coast of the island of the same name .
 Melos claimed a right to be neutral in the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta . Melos had claimed to have been neutral during the war .
 The Athenian had the capabilities to force the Melians into subjection, which they proceeded to do . Even though we dispute the Athenian claim to any right based on its power position, they nevertheless had the capability to force them to subjection .
 In the absence of an invitation from the legitimate government of a state, even humanitarian intervention is illegal . Even humanitarian intervention violates the principle of nonintervention in the domestic affairs of the state .
 The UN Charter does not give the Security Council authority to use force for humanitarian purposes per se . UN Charter doesn't give the UN Charter authority for use of force in humanitarian situations . UN charter does not allow the Security council to use military force on humanitarian grounds .
 Armed intervention under UN auspices in the internal affairs of a state, however justifiable the humanitarian purpose might seem, is legitimate in this strict interpretation only if the problem cannot likely be contained, thus posing a threat to international peace and security . Armed intervention is under the auspices under UN
 Some argue that interventions to stop genocide or other serious human rights violations do have a humanitarian basis or grounding in customary international law . Not everyone agrees, but not everyone agrees .
 The UN Charter does allow intervention for these purposes when genocide or other human rights violations rise to the level of being a threat to international peace and security . Article 42 is the criterion the Security Council uses to authorize such actions .
 Serbs stated that whatever actions they took in the province were therefore an internal matter, and outside intervention was a violation of Yugoslavian sovereignty . Serbs said that outside intervention would be an infringement of their sovereignty .
 The Serbian policy of systematic ethnic cleansing led to NATO military action on the grounds of humanitarian intervention . NATO claimed Serbia's actions were a threat to regional peace and security .
 NATO did not ask for the blessing of the United Nations for NATO’s air campaign, given opposition within the UN Security Council on both political and legal grounds . NATO has not asked for the approval of the U.N. for the air campaign . It is significant that NATO did
 Humanitarian motives may genuinely accompany actions taken primarily for national-interest reasons . National-interest motives may be genuine, but they may not be for humanitarian reasons .
 In some cases, humanitarian motives are presented as a pretext used by political leaders and diplomats in an effort to justify armed interventions done exclusively for national-interest reasons . In other cases, however, humanitarian reasons are used as pretexts to justify military intervention .
 Propagandists like to present humanitarian purposes for armed intervention to make the behavior seem less self-serving . Propaganda often tries to make it seem more self-defensible .
 Because states usually intervene to serve their interests does not mean that they always do so for only self-serving purposes . It does not always serve the interests of the state, however, of course .
 They may wish to intervene quite genuinely for humanitarian purposes or, consistent with their broad interests, to contribute to restoration of international peace and security . They may also want to intervene genuinely .
 Or they may wish to use military force in efforts to stop drug smugglers . The U.S. may want to use force to stop smugglers .
 In such cases states may weigh the costs and benefits of armed intervention or in terms of how well they serve the human condition . States may also weigh the benefits and costs of such intervention .
 Use of force for humanitarian purposes may cause even more bloodshed than if no intervention had taken place . In some cases the use of force may cause more bloodshed if no action was taken .
 Armed intervention at relatively low cost may succeed in providing greater security and meeting human needs . Armed intervention may help provide greater security for the world's needs .
 The difficulty is that expected net costs or benefits to human beings are not always easy to estimate accurately . The difficulty, of course, is that that is not always accurate . But the difficulty is to estimate net costs of human beings .
 Events in 1989 brought an end to the Cold War but not to armed intervention . Competing Criteria for Decisions on Armed Intervention Events was set up in 1989 .
 Subsequent years have been marked by a continuation of armed intervention by outside states and multilateral coalitions of states, such as Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Humanitarian efforts in Sudan confined primarily to diplomatic and peacekeeping efforts, the latter under the auspices of the African Union . Sometimes interventions for humanitarian purposes seem too little or too late to stop the bloodshed .
 Policymakers face difficult decisions about whether or not to intervene with armed force to respond to aggression, prevent or stop genocide, restore order, or maintain the peace . Policymakers have to make difficult decisions on whether to intervene .
 Armed interventions are difficult (if not destined for failure) if they proceed without domestic political support . Armed interventions will be difficult without support from domestic political parties .
 Even authoritarian regimes find it easier to intervene militarily when their publics support such action . This is particularly true in democracies, but even authoritarian regimes often find it harder to do so when their people support it .
 A problem for policymakers is how fickle popular support often can be, shifting over time to opposition, particularly as the human and material costs mount . Policymakers need to be aware of the fact that public support is fickle and fickle .
 Even in the absence of popular support, policymakers may choose to intervene or sustain their military presence in other countries when they understand important interests are at stake . The U.S. has a history of intervening or sustaining military operations in other nations .
 Not all countries have the economic and military capabilities they need to intervene . Such contingencies may be far away, well beyond their borders, say experts .
 Iraq and Afghanistan make additional interventions problematic even when humanitarian or other factors might warrant doing so . Stand-up commitments in Europe, Japan, South Korea, and elsewhere make additional intervention problematic .
 Some argue armed intervention should be pursued only if there is a vital national interest to be served . Some argue that armed intervention is only if it is in the national interest .
 There is no escaping the practical difficulty in trying to define precisely what the national interest might be in a particular case . Even if one considers this criterion to be decisive, as many realists do, there is no escape from this .
 The national interest is subject to multiple interpretations, but even with this ambiguity, it remains part of the decision-making calculus . National interest is a matter of national interest in the United States .
 A consensus has been forming, mainly in the last half of the 20th century that continues to the present . It holds that human beings have rights that may supersede those claimed by sovereign states . Human rights supersede that of sovereign states and supersede their rights .
 This human rights consensus rests on increasing understanding and acceptance of respect for life, human dignity, and justice or fairness as universal ethical or moral principles that have global application to individuals, groups, and other categories of human beings .
 Voluntary assistance for relief in natural disasters is one manifestation of these principles in action . Voluntary aid is voluntary assistance to help victims of natural disasters . The U.S. government is encouraging voluntary assistance for disaster relief .
 The enormous human and material cost suffered by the victims of mass destruction and atrocities throughout the 20th century resulted in substantial growth in international law . International law has come to define certain civil or political, social, and economic rights .
 When such human rights violations are also understood to endanger international peace and security, there is clearer legal ground for humanitarian intervention under UN Security Council auspices, following Chapter VII of the UN Charter .
 Armed intervention has very real costs not just to people and property in states and societies subject to intervention, but also to the armed forces conducting such interventions . The Net Effect on the Human Condition is on the human condition . The net effect of armed intervention on the nation and society can be seen
 The extent of these costs usually cannot be known with certainty, but policymakers nevertheless try to estimate what they are likely to be . The full cost of the project is not known, but the extent of the costs can be estimated .
 Some human costs (for example, psychological damage) may not be known for many years, if then . Deaths and other casualties can be counted and property losses estimated .
 The problem is compounded when one tries to estimate what these costs might be in advance of an armed intervention . The cost of armed intervention in Syria could be much higher than the cost of a military operation .
 The criterion typically plays on the minds of policymakers who contemplate whether armed intervention will improve or worsen the human condition . Nevertheless, this criterion plays on .
 At the very least, expected net effect on the human condition can influence how an armed intervention is implemented . At the least, the net effect of a military intervention can influence the outcome .
 Using this criterion, policymakers may select options expected to minimize or reduce adverse consequences to both armed forces and the peoples subject to their actions . Policymakers can select options that minimize adverse consequences .
 Unilateral armed intervention, regardless of motivation or justification, has come increasingly into disfavor . Policymakers are more prone to look for multilateral support and cooperation in conducting armed interventions .
 UN Security Council mandates, for example, provide political and legal grounds for proceeding . UN security Council mandates provide political, legal grounds to proceed against the Syrian regime .
 In the absence of such Security Council action, proceeding multilaterally under Article 51 as a collective-defense response is still viewed by most policymakers as politically preferable to unilateral action .
 Bush administration sought UN Security Council resolution in fall of 2002 requiring Iraq to readmit weapons inspectors . This helps explain why the George W Bush administration had a generally dismissive attitude toward the United Nations .
 This effort included an elaborate oral and visual presentation by Colin Powell . Colin Powell, the secretary of state, was the subject of the presentation .
 These seven criteria often compete with one another, and choices concerning how much weight to give to one over another have to be made sooner or later .
 "We are left with an analytical framework that specifies factors that typically are part of decisions to engage in armed intervention," says the author of the book .
 Many trees have been sacrificed to provide the paper for scholars and political leaders to pontificate on the causes of interstate conflict and the use of force . Many people believe these are the defining issues in the study of international relations and world politics .
 Current policymakers dealing with dictators and authoritarian leaders in such countries as North Korea and Iran would probably agree . North Korea's Kim Jong-ho is the world's most authoritarian leader .
 The situation in Libya exemplified the complexities of deciding to actually engage in military action against other regimes, says CNN's John Sutter . Libya exemplifies the complexities involved in the decision to engage in a military action .
 Despite U.S. and NATO intervention, the war dragged on for months until Kaddafi’s death in October 2011 . Kaddafi died in 2011 after being captured by rebels in Libya .
 War should be viewed as an instrument of policy, but this requires thinking carefully about what objectives are being sought, what capabilities can be brought to bear, and what should be done if the original plan is not achieved .
 A series of questions also arise once the shooting stops. Furthermore, in the modern age a series of . questions . arise once a shooting stops .
 The world today has changed in at least one aspect—interstate wars have become rare . Interstate wars are rare, but they are still rare, the author says .
 Exam at mypoliscilab.com laws, and rules oi the game have been devised by clashing kings, prime ministers, chancellors, and presidents to influence, if not govern, their international contests .
 Using force is often seen by decision makers as a rational instrument of policy or means to attain their national objectives or serve their national interests . Certainly, using force is seen as an effective means of achieving their objectives or serving their interests .
 In our world of such increasing dangers as nuclear proliferation and recurrent crises of authority that tempt external armed intervention, we can only hope most states will see the logic behind the need in collectively abiding by a common set of rules .
 Explain how international relations practitioners use the rationality assumption to determine when it is in their interest to use force . Use this article to help students understand the concept of force in international relations .
 Policymakers may see the use of force as necessary or as a cost-effective way to achieve their objectives . Although they may miscalculate, policymakers may see force necessary or cost effective ways to achieve objectives .
 The use of force still has legitimacy among policymakers in many countries, particularly when peaceful remedies have been exhausted . However desirable it may be to eliminate interstate conflict, it may still have legitimacy . Use of force is still a key part of the U.S. policy .
 A rigorous application of logic and math to aid the understanding of why wars occur . The U.S. has been at odds with the U.N. since 2001 .
 Illustate how the international system, the individual and group, and the state and societal levels of analysis help to understand the causes of interstate conflicts . Illustrate how the individual, group and state level of analysis helps to understand causes of international conflicts . E Illustrate . how the . international
 Levels of analysis is an excellent way to formulate hypotheses as to why a conflict has occurred . Using the levels of analysis can be used to form hypotheses about the causes of conflict .
 Factors or explanations may involve individuals, small groups, the nature of state and society, or the structure of the international system . The world's power distribution among states is one of the most important factors or explanations to consider .
 An example provided was explanations as to why the U.S. invaded Iraq in 2003 . An example was given as to explain the reasons for the invasion .
 The 19th-century Prussian writer and military officer Carl von Clausewitz argued that war should only be pursued as an instrument of national policy not for glory or personal satisfaction .
 Such factors as friction and the fog of war often cause the best-laid plans to go awry . Although policymakers should plan as rationally as possible, the appropriate means to achieve the desired ends often fail .
 Illustrate how military force-employment doctrines of deterrence, defense, and warfighting apply not only to great-power strategic nuclear arsenals, but also to states with smaller arsenals . Illustrates how force-employed doctrines apply to great power and smaller-power states .
 Warfighting can be employed for offensive reasons or in retaliation for being attacked . Deterrence doctrines attempt to prevent an adversary from attacking, defense is designed to mitigate the effects of an attack if deterrence fails, and warfighting is used for offensive purposes or for retaliation .
 The best historical overview of nuclear strategy and the individuals associated with various doctrines . The best . overview of . nuclear strategy .
 A highly influential work that utilizes game theory to produce insights on conflict and nuclear bargaining . Game theory is a highly influential piece of history that uses game theory .
 Just-war theory (sometimes cailed just-war doctrine) is an example of normative theory that prescribes right conduct . It prescribes how states and their agents ought to act . The theory is a normative theory of right conduct, how states should act .
 The preeminent book on the topic. m Describe the diverse purposes that motivate states and the criteria state authorities use to decide whether or not to intervene .
 A sobering overview of the repeated use of U.S. military force to change regimes . The unintended consequences that usually result from the use of military force usually result .
 To defend the territory of the state To settle personal disputes To loot another territory To demonstrate military prowess 2. To loot a territory to prove military prowess, to defend the state, to show military prowess .
 The state and society level of analysis might suggest that_ are responsible for increasing or decreasing the likelihood of war . heads of states and heads of societies . political regimes and economic systems . democrats and Republicans terrorists and armies .
 To destroy or substantially weaken an enemy’s warfighting or warmaking capability, to destroy or . substantially weaken their political will, economic capital, political will and political will . To destroy, substantially weaken, to weaken, an enemy's underlying civilian productive capacity . To weaken an opponent
 Political capabilities and military will . Military capabilities and economic strength . Will to use means and political capabilities 12. Military capabilities . Political capabilities, political will .
 The threatening state’s perceived capabilities and their credibility . Threatening state's perceived weaknesses and their capabilities . Threatened state's propensity to use force and the battle readiness of their forces . The threat state's political and economic capital .
 Concerns over new nuclear weapon states include heavy reliance on the threat of retaliation as the basis for deterrence . The command and control system . that a small number of nuclear weapons in a country’s arsenal might tempt another state to launch a first strike .
 Just-war theory seeks to end the war . limit its destructive consequences. create total destruction regardless of the consequences . force one side to surrender unconditionally. force one part of the war unconditionally . limit the consequences of a war to end it . limit it's destructive consequences . limit
 According to the principle of jus in hello, an army need only employ the least destructive weapons . An army must employ the most destructive weapons in order to defeat enemies .
 When bad effects of an action precede the good When an enemy did it first Never 21. When the good effects of a person's action precedes the bad effects, the bad ones precede them .
 The conflict is unlikely to be contained within a state, thus posing a threat to international peace and security . The conflict will not be contained in any state, it has been claimed .
 The conflict is likely to be contained within a state, but there is a likelihood that violence in the state will continue perpetually . The conflict will likely be contained in a state but it is likely that violence will continue to exist .
 A state fails to protect its citizens from mob violence or private militias, says CNN.com's John Sutter . A state must protect citizens from mobs or militias, he says . Sutter: A state should not be able to keep citizens safe .
 The state perceives going to war as in its vital national interest . When the legal restrictions were enacted prior to 1990, legal restrictions had to be enacted . The state persevered as a nation's national security .
 Policymakers have personal vendettas against another state’s policymakers . Policymakers are trying to get revenge for each other's decisions .
 Allowing citizens to vote in another state’s elections . Intervening in another states’ internal affairs going to war with another state 25. Allowing their citizens to . vote in . another state's elections . Entering into multiple collective security agreements. Intervenering in
 From terrorism to globai disease or environmental degradation, the challenges have become transnational rather than international . The challenges are transnational, rather than transnational than international, say the experts .
 T She Sandbox is an online forum for service members in Afghanistan and elsewhere in the “global war on terror,” returned veterans, spouses, and caregivers .
 Entries range from reports on operations to distant Afghani villages that at night are under Taliban control . Marines were deployed to protect the United States embassy in Cairo during the overthrow of the Mubarak regime in early 2011 .
 What is extraordinary is that instantaneous personal communications from war zones even occur . What is remarkable is that instantaneously personal communications even occur, says CNN.com .
 Such a possibility would have been unheard of ten years ago, but are all too common now in an age of globalization . Such a possible outcome would be unheard of in an era of globalization, but now is common now .
 The conflict these men and women have experienced is not the classic clash of conventional armies on the battlefield . The conflict has been described as not a battle between conventional armies but a civil war .
 Chapter 10 involves wars in which there is no frontline or rear area, and personal relations with the local population are often more important than the amount of firepower one can bring to bear on a target .
 With the rapid expansion of globalization, the role and importance of transnational, nongovernmental actors has expanded dramatically . The role of transhuman organizations has been expanded dramatically in recent years . The United States is one of the fastest-growing countries in the world .
 The rise of armed groups is one aspect of the dark side of globalization . Here we will examine one important aspect of globalization -- the rise of the armed groups .
 Despite their differences, all engage in some form of asymmetric warfare that adversely affects states and societies . The U.S. and allies are engaged in some of the world's most asymmetric wars .
 Interstate warfare has historically involved conflicts between states with similar capabilities . The 5th-century conflict was likely to have occurred between 5th century and 7th century .
 Greek city-states, European states since the 17th century, India and Pakistan in the 20th century . The United States and its coalition allies against Iraq in 1991 and again in 2003 .
 Interstate wars, however, have become relatively rare over the past fifty years . Armed groups have come to pose what some see as the major threat to international security . Interstate wars have been relatively rare in the past 50 years, while armed groups pose a major threat .
 Athens and Sparta both armed their soldiers with similar long pikes, bows and arrows, and shields . Both sides armed their troops with similar pikes and bows, bows, arrows and shields.
 Cavalry was used for scouting missions and harassment of the enemy’s lines . Cavalry used to harass the enemy's lines and scout missions .
 Strategy essentially involved one side attempting to crush and rout the enemy on the battlefield and lay siege to and capture cities . Strategy was essentially one side trying to crush, rout and rout and capture the enemy in the battlefield . Strategy essentially involves one side laying siege on and capturing cities .
 European armies in the 18th and 19th centuries emulated each other’s organization, training, and weapons with the goal of concentrating and using these capabilities on what Clausewitz termed the enemies’ center of gravity .
 Asymmetric warfare involves a lack of congruity in the capabilities and strategies of two foes . The U.S. has been involved in Afghanistan in the past two decades .
 Asymmetric warfare is defined as a situation in which a nonstate opponent has developed capabilities and strategies designed to diminish greatly a state’s capabilities and strengths or render them irrelevant . More specifically, asymmetric warfare can be defined as the nonstate opponents have developed capabilities .
 An example would be the al-Qaeda attack on September 11, 2001, on the U.S. homeland . An example of that attack on 9/11 would be an example .
 The terrorists hijacked American aircraft and essentially turned them into deadly assault missiles . Lacking traditional missile capability, the terrorists hijacked U.S. aircraft .
 IEDs are responsible for the vast majority of U.S. casualties in Iraq and Afghanistan . Simple and simple improvised explosive devices used by insurgents are also responsible for most casualties . IEDIs are used to carry out attacks in Iraq, Afghanistan .
 The insurgents do not have aircraft, helicopters, tanks, or sophisticated technology, so they have devised alternative capabilities and strategies to attack the United States and its allies .
 The result has been to diminish U.S. military strength, one small attack at a time . The result is to diminish United States military strength .
 Even within more classic symmetric warfare scenarios, one side can utilize asymmetric tactics on the battlefield . Even within symmetric war scenarios, asymmetric warfare is still possible .
 The deployment of small, special operations forces to breach enemy defenses has a long tradition in warfare . Special operations forces have a long history of breaching enemy defenses in the past .
 The Greeks’ use of the Trojan horse to break the siege of Troy is one example . The Trojan horse was used by the Greeks to help break the Siege of Troy .
 In 1940, the Erench constructed defensive fortifications in anticipation that the invading Germans would engage in frontal assaults as they had done in World War I . The Germans utilized the tactic of blitzkrieg, which involved the creative integration of fast-moving tank battalions supported by air power to
 These turning points represent new faces of war and have been termed revolutions in military affairs . The turning points have been known as turning points in the world's armed forces .
 The state most creative in combining such weapons with new tactics and military organization held the key to success, says CNN's John Defterios .
 With each revolution in military affairs, defeated or threatened powers raced to catch up, hoping to turn the strategic asymmetric disadvantage they faced into a more symmetrical conflict or competition .
 Armed groups utilizing asymmetric warfare against the ruling states and societies have existed throughout history . Armed groups have existed in the past .
 The technology available to them was primitive by today's standards . What they all had in common was that the technology available was primitive .
 The specter of mass casualties was limited, and the threats were generally geographically localized in one region or another . The threat was limited to mass casualties, but the threat was localized .
 The information revolution has so dramatically changed the strategic landscape in recent decades . What is historically unprecedented today is how one particular aspect of globalization . Information revolution is so important that it is unprecedented today, says CNN.com .
 Armed groups have been able to acquire weapons on the global arms market of such alarming firepower that security forces are at times outgunned . Armed groups are able to buy weapons such as weapons from the global market .
 Insurgents in Somalia, Afghanistan, and Pakistan are similarly awash in weapons . Many weapons are provided by international arms traders, many providing them to insurgents .
 A Pakistani-American, David Headley, allegedly went to Mumbai, took photographs of possible targets, and noted GPS coordinates . Headley is accused of going to Mumbai and photographing possible targets . He is believed to be the mastermind behind the Mumbai terror attack .
 During the attack the ten terrorists maintained ceil phone and VOIP contact with operational planners in Pakistan . Ten terrorists maintained contact with operatives in Pakistan during the attack .
 Technology in an era of globalization can work as much to the benefit of an armed group as it can for the state . Technology in the age of globalization works as much as it does for the security forces .
 Terrorism, as politically motivated violence, aims to achieve a demoralizing effect on publics and governments . Terrorism aims to demoralize publics, governments, and demoralize them, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The very act of attacking innocents raises the shock value and sends a message that the government is unable to protect its own citizens . The very attack on innocents is the most shocking act of attack on innocent people .
 The concern is that terrorism eats away at the social-political fabric of many states, undermines democracy, provides a rationale for a government to delay democratic reforms, and can increase tension among states . Terrorists can also be seen as a pretext for delaying democratic reforms in many countries .
 The result is often the impression that the world is in a state of chaos, and international order and authority are collapsing, says David Cameron . The result of the situation is that international order is collapsing, he says .
 It is understandable why terrorism is considered a major challenge to international security . It's understandable why terrorists are considered a big challenge to the world's security .
 Terrorism is usually viewed as a weapon of the weak, so it is associated with such nonstate actors as clandestine terrorist groups and insurgencies . Terrorism is considered a weapon for the weak .
 The definition of terrorism is neutral and can be applied to any number of armed groups, some of whom pose serious threats to ruling authorities . But our definition of terror is neutral .
 Terrorism continues to be used, for example, by drug traffickers in northern Mexico against government officials, journalists, and photographers .
 The insurgent organization al-Shabaab controls large geographic areas of Somalia . The group controls large areas of the country .
 Vast areas of Pakistan’s Federally Administered Tribal Areas are also under insurgent control . The region is also known as Pakistan's FATA region .
 States have terrorized many more people than have terrorist groups or insurgencies . State terror has terrorized people more than terrorist groups, insurgencies, than terrorism groups .
 The focus in this chapter, however, is on the challenges posed by armed terrorist and criminal groups who use violence to achieve political objectives . The focus of this chapter will be on the challenge posed by terrorists and criminals .
 The Zealots, for example, were a Jewish sect that appeared in 6e. and assassinated local government officials in an attempt to ignite uprisings and drive the Romans out of Palestine . The Zealot was a sect that assassinated local . government officials .
 The Middle East spawned the Assassins . Muslims killed political rivals of the potentate for whom they worked . The Assassins were Muslims who killed the political enemies of their enemies .
 Christian Europe also had its experience with terror during the 15th-century Spanish Inquisition . The Spanish Inquisition combined the forces of church and state in trials and burning of accused witches . The Inquisition even touched the New World, most notably at Salem, Massachusetts .
 Historically, the vast majority of terrorism in traditional societies has been religiously inspired . Terrorists often claimed they were carrying out the will of God . Terrorist terrorists often claimed to be carrying out their will .
 These historical examples are a good reminder that religiously inspired terrorism is a major contemporary concern, not new .
 It was the French Revolution of 1789 that popularized the term terrorism . The French Revolution was a precursor to terrorism, but it was not until 1789 .
 During this period, terrorism was associated with the state, as the guillotine was used to behead publicly those who were declared enemies of the state . Terrorists were killed by public beheadings during this period .
 More highly developed forms of state terrorism were practiced in both the Stalinist Soviet Union and Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s . In later years, even more highly developed .
 Such tactics also found their way into Saddam Hussein’s Iraq as well as other states and societies . Whether on the left or right, secular or religious, they were used in Iraq and Syria .
 The 19th century witnessed the rise of secular or nonreligious terrorism on the part of groups that were opposed to particular governments . Terrorists were often involved in non-religious terrorism .
 During the 1800s, both the creative and destructive effects of the scientific and industrial revolutions became obvious in Europe and North America . The industrial revolution was the result of scientific and scientific discoveries .
 Humanity grew confident in its ability to master nature and design and create the perfect society . Humanity grew more confident in . the ability to . master nature .
 Karl Marx and other communists demonstrated faith in their vision of a worker’s paradise established after the victory of the downtrodden classes over their capitalist oppressors . Karl Marx showed faith in his vision of the worker's paradise established by the workers .
 Other leftists, however, were impatient with the slow unfolding of history and wished to hasten the revolutionary process . Other leftists were impatient and wished the revolution was over .
 Collectively known as anarchists, anarchists, they accomplished a number of terrorist spectaculars . Collected in the 1980s and 1990s, anarchists were involved in several terrorist attacks .
 In the 1890s alone, anarchist victims included the presidents of France and Italy, the kings of Portugal and Italy . The empress of Austria, the empress and the prime minister of Spain were among the victims .
 Anarchists attempted to assassinate the German kaiser and chancellor . Anarchists also attempted to kill the German Kaiser and Chancellor .
 What distinguished them from modern-day terrorists, however, is that their victims were almost always government officials, not innocent civilians . The victims were government officials and not innocent citizens .
 The Russian anarchist group known as the People’s Will, for example, rarely placed bombs in public places and never kidnapped schoolchildren or shot people in the knee .
 Ethnic violence and terrorism came to the fore following the collapse of the major continental monarchies in Russia, Germany, and the Austro-Hungarian Empire following World War I .
 Terrorist violence is particularly pronounced in Eastern and Central Europe . Under the banner of national selfdetermination, terrorist violence was particularly pronounced .
 Having fought Nazi Germany, fascist Italy, and Japan in defense of freedom . Having fought for freedom in the past .
 Western European leaders found it difficult to answer nationalist leaders in the colonial world who asked why their countries should not also be free from outside control . Western Europe leaders struggled to answer nationalists in colonial world .
 European reluctance to end colonial rule led to nationalist movements, often with a terrorist wing, to fight British, French, Belgian, Belgian and Portuguese domination .
 By the 1960s European colonial rule was effectively ended in most areas of the globe . By the 1970s colonial rule had effectively been effectively ended .
 The Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and their respective allies and supporters lent an ideological cast to much of the terrorism perpetrated from the late 1940s to the late 1980s . Much of the Cold War was centered around the United States and Soviet Union .
 Marxist-Leninist teachings on revolution helped to inspire and justify revolutionary movements throughout the world and justify, to such participants at least, their use of terrorism . Karl Marx himself believed terrorism to be self-defeating, Karl Marx believed it to be a form of terrorism, but Marxist-
 These movements included the Red Army Faction in Germany, Red Brigades in Italy, 17 November in Greece, Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, Shining Path of Peru, Japanese Red Army, and New People’s Army of the Philippines .
 Throughout the Cold War, insurgent organizations often combined MarxismLeninism with old-fashioned nationalist appeals . In the 1960s and '60s, insurgent groups often combined Marxist Leninism with nationalism .
 All successful revolutions, including Lenin's in Russia and Mao's in China, have relied extensively on such appeals . Lenin's Russia, Mao's China and Lenin's China revolutions have relied heavily on these appeals .
 With the end of the Cold War, most Russians acknowledged that their Marxist-Leninist vision for society was bankrupt . Most Russians acknowledge that their Marxism-Leninism vision was bankrupt with the end .
 China experienced an economic boom as the state encouraged the development of a free market . Despite its socialist pronouncements, China experienced a boom in the 1990s .
 These policies on the part of the two states most closely associated with Marxist-Leninist ideas on international revolution caused a predictable crisis of confidence for revolutionary movements around the world .
 Some, like Shining Path, simply condemned Russia and China for backsliding . Others, like the New People's Army, experienced bitter internal divisions that weakened them .
 Even organizations such as Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in the Palestinian West Bank of the Jordan River and in the Gaza Strip are fueled in part by nationalist sentiment . Despite couching their agenda in Islamic terms, even organizations like Hezbollah are fueled by nationalist sentiments .
 Israel, despite its historical association with the region, is viewed as an outpost of Western interests and values . Israel is seen as a Western outpost of the region .
 For some observers in the West, the ideological clash of democracy and communism during the Cold War has been replaced by the clash of Eastern and Western civilizations . The Cold War was replaced by a clash of Western and Eastern civilizations, some observers say .
 Others see conflicts driven by intercommunal and cultural differences that divide peoples in many parts of the world . If not a clash of civilizations, others see conflict driven by cultural differences . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful nations .
 Russia, for example, has suffered from a number of deadly suicide bombings related to ongoing ethnic conflicts in the Caucasus region . Russia, however, has also suffered from ongoing ethnic conflict in the region .
 The PLO terrorist campaign included the murder of Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics and massacres of civilians at the Rome and Vienna airports in 1985 .
 Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982 was designed to root out Palestinian terrorists . Islamist groups such as Lebanese Hezbollah, backed by Syria and Iran, began in the early 1980s its ultimately successful campaign to drive Israel out .
 Further trouble for the Israelis began in the 1990s in the wake of the first Palestinian uprising or intifada in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip .
 The United States felt relatively immune from terrorist threats in the 1950s and 1960s . Puerto Rican nationalists wanted an independent country and the Weather Underground wanted a revolution against the government .
 The United States came face to face with international terrorism in the Middle East . The U.S. came face-to-face with international terror in the region .
 With the overthrow of the U.S.-backed shah of Iran in 1978, a radical Islamic regime came to power . The regime wanted to spread its brand of Islamist radicalism to other countries .
 United States diplomats were held hostage for over a year in Iran before being released in 1981 with the aid of Canadian officials . U.S. diplomats were freed in 1981 after being held hostage in Iran .
 Libya's act of state-sponsored international terrorism galvanized cooperation among Western governments . The Benghazi attack galvanized international terrorism, more than any other single terrorist incident, in Libya . The attack was conducted by Libyan intelligence agents .
 Americans seemed to be immune from international terrorism on the home front . With the exception of the first attack on the World Trade Center in 1993, Americans seemed immune from terrorism .
 A great deal has been written on the causes of terrorism, including terrorism, terrorism and terrorism . Terrorism is a major cause for terrorism in the world .
 As is often the case with human behavior, no single factor can be identified as the root cause of the problem . But, as is often, it's not easy to identify a single factor to blame .
 It is possible, however, to break down the major categories as follows . It's possible, but it is possible to break it down to categories such as 'golden coins'
 Identify and critique three factors used to expiain the causes of terrorism . Criticise three factors: terrorism, terrorism and terrorism . Identify the causes and reasons behind terrorism .
 Analysts view some individuals who engage in terrorism as mentally disturbed or socially maladjusted . Analysts tend to be trained psychologists or psychiatrists . Some analysts view some terrorists as mentally disgusted or socially maladjusted .
 Analysis of European terrorists points to such factors as abusive or unemotional parents . Some terrorists are rebelling against authority figures as personified in their minds by the state .
 While undoubtedly some terrorists exhibit pathological behavior, to dismiss all terrorists as mentally ill is simply wrong . To dismiss all terrorist behavior as mental ill, it's simply wrong to dismiss them as mental .
 Shehzad Tanweer, 22, lived with his mother and father and worked in a fish-and-chip shop . He lived in a family home with his parents and lived with them in a local fish-based shop .
 A young person with few life prospects may choose to join a terrorist organization for the expected thrill of life in the underground . A terrorist organization may be a way to enhance his or her self-esteem by becoming a “defender of the community,” or even simply as a
 Psychological explanations often have the effect of downplaying terrorism’s political component . Such prosaic possibilities have little to do with mental illness, he says .
 These are young men without much hope of employment who had seen their communities devastated in sectarian attacks . These were young men with little hope of finding employment . They had seen communities devastated by sectarian attacks.
 "Their pride and dignity were restored. Now that they were hitting back, their pride was restored," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Now that they have hit back, they're hitting back," he says .
 Men from Arab and Islamic countries who travel to the West for schooling or employment find themselves alienated from their surroundings .
 Local mosques become a place of comfort and refuge and incubator for radical Islamist views . Local mosques are also incubator, in some cases, for radical views .
 Mohamed Atta, head of the 9/11 hijackers, and several of his colleagues living in Hamburg, Germany . Atta's colleagues were living in Germany, but he was not in the United States .
 Young Muslim men who were born and raised in a Western country turn to terrorism . Even more ominous are those cases where young Muslim men born in Western countries turn to terrorists .
 The perpetrators of the July 2005 suicide bombings in London fit this profile . The perpetrators in the 2005 London bombings were known to be British terrorists .
 Those who risk or sacrifice their lives as perpetrators of terrorism set aside instrumental rationality . Max Weber called instrumental rationality one employs in trying to match means to the ends we seek . When considering each alternative, the careful weighing of the costs and benefits of each alternative .
 Leaders of movements or groups using terror as a tactic usually do not put their own lives on the line, but learn how or learn to use the value-rational, sacrificial efforts of those they employ in an instrumentally rational way .
 The 9/11 attacks were supposedly designed to get the U.S. embroiled in wars in South Asia and hopefully the Middle East . The attacks were supposed to get involved in wars that sapped American military and economic strength . The Soviet Union's misadventure in Afghanistan from 1979 to
 Osama bin Laden is able to mobilize the selfsacrificing value rationality of others to commit suicide or take other high-risk actions to advance a cause . Ironically, it is the instrumentally rational bin Laden as well .
 One way to understand terrorism is to see it as the rational or purposive use of the irrational, that is, the intimidating effects of threats or violence to advance some objective or set of objectives, typically for political ends . Point: Terrorists often use the irrational to advance their objectives
 Resorting to terrorism is a way relatively weaker parties (those lacking armies, navies, and air forces to do their bidding) can engage in asymmetric warfare to try to level the playing field .
 Terrorism, then, is a form of what the late-19th, early-20th-century German political sociologist Max Weber, though not writing about terrorism, referred to as instrumental rationality— a means to some desired end . Terrorism is what Weber called instrumental rationality .
 Terrorists may be willing to make major sacrifices, even committing suicide, for a cause to which they are deeply committed . That said, terrorists may also make sacrifices for the cause they are committed .
 Weber called value rationality: commitment regardless of costs . This is another kind of rationality one of Weber's "value rationality" Weber called it 'value rationality'
 Ideological explanations emphasize the power of ideas . Ideological factors emphasize the importance of ideas to explain ideas .
 MarxismLeninism has proven to be powerfully attractive to individuals who seek a framework that enables them to understand not only why injustices exist in a society but also how to end them . Marxism Leninism has proved to be powerful attractive to those who seek to understand injustices .
 Terrorists, therefore, are true believers, possessed by an idea that a better society can be created if only certain obstacles or threats can be eliminated . Terrorists believe that a society can only be created by eliminating certain obstacles and threats . Terrorist terrorists believe that only certain threats or obstacles
 For Marxist-Leninists, this threat is the upper classes and bourgeoisie . For fascists, it is often minority groups or foreign immigrants . For religious extremists, it's not simply foreigners, but rather the values they represent that threaten indigenous culture .
 Religious motivation, for example, is the recurrent claim made on the part of such organizations as al-Qaeda . Religious motivation is often cited as motivation for terrorism .
 Al-Qaeda and Islamist groups are reacting against Western influences and Western presence in the Middle East . They are reacting to the forces of globalization that are undermining more traditional Islamic societies and their ways of life, CNN's Peter Bergen says .
 Environmental grievances can affect a community can be social, political, or economic in nature . Environmental grievances are often social or political grievances that affect the community .
 ‘Community’ can be broadly defined, referring to either a particular economic class such as exploited peasants or perhaps ethnic or religious groups that have experienced political and economic discrimination over the years .
 Muslims of Lebanon, particularly the Shia, see themselves as having historically suffered from discrimination at the hands of the Christian Lebanese . The Shia see themselves in Lebanon as having traditionally suffered discrimination .
 Shia have been at the bottom of the economic ladder . They have also been politically underrepresented in the government and parliament . The Shia have not been politically represented in parliament .
 Lebanese grievances often fester for a long period of time and then erupt in bloody violence, as they did in Lebanon in 1976 . Such grievances often erupt in violent violence, such as in 1976, as did in 1976 in Lebanon .
 The Shia were energized by other factors, such as the growing power of the Palestinians, particularly in southern Lebanon . In this particular case the Shia are energizing by the growing number of Palestinians .
 Expelled from Jordan in 1970, many Palestinians fled to Lebanon, where they initially received a warm welcome . Many Palestinians fled from Jordan to Lebanon in 1970 .
 Many Shia grew resentful when Israeli military reprisals were directed against Palestinians . The Palestinians were using southern Lebanon as a base of operations against Israel . Many Shia also resentful that they suffered from Israeli military attacks on them .
 A second environmental source of terrorism can be termed cultures of violence . Cultures of Violence is a culture of violence, and terrorism is a form of terrorism . The U.S. government has been accused of encouraging terrorism in the past .
 It refers to societies that have experienced high levels of intercommunal violence over a number of years so that violence, not peace, becomes the norm . The term is used to refer to societies where violence, rather than peace, has become the norm in society .
 For young people growing up in Northern Ireland from the 1970s to the early 1990s, intercommunal warfare and the presence of British troops and security forces on the streets were part of their everyday existence . Young people grew up in the region during the early 1980s and 1990s .
 Lebanon from the late 1970s through the 1980s represents a similar case . Lebanon is a similar country to Lebanon in the 1970s and 1980s . Lebanon has a long history of anti-Semitism .
 As intercommunal violence continues, people may forget the original reason for conflict . Instead hatred becomes habitual and violence is a function of revenge . Violence may be the result of hatred, hatred is habitual and revenge is the result .
 The key point is that the search for a single factor to explain terrorism is self-defeating, says David Cameron . The search for the cause of terrorism is not the answer to terrorism, he says .
 To explain why any single individual turned to terrorism, one would have to consider the relative importance of psychological or social-psychological, ideological, and environmental factors . To explain the impact of these factors, consider the importance of social and psychological factors .
 An examination of the lives of the 9/11 hijackers certainly shows a high degree of religiously based motivation for persons such as Mohamed Atta, leader of the plot .
 The decision to seek support from al-Qaeda was taken after experiencing the alienating environment of living and studying in the West . But it is also interesting to note that the decision was taken in response to the alienation of living in the Western society .
 To assume that all terrorists are ideologically driven zealots is as much of an overgeneralization as it is to assume they are all mentally ill . To assume all terrorist zealots are ideological zealots isn't just a generalization .
 A rational commitment to cause is an extraordinarily strong motivating factor for those who engage in or engage others to carry out terrorist acts . "Ruthless commitment to a cause, whatever its merits in the minds of others, is a strong motivation for terrorists," says Obama .
 As time goes by, the continuation of a terrorist campaign may have perhaps as much to do with maintaining the existence of the organization as it has to do to achieve the originally stated political objective . The continuation of the terrorist campaign is perhaps as important as its original stated political objectives .
 It is probable that the longer one is with the organization, the more important this factor becomes . The longer a person is with an organization, it is more important to have a strong presence .
 Most altruistic and ideologically driven members of the group are the newest recruits . Conversely, it is likely that the most altruistic members are the most ideologically driven recruits .
 Today’s terrorism is a multifaceted phenomenon consisting of a diverse array of actors, motivations, and tactics that evolves over time . Terrorism is a complex phenomenon with a wide range of actors and motivations that evolve over time.
 Such a phenomenon requires equal ingenuity and flexibility on the part of those who study it or deal with it . Intelligence analysts, operators, and policymakers need to adapt to it .
 "What is occurring today has been an evolution in the who, why, and how of terrorism," says President Obama . Obama: "What's happening today is an evolution of the who and why of terrorism" "
 Explain how I'adicalization, revenge, and networks have increased the threat of terrorism . Explain how the threat has been increased by the rise of terrorism in recent years .
 From the perspective of the West, the single most disturbing development in recent years has been the radicalization of its own residents and citizens who came to support and justify terrorism . The West's radicalization has been a problem for the West since the 1980s, writes Peter Bergen .
 This radicalization process can occur whether the individual’s belief system is sacred or secular . The process can be radicalized whether it is sacred, secular or sacred, it can be a matter of time .
 One can hold radical beliefs but not engage in any illegal activity, let alone acts of terrorism, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The number of individuals living in the West who have turned to political violence and professed adherence to the radical jihadist worldview offered by the late Osama bin Laden and others has been of concern .
 In June 2009 Bledsoe, from Memphis, Tennessee, killed one soldier and wounded another at a recruiting station in Little Rock, Arkansas . He killed one of the soldiers at the recruiting station .
 Major Hasan opened fire on Fort Hood in 2009, killing 13 and wounding forty-three . Hasan was a military psychologist stationed at Fort Hood, Texas . Security officers shot and disabled him .
 He also had been in touch with AQAP member and American citizen Anwar al-Awlaki . He had also had contact with Anwar Awlaki, an American citizen .
 A convert to Islam, Finton, of Decatur, Illinois, was arrested in September 2009 after attempting to set off an inert car bomb in front of a federal government building in Springfield, Illinois . Finton was arrested after an attempt to detonate an inert bomb in Springfield .
 A Report of the Bipartisan Policy Center’s National Security Preparedness Group, September 10,2010 .
 Fie pleaded guilty in February 2010 to conspiring to commit a terrorist act using a weapon of mass destruction . Fie was sentenced to life in prison after pleading guilty to the charge .
 Zazi had gone originally to fight American forces in Afghanistan, but al-Qaeda leaders convinced him to return to the United States . Zazi was originally wanted to fight U.S. troops in Afghanistan but was convinced to return .
 A Pakistani-American, Headley was arrested along with Tawhur Rana in October 2009 on charges that he helped conduct preoperational surveillance of targets for the 2008 Mumbai attacks conducted by the Pakistani militant group Lashkar-e-Taiba .
 Headley pleaded guilty in March 2010 to having helped plot an attack against Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten . Headley also admitted to helping plot to attack the newspaper in retaliation for its publication of cartoons depicting Mohammed .
 The five reportedly had tried to join multiple Pakistani militant groups, without success, before being picked up by Pakistani police . The five were reportedly picked up in Pakistan by Pakistani authorities .
 They were charged in Pakistan and convicted in June 2010 of criminal conspiracy and funding a banned terrorist organization . They were also convicted of funding the banned terrorist group in Pakistan .
 Federal prosecutors in 2009 indicted two groups of men, eight in one indictment, six in another, for recruiting young men in Somali communities in Minnesota . The men were accused of fundraising for the al-Qaeda-linked group al-Shabaab, prosecutors say .
 Seven of those charged as part of the ongoing investigation were indicted in August 2010 on additional charges of providing material support to Shabaab . Seven of the seven were indicted on charges related to the alleged support of Shabaaba .
 American-born Daniel Boyd, a convert to Islam, was arrested in July 2009 along with six others, including two of his sons . Boyd was charged with plotting to wage violent jihad abroad . Boyd, who converted to Islam in 2009, is a father of three .
 He allegedly performed reconnaissance on the U.S. Marine base at Quantico, Virginia, while planning a possible attack on the base . He allegedly planned to attack the base, according to the FBI .
 Members of the ‘Cluster’ allegedly traveled to Gaza, Israel, and Jordan in the hope of fighting Israeli forces . The group is believed to have traveled to Jordan, Gaza and Israel to prepare for fighting .
 The possible motivations for individuals engaging in terrorism are diverse . As noted, the possible motivations are diverse.
 They include such possibilities as psychological and social-psychological factors, both sacred and secular ideologies, and political, social, and economic grievances, as well as political and social grievances .
 As has been the case throughout recorded history, the mix and relative weight will vary depending on the individual and group .
 It appears revenge was a prominent motivating factor beginning in the 1990s . Having said that, it appears that revenge was not a motivating factor .
 The potential for high casualties is always there, whether it is a citizen-directed attack against the U.S. government, or an Islamic extremist attack against Western values .
 What is disturbing is that such attacks are not necessarily aimed at achieving a particular political agenda but rather have the generalized goal of inflicting pain and suffering on innocent people . Such attacks are aimed at inflicting pain, suffering, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Religious motivation coupled with a desire for revenge is a particularly explosive combination . It makes it easier in one’s mind high numbers of casualties, whether they are military or civilian, government employees or tourists .
 No one is innocent, and no moral, ethical, or religious constraints apply . In other words, no one is an innocent . No moral or ethical constraints apply to those who are not innocent .
 In fact, religion often acts as a justification as opposed to a constraint on terrorist actions, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Our drive and motivation doesn’t come from tangible commodities that this world has to offer,’s author says . ‘Our motivation doesn't come from real-life commodities that we have to offer.’ ‘We’ve been here for more than a
 Our religion is Islam, obedience to the one true God, and following the footsteps of the final prophet messenger . We are proud to say that we are Muslims, not Muslims, but we are proud of our faith .
 Your democratically elected governments continuously perpetuate atrocities against my people all over the world, says President Obama . Your government continues to commit atrocities against your people, he says .
 "I am directly responsible for protecting and avenging my Muslim brothers and sisters. And your support of them makes you directly responsible, just as I'm directly responsible," he says .
 "We will not stop this fight. Until we feel security you will be our targets," she said . "Until you stop the bombing, gassing, imprisonment, and torture of my people we will not fight"
 A chilling example of the combination of ideological motivation, grievances, and revenge which, from Khan’s perspective, justifies attacks on civilian targets . Here we find a chilling, yet excellent example .
 Looking back over the past one hundred years, we have come a long way from 19th-century terrorist organizations such as the People’s Will that targeted government officials .
 For many of today’s terrorists, the death of innocents not only increases the shock value of the attack, but is an end in itself . For many, it is a shock value, but also an end to the attack itself .
 Examine any anthology of articles on terrorism and you will find discussions of ‘the group’ as the unit of analysis . How Terrorism Works: Terrorism works. How Terrorism works .
 Terrorists use nouns as “army,” “brigade” or “command” in the name of their organization in order to enhance the legitimacy of their cause by suggesting they view themselves as soldiers . Terrorists typically use such nouns in
 Many larger terrorist groups have historically organized themselves along paramilitary lines . Terrorist groups lend themselves to classic line-and-block organizational diagrams .
 What is different about the current jihadist terrorist threat is its complexity and diversity, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Al-Qaeda still exists despite the death of Osama bin Laden in May 2011 . The Egyptian Ayman al-Zawahiri was named his successor by al-Qaeda .
 We can still speak of it as an organization with the intent to organize and conduct attacks, despite being forced to maintain a clandestine existence in Pakistan . The group has been forced to remain clandestine in Pakistan, despite its clandestine existence .
 Its real, although perhaps waning strength, however, has been its ability to survive and continue to spread the worldwide jihadist call to arms . Its real strength is still to be seen, but it has survived and continues to spread its worldwide jihadism .
 The best expression of al-Qaeda’s capability, however, is in its relations with like-minded affiliated armed groups . This is best reflected in those cases such as the DC Five where individuals not associated with any one particular group have attempted acts of terrorism in the name of al
 Al-Qaeda has assiduously worked to create a decentralized transnational network that reflects and encourages the spreading of violent jihad . The network has been created by Al Qaeda to reflect and encourage the spread of jihad .
 The result has been a particular type of asymmetric warfare termed netwar . Netwar is a form of warfare called netwar. The result of netwar has been dubbed netwar by the U.S.
 Umar Farouq Abdulmutallab, a 23-year-old Nigerian affiliated with AQAP, failed in his attempt to explode a bomb with plastic explosives . He is believed to be affiliated with the group in Nigeria .
 As the plane neared Detroit, he tried to initiate the bomb with a chemical injection, setting himself on fire and suffering severe burns . He suffered severe burns to his skin in the attack .
 The plot was encouraged by the now deceased Anwar al-Awlaki, a dual U.S.-Yemeni citizen, member of AQAP, and Islamic extremist ideologue with a large following online .
 He also has been implicated in other plots against the U.S. through his exchange of e-mails with Major Hasan prior to the latter’s attack in Ft. Hasan . He has also been linked to other plots .
 In 2010, ink cartridges loaded with explosives were used to detonate on air freight planes in Texas . The ink cartridges were loaded with explosive ink on planes .
 Al-Qaeda also has ties with al-Shabaab of Somalia and al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb of Algeria . The group operates out of Algeria and has ties to Somalia .
 Al-Qaeda’s affiliates’ increasing ability to provide training, guidance, and support for attacks against the West, local regimes, and the U.S. in particular makes it more difficult to anticipate the precise nature of the next attack . The United States and the West are
 Some would argue that by simply managing to persist since 9/1 lisa great achievement on the part of al-Qaeda . Al-Qaeda has managed to persist in the terror network since September 11, 2001 .
 When it comes to applying theory to armed groups, realists tend to ignore them, and liberals simply list them as another type of transnational actor . But a balanced threat assessment that takes into account ARGUMENT-COUNTERARGument I Netwar is a balanced
 National security theorists see warfare in terms of what is called netwar . The netwar is a form of warfare that is defined by netwar, the theory of netwar.
 The organizational form is not the classic hierarchical structure as reflected in line-and-block organizational charts . Instead, the organizational form of the organization is more complex and more complex .
 Chain Star or Hub members of networks do not necessarily have to meet face-to-face . Chain Star and Hub members don't necessarily need to meet in person to form .
 Terrorist organization could conceivably have supporters around the world . From the perspective of terrorists, security is therefore enhanced, and security is enhanced .
 These actors generally consist of dispersed groups who agree to communicate and act, perhaps without a central leadership or headquarters . These actors are dispersed groups that agree and act together .
 It is suggested that hierarchical organizations such as states might be ill-equipped to deal with such organizational innovations .
 Realists believe the focus on armed groups, while useful, overstates their relative importance in international relations and world politics compared to states . Realists, as noted, believe that armed groups are useful but overstates the relative importance of states .
 Such organizations may indeed pose a threat to national security, but rarely actually come to power . Such organizations rarely actually get elected, but they rarely actually do .
 Earlier transnational armed groups such as pirates were eventually suppressed by the power of states . The power of state is now the ultimate source of power in the region .
 Similar headway could be made against modern armed groups once they are deemed threats to vital national interests, say experts .
 National Counterterrorism Center maintains a robust database on terrorist groups and activities . Take some time to navigate around the site .
 John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, The Advent of Netwar, IV1R-678-0SD (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1996), 49. John Arqilla and . David Ronfeldt: Netwar was the first time Netwar had
 Islamic armed groups account for the greatest number of Muslim casualties around the world . Islamic armed forces account for most of the Muslim casualties in the region .
 This is not a winning recruitment strategy for an organization that calls for a massive, worldwide Muslim uprising against apostate regimes . The U.S. government has been accused of calling for an apostate regime to be toppled .
 Second, al-Qaeda has not managed to create a genuine mass political movement, says Al Qaeda . Al-Qaeda is not a major mass political force, says the U.S. president .
 Opinion polls show a decline in support among Muslims for bin Laden’s vision of the world . No al-Qaeda political parties exist, and opinion polls have shown a decline among Muslims .
 The organization has publicly stated it opposes all Middle Eastern regimes; Muslims who don’t share their views; the Shia —the other major branch of Islam; most Western countries; Jews and Christians . The group also opposes the governments of India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Russia; the
 Finally, al-Qaeda has no positive vision of what it hopes to ultimately achieve, says Al-Qaeda expert . "Al-Qaeda is not realistic," he says .
 Computer-based attacks on information systems designed to destroy or manipulate data banks or cause the system to crash with the goal of furthering a political agenda . It would mean the creation of Taliban-style theocracies, which even fewer Muslims would wish to see instituted .
 This topic is part of a larger concern over the implications of our increasingly technologically reliant society . This topic of the topic of our technology-obsessed society is discussed .
 The subject can be discussed from the perspective of terrorist use of technology as well as from societies’ reliance on it . The subject is discussed in the view of terrorism and society’s reliance on technology .
 The media, for example, have always had a symbiotic relationship with terrorists . The media and terrorists provide the drama and the dissemination of the dramatic story to readers and viewers .
 For some critics, the electronic media in particular are to terrorism what oxygen is to a fire, almost deserving to be viewed as unindicted coconspirators . The electronic media is to terrorism, what is oxygen to the fire, according to critics .
 In recent years, technological developments have provided terrorists with another communications option over which they have more control . Terrorists have been able to communicate with each other via text message .
 Such sites are obviously a source of propaganda and a way to solicit financial contributions . Such sites have been used as a way of soliciting financial contributions to fund terrorism .
 The internet also reflects the vulnerability of our technologically reliant society . The internet is also a reflection of our vulnerability in our society, say experts .
 In recent years there has been a steady drumbeat of journalistic and government reports analyzing the vulnerabilities of air traffic and rail control systems, electrical power grids, government computer networks .
 Rather than having to be physically present at the chosen target, an adept hacker could be located on the other side of the world, using keystrokes to gain access to computers .
 Computer hacking, dubbed cyberterrorism, could obviously cause economic chaos . The alteration or wiping out of financial records may not have the visual impact or resultant fatalities of a car bomb .
 Hackers with such goals can use the internet to gain access to military, police, air traffic control, and other networks on which public safety depends . Hackers can access the military and police via the internet, which depends on the internet .
 Computer security experts are seriously considered by government investigative agencies . Yet such possibilities are serious considered by computer security experts .
 The dilemma is that in highlighting technological interdependencies and vulnerabilities, terrorists might be given ideas for new modes of disruption . The dilemmas are that terrorists might have new modes for disruption, say experts .
 Ignoring such possibilities, the private sector and government reduce their ability to take preemptive action to neutralize system vulnerabilities . Ignoring these possibilities, government and private sector can't take pre-emptive action, experts say .
 Newspaper reports have highlighted the dangers posed by ‘nuclear leakage’ from the former Soviet Union . Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal and erratic nuclear policy of North Korea are also highlighted .
 Having nuclear material fall into the hands of renegade states is bad enough, but having terrorists get their hands on it is even worse . The U.S. government says it is working to prevent the spread of nuclear material to rogue states .
 A small band of terrorists, however, perhaps feels confident that they are difficult to locate, or they simply do not care about retaliation . A small group of terrorists feels confident they can't be found, or that they don't want retaliation .
 Raising specter of terrorist use of nuclear weapons dates from the 1970s . Raising the specter was raised by the U.S. government in the 1980s .
 Analysts assumed terrorists recognized that employment of such weapons was counterproductive in achieving political objectives and gaining public support for one’s cause . Terrorists were assumed to be rational-actor thinkers .
 Some commentators argue that self-sanctions against the use of weapons of mass destruction may have eroded over the years . Some commentators say self-Sanctions against such weapons have eroded .
 It is necessary, however, to distinguish among different types of armed terrorist groups, it is necessary to distinguish .
 It is unlikely such weapons will be utilized if we are talking about secular terrorist organizations with a political agenda that requires public support in order to succeed . With some degree of confidence, we can state .
 Nationalist-separatist movements often have political as well as clandestine terrorist wings . Nationalist movements, for example, often have both political and clandestine terror wings .
 The terrorist wing may indeed be more likely to consider using WMD for a number of reasons . Violence-prone individuals are by definition drawn to operational cells; if cut off from broader society, internal dynamics tend to move a group toward extreme actions .
 The political wings of nationalist-separatist movements must take into account numerous factors . The political wing of nationalists must take account of numerous factors, including factors such as economic and political factors .
 First, there is the attitude of the core constituency they claim to represent, and there is a lack of respect for the Labour Party .
 As horrible as the effects of bombings may be, crossing the nuclear, chemical, or biological threshold has emotional and psychological effects that go beyond the resultant physical devastation . The effects of crossing the threshold of a nuclear or chemical threshold have psychological and emotional effects .
 Death by biological agents is simply viewed differently from death by conventional explosives . It's not a matter of difference between biological agents and conventional explosives, it says .
 Second, political leaders must consider the possibility of retribution against their own community . Political leaders must also consider possible retribution against themselves, says CNN.com senior editor .
 Third, the employment of weapons of mass destruction ■ chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear weapons as well as large amounts of conventional explosives that cause widespread death .
 The universe of terrorist organizations has been restricted to secular groups with political agendas requiring public support . The limitations in such arguments stem from the fact that such groups are secular groups, he says .
 Islamic extremist organizations engage in suicide bombings come to mind . Islamic extremist groups engage suicide bombings . Islamic extremists are known to engage in bombings .
 It is often suggested that religious extremists differ from secular organizations in that they are trying to impress God, as opposed to a segment of the public . Religious extremists are often more likely to be religious extremists than secular extremists .
 Religious convictions supposedly make it easier to engage in . actions causing large numbers of deaths when the act is done in the name of God and supposedly with his blessing . Hence, religious convictions make it . easier to . engage in religious convictions .
 The Lebanese Hezbollah, for example, is best known in the West for its terrorist operations . Hezbollah is known for its operations in Lebanon, Lebanon and Syria .
 Lebanon wants to be viewed as a legitimate political player in Lebanon . It is represented in the Lebanese parliament and wants to become a legitimate player .
 Such ambitions undoubtedly influence the group’s approach to terrorism, it has been claimed . Such ambitions are likely to influence the organization's ambitions, it says .
 Al-Qaeda and affiliated religious extremist groups, however, do not share these secular motivations . Al- Qaeda and affiliated groups, like al-Qaeda, are not all religious extremists .
 Material found in training camps in Afghanistan makes it quite clear that al-Qaeda was actively pursuing the purchase or development of weapons of mass destruction . Al-Qaeda is believed to have been actively pursuing or developing the purchase of such weapons .
 Osama bin Laden’s public statements have explicitly acknowledged this goal . Furthermore, bin Laden has explicitly acknowledged it .
 bin Laden had called on Islamists to build or procure weapons of mass destruction . He claimed it is a duty to use them against the United States and other oppressors of the Muslim peoples .
 Authorities in Jordan disrupted what would have been the largest chemical and terrorist attack ever . In April 2004, authorities in Jordan thwarted what would be the largest terrorist and chemical attack .
 Islamist terrorists had managed to smuggle three cars packed with explosives, a chemical bomb, and poisonous gas into the capital city of Amman . Three cars were loaded with explosives and a poisonous gas, according to reports .
 It is estimated an incredible eighty thousand people would have been casualties if the bombs had gone off at their intended targets . The bombs targeted intelligence headquarters, the U.S. embassy in Amman, and the Jordanian prime minister’s office .
 The other type of religious organization likely to use weapons of mass destruction can be characterized as cults . Cults are likely to be religious organizations that use such weapons, the author says .
 In cults, the focus of group loyalty and devotion is not so much to religious precepts as expounded by prophets who have long since departed this Earth, but to a “living god” who issues edicts designed to enforce discipline and loyalty among followers .
 A cult can either withdraw into itself and avoid contact with the sinful outside world, or it can work to destroy and transform it . When coupled with physical isolation and a worldview that outside society is corrupt and sinful, a cult can both withdraw and transform .
 It is when a transformative agenda is coupled with the capability to produce weapons of mass destruction that a threat arises . The threat arises when the agenda is combined with the ability to produce WMD is a threat, the author says .
 Groups that engaged in terrorism from the 1960s through the 1990s had stated political objectives that, however much one might disagree with them, were still fathomable . Groups that engage in terrorism in the past have stated political goals that were still political objectives .
 "They developed a particular modus operandi and generally stayed with it," the author says of the team . "They had a modus op that they used to be very secretive," she says .
 Analysts were perhaps no better than today in providing sufficient warning of impending terrorist acts . But at least there was a certain degree of confidence as to the limits to which groups would go to achieve their stated objectives .
 One of the difficulties in discussing terrorism and international security is that a single event can immediately and dramatically shift perceptions of the relation between the two . The first is that one of the . difficulties in . discussing terrorism is that it is difficult to discuss the relationship between terrorism and security .
 Environmental degradation, progress toward global democratization, and even the spread of nuclear weapons allow one to identify and assess trends with some degree of confidence . Even nuclear weapons can be used to assess trends .
 A devastating act by a single individual or small group can make current analyses seemingly irrelevant overnight . In the case of terrorism, however, the impact of such a devastating act can make it all seem irrelevant .
 Relying on the historical record and simply projecting it into the future is problematic when dealing with terrorism . Relying . on historical record is problematic, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Terrorist attacks may have an instrumental purpose such as driving the U.S. military out of Afghanistan, derailing the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, or intimidating policymakers into releasing jailed comrades . Second, terrorist attacks may also have a purpose to drive the United States to Afghanistan .
 Terrorist attacks often derive their real power from their psychological effects on the public . But such terrorist attacks often have psychological effects of the public, such as psychological damage .
 Government policies have the instrumental goal to deter, respond, and punish terrorists . Similarly, government policies also have the goal of detering, responding, and punishing terrorists .
 We should not underestimate the need for government policies to create a reassuring psychological effect among the public . Government policies need to create psychological effect on the public, he says . We should never underestimate the psychological effect of government policies .
 National security is not simply an empirical fact; it is also a state of mind, says President Obama . Obama says national security is a "state of mind" for the U.S.
 Government policymakers have made what they view as prudent investments in efforts to respond to the evolving phenomenon of terrorism . It is therefore understandable why in recent years many government policymakers have invested in such investments .
 Possible responses to international terrorism are worthy of further discussion . Possible ways to deal with international terrorism worthy of discussion .
 Innumerable studies, articles, and reports have been produced over the years on the subject of how best to deal with the specter of terrorism . In the past, terrorism has been a major problem in the world .
 Terrorism has been on the agenda of international summits and UN resolutions . Terrorism is a favorite topic of congressional hearings and presidential, vice presidential, or high-level task forces .
 The Department of Homeland Security was created to coordinate the multitude of agencies involved in homeland defense . In the United States, a new cabinet-level department was created .
 In Washington it was recognized that first responders to a terrorist incident would not be federal or military forces, but rather local fire, police, and emergency medical personnel . First responders would be local fire and police, not federal forces .
 National security planning now involves local and state authorities to a degree never before experienced . It is now a matter of national security planning for the future .
 UAVs continue to play a key role in the war against terrorist organizations . Whether limited to intelligence collection or actually armed with missiles, they are still a key part of the fight against terrorists .
 Persistent intelligence collection and analysis since 9/11 finally led to the location of Osama bin Laden in a compound in Pakistan .
 President Obama and senior national security advisers receive an update on the military mission via a video teleconference . In this famous photograph, Obama and advisers receive a photo of the mission via teleconference.
 This approach assumes that grievances lie at the heart of the problem . Eliminate the Underlying Causes, eliminate the underlying causes of problems .
 Spain devolved power to the Basque region, undercutting the appeal of the separatist movement . Spain, for example, devolved the power of the Basques region to Spain .
 The peace process in Northern Ireland has been one of fits and starts, progress and reversals . Northern Ireland is one of the most troubled parts of the country's history .
 In May 2007, two long-time Catholic and Protestant adversaries declared an end to violence and embraced political compromise . In 2007, Catholics and Protestants agreed to end violence and embrace compromise .
 In recent years there has also been much discussion in Europe on how better to integrate into society . There has been a growing discussion in recent years on how to integrate with society .
 The sheer degree of poverty and social ills found throughout the world, however, always will provide a fertile ground for political discontent . Poverty and social problems will always provide fertile ground to political discontent, which may be harnessed for terrorist violence .
 Investment in development is one remedy, particularly when grievances are at the core of the discontent . Investment in the South African economy is one of the key factors in the country's woes .
 Progress in accommodating the demands of some groups may reduce the likelihood that they will continue to resort to terrorist actions . This approach calls for military attacks such as the use of armed Predator drones on terrorist organizations .
 Such an approach is appealing, as it satisfies demands for punishment and justice and can disrupt terrorist planning . Such a punishment can be satisfying demands for justice and disrupt terror planning, it is appealing .
 Complications with this approach, however, must be taken into account by policymakers . Complications must be dealt with by policymakers, says David Cameron .
 "Excellent intelligence is required to locate members of terrorist groups that by definition are clandestine in nature. First of all, excellent intelligence is needed to locate terrorists," says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 This is not easy to do, as witnessed by the almost ten-year hunt for bin Laden . The hunt for Osama bin Laden has been on hold for ten years . It is not always easy to hunt for the elusive terrorist .
 Placing an agent inside a terrorist group is no simple task . Terrorists don't openly advertise for new members . The vetting process is understandably quite rigorous .
 Satellite or drone imagery might locate possible training sites in the countryside, but it is of limited utility in finding terrorists located in urban environments . Drone imagery can be used to find terrorists in urban areas, experts say .
 Intercepting terrorist communications assumes that one knows where to direct one’s electronic gathering capabilities . Intercepting terrorism communications assumes one is to direct electronic gathering capability .
 A military operation designed to eliminate terrorists faces tactical and political challenges in its actual execution . Second, even if a government can locate terrorists, a military operation will be difficult to do .
 There is evident concern over the use of unmanned aerial vehicles such as the Predator in Pakistan to eliminate al-Qaeda and Taliban operatives .
 So-called collateral damage in terms of civilians has caused diplomatic problems for the United States . The U.S. has evoked outrage among large segments of the Pakistani populace, even those opposed to militant Islamic armed groups and agendas .
 When casualties sustained by noncombatants, perpetrators tend to lose the popular support they seek, they lose public support . However unintended, the casualties are often unintended, when they are sustained by people not connected to terrorism .
 Impose the Rule of Law is the critical pillar of any effective international antiterrorist policy . Imposing the rule of law is the key to an effective anti-terror policy .
 History too often shows that in the name of combating terrorism or subversion, temporary states of emergency evolve into dictatorial governments . "In the face of terrorism, temporary state of emergency" is a dangerous move, says Julian Zelizer .
 Legislation designed to undercut terrorism also has implications for the United States government, U.S. citizens, corporations, and foreign governments and nationals . Legislation has implications on the U.N. government, United States citizens and corporations . It also affects foreign governments, corporations and foreign nationals .
 The Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Anti-Terrorism Act of 1986 strengthened so-called long-arm statutes . The act allows the Federal Bureau of Investigation to arrest individuals overseas who are charged with committing a terrorist-related criminal act against United States citizens .
 Section 6 of the Export Administration Act allows the secretary of state to place a country on what has come to be known as the Terrorism List . Section 6 is part of the Terrorism Administration Act, which allows for a country to be placed on the terrorism list .
 If so designated, a whole host of sanctions are employed . No United States foreign assistance to the country, no export of weapons, and a negative United States vote amounts to a veto in international economic institutions such as the World Bank or International Monetary Fund .
 The quest for greater security against terrorist attacks has eroded essential liberties that define civil society . Civil liberties groups have sounded alarm that the quest for security has eroded civil liberties in society .
 States can pursue bilateral or multilateral approaches to international legal efforts . International legal efforts are possible for states to pursue bilateral and multilateral efforts .
 An example of a bilateral agreement is the U.S.-U.S. extradition treaty, which states that in certain crimes associated with terrorism like skyjackings or the murder of diplomats, the defendant cannot claim to have been engaged in a political act of conscience .
 Asylum or protection may be granted to noncitizens with political or religious beliefs that put them in jeopardy in their own or other countries . But when those same individuals commit acts of terror they are not protected .
 The problem is that not all states sign such conventions, such as Iran and Syria . The most obvious being those that have been accused of supporting or conducting international terrorism .
 All states, however, can fall back on a particular functional agreement— Article 51 of the UN Charter . Article 51 is part of a functional agreement with the UN, which states must abide by .
 The provision was originally intended as a legal basis for defense by sovereign states against aggression by other states . It can broadly be applied to defense against terrorist activity, whether or not it is state sponsored .
 All sovereign states reserve the right to engage in unilateral or, working with other states, collective military action against such threats . The U.S. has no obligation to act in response to such threats, it has said .
 International Cooperation Efforts to improve international cooperation in the struggle against terrorism . Encourage international cooperation among states .
 Diplomatic progress, often painstaking and requiring patience, can reduce resorting to terrorism by some groups, can help reduce resort to terrorism . Diplomacy progress requires patience and patience and persistence .
 Cooperation can take any number of forms—diplomatic support for another state’s counterterrorist efforts, combined military operations, intelligence sharing, law enforcement cooperation or security assistance and training .
 A concern for international terrorism may be a common concern for most states, but its relative priority among foreign policy issues is not always the same . Terrorist terrorism is a major concern for many countries, but it's not always a common priority .
 Prior to 9/11, Europeans often noted that their geographical proximity to the Middle East meant they were more likely than the United States to be the venue for terrorist actions on the part of Islamic extremists .
 Italy, Germany, Erance and the United Kingdom also play host to a large number of foreign nationals from this region .
 After 9/11, many of the successes against terrorist groups and their plans came about as the result of cooperation among law enforcement officials around the world . Law enforcement officials say they are working together to prevent terrorism .
 A complication arises if democracies have to create informal alliances with unsavory regimes in the name of fighting terrorism . A complication arose, however, if democracies had to create even informal alliances .
 More often than not, the terrorist problem emanates from areas of the developing world where democratic regimes are more the exception than the rule . The terrorist problem originates in developing countries, such as the Middle East .
 By supporting these regimes, Western states can become associated with repressive domestic policies that have more to do with keeping leaders in power than fighting terrorism . Western states should not support these regimes as they are repressive, writes Peter Bergen .
 In sum, terrorism is a phenomenon that is here to stay . History shows that terrorism doesn’t end; rather, it evolves . Terrorism is a phenomena that is not an end, but it evolves, says author .
 A government simply cannot ignore terrorism even if it might wish to do so, it says . A government can't ignore terrorism, even though it may wish to, it can't .
 CNN effect brings terrorist incidents in remote parts of the globe into our living rooms . Mass media, instantaneous communications, and social networking, known as the CNN effect, have brought terrorist incidents into our homes .
 Governments must address the clamor of questions raised by a press corps covering terrorism . Governments must also address the concerns raised by the press corps, writes Peter Bergen .
 To believe terrorism’s underlying causes can’t be cured or terroism stamped out purely by military force is naive, says David Cameron . To believe terrorists can be cured of their underlying causes is naive .
 If successful, addressing grievances and related causes may reduce the propensity of groups to resort to terrorism . However, defensive measures are still necessary, according to the author .
 Combating terrorism requires patience on the part of policymakers and the execution of a strategy that connects a country’s capabilities to the antiterrorist goals it seeks to realize . The U.S. should be patient as it fights terrorism with patience .
 Prevention through good intelligence and effective law enforcement measures is best, but also planning for the worst . Well-trained and equipped police, firefighters, medical personnel, and other first responders are essential, says CNN.com .
 A successful strategy also requires diplomatic and conflict-resolution approaches that, if successful, reduce substantially the propensity of affected groups to resort to further terrorist activity . In addition to a successful strategy, the strategy must also be successful, the government says .
 In an era of global interdependence, when no state can't be sure it will not fall victim to terrorist attacks, international cooperation is particularly important . International cooperation is especially important in the fight against terrorism, especially in the U.S.
 Scant mainstream international relations literature deals with transnational organized crime . Transnational crime is transnational crime and global crime .
 Little theory has actually been applied to the phenomenon . As a result, little theory has ever been applied .
 Realists have maintained their focus on states and have not had much to say about transnational criminal organizations in general and criminals groups in particular .
 When a border is breached the focus is understandably on a military invasion . As the realist conception of security emphasizes external military threats, the focus should be on external threats .
 Despite an acknowledgment of the importance of transnational actors, they are most concerned with private-sector economic actors, nongovernment- organizations, and international organizations as facilitators .
 Terrorism may currently be the number one transnational threat from the perspective of policymakers, transnational crime is a close second . While terrorism may be the top threat, crime is close second to terrorism .
 Terrorist violence is a type of criminal activity as it violates laws . Organized crime usually are motivated by economic purposes, making illicit gains . Terrorism with a political motivation and organized crime is a form of crime .
 Many terrorist groups also engage in criminal activity to financially support their organizations . Terrorists use threats and financial enticements to frighten and corrupt politicians to become complicit in their criminal activities .
 Most organized criminal groups don't seek illicit gains as a means to serve political purposes . Most organized criminals do not seek illicit gain as a result of political gain, says CNN.com .
 They work to keep their identities and activities off the radar of national and international law enforcement agencies . Ideally, they work to avoid detection by international agencies .
 When threatened, such groups have not hesitated to engage in violent asymmetric warfare against the state . But when threatened, they've not hesitated .
 TCOs are not new actors on the world stage, but globalization has impacted the massive scale and geographic spread of their activities . globalization has also impacted the size and scope of these activities, experts say .
 Developments like the expansion of international telecommunications allows for the easy electronic transfer of money . The removal of political and economic barriers between the East and West after the end of the Cold War encouraged expansion of the capitalist economic system .
 World Trade Organization was created in 1995 to encourage further liberalization of trade . Tariffs on the importation of goods were dropped, and in 1995 the WTO was created .
 Erom 1990 to 2000 world trade increased by over 6 percent per year on average . World trade increased over 6% per year between 1990 and 2000 . Erom trade was the fastest growing economy in the world .
 The establishment of the North American Eree Trade Agreement and similar actions in Latin America and Asia occurred in tandem with the global expansion of trade and transportation . North America's Eree trade agreement was established in 1973 .
 The European Union expanded from fifteen to twenty-five members in 2004, rising to . twenty-seven by 2007, reducing border controls over the same period .
 Trade boomed, accompanied by a rise in air cargo and express shipping by companies such as EedEx and DHL . States were able to inspect more than a small percentage of trucks and containers dropped .
 Express custom clearance schemes were devised as well as export processing zones . The scheme was devised as part of an effort to tackle the problem of India’s export policy .
 As state properties were sold in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, warehouses full of weapons and munitions became available on the open market . Weapons and munitions are still available in Russia and Ukraine .
 Criminals have taken full advantage of the anonymity of Web-based e-mail accounts and the use of computers in internet cafes and cheap, disposable cell phones . Criminals also use computers in Internet cafes, cheap cell phones and cheap phones .
 Daily transactions in the global currency market totaled $590 million in 1989 . In 1989, daily transactions in global currency markets totaled $600 million .
 Money launderers find it easier to conceal and funnel illicit gains from crime into legitimate businesses and other accounts . Financial smurfing —concealing or avoiding records of financial transactions that can be traced by law-enforcement officials .
 Activities of this type are much easier when criminals can take advantage of weak states . Criminals are often able to target weak states in order to get their hands on weak states, say officials .
 In such countries, it is not surprising that criminal organizations with ready cash attempt to influence or capture key institutions such as the courts, customs offices, banks, police, and politicians, says CNN.com .
 Once they gain a foothold, they branch out into legitimate businesses . They are deeply permeating the political and economic life of a country . Once they are established, they will be able to make it into legitimate business ventures .
 The tiny Pacific island nation of Nauru is a haven for money laundering, particularly from Russia . The tiny island nation is known for its role in laundering .
 Suriname, located on South America’s northern coast, is a transshipment point for drug traffickers . It is located on the island nation's northern coast .
 The experience of Suriname, Mexico, Colombia, Afghanistan, Lebanon, and other countries underscores the increasing importance of TCOs on the supply side of a seemingly insatiable world demand .
 Estimates of the value of all global retail sales of illicit drugs are over $320 billion, making the drug trade one of the largest commercial activities in the world . The drug trade is estimated to be the world's largest commercial activity .
 Afghanistan is now the world’s largest producer of heroin . Latin American countries such as Colombia and the notorious Medellin and Cali cartels historically have drawn the most attention . Afghanistan now produces the most heroin .
 Other states, while not quite so visible in terms of public awareness, suffer from the plague of criminal activity associated with drug trafficking .
 The government is committed to fighting domestic and international trafficking in illicit narcotic drugs . Evidence suggests that the country continues to be an important transit area for cocaine and heroin .
 South Africa has for some time been the origin, the transit point, or the terminus of many major smuggling routes . This was particularly so during the apartheid period or era of white rule .
 Trends and practices begun in the sanctions-busting apartheid period continue into the current era . Rather than embargoed items, drugs and other illicit items are smuggled into and out of South Africa .
 South Africa has the most developed transportation, communications, and banking infrastructure in sub-Saharan Africa . Additionally, South Africa's most developed transport, communications and banking infrastructures .
 The country’s modern international telecommunications systems, particularly wireless telephones, provide opportunities for international drug trafficking . The country's direct air links with South America, Asia, and Europe, and its permeable land borders provide .
 One of the most appalling developments in recent decades has been the expansion in human trafficking . Human trafficking has been a major problem since the 1970s, with the rise in trafficking .
 Aided and abetted by a reduction in border controls, victims end up in sweatshops, plantations, and factories . Victims end up . in sweatshop, plantations and factories, and . factories .
 Some countries are notorious destinations for sex-trade tourists—Myanmar, China, Cambodia, Thailand, Colombia, and the Philippines . Some of the world's most notorious destinations are notorious for sex trade tourists .
 Russia, Ukraine, Moldova, and Romania are well known for the export of sex-slaves . Former communist countries such as Russia and Ukraine are known for their export of slaves .
 Japan is often the destination for girls from Brazil, Ecuador, and Colombia . Girls from Ecuador, Colombia and Colombia often visit Japan often .
 Cambodian teenagers are sent to brothels in Thailand . They are often sold into servitude by desperately poor families .
 Foreign sex slaves are being brought into the U.S. as if they were commodities bought and sold on the open market . The United States has not been immune to the problem .
 Terrorists tend to be more motivated by political objectives than criminals who pursue essentially economic goals . Terrorists are motivated by their political objectives rather than their economic goals, CNN.com says .
 Criminals usually want to be left alone to pursue their criminal activities . Criminals are usually left alone with their activities, police say .
 Criminals embrace the market system and exploit it to their advantage, says the author . Far from wanting to overthrow the capitalist system, terrorists embrace it, he says . Terrorists are exploiting the system to gain access to the market, he writes .
 Instead of attacking governments and law enforcement agencies, they prefer, when possible, to corrupt and intimidate them . "They prefer, as possible," they prefer to corrupt, intimidate them," says CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The traditional distinction between terrorists and criminals is eroding . It's a sign that the distinction between criminals and terrorists has been eroding.
 Criminals at times resort to political violence to intimidate government officials, as seen in the assassination campaigns of the Mexican drug organizations . Criminals often resort to assassinations of government officials to intimidate .
 El Salvador, Guatemala, and Elonduras now suffer the world’s highest murder rates . The drug battlefield has moved south, El Salvador and Guatemala have the highest rates of murder .
 Central America forms a bridge between Colombia, the world’s biggest cocaine producer, and the United States . Central America is also the world's biggest market for drugs . Colombia is the biggest producer of cocaine in the world, followed by Colombia .
 Afghanistan, Colombia, Peru, and Lebanon are the source of much of the world’s illicit drugs . Terrorist organizations operating in such countries as Afghanistan and Colombia have become involved in the drug trade .
 As governments gear up to deal with the expanding transnational crime problem, criminals likely will resort more frequently to asymmetric warfare as a means to intimidate officials and coerce policy changes . On the other hand, criminals are likely to resort to warfare to intimidate government officials .
 If criminals essentially see their operations as businesses, it's not surprising that they create strategic alliances that work to their mutual benefit . Criminals essentially see themselves as businesses .
 As with legitimate businesses, the point is to reduce risk and improve profits . The point is the point of reducing risk and improving profits, says the author .
 One example involves relationships between Colombian drug cartels and Mexican drug-trafficking families . Drug-related families are involved in the drug trade .
 Mexican criminal organizations have developed over the years an excellent smuggling infrastructure for transporting goods and people across the border into the U.S. Mexican criminals have developed an excellent infrastructure for smuggling .
 For the Colombians, employing the Mexican smuggling networks to get their cocaine into the United States lowers the risk of running afoul of U.S. drug interdiction efforts .
 The alliance allows them to share some of the profits of the cocaine industry . The cocaine industry has much higher profit margins than marijuana and other smuggled commodities .
 A similar alliance has been developed between Mexican smugglers and Chinese criminal organizations that transport illegal immigrants seeking to enter the U.S. The alliance is similar to a similar alliance developed with Mexican smugglers .
 Colombians have also worked with Nigerian drug-trafficking organizations . Colombians and Nigerians sell heroin to Nigerians in exchange for cocaine, which sells in Europe .
 The Sicilians had a well-established distribution system in Europe and knowledge of regional law-enforcement capabilities . They were also making efforts to recapture a portion of the U.S. heroin market they had progressively lost to Asian suppliers .
 A comparative study reveals many interesting similarities among several criminal groups such as the Italian Mafia, Japanese Yakusa, Russian mafia, and Chinese Triads . The study also reveals similarities among the Russian mafia and Chinese triads .
 At their origins fraternities were also known for good or service-oriented works that built their legitimacy in the communities in which they operated . Very much a part of their national and local cultures, they were at their origins .
 Triad refers to an essential three-way link between spiritual, material, and human beings . The Triad is a link between the spiritual and material, the material and human being .
 The omerta or code of silence among members is by no means unique to the Mafia . Commitment to secrecy also being an integral part of Russian mafia, Yakusa, Triads, and other criminal groups .
 Hierarchical structures of social organization based on personal, reciprocal loyalties and protection of other family members are also characteristics in common, albeit with cultural variations . Hierarchial structures are also characteristic in common with cultural differences .
 Viewing the criminal organization as a form of extended family with expectations of loyalty is to be found in Mafia and Triad groups . However, reflecting its origins in feudal Japan, the Yakusa put greater emphasis on personal, mutual loyalties .
 The answer varies depending on the state, TCO, and region of the world . The answer to the question varies depending upon the state and TCO .
 There is no movement to create some sort of global criminal organization with central direction and enforcement mechanisms . Such organizations are highly protective of their independence and markets, so no movement is to create such a global organization .
 In fact, transnational criminal alliances also have their strains and easily can fall apart . Transnational crime alliances have strains and can easily fall apart, like with legitimate international business .
 They tend to epitomize the netwar type of organization . They tend, in other words, to be netwar-like organizations .
 Organized criminal activity can undermine the social fabric of a society and contribute to a host of financial and social ills and political crises of authority . Organized crime is not designed to bring down a state and create a new political order, says Julian Zelizer .
 This is particularly the case with narcotics trafficking and the attendant consequences of widespread drug abuse and the financial corruption of governments . This is especially true in the United States, where governments are corrupt .
 Such dangers are particularly pronounced in countries struggling to escape from authoritarian past but saddled with weak legal, financial, and democratic institutions . The dangers of authoritarian regimes are especially pronounced in authoritarian countries with weak institutions .
 Third, the trend line in terms of narcotics trafficking, human trafficking, and the general spread of illicit activities on the part of TCOs is not encouraging, says the report .
 This “mapping of the terrain” requires the sharing of information and intelligence among interested states . This "mapping the terrain" requires the . sharing of . information and . intelligence among . interested states.
 International Criminal Police Organization, more commonly known as INTERPOL, was established in 1923 . The name was adopted in 1956 for a law-enforcement information-exchange network . INTERPOL was originally established by 1923 .
 Singled out for particular emphasis these days are terrorism, criminal organizations, narcotics production and trade, human trafficking, financial and high-tech crimes, and alien and fugitive investigation support to national authorities .
 EUROPOL, a clearinghouse for police information based in Europe, is another example of such an enterprise . Police information clearinghouses are often used to provide vital information to the public .
 What is required is the development of joint programs and operations among those states that have the interest, will, and capability to make inroads that undermine the power of TCOs . What is needed is joint programs, operations among states that can undermine TCO's power .
 Counterdrug efforts in some Latin American countries end up violating human rights . Developing any strategy or policy requires taking into account the possible unexpected consequences of a particular line of attack .
 Such military phrases imply that such problems can be solved once and for all, a more reasonable goal . Instead of merely reduced, it's a naive hope that such things can be resolved once and again .
 More progress can be made in curbing the market that gives incentives to criminal activity in the first place . More progress is needed to curb the demand for illicit drugs, the authors say .
 It is not enough to wage war on the supply side without attending to the difficult social and other factors that lead people to buy and use drugs in the first place . The demand side is the demand side, not just the supply supply side .
 As U.S. and Western military involvement winds down in Iraq and Afghanistan, so, too, will the number of dispatches posted on the online forum The Sandbox . As the United States and Western forces wind down in Afghanistan and Iraq, so do the dispatches . The Sand
 Eventually more postings will occur as efforts are made to suppress if not resolve the myriad of asymmetric conflicts that plague so many parts of the world . Yet eventually more postings are expected to occur .
 While fifty years ago the West could essentially ignore many of these small wars, in an age of globalization, this is harder to do in those cases where local threat groups have an actual or potential global reach .
 Terrorism and crime are where realist concern with national security threats to states intersects with liberal interest in nonstate actors . Realist concerns with state security and nonstate threats intersect with the liberal interest of nonstate agents .
 Terrorism has received more headlines and news coverage than has transnational organized crime . Terrorism has understandably received more attention than organized crime has received in recent years .
 Few of us or anyone we know likely will ever fall victim to a terrorist attack . On the other hand, few of us are likely to ever fall victims to a terror attack .
 It is evident in the drug problems in our schools and society in general. It's evident in our school and society, it's not just a drug problem, it says .
 Criminal activity has major financial consequences and, like terrorism, can threaten democratic institutions, says CNN.com . Criminal activity can have financial consequences like terrorism like terrorism. Criminal activity is like terrorism and can threaten democracy.
 "These asymmetric threat organizations or armed groups both attack or attempt to circumvent existing political authorities," says the U.S. State Department .
 asymmetric conflicts involve the use of the entire range of domestic and international resources available to policymakers, including law enforcement, intelligence, and support of the general populace .
 Asymmetric warfare involves a lack of congruity in the capabiiities and strategies of two foes . The U.S. has been involved in asymmetric warfare in the past .
 In this chapter it specificaliy refers to a situation in which the nonstate opponent has deveioped capabiiities and strategies designed to diminish the state's capabilities or strengths .
 Asymmetric warfare in the form of terrorism is not new, as evident by such historicai exampies as the Zeaiots and Assassins . It is not the first time the U.S. has used asymmetric warfare as a weapon .
 After the French Revolution there was a rise in secuiar-based terrorism on the part of such movements as the anarchists . Anarchists were involved in the rise of secuar terrorism in France .
 The 20th century witnessed the rise of ideoiogicicaily based terrorism that drew strength from Marxism-Leninism and nationaiist appeais .
 Current Islamic terrorism is often traced to 1979, when the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the fali of the shah of Iran occurred that same year . The shah was overthrown by the Soviet-led invasion of Iran .
 The best textbook on terrorism, its evolution, and efforts to combat it . The best book on terrorism: Terrorism, terrorism .
 Describe the history of international terrorism and key terrorist attacks against the United States over the past sixty years . Describe a key terrorist attack on the U.S. over the last sixty years as a terrorist attack .
 The French Revolution of 1789 popularized the term terrorism, and by the 19th century there were a number of secuiar terrorist groups and movements such as the Anarchists .
 Ethnic and nationalist-based terrorism came to the fore during World Wars I and II . Ethnic and nationalistic terrorism was a major factor in the rise of terrorism in the Middle East .
 During the Coid War insurgent organizations in the deveioping world often used terrorism as part of broader political-miiitary strategies . The U.S. came face to face with international terrorism in the Middle East in the 1970s, with the 9/11 attacks .
 A classic work presenting both a historical and conceptual overview of terrorism . The work is presented with an overview of the terrorist landscape . The book is published by David Frum at the University of Cambridge .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning book traces the evolution of al-Qaeda and the attempts of an FBI agent to thwart follow-on attacks after 9/11 .
 There are three basic explanations for terrorist motivation-psychological and social factors, ideological factors, both secular and religious, and environmental factors for grievances and cultures of violence .
 A classic, the book covers the ideological, psychological, and social-psychological approaches to explaining terrorism . A classic of the book, it also covers the ideology, psychological and social psychological approaches to explain terrorism .
 Explain how radicalization, revenge, and networks have increased the threat of terrorism . Explain how the threat has been increased by the rise in terrorism .
 Contemporary terrorism consists of a diverse array of actors, motivations, and tactics that evolve over time . Contemporary terrorism has a diverse range of actors and motivations, say experts .
 Recent trends include the domestic radicalization of individuals living in the West, including the United States . The rising threat posed by weapons of mass destruction, the rise of transnational network terrorism, and the increasing importance of technology .
 Four major policymaking approaches to dealing strategically with the threat of international terrorism . Compare and contrast the strengths and weaknesses of four major policy making approaches .
 Military attacks against suspected terrorists run into practical problems such as locating them and dealing with the reality of collateral damage when using standoff weapons such as UAVs .
 Imposing the rule of law both domestically and internationally is an important element of any counterterrorist strategy . But there is the risk of going so far as to undermine civil liberties, says Peter Bergen .
 International cooperation is of paramount importance given the transnational dimension of terrorism, says U.S. President Barack Obama . International cooperation must be paramount, says Obama .
 A comprehensive overview of various policies designed to defeat or at least diminish terrorism . The U.S. government has been involved in the fight against terrorism since 2001 .
 Chapters include legal, military, diplomatic, and international cooperative approaches . Chapters include military, military and diplomatic approaches . Chapter 1: "Cooperation is a form of cooperation"
 The contributors deal strategically with with with this challenge and thus providing greater homeland terrorism . Explain how globalization has aided the rise of transnational criminal organizations and their attendant illicit activities .
 Transnational criminal organizations have benefited since the 1990s from the lowering of customs and border controls in Europe and elsewhere . They have benefited from the expansion of free trade and technological developments such as the internet, enhanced computing power and programs that encourage the dramatic increases in trade and financial transactions .
 These organizations have creatively taken what is usually seen as the benefits of globalization and used them for their own nefarious ends . These organizations and their networks have creatively used what is seen as globalization as a benefit to their own ends .
 This book details the interconnection between TCOs. Disturbing and well-written, this book is about the interconnections of TCO.
 Terrorism and transnational crime are examples of the depraved nature of human beings. kinds of problems inherent in societies that are not democratic. worldwide security issues that confront us in an increasingly globalized world. methods used exclusively by Middle Eastern, European, and Asian religious fanatic fringe groups to advance
 Terrorism is all of the following EXCEPT a weapon of the weak. symbol of the rejection of authority. symbol . threat to democratic civil societies. relatively new phenomenon. relatively recent phenomenon. .
 The Zealots are Peruvian dissidents who resort to terrorist actions . ancient Jewish dissidents who took terrorist actions. ancient Jews were Peruvians . Peruvian Jews were ancient Jews .
 Erom the perspective of instrumental rationality, terrorism is an end to some desired means . Erom is the same as value rationality, a practice that is morally or legally legitimate .
 Causes of terrorism are least likely to include profit making through illegal business activity . Psychological factors. ideological factors. environmental factors. psychological factors.
 The thing that most terrorists have in common is that they are psychopaths. sociopaths. never bound by ideology. apparently normal human beings. sociopathic sociopaths . never bound to ideology. sociopathy .
 Religiously based Politically based . Regionally based regionally based . Ethnically based. Religly based . Religially based . Politically and politically based .
 The radicalization process only involves religious belief systems . Only involves adherence to the Muslim faith . in recent years has affected a number of Muslims living in the West .
 Revenge as a motivation for terrorism has been evident in recent years . Revenge has been a motivation in many of the world's most recent terrorist attacks .
 It can be particularly dangerous in terms of casualties when combined with religious justification . secular ideologies such as Marxism-Leninism. none of the above. none .
 Weapons of mass destruction refers to nuclear weapons . are just as likely to be used by one terrorist group as another . are most likely to use by religious extremists or cults . would probably not be used as they would alienate their supporters . would most likely not be . used by terrorist
 Problems associated with a military attack on terrorist organizations and states that support them include all of the following EXCEPT it is financially too expensive .
 NATO documents say a state can defend itself from attacks as an inherent right of sovereignty . NATO documents call it a right to be able to defend itself .
 Examples of known international criminal organizations do NOT include the Palestine Liberation Organization . Examples include the Palestinian Liberation Organization and the International Criminal Organization .
 The end of the Cold War has facilitated criminal access to worldwide markets . Advances in international telecommunications can be used to facilitate criminal activities around the world . A marked decline in moral or religious education in an increasingly secularized world .
 The single most important difference between terrorist and criminal organizations is that they have different goals and therefore different means . criminal organizations usually seek economic gain while terrorist organizations are usually more motivated by political objectives . terrorist organizations use more violent means .
 Apply free trade theory to Wmt present-day circumstances . Evaluate progress made globally and regionally of uneven development in on liberalizing trade . Some countries have achieving integration goals well-capitalized, largein Europe, North America, scale producers capable of and other parts of the developing
 Twelve pirates armed with guns boarded a chemical tanker involved in STS operations . Twelve pirates boarded the chemical tanker in an attack on the ship . The ship was involved in an operation in the area of STS .
 The pirates took control of the ship and sailed to an unknown location . The ship was taken over by the pirates in the early 1900s .
 The 2/0 saw the robbers with a big heavy black bag and he tried to stop them . The 2-0 saw them with the bag and stopped them . Police say the bag was stolen from the scene .
 The robbers pushed the 2/0 and threw the bag ashore and escaped with ship’s properties . The robbery happened in the early 1900s .
 Ever-increasing commerce under globalization provides new opportunities not just for traders, but also for pirates . Piracy is a growing problem for pirates in the world .
 As with other international challenges, states and nonstate multinational corporations find it to their advantage to work together to meet the threat . States and multinational corporations will work together in the fight against the threat of terrorism .
 Authorities in governments and international organizations join with the private sector in global-governance arrangements . This is designed to curb piracy and other crimes that threaten day-to-day commerce among nations .
 Governments can act unilaterally, of course, but imposing one state’s will on others invites retaliatory measures by those adversely affected . Governments can take action unilaterally, but it invites retaliation by those affected .
 Working with others either bilaterally or in multilateral, institutional settings usually proves more beneficial to all parties concerned . Working with other nations is more beneficial than working with others bilaterally, or bilaterally .
 In this chapter we examine trade and the exchange of money in the global political economy . We examine the role of trade and money exchange in global political economies . We also examine the importance of trade in global politics .
 When Mexican traders want to purchase goods or services priced in dollars, they need to exchange their pesos for dollars to complete the purchase . Mexican traders exchange pesos with dollars to buy goods priced in dollar .
 Banks and money-exchange firms routinely make these transactions, buying dollars or other international currencies they sell to their customers .
 Mexico’s central bank maintains a supply of international currencies in its reserves, which it can sell to banks using pesos to purchase them . The central bank can sell the currencies using its own currency reserves .
 Maintaining international liquidity is a core task in the politics of global governance, says David Frum . He says it's vital to maintain the cash needed to finance trade in global markets .
 In this regard, we explore the roles institutions play, particularly governments and central banks . The World Trade Organization in Geneva, Switzerland; the International Monetary Fund in Washington, DC; and the Bank for International Settlements in Switzerland .
 In Chapter 12, “Development,” we revisit trade and finance as they relate to the developing world . We also address demographics, the environment, and health, which have proven to be further burdens to economic advancement .
 As noted earlier, it should not surprise us that anything as important as economics is also highly political . It should be unsurprising that economics and politics are both highly political, say experts .
 Politics is core to economics as peoples and their governments become involved in economic decisions . International and nongovernment organizations become involved to a greater or lesser degree in the decisions they make about budgets, money, trade, investment, and other commercial matters .
 Anything important, like economics, seems always to become political . Economic decisions involve decisions made by officials in governments or international organizations . The stakes involved are high in politics .
 "We see these choices that relate to economic matters as part of the politics of global governance," says David Cameron . "These choices are important choices for the future of the world," he says .
 Trade firms, banks and investment firms seek to influence those making these decisions . Those affected by these authoritative choices seek to represent their interests . Trade firms and nongovernmental organizations seek to sway those making decisions .
 As in domestic politics, interests of workers, consumers depend on actions taken in political processes . Interest groups, political parties, and other nongovernmental organizations acting on their behalf in efforts to sway officials .
 Some people think governments have a constructive role to play in managing their economies . Governments should manage regional and global commerce, they say . Governments must work with other governments to manage regional commerce .
 Others prefer a laissez-faire approach, minimizing government participation or interference in the marketplace, whether domestically or globally . Others prefer to minimize government participation .
 Most laissez-faire advocates concede that government treasuries and central banks wind up playing an instrumental role in global commerce by managing the national supply of money . They also assume obligations to make payments to other countries that come from international trade .
 Governments play a pivotal role defining, enforcing, and adjudicating disputes concerning property rights . Governments, their courts, and their law-enforcement authorities also play a crucial role defining and enforcing property rights, experts say .
 It is difficult to talk about trade and commerce without talking about politics and the roles played by governments and international organizations . Once again, the politics of global governance is the key to global governance, says CNN.com .
 Exports and imports are an important part of national economies . Some countries are relatively more dependent on their trade sectors than others .
 Table shows relative size of the trade sector both regionally and in high-income and low-income, least-developed countries .
 High-tech exports of high-technology products are concentrated in the highincome countries located primarily in Europe, North America, and East Asia .
 Arab World lags far behind capital-rich, high-income countries in terms of high-tech exports . Least-developed countries lags behind capital rich countries in high-technology exports . OECD High Income 18 23 17 22 18 19 OECD High-Tech Exports as %
 Classical trade theory is exemplified in the writings of David Ricardo and others . David Ricardo is a proponent of classical trade theory .
 For countries or their business firms to engage in international trade requires some reason or rationale for doing so . For countries to engage international trade, there must be a reason to do so. For countries in the world, there is no easy way to do it.
 Classical trade theory predicts that countries will tend ceteris paribus ^ to produce and export those products in which they have a comparative advantage . Countries tend to export products that they have an advantage in which it is comparative advantage.
 Trade depends upon differences in relative efficiency and capacity of production among two or more countries, not sameness . Trade depends on differences, not relative efficiency, of production . Trade also depends on the quality of the products they trade regionally or globally .
 If there were no differences in efficiency of production and domestic production capacity were sufficient to meet demand, in theory there would be no trade at all .
 Heckscher-Ohlin: Different countries have diverse factor endowments, different amounts and quality of land, labor, and capital . Different countries likely to export those goods or services in which their combination of these production factors gives them a comparative advantage .
 Producers in some countries, having sufficient labor and a favorable climate, might specialize in agricultural production . Others, having larger capital endowments, may specialize in manufactured goods such as banking .
 This may all sound well and good in theory, but there are at least two major criticisms of classical trade theory that should be mentioned .
 It is one thing to state that countries should produce what is favored by their factor endowments, but that still does not guarantee a significant role or comparative advantage for many developing world countries . The World Resources Institute has published a new book on the subject of the same topic .
 You would think, for example, that developed countries should emphasize high-tech production and less-developed countries agricultural exports . You would also think that less developed nations should emphasize agricultural exports, but that's not the case .
 We still often think of agriculture as a labor-intensive enterprise favoring countries with good soil, favorable growing climate, and abundant populations willing to work the land . Agriculture is still a labor intensive enterprise, but it can be a job-intensive endeavor .
 Many less-developed world economies remain 30 percent or more agricultural compared to advanced-industrial or postindustrial economies that are perhaps just 1 to 3 percent agricultural . Even today, the composition of many less developed world economies remains 30 percent of agricultural .
 Capital-rich countries may find that their capital still gives them advantages over other countries that are rich in natural resources . Capital rich countries, however, may find their capital gives them decided advantages over others that have resources .
 The U.S. and other developed economies tend to be relatively more efficient in agricultural production . Capital has been effectively substituted for higher-cost labor in these countries .
 The mechanization of agriculture, coupled with agricultural research and development of growing-and-producing technologies, requires vast amounts of capital . Developed countries have in relatively more abundant supply of capital than do less-developed countries .
 Such technologies include using chemicals as fertilizer and for insect or pest control, developing plant hybrids with greater or more diverse crop yields, and genetically engineering new plant and animal forms by altering DNA or cell content .
 Capital-intensive agriculture becomes a comparative cost advantage for many capital-rich countries . Capital intensive agriculture has a cost advantage in capital rich countries . Agriculture is a major source of income for capital rich nations .
 Governments in these countries, enjoying ample access to capital through taxation or borrowing, have also subsidized the politically influential agricultural sectors in their countries .
 Capital-rich countries are prone to export agricultural produce to each other and even to less-developed countries . Not surprisingly, in the absence of tariffs, quotas, or other barriers, these countries export produce to other countries .
 Classical economist David Ricardo considered the value of a product a function of the labor put into its production . Adam Smith and Karl Marx had advanced central tenets of trade theory . Why and How and How to Trade?
 In an international market free of tariffs or other barriers to trade, a country's firms would tend to produce for export those products in which it enjoyed a comparative advantage, that is, it was more efficient in producing them than foreign competitors .
 To understand classical trade theory and the concept of comparative advantage, it helps to simplify things a bit . It helps to understand classical theory and comparative advantage .
 Let's pretend there are only two countries in the world capable of producing the same two products . So let's pretend that only one country can produce the same products .
 Many texts illustrate the concept of comparative advantage as affecting the trade of cloth versus wheat or wine versus textiles, but we will modernize the example by referring to the trading of semiconductors versus lumber . We will use this example to refer to the trade in semiconductor versus lumber
 Insula is an island country with small, well-tended forests and other natural resources . Insula was founded in the 1930s and is named Insula .
 Terra, a continental country, also has natural resources and vast forest lands . Terra is also known for its vast natural resources, including vast forests .
 Let's assume each country uses the factors of production (land, labor, and capital) to produce just two products — semiconductors and lumber . The countries exchange one product for another without using money .
 Semiconductor and lumber production rely heavily on labor and capital in the forms of machinery, work space, and finance for these enterprises . Semiconduct and lumber industries depend heavily on land and other natural resources .
 Insula and Terra can produce semiconductors and lumber that can be produced separately . Take a look at graphic presentation of production possibilities for the two countries . The diagonal lines on both graphs represent the maximum possible combinations of semiconductor and lumber .
 Insula produces only semiconductors (putting all of its available land, labor, and capital to that purpose) The most it can produce is 100,000 units, but no lumber at all is produced at that level of semiconductor production . Insula produced only semiconductor semic
 Insula forgoes semiconductor production entirely and produces only lumber . The most lumber it can produce is 50,000 units . Insula could produce only 50,500 units of lumber .
 A similar analysis for Terra reveals a maximum production possibility of either 100,000 units of lumber or 50,000 semiconductors with actual production, point T, being a combination of 50,00 units of wood and 25,000 chips .
 The marginal trade-off between producing semiconductors and lumber for Insula is 2:1—for every two units of reduced semiconductor production . Insula: "The marginal trade off between semiconductor and lumber is 2.1"
 Insula can allocate enough land, labor, and capital to produce two more semiconductors instead . Insula: "Insula can't allocate enough time, labor and capital" Insula plans to build two more chipsets instead of one .
 Terra's marginal trade-off between producing semiconductors and lumber is 1:2—for every unit of reduced semiconductor production . Terra says it's a better deal for lumber and semiconductor than for semiconductor manufacturing .
 Terra can free up enough land, labor, and capital to produce two more units of lumber instead . Terra can now produce enough land and labor to produce more than two units of wood . Terra: "I'm not going to have to wait and wait"
 Terra forgoes two units of lumber production to produce one semiconductor instead . Alternatively, Terra would have enough land, labor, and capital to produce another semiconductor . Terra could have the same amount of land and labor to produce as many semiconductors .
 Insula's efficiency in producing semiconductors allows Insula to produce them less expensively than Terra can . Insula can also produce them cheaper than Terra's .
 Terra's comparative advantage in lumber allows it to produce lumber less expensively than Insula can . Insula produces lumber less cheaply than Terra can . Terra has a comparative advantage over Insula .
 If a country chooses to invest its capital and other resources to production of semiconductors, the same capital and labor will not be available for production of some quantity of lumber . If a company chooses to allocate its capital to production, it will not have the same resources available for some quantity
 Insula would not have any labor or capital left to cut trees, process them, and deliver lumber to market . Insula will not have all of its production to semiconductors, says CEO .
 Inability to produce any lumber because production factors have been allocated to producing only semiconductors is referred to as an opportunity cost . The opportunity cost is a cost of not producing any lumber .
 Production decisions in the real world are usually not all-or-nothing decisions . As a practical matter, of course, production decisions are not all or nothing decisions .
 A country may allocate its capital, labor, and natural resources to production of different amounts of semiconductors, lumber, or other products . Instead of a country's capital or labor, the resources may be allocated to different products . A country can allocate its resources to produce different semiconduct
 Insula's decision this year to produce 50,000 semiconductors and 25,000 units of lumber also means it is forgoing as opportunity costs the production of up to an additional 50,00 semiconductor .
 The difference in efficiency in the use of the three factors of production and the consequent cost of production, there is an opportunity for trade . Because of this difference, there will be an opportunity to trade, says the author .
 If the two countries do specialize in producing those products in which they enjoy a comparative advantage, it could expand substantially .
 The labor theory of value accepted by classical economic theorists has been overtaken by neoclassical understandings in which supply and demand for goods are a function of demand for them, not the labor put into their production .
 The theory is often used ideologically to justify unfair terms of trade that work to the disadvantage of less-developed countries .
 Capital-rich countries masking terms of trade that are so unfavorable to less-developed countries . Capital rich countries relegate to them the production of commodities in which they allegedly have the comparative advantage . Put another way, it is an ideology masquerading as theory set forth by capital-
 Agricultural products, minerals, and other natural resources typically are purchased at bargainbasement prices by producers in capital-rich, more advanced economies .
 Classical trade theory states that if we allow free, unencumbered trade, countries will tend to specialize in production of products in which they have a comparative advantage . Countries tend to prefer products that they have an advantage, such as those in which it is at a cost .
 A world in which the most efficient producers of particular products tend to specialize in their production results in maximizing or optimizing aggregate, woridwide production, thus enhancing global welfare . The most efficient producer of certain products tends to specialize, so that their production can be optimized .
 As critics quick to point out, however, enhancing aggregate production through specialization and free trade does not mean an equal or even equitable distribution of these gains . As critics say, it doesn't mean that these gains should be distributed equally .
 In a capitalist world economy, we should not be surprised that decisive advantages even in agriculture often go to capital-rich countries . Capital rich countries often have decisive advantages in agriculture, says David Cameron .
 A second and related objection to classical trade theory is that it ignores unequal terms of trade . A second objection is that the theory of free trade is based on inequality .
 Latin American and other economists charged in the 1960s that less-developed countries of the South were in a decidedly disadvantageous position compared to more advanced, industrial nations of the North .
 Economists such as Argentine Raul Prebisch observed that countries in the South export raw materials and agricultural commodities that tend not to increase (or even tend to decline) in price . Countries in the North gain an advantage from production and export of manufactured goods that tend to increase in price
 To address this and other trade problems, less-developed countries have sought trade preferences from rich countries . Less-developed nations have sought the help of rich countries to address this .
 Trade preferences can take the form of assurances by developed countries that they or their businesses will buy at least a certain minimum quantity of developing world products . Developed countries promise to buy more of the developing world goods .
 China may agree to give trade preferences, not impose tariffs, quotas, or other barriers against developing world exports . Alternatively, they may agree not to impose such barriers against imports from capital-rich, developed world .
 European Union countries have developed by political agreement the most extensive set of trade preferences in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific . Many of the so-called “ACP’s” countries were former colonies of EU members .
 Trade preferences and cooperative monetary measures also tie them economically to the countries granting these favors . Developed world countries benefit from these measures, trade preferences and monetary measures .
 Critics see extensive trade preferences as a means of maintaining neocolonial relations that convey substantial advantages to developed countries . Critics say trade preferences are a way of maintaining political relations .
 Defenders see little or nothing wrong with trade preferences or arrangements that benefit both sides, however unequally . Defenders of trade preferences see little wrong with deals that help both sides .
 Differentiate between classical and neoclassical economic understandings as they relate to macroeconomic and microeconomic theories applicable to global, regional, national, and local political economies . Differentiate from neoclassic understandings and macroeconomic understandings .
 Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Adam Smith and other classical economists have taken issue with classical economic theory . Adam Smith's economic theory was advanced by David Ricardo and Adam Smith . Adam and David Ricardo were the world's leading economists .
 As far back as the late 19th and early 20th centuries, there were developments in economic thought that departed from the labor theory of value . The labor theory was developed in the early 1900s .
 Value is to be found in relative abundance or scarcity and in utility buyers and sellers place on the goods or services they seek or provide to markets . As such, value is found in scarcity and utility buyers place on goods they seek, they place on .
 Marshall and Walras dealt with different aspects of market equilibrium as a conceptual device for understanding market forces . Bringing the ideas of earlier economists together, they used the idea of earlier economics together to create a conceptual framework .
 neoclassical theorists have made heavy use of mathematics (stating economic ideas symbolically in algebraic equations), statistics, and econometrics — such methods as correlation, regression, and causal modeling .
 At the same time, other economists have also made substantial contributions to macroeconomic theory .
 Keynes and his followers have taken a macroeconomic view, dealing with aggregate demand and supply for an entire economy taken as a whole . Keynes was influenced by Marshall's earlier work .
 Milton Friedman and other monetarists have focused on how the supply and velocity or flow of money in an entire economy affect production and supply as well as demand . Keynesian economists are often at odds with Keynesian economics .
 He also investigated how capitalism and socialism relate to democracy and democratic ideas . Expressly interested in the linkage between politics and economics .
 Economists have made important contributions to macroeconomic theories and concepts . They have also had an even greater impact on microeconomic theorizing . This article is an open-ended look at the history of the economy .
 Neoclassical economic theories developed by neoclassical economists have increasing applicability to the global political economy . Microeconomic theories were originally formulated more with local or domestic markets in mind .
 Microeconomic theory offers explanation of the exchange value of currencies in relation to each other as well as account of the expected effects of governmental subsidies, regional integration, tariffs, quotas, or other barriers to trade .
 All these issues have enormous political importance, given the high economic stakes states, firms, consuming publics, and others have in such matters . All of these issues are important to state, firm, and publics .
 Neoclassical and other theorists have continued to expand our understanding of the global political economy beyond the foundational insights offered by classical writers .
 Ricardian free-trade theory focuses primarily on cost differences among producers . Ricard's theory is based on the cost differences between producers and producers .
 If a country is relatively more costefficient at producing a particular good or service, it will supposedly tend to specialize in producing and exporting what is not consumed or used domestically . The country is supposedly more cost efficient than other countries .
 In the absence of government intervention to place tariffs, quotas, or any other obstacles in the way of trade, countries will tend to specialize in producing those products in which they enjoy a comparative cost advantage relative to others .
 The result of relegating production to the most efficient producers is, in principle, to maximize total productive capacity or aggregate output of goods and services, enhancing global welfare, however uneven the distribution of these gains from specialization and trade may be .
 Ricardian theory goes partway but does not really provide a complete answer to why countries trade . Ricard's theory is incomplete, he says, but it is useful to know why nations trade trade .
 Instead of focusing on differences in production cost efficiencies, we need to understand how economies of scale deriving from technological innovation influence marketing and production for export trade .
 The average cost per unit of producing a million semiconductors typically is less than when a production line is set up to produce only a thousand is an example of an economy or unit-cost reduction based on large-scale production .
 Existing producers, large or small, of particular goods and services may look globally to expand their markets and enjoy increasing gains from export trade . Existing firms may look to expand markets to find customers that can be served efficiently by increasing substantially the overall level of domestic production .
 In the 1930s and 1940s economist Joseph Schumpeter, a contemporary of John Maynard Keynes, addressed the impact of technological innovation on business cycles . The economist said that technological innovation can lead to a downturn in the economy .
 Investments in technology are seen as crucial determinants of economic growth and future competitiveness in the global economy . Investing in technology usually is very costly, but it is seen as a crucial determinant of growth .
 Governments have been active players along with business enterprises in pursuing technological development, particularly ‘high technologies’ with application in such knowledge-intensive industries as electronics, computers, and telecommunications . Governments have also pursued technological development .
 Know-how in advanced materials, superconductors, semiconductors, computers, and lasers has very real market applicability . Know-knowing in advanced material, superconductor, semiconductor, computers and lasers is a real market .
 Payoffs in these sectors potentially greater but also increasing compared with similar investments in machines for lower-technology manufacturing enterprises . Payoffs could also be greater than those made by lower-tech manufacturing firms .
 The implication is that countries and firms able to work in this high-tech sector will reap the greater rewards of knowledge-intensive production .
 This tends to leave developing world countries in the dust. Once again, this tends to be the case of developing countries .
 Economist Paul Krugman is prominent among those who have raised theoretical challenges to classical Ricardian trade theory . Paul Krugman has been a long-running critic of Ricardan trade theory.
 Krugman is careful to note that focusing on increasing gains aided by technological innovation as motivation for export trade is a supplement to comparativecost considerations as to why trade occurs .
 The increasing-gains argument may actually matter more than merely enjoying a comparative-cost advantage . It may matter more for high-technology products in some markets in which certain firms have already established themselves .
 It is difficult, although not impossible, to start up a new firm and achieve a strong market position when one or a few large firms with ready access to capital already dominate a market .
 It is even harder to compete when new, fast-changing high technologies are difficult to acquire and develop into marketable products that can be produced at sufficient scale to be cost competitive .
 Large, established firms in industries with increasing returns to scale are usually quite able to beat start-up competition . Large firms are able to grow even larger and realize ever-increasing gains from expanding their export-market positions .
 Aviation is a good example of a market in which only a few firms dominate globally . Only a few companies dominate globally. Aviation is one of the world's largest aviation markets .
 In fact, mergers and acquisitions of existing firms have continued to reduce the numbers of these large firms to just a few .
 Capital for production of aircraft and related high-tech products is increasingly concentrated in fewer corporations . Capital for aircraft production and related products is now increasingly concentrated on fewer corporations.
 Thousands of smaller firms offering specialized products are increasingly dependent for contracts on a declining number of major producers . Thousands of small firms offer specialized products .
 European producers have pooled their efforts in joint development and production agreements for both civil and military aircraft . The agreements reduce the total number of competitors in global markets .
 Although oil as an energy source is well known, coal continues to play an important role, particularly for the poor . This photo was taken in Bangladesh .
 Two sets of transnational mergers in the auto industry underscore market incentives to remain competitive and realize increasing gains by pooling technologies and other forms of capital . Consider, for example, two sets of . mergers .
 The original mergers were followed during the great recession of 2008 with further “restructuring” by the two American multinationals . Offloading their interests to Italian and Chinese firms, they sold off their interests .
 The gradual acquisition of Chrysler by Fiat, the Italian automaker, began in 2009 . Chrysler is now owned by Fiat and Chrysler Group Group .
 Chrysler merged in 1998 with Daimler-Benz, best known as the manufacturer of Mercedes cars, which in 2007 sold its interest in Chrysler to a private equity firm . Previously Chrysler had merged with Germany’s Mercedes-Benz in 2007 .
 The merger in 1999 between Ford and Volvo passenger —Ford’s interest was sold in 2010 to Geely, a Chinese firm . The merger was between 1999 and 2010 .
 Some start-up firms with high-technology applications have been successful challengers to established, large-scale firms .
 Even new players have had to secure substantial access to capital to finance and expand their efforts by selling stocks and issuing bonds in financial markets . But even these new players must secure substantial .
 Market forces have ruthlessly eliminated many of these firms. Furthermore, market forces have also eliminated many firms. Market forces are ruthlessly eliminating many of the firms.
 In sum, existing large-scale producers motivated by the prospects of increasing gains have a decided trade advantage . This is apart from any comparative-cost considerations .
 Even smaller firms marketing specialized products seek to increase both their domestic and export-market shares to achieve increasing gains .
 New thinking on trade challenges old theoretical assumptions and predictions . It aims to expand our understanding of how international and global trade actually work . Although not yet fully developed, new thinking is needed to understand the global economy .
 Classical free-trade theory assumes the neutrality of money, which hardly seems to be the case in the real world . Classical free trade theory assumes that money is neutral, but that is not true in real life .
 In classical trade theory, the exchange of goods and services is influenced only by production costs and related considerations, not fluctuations in the value or exchange rates of currencies . By “neutralizing” money, “money’s role in the exchange is neutralizing money .
 In the earlier example in which the fictional countries Insula and Terra bartered semiconductors and lumber, no consideration was given to the value of currencies . In the previous example, the currencies were exchanged for semiconductments .
 It is comparative production costs, not changes in the value of money, that are supposed to drive consequent changes .
 Production and pesoWsis""Tt delivery-to-market costs are borne by suppliers of the good or service produced . Illustrate how changes in exchange rates affect prices of both exports and imports . mypoiisciiab .
 Prices in these microeconomic, market-oriented understandings are a function of both supply and demand . The most efficient producer is able to offer the same good or service at a lower price than competitors seeking the same export sales .
 The value of money does fluctuate with consequent effects on prices . But in the real world, the value of the money fluctuates, and prices do .
 One country's currency may be worth more in relation to another country’s currency today than it was yesterday . However, it could be worth less tomorrow . The UK's currency is worth more today than yesterday .
 Prices at which goods and services are traded also change when exchange rates between currencies also change . Unfortunately, the prices at which items are traded are also affected .
 An exchange rate is merely the price at which a currency can be bought using another currency . Exchange rates are based on exchange rates between a currency and a currency .
 Exchange-rate arithmetic may seem confusing at first, but it's not so difficult to figure out if we treat a currency just like any product traded in markets . We take a few moments to sort out how it is priced, and we take a look at how the currency is priced .
 The exchange rate of a currency fluctuates in financial markets in response to shifts in demand for them in much the same way as commodities do . Exchange rates fluctuate in the currency markets in much of a financial market response to changes in demand .
 Currencies in demand ceteris paribus tend to rise in price . A drop in demand for a currency means its exchange rate in relation to other currencies falls . Drop in demand means currency exchange rate falls .
 When governments or their central banks make the authoritative or political choice to increase or decrease the supply of their currencies, they also can impact exchange rates for these currencies .
 The intersection of the demand and supply curves is the equilibrium exchange rate in a financial market . It is the result of the intersection of supply and demand curves in a particular financial market.
 I Effects of Supply of Supply and Demand on Currency Exchange Rates . alternative demand and supply curves . I effects of supply and demand on currency exchange rates. alternative demand curves .
 The Impact of Exchange-Rate Fluctuations on Trade can be seen in the context of exchange rates . Look at what happens to exchange rates when the levels of demand and supply go up or go down .
 The yen has appreciated in relation to the dollar over the same period . Put another way, the dollar has appreciated slightly in terms of value .
 Savings on the car are to the benefit of the Japanese importer; however, the American exporter is paid the same amount this week as last week .
 Japanese importers are willing to buy more Fords at 2,750,000 yen than they would at 3 million yen . The real gain to the American exporter, of course, is the degree to which the real gain is to the U.S.
 More sales at the same dollar price mean more revenue and profits to Ford and Ford retailers . Other things equal, more sales at same price means more revenue for retailers .
 Economists describe the impact on markets of exchange-rate changes by referring to the price elasticity of demand in the Japanese market for Fords . Economists say the impact of exchange rate changes can be seen in Japan .
 If demand for Fords increases substantially with a small decline in yen price, elasticity is said to be high . For example, if a small price drop in yen increases, many more are purchased .
 The American exporter’s gain is not caused by increased efficiencies or reduced production costs on the American side . The U.S. exporter's gain would not be due to increased efficiency or lower production costs .
 The gain in sales is due to a change in the dollar-yen exchange rate . The gain is purely due to an exchange rate change . Sales are based on the change in exchange rate between the dollar and yen .
 Honda is a Japanese exporter of Honda automobiles . Honda is the largest exporter in the world, followed by a Japanese company that sells cars .
 The Honda will be less competitive in this circumstance, not due to any change in quality or cost of production, but solely because a change in exchange rate has had an adverse impact on its price . Honda will not be able to compete in terms of quality, cost or production .
 A price rise can adversely affect Honda’s market position, undercutting its sales and revenues . In an elastic market in the United States consumers are willing to substitute Fords for Hondas, Honda says .
 The exporter and retailer may choose for the time being to hold the American price at $25,000 . On the other hand, if the United States market for Hondas is elastic, the exporter may choose to keep the U.S. price low .
 Exchange rates are important to know about precisely because changes in them directly affect prices and thus the revenues earned from international trade . To sum up, exchange rates must be seen as a key indicator for international trade in the world .
 Foreign goods its firms and individuals import become more expensive in domestic markets . At the same time, foreign goods are becoming more expensive . Foreign goods such as food, clothing, clothing and shoes are also becoming more popular in China .
 Some differences in profit margins and cost of production and delivery are relatively minor compared to the impact of currency values . However, there are some differences in profits and production costs .
 Chinese authorities keep the yuan (or RM B, the renminbi) undervalued in relation to both the dollar and euro . The yuan is the people's currency, or RM B .
 Chinese goods are priced lower in foreign currencies than they otherwise would be, a trade advantage for China . As a result, China has a decided trade advantage over other countries .
 The dollar and euro are both overvalued in relation to the yuan . As with most Chinese goods and services, they can be bought more cheaply from China than if produced domestically . Put another way, the dollar and the euro are .
 The exodus of U.S. production to China and other countries is due to less-expensive labor costs abroad . An overvalued dollar goes much further in places like China . The exodus is due not just to less expensive labor costs .
 Dollar investments buy more plant and production capacity than the same in the U.S. than in the United States . Dollar investments make more plant, production capacity in the US .
 It's cheaper for large segments of corporate America to produce abroad and import these products for sale in the U.S. The dollar is overvalued, especially since it's overvalued . It's much cheaper for corporations to produce and import products from abroad .
 A single dollar buys more in a country like China than if currency values were set in a market free of intervention by government or central banking authorities . China's currency values would be better if the market were free to allow intervention .
 The market, left to its own devices, would result in an upward revaluation of the yuan . Or so theory holds—a devaluation of both the dollar and the euro in relation to the Chinese currency . The yuan would achieve purchasing power parity with the dollar .
 In principle, the price of the Big Mac should be about the same everywhere, but that's usually not the case . Absent substantial differences in production, marketing, or other costs, in principle the price should be the same .
 Critics have advocated that the Economist move away from its Big Mac index to a more diverse, marketbasket calculation .
 As a practical matter, of course, the magazine never restricted itself to reporting only this one index, but found its iconic Big Mac indicator as telling much the same story .
 One can find purchasing power parity statistics compiled in IMF, World Bank, UN Development Programme, and other publications . But they usually do not communicate to noneconomists with the same degree of clarity as the ""Big Mac index"
 W goods and services traded, changes in prices or currency values are not just economic, but also highly political decisions . Changes in prices, currency values can be politically important decisions, experts say .
 U.S. monetary authorities perceived that the dollar had become too overvalued in relation to other major currencies in the mid-1980s . In the 1960s and early 1970s, the dollar was perceived too much overvalued .
 Overvalued dollar means that U.S. firms and individuals could import foreign products too cheaply . United States exports were too pricey or expensive to foreigners, the economist says .
 The same decision to allow the dollar to depreciate in value relative to other currencies in global markets occurred more recently in the Great Recession that began in 2008 .
 Any such decision to depreciate the dollar would reduce the foreign buying power of the dollar, making foreign goods pricier to Americans . The move also makes United States products cheaper to foreigners, making U.S. products cheaper .
 This sounds at first like a charitable gesture or good deal to foreigners by U.S. monetary authorities . This sounds like a good deal by the United States monetary authorities, but it's not a good thing .
 An overvalued dollar means U.S. consumers tend to pass up buying foreign-made products . The dollar-foreign currency exchange rates are at an overvaluation in the United States .
 When the dollar is overvalued relative to foreign currencies overall, U.S. purchases from other countries tend to be far greater than American sales abroad . This creates a national trade imbalance deeply in red ink .
 Imports of foreign products stimulate production in other countries, but tend to dampen or reduce domestic production with consequent losses of jobs . Even more important from a domestic political perspective, imports of foreign goods stimulate other countries' production, but also dampen domestic production .
 Labor unions argue that overvaluation costs U.S. jobs lost to producers in other countries . Labor unions say it costs American jobs lost in the process .
 Overvaluation of the dollar tends to shift production to other countries . Job creation abroad to replace jobs cut at home, in effect ‘exporting’ jobs .
 U.S. monetary authorities might try to depreciate the dollar unilaterally, but instead usually work multilateral . They negotiate with their treasury and central bank monetary-authority counterparts in other countries to collaborate in depreciating the dollar .
 This means refusing to defend the existing exchange rates between the dollar and other currencies . Instead, let the dollar slide or help it down the depreciation road to a new, lower level at which valuation of the dollar is at least closer or somewhat more comparable .
 Treasury officials and central bankers may agree to do this by not buying up surplus dollars in global markets, thus reducing demand for them . Central bankers may also agree to reduce demand for surplus dollars .
 Americans may buy dollars and thus increase demand for them . Alternatively, when they want to see the dollar appreciate, they may choose to buy dollars .
 In either case, these officials in conjunction with their counterparts abroad are making essentially political decisions about economic matters . This is an exercise of global governance, discussed in greater detail in the next section .
 The effort to adjust exchange rates in this way is designed to achieve greater purchasing-power parity between the dollar and other currencies . This shifts competition from artificial, exchangerate considerations to such factors such as efficiency, cost of production, and quality .
 Trade theory assumes the neutrality of money, but exchange rates can get out of whack . Exchange rates can adversely affect trade that otherwise would be based on comparative advantage with lower-cost, more efficient producers .
 To be neutral, money should be in parity or roughly the same in purchasing power to buy goods and services in one country as in another . Money should be roughly the equivalent purchasing power of one country, say experts .
 A practical, but amusing way to measure purchasing power parity is to compare how much it costs to buy the same hamburger, fries, and cola in one country as in another .
 If money is neutral and production costs are roughly the same, the hamburger, fries, and cola should cost or be priced about the same regardless of which currency one uses .
 The equivalent values of all currencies, in principle, should buy about the same number or amount of the same goods or services . This is what is meant by purchasing-power parity .
 In day-to-day international commerce, government agencies, business firms, other groups, and individuals use domestic currency to buy foreign currencies . Foreign currencies are used to finance the purchase of goods and services imported from abroad, to loan or invest money in foreign countries .
 Foreign government agencies, foreign business firms, other groups, and individuals living abroad use their currencies to buy currencies in other countries needed to conduct the same kinds of transactions .
 Currencies, usually in the form of deposits in banks and other financial institutions, can easily move back and forth electronically across national boundaries . Currencies are usually deposited in banks, and can easily easily move across national borders .
 International Liquidity Rules governing the exchange of currencies and conditions for loans have evolved over time, as have the international organizations tasked by member countries with implementing or enforcing them . Rules governing exchange of currency and condition for loans are evolving over time .
 The sets of rules and institutions associated with them constitute what we can refer to as an international monetary regime . It has as its purpose providing financial arrangements so essential to maintaining and expanding trade and other forms of international commerce .
 Maintaining international liquidity is the principal global-governance function associated with this international monetary regime . The IMF is tasked with maintaining international liquidity in the wake of the financial crisis .
 Liquidity is a financial term referring to having cash available or a ability to raise such funds readily by selling assets . Liquidity refers to having money available or being able to raise money readily by sale of assets. Liquidity can also be used to raise funds easily .
 Maintaining international liquidity, the most important IMF task, means providing member countries in need with access to financial assets that can be exchanged for currencies necessary to meet their payments obligations . The IMF's most important task is to maintain international liquidity .
 Financial assets held as reserves by national monetary authorities include gold, special drawing rights, and “hard’s currencies .
 What made them “hard” in earlier times was their convertibility to gold (or dollars) by national treasuries or at their central banks . In turn, they were readily convertible to gold, which in turn turned to gold .
 By contrast, ‘soft’ currencies lacked this convertibility and thus were less accepted globally . Soft currencies are more accepted globally than soft currencies . ‘Soft currencies’ are more likely to be accepted globally, but not more accepted .
 Nowadays we refer to hard currencies simply as those readily accepted and exchangeable for one another and thus easily used to buy any country’s currency whenever needed . Hard currencies are readily accepted, exchangeable and easily exchanged for each other .
 Monetary authorities of countries with soft currencies sometimes peg or link these currencies to the dollar or one or another of the hard currencies . Soft currencies allow their soft currencies to rise and fall in value in the same way as the leading hard currencies do .
 Soft currencies are more readily accepted in commercial transactions . As a result, their otherwise soft currencies are easier accepted in transactions .
 In earlier centuries, currencies were defined as being equivalent in value to a fixed weight of some precious metal, such as silver or gold . Fixed Exchange-Rate Regimes were often defined in value in value . Currency was often defined as equivalent to the weight of a precious metal .
 In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the U.S. dollar could be exchanged for l/20th of an ounce of gold . The U.K. dollar was exchanged for 1/10th of a gold ounce .
 It took $20 to buy an ounce of gold from the U.S. Treasury from the United States Treasury . Put another way, $20 was needed to buy a gold .
 The value of the British currency was defined as a fixed weight of gold . At the same time the value was also defined as the weight of the gold .
 Countries willing to exchange their currencies for gold on demand at these fixed rates were said to be on the gold standard . Countries willing exchange their currency for gold at fixed rates at these rates are said to have been on the standard .
 In fact, relatively little gold was actually exchanged because countries found it more convenient to exchange each other’s currencies as needed to finance trade and other forms of commerce .
 The exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and British pound was easy to calculate because both were defined in terms of specified weights of gold . The exchange rates between the United States dollar and the British pound were easy-to- calculate .
 At the time, it took about $4.87 (more precisely $4,867) to buy one British pound note . At the same time, at the time of the 1930s, the British pound was worth $1.87 .
 At the core of the international monetary regime at the time was what amounted to a gold-exchange standard . At the time, the international currency system was a gold exchange standard . The current system is now known as the Eurozone .
 In the late 1800s and early 1900s, the United Kingdom enjoyed financial prominence in Europe and throughout the world . The United Kingdom had financial prominence throughout Europe .
 The Bank of England managed not only the British currency, but also effectively the worldwide international monetary regime . Given its standing and its global access to capital, the bank managed to manage not only sterling currency but also the global capital .
 Other countries often held deposits of the pound sterling as reserves . The pound sterling could be used to finance their trade and other purchases abroad .
 Holding sterling deposits as reserves as reserves was actually preferable to holding gold because these sterling deposits could even earn interest . Holdings of sterling deposits were actually better than holding gold .
 Because of its pivotal role in the international monetary regime of the time, sterling came to be regarded in effect as a key currency .
 This is how the Bank of England managed the international monetary regime at the time . This is the same as the current global monetary regime .
 By raising its discount rate, the Bank of England in effect encouraged the sale of sterling to holders of foreign currencies seeking greater earnings due to higher interest rates in British financial markets .
 Holders of foreign currencies would readily use these holdings to buy sterling for deposit in British banks, thus taking advantage of higher British interest rates . Put another way, holders of foreign currency would readily buy sterling from foreign currencies .
 Many foreign currencies would wind up in the Bank of England’s reserves as British banks exchanged them there for sterling . In turn, many of these foreign currencies wind up .
 During World War I, Britain abandoned the gold-exchangeability of their currencies . During the war, the British currency was used to help finance the war effort . The British currency has since been replaced by gold .
 Wartime controls on currency expenditures were eventually removed when the war ended . The United Kingdom tried to reassume its prewar role as manager of a restored international monetary regime .
 Britain’s capital base had been significantly eroded by heavy borrowing necessitated by massive wartime expenditures . Although the United Kingdom still retained its worldwide empire, the U.K. still retained worldwide empire .
 The United States, although it possessed the capital base to assume the international monetary-management role, was unwilling to do so . The U.S. was not willing to take the lead in monetary policy .
 At the same time, imports were restrained by high tariffs, quotas, and other barriers to trade . The U.S. has a history of high tariffs and quotas in trade .
 It was described as “beggar thy neighbor” as countries turned inward to protect themselves . Countries turned inward no matter what the negative externalities—the expense might be to others .
 Countries devalued their currencies in an effort to make imports more expensive to firms and individuals at home . Countries also devalued currencies to promote their exports by making them cheaper to foreigners .
 The United States did this by raising the price of gold from $20 to $35 an ounce . The U.S. raised the gold price of $20 an ounce by raising it from $30 an ounce to $40 .
 Raising the official price of gold amounted to a devaluation of the dollar, says President Obama . The move amounted to an official devaluation, he says .
 The exchange value of the dollar depended upon its gold value, hollowing the increase in gold price . Americans now had to pay $35 for the same amount of foreign goods and services that they previously bought with the dollar equivalent of an ounce of gold when it was priced at .
 Foreign currency equivalent to an ounce of gold now bought $35 worth of U.S. goods and services instead of just $20 worth . At the same time, foreign purchasers got a good deal designed to promote exports . The deal was designed to encourage exports .
 Each country tried to establish a trade advantage over others—maximizing exports and minimizing imports . As a result, round after round of competitive devaluations characterized the 1930s . The 1930s was characterized by round after rounds of devaluations .
 It was a “zero-sum’s political game that countries played, seeking gains at the expense of others, says President Obama . It's a "zero sum” political game, he says. It was the game of nations seeking gains, he adds .
 The net effect of such policies was a drastic reduction in international trade and foreign investment as the worldwide economy continued to stagnate, says the author . The world's economy is stagnating, he says .
 It didn’t work as other countries retaliated, which set in motion a devastating, downward spiral in the volume of international trade that hurt producers and cost jobs in all countries .
 Lessons drawn from this experience led to political plans for establishing a new international monetary regime that would make possible a reopening of international trade and investment across national borders . Lessons from this led during World War II to plans for a new monetary regime .
 Instead of zero-sum thinking, achieving positive gains through expanded trade and commerce took center stage . The U.S. should focus on expanding trade, commerce, says President Obama . Obama: "We need to find a way to get around the world"
 In game-theoretic terms, there was a visible shift from the zero-sum political game of the Depression years to a positive-sum game to guide country players in the postwar period . In the Depression, the political game was a positive one to guide players in postwar period.
 The IMF was established by international agreement at a conference held in 1944 at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire . The World Bank was established to help finance postwar reconstruction and development .
 British economist John Maynard Keynes and his American counterpart, Harry Dexter White, were the key proponents of alternative plans . Keynes and White were key proponents .
 Given the political-economic prominence of the United States in these negotiations, the U.S. view was more influential in determining the final outcome . The American view is more influential than that of other nations .
 Keynesian thinking was evident in the 1960s when member countries authorized the IMF to create SDRs . IMF members could count as monetary reserves along with gold, dollars, and other key currencies convertible into gold or dollars .
 The task the IMF was given at Bretton Woods, which prevailed during the institution's first quarter-century, was to oversee and manage an international monetary regime of relatively fixed exchange rates . The IMF was tasked with overseeing and managing an international currency regime .
 It did this by relying on key currencies like the United States dollar, which were readily exchangeable into gold or other currencies . The U.S. dollar was readily exchanged into gold and other currencies in the 1980s .
 A new gold-exchange standard came into existence with the United States dollar at its center . As such, the dollar still remained at its 1934 level of $35 an ounce . The new standard was in effect with the dollar at the center .
 As in the sterling-gold-exchange standard of the late I9th and early 20th centuries, relatively few actual gold exchanges occurred among national monetary authorities .
 Most countries held their reserves in the form of U.S. dollar deposits . The deposits were understood to be at least as good as gold, or better because they earned interest .
 It allowed the value of its currency to float, or be set based on currency market supply and demand . The value of the country's currency was allowed to float or set up based on market demand .
 American officials complained that over the years the dollar had become overvalued . That meant that U.S. exports were too expensive to foreigners and imports too cheap to Americans .
 The volume of U.S. exports could not keep up with the ever-increasing volume of American imports . As a result, the volume of United States exports has been unable to keep pace with the imports .
 Many other countries seen as having undervalued currencies, giving them a decisive trade advantage . By contrast, many other countries had undervalued currency . The U.S. trade advantage is seen as promoting exports to the United States .
 American officials devalued the dollar by letting its value float, depreciating it in currency markets . With its trade balance slipping into deficit, U.S. officials chose to devalue the dollar .
 Many other currencies were tied to what had become a floating dollar, their values also fluctuated . The exchange value of many other currencies was tied to the dollar .
 A new international monetary regime of flexible exchange rates had come into existence . The new international currency regime had come to existence . A new global monetary regime had been created .
 Fierce debates among monetary authorities as to just how flexible these rates should be . Fierce debate over how flexible this rate should be, though .
 Currency markets are viewed in currency markets as either overvalued or undervalued in relation to other currencies . On the other hand, they were also blamed for leading to financial crises .
 A compromise position, managed flexibility, allows for some intervention in currency markets by monetary authorities to stabilize or otherwise influence exchange rates . The compromise position is managed flexibility and allows some intervention .
 The new flexible exchange-rate regime established by the mid-1970s remains in effect today .
 It relies on market forces, but allows treasuries and central banks to intervene in global markets, particularly when they do so multilaterally in coordinated, cooperative actions . Central banks can intervene multilateral in coordinated actions .
 The politics of global governance in this regime capture the give-and-take among national and international authorities often disagreeing on what is to be done . The world's most powerful and most powerful governments often disagree with each other .
 When national monetary authorities do coalesce, they may decide to buy or sell each other’s currencies to correct underor overvaluations and maintain international liquidity . Each country has the cash it needs to cover shortfalls in the balance of trade .
 In the absence of this liquidity and political consensus on the need to provide it, countries unable to pay their bills might be forced to reduce or cut imports . Perhaps also imposing exchange controls to keep their country’s money from being spent or invested abroad .
 Members of the European Communities developed a monetary arrangement to stabilize rates among themselves . The European Economic Community, Coal and Steel Community, and Atomic Energy Community did so .
 As the EC became incorporated in the 1990s in a new European Union, an outgrowth of earlier monetary collaboration was the establishment of an economic and monetary union . The EC was incorporated into the EU in 1990s .
 This included a common central bank located in Frankfurt managing the new currency, the euro . The euro is often viewed as the leading or potential competitor to the dollar as a global key currency .
 The U.S. continues to pressure China to allow its national currency to appreciate somewhat . An “upward revaluation” in relation to the dollar increases the price of its exports and decreases import prices in China .
 China depends on its favorable trade position to sustain domestic production and employment . Critics call China’s position a form of neomercantilism—pursuing national gain without regard for the costs or negative externalities imposed on other countries .
 IMF has its headquarters in Washington, DC, next to the headquarters of the World Bank . The IMF is the world's largest multibillion dollar bank .
 The World Bank specializes in making loans for investment in economic reconstruction and development . The focus of the IMF is on the finance of trade—assisting member countries to manage their payment obligations to each other .
 Bank for International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland, is a bank for central bankers . Central bankers engage in buying, selling, lending, and borrowing each other’s currencies as needed to sustain international commerce .
 Central bankers participating in the BIS have played an active, often pivotal role in making some of the financial arrangements agreed to by treasury and other government officials of IMF member countries .
 If there is a shortfall in the supply of foreign currencies available, banks (and governments) can turn to their central banks . Central banks are national institutions that service the banking needs of both member banks and government treasuries .
 Countries normally keep reserves of foreign currencies (and gold that can be used to buy these currencies) But sometimes these reserves become depleted, as when charges for imported goods and services and other payments exceed earnings from exports .
 IMF is in a position to keep its members in cash—maintain international liquidity . When that happens, member countries can draw on their accounts or borrow from the IMF . IMF members are able to use their accounts and borrow from their accounts .
 The IMF makes advances of hard currencies that can readily be exchanged for whatever currency may be needed to finance transactions . IMF advances hard currency that can be easily exchanged for other currencies .
 IMF operates in much the same way as a credit union by offering its member countries a variety of different kinds of loans and other mechanisms to meet their financial needs . The IMF is the world's largest credit union, with member countries offering different types of loans .
 If countries did not have such a source of short-term finance for balancing their payments, they probably would be forced to impose exchange controls . This would be severely limiting the amount of domestic currency used to acquire foreign currencies .
 IMF allocations amounted to a new line of credit that could be drawn on without challenge in a time of need . SDR allocations to each IMF member country amounted to an SDR allocation of SDRs .
 SDRs are “as good as gold” and thus also can be included as part of a country’s official reserves . Countries can readily exchange them at any time for hard currencies such as the United States dollar, Japanese yen .
 IMF has been authorized to create and allocate SDRs worth a total of about $30 billion . IMF has created and allocated SDRS worth about $29 billion in the past year .
 Advances by the IMF are just that—advances that must be repaid, usually with interest . The IMF is just that, usually, repaid with interest. The IMF has no obligation to repay the money .
 IMF has about $300 billion in deposits by its members, which it can use to provide hard currencies to members in need . IMF has a hard currency fund to help members of the world's poorest members .
 The amount of each country’s required deposit or “quota” is different, depending on the size of its economy and trade requirements . Each country has a different amount of deposit or "quota" required .
 The quota size also determines the voting power a member has on the board of governors . Board of governors provides policy guidance and direction to the executive board, IMF managing director, and IMF staff .
 In effect, this gives political primacy in the IMF to countries with the largest economies, notably the United States, EU countries and Japan . This gives the U.S., EU countries, and Japan the power to influence the IMF .
 With 18 percent of the vote, the U.S. has the largest number of votes . The United States has the most votes in the world .
 European Union members voting as a block and the United States voting alone all enjoy the political advantage of an effective veto on major policy questions and other organizational decisions . Given the requirement for an 85 percent voting majority on important matters, the U.S. can veto on important decisions .
 IMF puts on deposit 25 percent of the amount in convertible currencies, gold, or SDRs . Each member of the IMF meets its contribution quota by putting on 25 percent in gold or convertible currencies . The remaining 75 percent is by deposit of the country's own currency .
 When in need, the first 25 percent can be drawn without question (which amounts to a line of credit) But drawings beyond that amount are usually subject to certain conditions .
 IMF-prescribed remedies are expected to lay a firm basis for producing a viable economy able to sustain growth and finance trade . IMF: In time, these IMF-precribed remedies will lay a firmer basis for a sustainable economy .
 Such policies are designed to dampen economies, cut inflation, curb imports and foster greater efficiency in use of factors of production . Unfortunately, such policies also impose enormous costs . So-called structural adjustments in the fundamental elements of an economy, such as structural adjustments, also impose costs .
 Critics refer to such policies as neoliberal—driven by market-oriented understandings that force national economies to adjust to external or global pressures in the world economy coming from economically powerful states .
 IMF-prescribed neoliberal austerity measures may well have politically explosive consequences for governments complying with IMF loan conditions . These economically difficult times brought on by such IMF-prompted austerity measures could well have political consequences for those who comply with the IMF's terms .
 IMF has been criticised for insisting on stringent requirements as conditions for advances to borrowing countries . IMF has also been the target of much criticism for insisting that these stringent requirements are necessary .
 Critics see structural adjustment measures as retarding economic growth and development in less-developed countries with unfair, often dire consequences to the peoples affected by these policies .
 If countries in economic difficulties impose exchange controls (as many did before the IMF became effective as a lending agency), the net effect will be reduction in imports and thus on the global volume of trade, adversely affecting economic growth .
 Other countries can no longer sell their products freely to countries limiting imports through exchange controls . Other countries are no longer allowed to sell their goods freely to other countries limiting import controls .
 These are real costs borne by other countries, which economists refer to, as negative externalities . These are costs that can be borne by countries, such as Russia and China .
 Resorting to exchange controls thus runs the political and economic risk that countries adversely affected by this policy may choose to retaliate economically by discriminating against the exports of countries adopting such measures .
 Those opposing resort to exchange controls as a way of managing a country’s payments not only see such a policy as reducing the volume of trade, but also argue that it is an unfair way of shifting some of the costs of structural adjustments to the shoulders of others .
 Defenders of managing a country’s payments through exchange controls see it as a more desirable, somewhat less intrusive remedy than either bearing the social and political consequences of fiscal and monetary austerity or, worse yet, blocking trade .
 The Effects of National Macroeconomic Policies . Fiscal policies deal with government budgetary matters . Monetary policies address government measures that affect size and growth of the money supply and level of interest rates .
 Together fiscal and monetary policies are sometimes referred to as macroeconomic policies . Macroeconomic policies affect the national economy taken as a whole . Monetary and fiscal policies affect national economies taken as whole .
 No matter how necessary imposing fiscal and monetary restraints may seem to seem to finance experts, compliance with loan conditions can be extraordinarily difficult . Compliance with loan terms can be difficult, experts say .
 Indonesia, Thailand, South Korea, and other countries caught in the Asian financial crisis during the late 1990s . Indonesia and Thailand were caught in financial crisis in the late 90s .
 Malaysia found its own way out of IMF-imposed austerity by breaking IMF rules and imposing exchange controls . Malaysia imposed exchange controls limiting the amount of ringgit, the Malaysian currency, that could leave the country .
 By adopting this monetary policy, Malaysia managed its payment obligations through government actions to limit the amount that could be spent abroad for imports or other purposes . Malaysia's monetary policy was adopted by government actions .
 Malaysia is not alone, among countries that over the decades have resisted imposition of stringent IMF requirements seen as too costly . Malaysia is among the countries that have resisted imposing stringent IMF demands .
 Domestic banking regulations limit purchase of foreign currencies used to finance imports, other purchases, or investments abroad . These controls usually take the form of domestic banking regulations in Country X .
 People leaving a country also are limited in the amounts of the country’s currency they physically can take with them . People leaving the country are also limited in how much of the currency they can physically take .
 With less money spent abroad, there are fewer payment obligations to meet . Central banks or treasuries of other countries seek hard currencies or other reserves in exchange for currency from Country X .
 Trade of goods and services in trade theory is based on differences in cost of production and market value of products themselves . Not on the value of money used to purchase them, trade theory says .
 Classical economic theorists assumed that money has no independent impact on the costs of production or market value of goods and services . The theory of money neutrality was convenient for classical economic theorists .
 As established above, however, money is anything but neutral in the real world . As well as money, it's not always neutral in real life . Money is not neutral, but it's neutral to the world .
 Changes in exchange value have a direct influence on the prices of exports and imports . The value of a country's currency has a direct impact on the demand for and supply of goods .
 Governments and their national monetary policies do influence both domestic and international trade . Governments and national monetary policy do influence international trade, economist says .
 These are economic matters, of course, but they are essentially political decisions made by authorities in a position to make them . These are political matters, and they are made by people in a political position .
 All parts of a national economy have high stakes in the implications of these choices for the economy as a whole . Owners of capital interests, owners of land and resources, workers and other citizens often have high stake in these decisions .
 This table indicates how money, interest rates, and exchange rates are by no means neutral in relation to either their domestic or external effects . The table also indicates how interest rates and interest rates are not neutral .
 If Japan has exported more than it has imported in a given year, it is said to have run a surplus or positive balance of trade . Japan's exports are said to be more than its imports in a year, but not all of them are made up of a surplus .
 The total of all four accounts is now zero . Reserves are sent to other countries to pay for deficits in the other three accounts . Transfers into and out of the fourth account bring the total to zero .
 Some countries like to accrue reserve assets by continually running surpluses . That work to the disadvantage of trade and investment partners, they say .
 Transportation abroad provided by domestic carriers (airplanes, ships, and the like) and paid for by foreigners . 3.5% of the budget budget is spent on travel abroad .
 Einancial services and insurance provided by domestic banks and other firms to foreigners 5.5% of foreign firms in India .
 Interest, dividends, and other financial payments received by domestic residents from abroad . Payments received from abroad from abroad include interest, dividends and dividends .
 Transportation abroad provided by foreign carriers and paid for by residents . 3.5% of residents live in the U.S. state .
 Einancial services and insurance provided by foreign banks and other firms to domestic residents . 5.5 per cent of foreign firms provide services and services provided by domestic banks .
 Interest, dividends, and other financial payments made to foreigners 6.6.5.5 million people .
 Increase in foreign-owned deposits or accounts in domestic banks, brokerage firms, or other financial institutions 2.2.3.5.5% increase in foreign owned deposits . Increase in deposits in domestic bank accounts 2.3% decrease in deposits from foreign accounts .
 Decrease in domestically owned deposits or accounts in foreign banks, brokerage firms, or other financial institutions 3.3.4.5.2.7.5 . Decrease of deposits or deposits in foreign bank accounts or accounts .
 Decrease in foreign-owned deposits or accounts in domestic banks, brokerage firms, or other financial institutions . 2.2.3% decrease in deposits in domestic bank accounts in 2.4% decrease .
 Increase in domestically owned deposits or accounts in foreign banks, brokerage firms, or other financial institutions 3. Increase in domestic deposits in foreign accounts or deposits . Increase in deposits or deposits in overseas banks or brokerage firms .
 Grants, contributions, or pensions received from nongovernmental foreign sources . 2.2.3% of funds received from foreign sources. 2.4% of foreign sources received from government sources .
 Grants or contributions made to foreigners or residents of foreign countries 2. 2. Grants or . contributions made in foreign countries . 2.2.3.4.5.5 .
 The ""balance"" of payments equals zero when overall surpluses or deficits in the first three accounts are compensated by transfers of official reserves in the fourth account . As an accounting tool, the ""balance" of payments is used as a financial tool .
 Trade balance or current account is only one of several accounts in a country’s overall balance of payments . The trade balance is a country's overall balance-of-payments account .
 This is the difference between capital investment by domestic investors in foreign countries and by foreign investment by foreign investors in the country’s domestic economy . The difference is between the investment in foreign investment in the domestic economy and the investment to the country's foreign economy .
 Unilateral transfers represent a third account—grants or other transfers received by a country’s government or residents from foreign governments minus grants and other transfers sent to other governments or to residents living in other countries . Unilateral transfer accounts are based on grants or transfers sent by the country
 The official reserves account is composed of assets used to balance payments with other countries . These are generally gold, foreign currencies, and special drawing rights from the International Monetary Fund .
 If after adding up the balances in the other accounts there is a net deficit, the balance can be made up by sending official reserves to other countries . If there's a deficit there can be a surplus of official reserves .
 IMF’s central function is to have the necessary funds available to lend to countries in balance-of-payments difficulties, thus precluding their resort either to erecting tariffs, quotas, and other barriers to trade or to imposing exchange controls .
 IMF facilitates dismantling exchange controls already in existence when countries are making the adjustments necessary to open their domestic economies . The IMF also facilitates dismantling foreign exchange controls when countries make adjustments necessary .
 IMF requires enormous capital resources to maintain international liquidity and make funds available for other purposes specified by international agreement of its member countries . IMF: To do all this, to be able to perform its core task of maintaining international liquidity as well as making funds available to other purposes, IMF needs enormous
 The amount of “hard currency” available for lending is considerably less than half of some $300 billion the IMF has on deposit from quota subscriptions . 75 percent of quota contributions made by member countries are in their own currencies .
 IMF lending resources were initially expanded in the 1960s when a new mechanism, the General Arrangements to Borrow, was constructed to supplement drawings on quotas . IMF lending was expanded in 1960s to supplement drawing on quotas for borrowing .
 Eleven capital-rich countries originally put up GAB funds, which now total about $25 billion, that can be lent to IMF members . IMF members need balance-of-payments assistance .
 The political decision to create special drawing rights or SDRs is so-called “paper gold’s” and allocate them to member countries also expanded capital resources that now amount to close to an additional $30 billion .
 IMF charges interest on drawings or borrowing of its funds . IMF is a lending institution, which charges interest . IMF charged interest on drawing, borrowing of funds .
 Member countries earn interest on their quota contributions when their currencies are borrowed by other countries . Member countries actually earn interest from their currencies when their currency is borrowed by others .
 The interest rates charged to borrowing countries are truly concessionary . They are well below rates countries would be charged if they borrowed in financial markets . Interest rates for borrowing countries, however, are very low .
 The IMF may lend funds to low-income countries, particularly for less-developed countries . The IMF has expanded the scope of its lending programs to help poorer countries . IMF has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The condition for such loans is that borrowing countries use the money for structural adjustment tasks . The loans are designed to provide a foundation for sustained economic growth . The condition is that the loans must be used to implement structural adjustment projects .
 A total of close to $13 billion in loans has been disbursed to more than fifty needy countries by this facility . New lending is projected at more than a billion dollars a year .
 The source of these funds is capital-rich and other more economically developed countries . The funds come from capital rich and more developed countries such as China .
 IMF may extend contingency lines of credit to countries not currently in balance-of-payments difficulties . IMF concerned that the effects of financial turmoil in other countries might spread to them . IMF may also extend credit lines to countries concerned about contagion spreading .
 IMF has special lending authority for countries recovering from war and other civil conflicts . IMF also has emergency assistance or compensatory financing when natural disasters adversely affect exports or disrupt normal trade and payments transactions .
 IMF not only lends money in such circumstances but also renders technical assistance toward establishing or reestablishing the financial infrastructure that may have been destroyed or weakened by political or economic turmoil brought on by natural disasters or armed conflict . IMF provides technical assistance to establish or rebuild financial infrastructure weakened by such turmoil
 IMF sees its role as an agent for global trade and commerce . IMF sees this role as encompassing technical tasks as well as fostering market-oriented values in member countries .
 IMF contributes to developing effective central banking and treasury institutions, collecting and refining statistical data on economic activities, and training officials .
 Technical experts can be understood as constituting a transnational professional community . They are conversant with each other across state boundaries, whether in direct meetings or by telecommunications .
 Evaluate progress made globally and regionally on liberalizing trade . Aim to achieve integration goals in Europe, North America, and other parts of the world . Focus on achieving integration goals .
 Many of these rules have standing as customary international law and enforceable in suits brought in national courts . Many of the rules are standing as international law .
 Both customary international law and the Law of the Sea Treaty identify territorial waters, define rights of passage for commercial vessels . Hugo Grotius addressed the topic, and emphasized the primacy of freedom of navigation .
 Similar rules with the force of international law apply to trade across land and by air . Similar rules also apply to international trade by air and land .
 Political opposition blocked efforts after World War II to establish an International Trade Organization . The U.S. saw such an institution as potentially threatening to private-sector business interests .
 The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade produced periodic international conferences that worked toward reduction of tariffs, quotas, and other barriers to trade . In the 1930s, protectionist sentiments had reigned supreme when protectionist sentiment was high .
 Even in the absence of an international organization or specialized agency for trade, participating countries made great progress in liberalizing global trade . The United States, Canada and other countries have made progress opening markets between and across national borders .
 Most of the existing trade agreements are the result of the 1986-1994 Uruguay Round negotiations, signed at the Marrakesh, Morocco, ministerial meeting in April 1994 .
 The World Trade Organization was established as a single institutional framework designed to encompass GATT, as modified by the Uruguay Round, and all agreements and arrangements concluded under its auspices . The Marrakesh meeting is where the World Trade Organisation was established .
 The WTO's essential mission is to ensure that trade flows as smoothly, predictably, and freely as possible . The WTO’s essential mission: To ensure trade flows flows smoothly and predictably, freely .
 The WTO structure is headed by a Ministerial Conference meeting held at least once every two years . WTO structure heads by a ministerial conference meeting held once a two-year period .
 A General Council at the WTO’s headquarters in Geneva oversees the operation of the agreement and ministerial decisions . The WTO is based in Geneva, Switzerland, and oversees the agreement .
 Member countries may bring complaints against other members to the WTO’s dispute-settlement process .
 The framework requires a “single undertaking approach” to the results of the Uruguay Round . The Uruguay Round took place in Uruguay last week . The World Cup will take place in November 2014 .
 Trade barriers, curbing bribery or other illicit practices and assuring global respect for intellectual property rights are issues high on the agenda of both private interests and those wishing to promote growth in international commerce .
 Advocates want to head off fears of trade wars or any thought of return to regional trading blocs that had prevailed in the 1930s .
 Major disputes do surround the WTO, as evidenced by demonstrators at WTO ministerial meetings .
 WTO opponents are highly critical of trading policies that in their view do not afford sufficient weight to protecting the environment . WTO opponents say trading policies do not pay enough weight to protect the environment.
 Labor interests challenge WTO policies that open trade at the expense of workers who lose their jobs . They argue is unfair global competition brought on by corporate exploitation of foreign workers who are paid very low wages .
 Environmental activists and labor rights advocates find common cause in these anti-WTO demonstrations . Environmentalists and labor advocates join together in these protests .
 Unfair trade practice complaints frequently made by member countries against each other . Members of the U.S. trade bloc differ philosophically on practical goals, say members .
 By no means does global governance suggest unanimity of thought, much less full agreement on what is to be done .
 Some members of the U.S. argue for open markets as free of government intervention or protectionism . Some members argue for free markets without government intervention . Others argue for protectionist measures .
 Other members argue not so much for free trade but for managed trade that avoids some of the environmental, labor, and other pitfalls encountered in free trade .
 The WTO can serve as a forum for discussing and negotiating managed trade arrangements . Governments intervene in markets to reduce costs to interested parties . WTO can discuss and negotiate managed-trade arrangements in which governments intervene in market .
 The collapse of the Cancun, Mexico, conference in September 2003 was a wakeup call highlighting obstacles that lay ahead . GATT's and WTO’s tremendous success in reducing trade barriers over the years has been achieved .
 The chief goal of the conference was to lower trade barriers in areas where freer trade would help poor countries the most, particularly in agriculture . The conference was held in a bid to lower the barriers to trade in the world's biggest agricultural fields .
 There was enough blame to be shared by rich countries, poor countries, and nongovernmental organizations for this failure to maintain momentum in the continuing liberalization of international trade .
 What has occurred in Europe since the end of World War II in 1945 is one of the more amazing international developments . What happened in Europe has been one of Europe's most remarkable achievements since 1945 .
 The continent was devastated by world wars, fueled by the nationalist fires and ambitions of century-long rivalries, and divided by the Cold War, but now an economic giant . Here we have a continent twice devastated by both world wars .
 Eor realists, the success of the Western European economic enterprise was essentially due to the security protection provided by the United States. Eorrealists, they say . The success of Western Europe was essentially because of the U.S. security .
 liberals are quick to point out that realists expected economic integration and cooperation to slow down or collapse after the Soviet Union and its allies had passed . There is much truth to that, but liberals say realists expect economic integration to slow or collapse .
 Such a crisis of authority for the European Union did not occur until the sovereign debt crisis of 2011 . The European Union has been in a power vacuum since 2008 . The EU has not been in such crisis mode since 2011, according to the European Commission .
 Enhanced economic ties and exchanges will have positive benefits in terms of economic prosperity and political benefits as well as political benefits . Enhanced trade and economic ties will be beneficial to the U.S.
 A critical objective of regional integration, therefore, is the prospect of enhancing peace among states . The aim of integration is to enhance peace among nations, says Dr. David Cameron .
 Jean Monnet, Robert Schuman and Konrad Adenauer were advocates of a new Europe . Monnet and Schuman from Erance were among the important advocates of the new European Union .
 These elites had made no secret of their objectives and plans for constructing a new Europe . These elites were making no secret, they said, of their plans .
 World War II leaders were trying to put in place an alternative set of positive relations among former enemies . They wanted to try to create a new set of constructive relations between former foes .
 Erance is trying to establish new, cooperative links between Erance and the Eederal Republic of Germany . The two countries are core players in the continental European economy .
 Theirs was an incremental, step-by-step strategy for attaining economic integration goals over time . Theirs aim is to achieve economic integration in the United States by reaching economic goals .
 A principal motivation was the expectation of a positive impact on political relations among European states to be drawn from progress toward greater economic integration . The aim was to promote the positive impact of economic integration in Europe .
 International organizations are formed from the recognition that certain tasks need to be performed, such as monetary exchange, trade, multilateral investment, mail service, or parceling out telecommunications frequencies .
 Neofunctionalists like Ernst Haas focused on the political processes orchestrated by politically connected specialists or elites . Haas: The process is orchestrated by political elites .
 To the neofunctionalist, integration doesn’t just happen, it arises by design . The neofunctionsalist says integration doesn't just happen but it arises from design .
 State preferences are chiefly determined by interdependence, opportunities for international economic exchange, and the dominant interests in a national society, argues the author . He argues that actual substantive integration outcomes resulting from hard bargaining among state elites .
 An internal logic to the economic integration process identified by neofunctionalists is apparent in the European integration experience . The European Union has been in the throes of an internal logic of the integration process .
 Commercial transactions and ties spilled over into other economic sectors in 1958 to create an enlarged European Economic Community . In 1958, the European Atomic Energy Community was formed to advance peaceful, economic uses of nuclear energy .
 Common Agricultural Policy was developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s to set farm prices and price supports within the EEC . It came apart when the policy was set apart in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The key precipitating event was when the dollar, to which European currencies were then tied, was allowed to fluctuate in value . The dollar was then tied to the European Union .
 European Economic and Monetary Union was not driven by the internal logic indicated by neofunctionalist theory . European Customs Union to Common Market in 1992 and achievement of the European Economic & Monetary Union were driven by internal logic . The Euro was not a European Union in 1992, it was a European
 In fact, widening membership has exposed substantial macroeconomic differences among EU countries, especially given the deepening of integration that came in 2000 with the euro as common currency for most member countries . The widening of membership exposes substantial macro economic differences among countries .
 To keep members in less capitalrich countries like Greece, Spain, and Ireland tied to the euro, better-off countries like Germany, Erance, and other northern European countries have resented having to finance those in difficulty .
 Capital-rich EU countries have been reluctant to abandon their integration goal of greater European unity . At the same time, however, capital-rich countries have remained committed to greater EU unity . Capital rich EU countries remain committed to the unity of the EU .
 Greece and Spain could withdraw from the euro, returning to its own national currencies . But the losses to Greece or Spain of doing so voluntarily have seemed greater than any gains from greater freedom to set their own fiscal and monetary policies independent of preferences .
 EU leaders see newer members in central and eastern Europe facing similar challenges . Long-standing members of the EU have found it difficult to maintain fiscal and monetary discipline required to stay in the euro group .
 The question of widening at the expense of deepening the level of integration in Europe is by no means new, it is said . The question is not new, but it's by no way new to the EU .
 The World War II general saw the United Kingdom as more closely tied to the United States and the British Commonwealth than to continental Europe . The British Commonwealth was more closely linked to the U.S. than continental Europe, he said .
 Accession to the EC by the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Denmark finally took place in 1973 . After reconsideration of the matter by successor governments in France as well as by the five other EC members, accession to EC took place .
 Two other central European states joined in 2007, while waiting in line are Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, Iceland, Serbia, and Turkey . Turkey is the last of these continuing its long-term, uphill struggle for membership .
 Critics of EC or EU enlargement noted that increasing the membership and thus widening its European scope risked undermining efforts to deepen integration . The EU is moving beyond a customs union to a common market, economic and monetary union .
 Collaboration among larger numbers of states understood to be more difficult than forging agreements among a few . asymmetries in levels of economic development and socioeconomic diversities among a larger membership were seen as posing substantial challenges to keeping ever-deeper integration on track .
 Descent on the ladder denotes movement from relatively shallow to ever-deeper levels of integration . Descent of the ladder is a step up to the next level of integration in the U.S. Descent is a relatively shallow ladder of integration.
 The North American FreeTrade Agreement countries—the United States, Canada, and Mexico —are on the first rung . Most members of the European Union are on the fourth rung - some, like the UK, are on third rungs .
 Work also was under way to create a European Union with common currency by the end of the 1990s . Goals set in December 1991 and formally agreed upon in the Eebruary 1992 Treaty of Maastricht .
 EU has made great progress in its quest not only to widen but also to deepen the level of integration, says EU boss . EU has been in the process of widening and deepening its membership, he says .
 Agricultural policy has always been a problematic issue, particularly given strong political pressures from farmers to continue or expand agricultural protection or subsidies . Agricultural policy is a thorny issue, especially given political pressure from farmers from farmers .
 Admission of new members adds to the challenge in the decades-long effort to develop and implement a Common Agricultural Policy .
 On monetary matters, great progress was marked in 2002 with the euro becoming the EU currency managed by a common central bank . However, asymmetries in fiscal and monetary policies and a political preference for retaining a greater degree of independent political control led the United Kingdom and Denmark to opt out of
 The euro became the major currency EU leaders sought, designed to facilitate trade, investment, and other forms of commerce across the European continent . That said, the euro is the most important currency the EU has ever sought .
 The debt crisis that emerged in 2011 challenged the solidarity of the 17 “eurozone” countries using the euro as common currency . Greece's debt crisis was the biggest crisis in the euro's history .
 The quest for a common foreign and security policy remains a substantial challenge, as did the effort to establish an agreed EU constitution, which faced a significant setback when rejected by Erench and Dutch voters .
 A substitute for this failed constitutional-ratification process, the Lisbon Treaty, was signed in 2007 and went into force in 2009 . The Lisbon Treaty is a substitute for the failed process, signed by 2007 and 2009 .
 Some progress has been made on security since the decision in 1999 to assume the tasks previously performed by the West European Union . Critics argue that the effort has not received the funding the program needs to establish a viable all-European defense capability .
 The decision in 2003 by the United Kingdom to join the United States in the invasion and subsequent occupation of Iraq effectively split the EU . Of even greater concern to many was the decision by the U.K. in 2003 . The U.S. joined the invasion of Iraq, thus effectively
 European members came together with the United States under NATO auspices in Afghanistan . EU members continue to divide on serious foreign and security policy matters to include the 2011 intervention in Libya championed by the Erench and British .
 European collaboration has proven easier to forge under NATO than under EU auspices . European collaboration is easier under NATO, than under the EU, experts say . NATO is the most powerful organization in the world .
 Realists have noted that perhaps the U.S. succeeded too well in encouraging European integration . Europeans have developed an ingrained aversion to large military budgets and the use of military force .
 Europeans have managed to create for themselves a Kantian peace based upon negotiation and cooperation . They don’t want to jeopardize it. To put it .
 The United States, however, being a superpower, supposedly lives in a Hobbesian world, with conflict being the essential characteristic . The U.S. is a superpower . It is supposed to live in a world of conflict, and conflict is essential to life .
 The EU now stretches from the Arctic to the Mediterranean and from the Irish Sea to the Black Sea . EU stretches from Arctic to Mediterranean, from Irish to Black Sea, and now stretches to Mediterranean .
 Realists foresee difficult times in U.S.-European relations . For this reason alone, realists foresee problems in relations with the EU . Realists see the situation as a problem .
 Our focus has been on European economic integration because it is the region that has made the most progress toward these goals . The region has made progress toward the goals of economic integration in recent years .
 The idea of a war among Western European countries is almost to the point of being far-fetched . Most important, it is not a war against each other in Western Europe .
 Much more modest efforts include the North American Free Trade Agreement . The West African Economic Community and the Common Market in the Southern Cone of South America .
 Compared to the EU, these associations do not even have as an objective the levels that already have been achieved in Europe, much less those that are anticipated by European integration advocates . Compared to EU, they do not have as much as the levels already achieved in the EU .
 For example, the much-celebrated Canada-Mexico-United States NAFTA accord has only the relatively modest ambition of gradually establishing a regional free-trade area . The accord is a relatively modest effort to gradually establish regional free trade areas .
 In this context it also provides for greater mobility of capital and some harmonization of business practices and standards . It also provides . greater mobility . of capital .
 As yet, there has been no serious discussion of moving to a customs union with a common external tariff . A common market that would allow for the free flow of labor across borders .
 This makes the European efforts to establish and sustain an economic and monetary union with a common currency even more impressive . This is a much deeper level of integration than ever attempted in other regional integration projects . The European Union is trying to establish an economic, monetary union, with a single currency .
 The current challenge is to maintain the role of the euro and prevent the catastrophic collapse of the European integration project . The European Union is currently struggling to find a way to maintain its role in Europe .
 Post-World War II circumstances in Western Europe were unique . Perhaps the post-WWII circumstances were unique, perhaps they were unique to Western Europe .
 The U.S. provided a security guarantee against the communist East and encouraged the Europeans to focus on economic recovery . As noted, the United States provided the security guarantee .
 The fact that the states were contiguous geographically was also a factor . The situation in Asia is quite different from that in Asia, the author says .
 The common aspirations of European elites were also important, and perhaps the common historical European values, despite the fascist experiences in Germany, Italy, and elsewhere, also made a difference . European values were important in the fight against fascism in Italy and Germany .
 In more recent years, the strong grounding in democratic values and traditions has encouraged the rise of civil society . Many transnational European organizations have encouraged social interactions below the level of the state .
 Developing and maintaining trade within a region can divert trade or displace other commercial relations outside of the regional context . Developing trade in a region may divert trade, displace trade outside the region .
 Advances at the regional level should be viewed in the broader context of the continual fast pace of globalization . Advances in the region should be seen as part of the ongoing globalization of the world, the author says .
 Economics has been called the dismal science, not just because of an inherent pessimism accompanying many economic theories or theorists . Economics has a certain opaqueness of presentation seemingly impervious to penetration by general readers .
 Understanding basic economics is important not only if you wish to enter the business world, but if you are to make sense of what is taking place in an increasingly globalized world . Understanding basic economic principles is important for you to enter a business world .
 For example, piracy would not have been possible without the globalization of trade . But for the same reason, piracy has been a major problem in the past, he says .
 The importance of economics underscores its link to politics, writes David Frum . Frum says the processes leading to authoritative decisions and implementation of economic policies by governments and international organizations are important to politics .
 It is a term that explicitly recognizes the political dimension of economic matters in domestic as well as international and global contexts . It is the term that . recognizes the . political dimension in domestic and international contexts, it says .
 In this chapter we’ve addressed a number of important conceptual issues related to trade and finance in an increasingly globalized world . We’ll discuss how to deal with the world’s most important issues in this chapter .
 Classical trade theory in relation to comparative advantage continues to hold sway among advocates of further trade liberalization . Those who see it taking account of the circumstances in which less developed countries find themselves are challenged .
 To sustain an open, if not entirely free, trading environment is the goal advanced by authorities in governments and international organizations like the WTO and IMF . Such global governance requires both bilateral and multilateral cooperation the Post-Test a Chapter .
 We note movement toward regional integration in Europe, free trade area in North America . We also note efforts in Africa, Southeast Asia, Asia, Africa, and Southeast Asia . We hope to see more economic and monetary union .
 Explain classical trade theory in relation to comparative advantage, unequal terms of trade, and the adverse implications of competitive devaluations . Use this article to help students understand the implications of trade theory .
 Classical trade theory holds that under free trade countries will specialize in producing goods and services in which they are more efficient, thus enhancing productivity and at iower costs than otherwise would be the case .
 A conceptual discussion of how global governance In various issue areas can be (and has been) achieved . The discussion will focus on how it has been achieved in various areas .
 Classical economic theory rested on the labor theory of value . Neoclassical theory shifts the focus to markets and the play of supply and demand .
 Macroeconomic policy—government fiscal (taxing, spending and borrowing) and monetary (money supply, interest rates, exchange rates, etc.) decisions—often affect trade, stimulating either exports or imports . Macroeconomic policies often affect trade .
 A highly readable account of the development of both classical and neoclassical thought . In economics In Economics In Economics .
 Some countries have well-capitalized, large-scale producers capable of developing and applying advanced technologies to the products they bring to market, but many other countries do not . Apply free trade theory to present-day circumstances of uneven development of countries .
 Efficiencies occur in large-scale production . The cost of producing each additional unit tends to decline . The marginal cost of production tends to rise .
 Large economies with large-scale producers tend to have an advantage in lower costs for goods or services sold in domestic markets or for export abroad . Large economies have a lower cost of goods sold to domestic markets, or exported abroad .
 When a currency becomes stronger in relation to other currencies, the price paid for goods and services imported from abroad also becomes cheaper . This tends to stimulate demand for imports .
 When a currency becomes weaker in relation to other currencies (i.e., the exchange rate or price paid for buying foreign currencies increases), imports also become more expensive, thus tending to dampen demand for imports . By contrast, when a currency is weaker, imports also tend to become more
 The last three now-classic, nonmathematical presentations on international political economy . Older, easily read volumes .
 Outline how monetary authorities in institutions like the International Monetary Fund, treasuries and central banks relate to each other in globalgovernance arrangements aimed at maintaining global trade .
 International organizations tasked by their state members with such economic responsibilities as maintaining international liquidity . International organizations work closely with national treasuries and central banks to assure traders and investors can buy foreign currencies .
 Institutions play an important role in global governance arrangements essential to sustaining trade relations . Institutions are important to maintaining trade relations in the world, the World Trade Council says .
 A classic study that combines liberal and realist understandings of world politics and international relations . Includes case studies on trade and international monetary regime .
 Focuses on institutions and theories of cooperation in the world political economy . Focusses on institutions, theories and theories in world political economic .
 Given asymmetries in level of development and substantial differences in fiscal policies, coordination of monetary policies in the EMU essential to sustaining the euro has proven difficult .
 Regional integration efforts in North America and elsewhere are shallow by comparison . Free-trade areas they have established are much less demanding politically on members than a customs union (common external tariff) —much less a common market or economic and monetary union . By contrast, efforts at regional integration in North
 Neill Nugent, The Government and Politics of the European Union, 7th ed. He says the EU is the most powerful institution in the world .
 According to classical trade theory, trade depends on relative efficiency and capacities of production . Trade depends on sameness relative equality differences and competitive gains .
 Critics of classic trade theory see trade preferences as a means of perpetuating inequality . Critics say trade preferences are a way of eliminating colonial relationships and maintaining neocolonial relationships .
 Insula and Terra illustrate comparative advantage. labor theory of value. monetary policy at work. regional integration .
 Economists have observed that . often do not increase in price over time and thus cause unequal terms of trade . Economists like Raul Prebisch have observed . that_often do not . increase in prices over time, thus causing unequal terms . trade terms .
 According to Paul Krugman, focusing on increasing gains aided by technological innovation should be seen as comparative cost considerations . Paul Krugman: Focus should be on the fact that technological innovation helps increase productivity .
 Neutralizing money is a scenario in which the exchange of goods and services is influenced only by currency exchange costs . Neutralized money is the scenario in a scenario where the exchange is affected only by production costs and prices .
 An exchange rate is the price to exchange one good for another . The price of a currency when bought or sold using another currency . The rate at which money can be exchanged for goods is the rate at .
 Decreasing tariff barriers . Encouraging free trade . Maintaining international liquidity . Increasing international currency exchange .
 One critical objective of regional integration is enhancing peace among states, authors say . diminishing regional wealth. creating markets for developing countries. facilitating security cooperatives . facilitating security cooperation. providing economic assistance to developing countries .
 The economic integration goal in a common market is to create a common external tariff . establish no tariffs or other trade barriers . allow the free movement of the factors of production . establish a common currency and integrated economic policies. create common currency .
 Identify the sources of capital sought by developing countries upon which their development depends . Identify a number of key sources of funding for developing countries' development depends on .
 Explain how population growth, resource depletion and environmental degradation can undermine development efforts . Explain how the absence of effective health care, excessive military spending and war can undermine efforts .
 Evaluate the various economic-structuralist perspectives on the global capitalist system . Evaluate an economic model of capitalism in the world .
 It was his base for reaching out to the indigenous Mapuche people, most living off the land in varying degrees of poverty . Most of the Mapuches people live in poverty, most of them living off their land .
 Over the next half century he traveled regularly throughout the wide area north, south, and west of Portezuelo, coming to know intimately the Mapuche .
 Capital formation to fund development was virtually nonexistent in this part of rural Chile . Capital formation for development in Chile is virtually nonexistent .
 He relied instead on funds he received from followers in America and from those Mapuche who had moved away, rising to higher socioeconomic positions in Chilean society .
 These were the principal sources of capital he needed for such projects as building a free boarding school (primary through 12th grades) and establishing a local-area radio station .
 In the years before his death in 2008 he was planning to ‘leapfrog’ telecommunications development by going directly from radio to the internet . Although expanding to television was a possibility, it was also a possibility .
 Politics matter in the conduct of development projects, say officials . Not surprisingly, politics matters in the construction of the projects, they say .
 Although a cleric, he kept his religious duties in second position to development projects, which earned him respect from better-off followers in Chillon .
 The military regime under Augusto Pinochet, however, distrusted his social-liberal projects and consequent empowerment of the Mapuche in these rural areas . The military government under Pinochet was wary of the social liberal projects .
 The Church in Santiago forced him to close his home-grown seminary in Portezuelo lest a socially committed, politicized Mapuche clergy emerge . For the same reasons, he closed the seminary because he feared a politicized clergy would emerge .
 His legacy of advancing the level of living of people he cared most about remained in place . Nevertheless, his legacy remains in place. Nevertheless, he was able to advance the lives of people most important .
 It’s hardly ever easy—a narrow, twisting path with many setbacks along the way—but socially committed individuals can make a difference . Social commitment is hardly always easy, but it can be made to a socially committed individual .
 We begin with essentially conventional or mainstream accounts of the global political economy . We end with emphasizing economic-structuralist perspectives that identify the problem as capital-poor countries in the South subordinated to capital-rich countries in North . Capital-owning classes in the North and South exploit
 Illustrate how differences between capital-rich and capital-poor, less-economically developed countries contribute to the uneven levels of development found around the world . Illustrate the differences in capital rich and capital poor countries .
 In this volume we refer to capital-poor countries generically as the less-developed or, more positively, the developing world . Capital-poor, low-income, or lessdeveloped countries are referred to as "capital-poor"
 Other writers often use the terms Third World or South, sometimes interchangeably to denote the same capital-poor, lowincome, or less-developed countries . Those at lower levels of economic development we’ve been describing .
 Although the term “Third World” is still widely in use, many writers now shy away from the term lest it be interpreted negatively . Using it implies that these countries or their peoples are somehow inferior to those in the “first” or high-income, capital-
 The term “Third World” was used in the 1960s to refer to the masses of “have-nots” who ultimately triumphed, substantially improving their lot over time . We note the hopeful position in the 60s of those who originated the term �
 Whether one accepts this analysis or not, the remedy lies in generating capital that can be invested to grow the productive capacity of the economies in these countries .
 They see harnessing information technology for productive purposes as by no means the exclusive preserve of capital-rich countries . They say harnessing technology is no longer a reserve of capital rich countries .
 Less-developed economies that acquire know-how in advanced-production processes that capitalize on information technologies will leapfrog to ever-higher levels of production and productivity . They see possibilities in many less-developed, lowerincome economies .
 Both China and India during the last quarter century have moved into the upper ranks of countries in terms of aggregate production of goods and services . India and China are the most populous countries in the world .
 Some capital-poor countries have improved their level of development, but most have not . Capital-poor nations have not improved their levels of development . The world's capital poor has not improved in the past decade .
 The economic-development gap between capital-poor and capital-rich countries remains . Poverty, disease, and malnutrition continue to plague the peoples of subSaharan Africa .
 Even in advanced economically developed countries, the inequality gap is growing, not getting smaller . Even in developed countries like the U.S., inequality gap among people is growing . The inequality gap in the United States continues to grow .
 Wealth in the U.S. has continued to increase substantially during the last four decades . Wealth has benefited the few at the top far more than the many below them .
 Six of the ten fastest growing countries in the world were African . Between 2000 and 2010, six of the world's fastest growing nations were African countries .
 Angola's economy grew faster than that of any other country on the planet . Angola is one of the fastest-growing countries in the world .
 What these African countries had in common were commodities desired by the rest of the world . Granted, what these African nations had in . common was commodities desired . by the . rest of . the world.
 A boom in prices spurred investment in mining and drilling as well as bridges, roads, and high-rise office buildings . A boom also spurred investments in mining, drilling and other industries .
 With wealth comes corruption and the squandering of income that could be used to benefit the broader population . Unfortunately, wealth comes with the squander of income, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Both China and India have dual economies: wealth produced each year concentrated in the upper tiers of their societies . The vast majority of China’s 1. billion people are less well off, the bottom 20 percent or more still living in varying degrees of poverty .
 Per capital income about $375 in China, just under $120 in India . The adverse plight of the less-advantaged masses remains severe with per capital income $375 .
 Social justice demands better levels of living than most of the world’s seven billion people now enjoy . Social justice requires better living conditions than most people in the world now enjoy, says the UN .
 Human rights and socioeconomic well-being require sustainable development and growth of economies on a truly global scale . Economic development advocates are seeking a more equitable distribution of wealth .
 The starkest contrast is between the United States and Chad, an African country . The U.S. economy is smaller than the size of the rising BRIC countries .
 The United States life expectancy is still thirty years more than that of Chad . Even given the troubling state of health of many Americans, the U.S. still lives longer than Chad's life expectancy .
 Those who see the exhausting pace prescribed by market capitalism as having eroded core values, the environment and the overall quality of life .
 For understandable reasons, more low-income countries still seem eager to get better seats on the growth-and-development train . Low-income nations still want better seats in the growth and development train .
 Progression from local to express and then to bullet-train class seems to be the more common worldwide aspiration . Progression to express class class is the most common global aspiration, according to experts .
 Most of the developing world or South is invisible to those in the capital-rich, economically advanced countries that label themselves First World or North . Most developing countries are invisible to most of the world .
 World Bank statistics tell us that of more than seven billion people on Earth, about a fifth of humanity subsist on less than $1.25 a day . World Bank: Of more than 7 billion people, about 1.25-a-day subsistently subsistess on
 Seventy-five percent of global income goes to just 20 percent of the world’s population, according to the World Economic Forum . Only 5 percent of world's top 40 percent goes to the bottom 40 percent—the poorest of the poor .
 Malnutrition accounts for 30 percent or more of children under five years old suffer from severe or moderate stunting . Malnutrition contributes to more than half of the deaths of children in developing countries . 30 percent of children are stunted or severely stunted .
 The differences between capital-rich and less-developed capital-poor countries become even more striking when we compare world regions . Capital-rich countries are more likely to be less developed than less developed countries .
 In European Union countries only five children die per 1,000 live births in the same age bracket . By sharp contrast, in EU countries only 5 children die a year after they are born .
 The absence of adequate medical or health care malnutrition, disease, and other factors are the underlying causes of most premature deaths in the earliest years of life . malnutrition is a major factor in premature death in less developed countries .
 The Human Condition in a Globalized World. The best starting point is the European Union. The European Union is a good starting point for the future.
 EU on any number of dimensions with other regions of the world . Compare the EU with other countries . The EU is one of the most powerful economies in the world, according to experts .
 Adam Smith saw the wealth of nations lying not in their stock of gold or other treasure but in their productive capacity . Smith combined capital with land and labor for production of goods and services . Smith: Wealth of nations lies not in gold or treasure but rather in productive capacity of capital .
 All countries have labor, yet in many countries of the developing world it is uneducated and poorly trained . In many developing countries, it is often uneducated, poorly trained and uneducated . The world's labor needs to be educated and well-trained .
 Land is essentially deserts, mountains, and jungles with scarce natural resources . Land may be essentially deserts or mountains, mountains or jungles . Land was essentially deserts and mountains .
 Capital formation on a national basis depends heavily on domestic savings . Millions of people are more worried about their next meal than saving for the future . Capital formation in a national .
 Official development assistance or aid from governments and international organizations continues to be an important source of investment capital for many developing countries .
 Low level of official development assistance as percentage of gross national income in terms of the United States . The highest proportionally coming from small Scandinavian countries in northern Europe .
 Eor years, states and international organizations have provided more than a trillion dollars in aid to developing countries . The aid has been provided to developing nations in more than 30 years .
 It was assumed that such aid would boost recipient countries’ growth rates and hence help millions escape poverty . However, it was assumed such aid was to boost recipient nations' growth rates .
 Many studies have failed to find a strong link between the amount of aid and faster economic growth . Unfortunately, many studies have not found a link between aid and growth .
 A good deal of the aid was not really concerned with stimulating economic growth, says Eirst . Eirst says a lot of the money was not going to stimulate economic growth .
 During the Cold War the Soviet Union, United States, and their respective allies were primarily concerned with propping up friendly governments . The Soviet Union and U.S. were mainly concerned with supporting friendly governments in order to keep the peace .
 To this day, Israel and Egypt are the two major recipients of U.S. foreign aid . The two countries are still receiving significant amounts of aid .
 Economic and financial competencies of governments were not considered a primary consideration . Nor were the economic and financial competence of governments, experts say .
 It is a summary of the enormous challenge posed by the goal of sustainable development . The challenge is the challenge to sustainable development in the world, says the author .
 Official development assistance and borrowed funds are important sources of capital for investment . Roads, rail, seaports, airports, power, telecommunications, and other utilities expand capacity for economic growth .
 Foreign aid and borrowed funds can contribute substantially to economic development . However, servicing debt can be a heavy burden for capital-poor states that find themselves overextended .
 Some prefer to direct aid to conspicuous prestige projects such as major dams, which may or may not contribute substantially to economic development . Others prefer to aid prestige projects, such as big dams .
 Foreign Aid to the South from the North remains an important source of capital for investment in capital-poor countries in the South and in other countries receiving such aid . Foreign aid from capital-rich countries in North remains a source of investment in South .
 The data in this table are for high-per-capita-income, capital-rich donor countries with the largest economies . The data are for the Group of Seven countries that have the highest GN Ps . Other countries with large economies with smaller economies with economies smaller in aggregate size .
 Corruption, incompetence, and poor economic policies have squandered large amounts of donor cash, he says . Corruption and incompetence are to blame for squandering donor cash .
 The arrows in the figure depict the direction of net capital flows preferred by less developed countries in the South . The arrows show the direction in which capital flows are preferred .
 Critics note that net capital flows often move in the opposite direction when MNCs send profits or investments back to the North . Countries in the South run negative trade balances and must repay their loans . Owners of capital in South choose to invest in the North, where they expect to realize greater
 Then diamonds were found in the desert, but the government did not squander its newfound wealth . Then the government didn't squander their newfound wealth, it says . The government has a history of squandering its wealth .
 Foreign investment was welcomed, and private business was allowed to flourish . Foreign business was also allowed to thrive in the country .
 Aid projects only if it was likely they would provide sustainable development . Aid projects proceeded only if they were likely to be successful, says UNICEF . U.N.ICEF: Aid projects should be followed by a sustainable development plan .
 In succeeding decades, Botswana’s economy grew at one of the fastest rates in the world . Botswana is one of Africa's fastest-growing economies .
 A key reason was the fact that ministers were for the most part honest and competent . The government ministers were honest, competent and competent, says David Cameron . Cameron's government has been criticised for its lack of transparency .
 As the economy slowly diversified, aid donors began to look for other, needier recipients . Aid donors began looking for other recipients as the economy grew .
 In addition to loans by government, banks, and nongovernmental organizations, the World Bank has provided most of the country's capital .
 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development was established along with the International Monetary Fund at an international conference at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944 . The institution was officially named the International Bank . It was established with the IMF and the International Economic Development .
 World Bank’s immediate post-World War II goal was economic recovery and reconstruction of major European and Asian economies devastated by the war . The World Bank was founded in 1945 after World War II .
 The World Bank’s focus since the 1950s and 1960s has been on loans for economic development to capital-poor countries . Located in Washington, DC, next to the IMF, the World Bank's focus is on economic development .
 The World Bank’s capital comes from contributions—a multilateral form of foreign assistance by capital-rich member countries . Capital rich member countries want to use this institution as a vehicle for lending to less-developed countries . Members of the World Bank contribute to contributions .
 World Bank loans for private-sector projects in developing countries are made through its International Finance Corporation affiliate . The World Bank is making loans to private sector projects through its IFC affiliate .
 Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency is an investment-insurance affiliate that provides political-risk insurance programs . To facilitate lending and direct investment to countries where investors fear takeover of their assets by nationalization or face political instability .
 Regional lending for development also occurs through such separate international organizations as the Inter-American Development Bank . The North American Development Bank is now the N.A. Bank .
 When global interest rates take a significant turn upward, additional strain is placed on developing countries . Developed countries trying to service (make payments on) existing debt or refinancing and securing new loans .
 Countries facing financial difficulties, perhaps in danger of being forced to default on their loan payments, often seek debt forgiveness . Countries with financial difficulties seeking debt forgiveness often seek forgiveness .
 Failing that, they ask for cooperation from governments or international or private lending institutions . They try to reschedule or refinance these obligations with new long-term loans at concessionary, below-market interest rates .
 Such concessionary loans are really a form of grant aid because interest earned from a proportion of the loan invested at higher market rates can actually be used to service the loan . Interest earned from the proportion of a portion of a loan invested in higher market rate can actually use to service it .
 Because lenders stand to lose all if borrowers default, lenders are usually willing to accommodate reasonable requests from the latter . Lenders are willing to give reasonable requests, particularly if these concessions give some assurance that the loan eventually will be repaid .
 Multinational corporations and investment firms seeking profits or returns on investment are a third source of capital . Direct Foreign Investment is a form of capital in the Middle East .
 Direct foreign investment may involve building a foreign subsidiary whose assets are controlled by the parent company . In terms of multinational corporations, direct foreign investment might involve building foreign subsidiary .
 Of course, proprietary interests of the MNCs often lead them to maximize profits while minimizing technology transfers . MNC's proprietary interests often lead to them maximizing profits and minimizing technology transfer .
 They are an important source of capital as well as training for domestic labor forces . Nevertheless, they are important sources of capital and capital for the economy .
 MNC advocates say MNCs provide jobs and contribute substantially to development . Those who contest this view say they are predatory, engaging in whatever levels of exploitation governments will tolerate .
 Critics claim that one reason MNCs organize their operations multinationally is to avoid taxes and circumvent obstacles or barriers imposed by particular states . Critics say that one of the reasons is that they avoid taxes .
 Private direct investment, portfolio investment, and bank lending continue to account for substantial sums of capital investment in developing countries . Nevertheless, private direct investment and portfolio investment still account for significant amounts of investment .
 Trade preferences have been a key element of the agenda for a New International Economic Order advanced by developing countries in the South . Trade preferences include aid, loans, investment, and occasionally debt forgiveness and technology transfers .
 Efforts began in the 1960s and 1970s to build an NIEO looked for ways to bridge the great North-South divide . The NIEO was created to help bridge the divide between the North and South .
 Less-developed countries have had a controlling majority in the General Assembly after decolonization . The creation of new states in Africa and Asia in the 1960s tipped the balance of votes in that chamber toward the South .
 Controversy in less-developed countries expressed concerning uneven or asymmetric distribution of wealth created through free trade . Critics claimed that the arrangement clearly favored the North .
 The terms of trade between exporters favor the North’s manufactured and higher-technology goods and services over the low-tech goods offered by developing countries .
 Prices for these exports from less-developed countries barely hold their own or tend to decline over time . Exports from less developed countries tend to fall in price over the years .
 Eirst World manufactured and higher-technology goods and services tend to hold their own or increase in price over time . By contrast, higher-tech products tend to increase their price over the course of time .
 The argument is that beginning or infant industries in the South may need the protection of tariffs or other barriers to trade until they have grown sufficiently to be competitive in global markets . The argument argues that the South needs protection from trade until it has grown sufficiently .
 These countries do not want advanced industrial or postindustrial societies to discriminate against exports from less-developed countries by imposing trade barriers against them . At the same time, these countries do want advanced . industrial . industrial societies should not discriminate against . exports from . less developed countries .
 Developing countries argue for unfettered access to Eirst World markets for their exports, without fear of reprisal if in the early stages of industrialization they are allowed to discriminate against them . Developing nations, in effect, have argued that they should be able to access to the
 Transfer pricing is a way to minimise MNC tax liability in countries with higher tax rates . This case takes up one way they do it: transfer pricing that minimizes MNCs tax liability .
 Since the end of World War II, the most controversial aspect of international political economy has been the rise of the multinational corporation . It is fair to say that since the war's end, the biggest issue of international politics has been that of multinational corporations .
 Some see MNCs as eventually superseding the nation-state, muting nationalism by providing economic benefits to all . Others see the benefits of MNCS superseding nation-states by providing all economic benefits .
 Others view MNCs as rapacious imperialists, exploiting the weak and poor in their quest for greater profits . Others view them as exploitative imperialists .
 In direct, open conflict between MNCs and the state, the state will in principle generally prevail, as it always has the option of closing down the corporation's operations . In direct conflict, state has the right to close down the operations of the corporation, says the author .
 Conflict between states and MNCs tends to be more subtle and is usually reported on the business page, not the front page of daily newspapers . Conflict between countries and corporations is more subtle than reported on front page .
 A state of state and a multinational corporation could be at risk of conflict . Consider a scenario involving a state and multinational corporation . The state and the corporation could face each other .
 XYZ Corporation's automobile assembly plant subsidiary in the country of Ruralia needs to import engines, computer parts, and other higher-technology components . The company imports engines and computer parts from more industrially developed countries .
 As it turns out, there is a difference in tax rates on profits in these countries . As a result of the tax rates, profits in the U.S. are taxed at lower rates .
 XYZ Corporation is a rational actor that tries to maximize its gains (or minimize its losses) The corporation can be expected to reduce its tax exposure in countries with lower tax rates .
 It may choose to do this through transfer pricing — increasing or decreasing the prices its subsidiaries charge each other for components . It may also choose to increase the prices of its subsidiaries .
 Its assembly plant is in low-tax, less-developed Ruralia, a country chosen because of its relatively low taxes and its abundant supply of relatively unskilled, lower-cost labor . The plant is located in the low-cost, less developed Ruralia .
 The local government has intentionally set the tax rate low to attract investment by multinational corporations as part of its own economic development plan . The tax rate is set to be set to attract multinational corporations .
 The Ruralian government would like XYZ Corporation to put in more than just an assembly plant . It recognizes that at least the assembly plant will employ a substantial number of Ruralians who would not otherwise have jobs .
 Opponents who see XYZ and other multinational corporations as exploiting local labor, damaging the environment are not as strong politically as local investors and businesses that favor the plant . Opponents of multinational corporations are not strong politically .
 Some of these interests will participate in the venture directly, while others expect to gain indirectly due to the plant's positive contribution to local economic growth .
 The argument in favor of XYZ is that foreign investment contributes to a rising tide that raises all ships . The argument for XYZ in the U.S. is that it contributes to the rising tide of foreign investment .
 "XYZ's investment in an assembly plant is compatible with both corporate and state objectives," says the company .
 In short, XYZ Corporation and the Ruralia government are rational actors seeking to make a good business deal . XYZ and Ruralia are rational partners in the deal .
 One side may get the better deal, but both see the investment as a potential or expected gain . Both sides may get better deals, but the investment is expected or expected to gain .
 Manufacturing computers, carburetors, or other engine components that involve higher technologies, requires greater capital investment in machinery . Manufacturing computers and other engine parts require more capital investment than assembly plants . Manufacturers employ relatively fewer but higherskilled and higher-paid workers than those needed for assembly plants
 Countries with higher-skilled and higher-paid labor forces are often higher-tax countries as well . Countries like Industritania with high-skilled labor force are often more tax-friendly .
 Company's internal sale prices of computers, carburetors, or other engine components needed by the assembly plant subsidiary in Ruralia are set legally at or near cost, thus minimizing profit from producing these components in the high-tax country .
 When the automobiles have been assembled in Ruralia, they are sold or exported at market prices . When the cars are assembled, they will be assembled at a cost of $1,000 .
 Production costs are held down in Ruralia and minimized in Industritania . Components were imported so cheaply, and labor and other production costs were also held down . Profit as the difference between revenue from sales and the overall costs of production is maximized .
 XYZ Corporation spends some of its gain on new investment in Ruralia but moves most of it out of the country . Some of the money moves to finance investments in other subsidiaries and repatriates the rest to its corporate headquarters .
 Had components manufactured there been exported at market prices well above cost, revenues would have been higher . Revenue revenues would be higher .
 XYZ exports components to its Ruralia subsidiary below production cost, thus avoiding payment of any tax at all to Industritania . XYZ Corporation can expect the Industritanian government to object, particularly if XYZ .
 Ruralia gains by having more profits to tax, even though its tax rate remains low . Ruralia's tax rate is still low, but Ruralia has a low tax rate of about 50 per cent .
 Governments may try through policy, law, and regulation to control multinational corporate operations . When their interests diverge, governments may try to control companies' operations .
 The complexity of financial transactions such as transfer pricing among subsidiaries of the same corporation in several countries makes regulation extraordinarily difficult .
 In effect, First World producers compete unfairly with unsubsidized producers in less-developed countries . If the company finds the local government too hostile, it may choose to close its plants and take operations elsewhere .
 The most protected industries in high-income economies tend to include agriculture and textiles . This is precisely those sectors in which many poor countries are most competitive .
 Foreign-exchange earnings that come from exports can be used to purchase capital goods from the advanced industrial and postindustrial economies that produce them .
 Trade balances favorable to a less-developed country are an important source of capital that can be invested for economic development purposes . Trade balance favorable to less developed countries is an important investment in developing countries .
 When developing countries continue to run negative trade balances, capital that could have been invested in their domestic economies is drained off . By contrast, when developing countries . developing countries run negative . trade balances .
 Trade and trade preferences are important to developing countries, especially to acquire capital for industrial or other economic development . That is why favorable terms of trade and trade preference are so important, especially for developing countries .
 Special trade arrangements have been made with less-developed ‘ACP’ countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific, many of which are former colonies of European powers .
 Efforts to form cartels among coffee producers and tin or other agricultural and mineral exporters have been relatively unsuccessful due to the difficulty enforcing compliance with cartel production targets .
 The ready availability of substitute suppliers outside cartel arrangements has compounded these difficulties . Substitute suppliers outside of cartel arrangements have compounded the difficulties .
 A rising price for one mineral or agricultural product may lead consumers to substitute and import another, less-expensive product . The price of one mineral may lead to substituting and importing less expensive products .
 If coffee becomes too high in price, some consumers may switch to tea . Some consumers may turn to tea because of the cost of coffee .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries was successful in raising the world price of oil in the 1970s . One exception to this generally negative record for cartels was the Organization of OPEC . The cartel was successful for a few years .
 The industrial world’s heavy dependence on imported oil at ever-higher prices significantly raised overall costs of production in oil-buying countries . This contributed to fueling inflation on a global scale, writes David Frum .
 Efforts to find new oil supplies and develop alternative energy sources were undertaken . Efforts were made to develop alternative sources of energy sources .
 Powerful Eirst World countries also brought great pressures to bear on those OPEC members they could influence . Powerful nations in the Middle East also brought pressure on OPEC members .
 The dollar price of oil was relatively static in the 1980s and 1990s . It was actually declining in real terms when we take inflation into account .
 OPEC cartel has not been as successful in keeping prices up as in its early years . Until recently, the OPEC cartel had not been able to keep prices up . OPEC cartel thus had not succeeded in keeping up prices .
 OPEC production targets were higher than they might have been and effectively added enough oil to world supplies to keep prices from rising . Eirst, rivalry among OPEC members and a desire to produce more oil for export than allowed by cartel agreements, kept OPEC targets higher .
 Saudi Arabia has the world’s largest oil reserves . The country has remained committed to maintaining an ample supply to world markets .
 Development of oil fields under the North Sea between Britain and Norway, at Prudhoe Bay in northern Alaska, in the Caribbean, and in the central Asia-Caspian Sea area have added to world oil supplies . Second, development of oil .
 Third, although aggregate demand for oil continued to increase over the decades, it was less than what it would have been thanks to some development of alternative energy sources and energy-efficiency measures .
 Growing demand in fast-growing economies like China and India, coupled with political turmoil, have absorbed surplus oil in global markets . Political turmoil and consequent uncertainties in the Middle East from North Africa to the Persian Gulf have put pressure on the market price of oil .
 OPEC countries gained substantially from the increased price of oil as did the companies producing and marketing it to purchasers around the world . OPEC did not increase oil production enough to meet increased demand .
 A great frustration for many in less-developed countries is the degree to which they are caught in a seemingly inescapable structure of dependency on capital-rich Eirst World countries . Less developed countries are often caught in the structure of dependence on capital rich countries .
 Developing countries lack easy access to computers, infrastructure to support their use, and skilled users . Developing nations lack access to computer technology and infrastructure to use it .
 UN Development Programme launched the Sustainable Development Networking Programme in 1992 . It was designed to help bridge the information gap between the haves and have-nots .
 The program was met with much initial skepticism both within and outside the United Nations . The U.N. program has been met with skepticism from both sides of the debate .
 The answer is, ""You don't,"" but that's hardly the way to look at how and why the internet matters . The answer to the question is, "You know you don't"
 The key intermediaries are NGOs that pass on useful information to farmers . NGOs are key to passing on information to the farmers .
 In Mexico, the SDN P established an information center for corn producers where farmers learned online what the market price of corn is in the capital .
 Information centers were established in Jamaica, Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica, and elsewhere . Similar information centers established in other countries .
 With the benefit of hindsight, we can now see how farsighted delegates were at the 1992 Rio meeting . The Rio meeting was held in 1992 in Rio de Janeiro .
 Global communications among buyers and sellers, investors and entrepreneurs, lenders and borrowers, producers and consumers all depend on the internet, which now is very much a part of the sustainable-development project worldwide . Capital-rich countries is a formidable task .
 Some newly industrializing countries have been able to break into world markets for manufactured goods or such technology-intensive services such as banking and insurance . South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong (now part of China), and Brazil have had success in manufacturing and banking .
 BRIC countries have had the greatest impact during the last decade . South Africa and Indonesia also expanding rapidly . BRIC economies have had greatest impact on the economy .
 Most developing countries have not been so successful as their domestic firms find it difficult to compete in global trading markets or are shut out of rich countries that protect their agricultural and textile industries .
 UN-affiliated economic commissions also work to advance trade and other commercial relations . Aside land and labor, the provision of capital is required to facilitate economic development .
 Capital and technology come together in the production and international sale of modern harvesters . Land, Labor, Capital, Land, Capital comes together to produce and sell the harvester .
 Such machinery Is not always affordable or appropriate in those cases where the result is to displace agricultural workers and disrupt land tenure patterns that provide employment to the poor . Such machinery isn't always affordable, appropriate, according to the author .
 Mexico has had to defend the peso, its currency, with heavy foreign borrowings from time to time . Given these economic asymmetries in levels of development, Mexico has faced substantial difficulties, as reflected in its having to defend its currency .
 Mexico’s hope, of course, is that NAFTA will continue to be a means of access to capital and to the huge, relatively wealthy Canadian and American markets for selling its goods and services now and over the long term .
 If the solution to global poverty and underdevelopment was simply the provision or generation of more capital for investment, the challenge, though daunting, would seem to be achievable . But if the solution is simply providing more capital, more investment is possible, it would seem a daunting task .
 A number of possible interrelated factors that impinge directly on economic prosperity deal with the domestic and regional issues faced by these states . These states have a wide range of issues they face from domestic issues to regional issues, such as immigration .
 Population Growth Economies that grow depend on a continuing investment of capital . Economies need to continue to invest in capital to grow .
 Populations that grow too fast consume whatever surplus would have been produced for capital investment . Populations grow too quickly, consuming surplus would be needed to invest in capital investment.
 Planners want to lift the capacity of less-developed countries to provide a better level of living for their peoples . Better medical and health conditions also reduce death rates .
 Parson Thomas Robert Malthus spent much of his life writing about human population growth in relation to the societal problem .
 According to Malthus, “Population, when unchecked, increases in a geometrical ratio.” “When unchecked,” population will increase in a “geometrical” ratio .
 Population tends to outpace the food production necessary to sustain the whole of humanity . Put another way, in the absence of measures that might be taken to slow its rate of growth, population tends to grow faster than food production .
 The challenge is to draw from the Earth resources necessary for increasing levels of production and improved human well-being . But avoiding resource depletion and environmental degradation that will undermine capacity for further production, scientists say .
 Development planners seek ways to curb birthrates and thus slow population growth . Population growth in less-developed countries can outstrip economic growth needed to provide food, shelter, clothing, clothing and other goods .
 Religious and cultural preferences constrain the choices of birth control method as a matter of individual choice or of national policy .
 The means used to stay within these limits go beyond contraceptives and medication to include abortion and, many cases, even resorting to infanticide . Infanticide is often used to be a form of abortion .
 The killing of newborns, particularly girls, is by no means government policy, but rather is an unintended consequence of limiting the number of live births in a society that has a long-established cultural preference for a family to have at least one boy succeed his father .
 Those who comply with the government’s one-child policy now have to cope with the absence of centralized social-security systems outside of extended family-support networks .
 A principal reason for large and extended families is the security one gets from knowing one’s children have a family and culturally established obligation to respect and care for their elders . Indeed, a principal reason . for large . and extended . families is still prevalent among the peasantry living in
 Given the smaller size of Chinese families than historically has been the case, an economically even more developed China will have more resources than before to establish the equivalent of the Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security pension systems .
 Annual growth rates as high as 3 percent or more in the 1960s are now trimmed to less than 2 percent in most countries . Substantial progress has been made to curb annual growth rates in recent decades .
 Population has continued to grow at a very rapid rate in many less-developed countries . Nevertheless, populations have continued to rise at a rapid rate .
 With a 3 percent growth rate, population doubles in just about a quarter-century, but a 2 percent rate slows this doubling time to about three and a half decades . Population doubles in about 3.5 decades if population doubles at 3 percent rate .
 Population is actually declining in some First World countries . By contrast, population in the U.S. is actually decreasing in some countries .
 Significant differences of view on what was to be done were readily apparent . Significant differences on what should be done are readily apparent in the debate .
 The Chinese policy of one child per family discussed above was scrutinized closely by those concerned that enforcement could easily violate human rights . Violators could face punitive sanctions or even forced sterilization .
 Another objective for many was to make birthcontrol technologies readily available free of charge or at relatively low cost . Another objective was to provide birthcontrol technology readily available .
 Forced sterilization is offensive to many on moral, human-rights, and legal grounds . Vasectomy is a choice many men make, particularly in First World countries, but forced sterilization or government incentives to undergo the procedure for national population-growth .
 A number of efforts to curb population growth focus primarily on women . Efforts focus on educating them on the pros and cons of various options and providing contraceptives .
 Empowering women has greater likelihood of achieving population-growth goals, but faces enormous obstacles, particularly in many male-dominated, less developed countries . Empowermenting women is greater likelihood to achieve population growth goals, especially in lessdeveloped countries .
 Since such family-planning support by governments often runs into political opposition, the task often falls to international and nongovernmental organizations not as constrained as governments sometimes are .
 Slower-growing populations and substantial capital investment are key ingredients in the recipe for economic development and continued growth for any economy . Slower growing populations, coupled with substantial investment, is key ingredients to economic development .
 Success in curbing population growth removes a significant obstacle or impediment to economic development . Success is a significant boost to economic growth, experts say . The U.S. government says .
 Excessive military spending drains important resources that could be used for more productive economic-development purposes . As will be discussed below, excessive military spending also drains resources in less developed countries .
 Relatively unconstrained efforts to achieve rapid economic growth can undermine the continued sustainability of economic development . The environment and environment of the economy can be affected by the rapid growth rate .
 The sheer size of populations in countries now industrializing magnifies the environmental impact of economic development . Economic development has a huge impact on the environment .
 The adverse environmental impact of industrialization seen in First World societies with populations in the millions when the industrialization process was well under way in the 19th and early 20th centuries can be expected on an even greater scale of damage if China and India continue to follow the same approach to industrial
 Agricultural productivity can be destroyed through erosion and misuse of fertilizers, water supplies can be contaminated . Water supplies can also be contaminated, and other forms of pollution can wreak havoc on agricultural .
 Resource depletion and reduction of wildlife, fishery, and seafood stocks can make continued production unsustainable even at present levels . Continued production can be unsustainable even though production is unsustainable .
 17,000 individuals, including 2,400 representatives of NGOs, held separate but simultaneous meetings in Rio on environmental and sustainable development issues . The meetings were held on the same issues .
 Subsequent conventions and programs have been instituted under UN auspices . Subsequent convention and programs were instituted under the UN auspice .
 Some developing countries worry about the danger of overpopulation to economic viability and quality of life . Other countries fear a precipitous decline in population due to the alarming increase in infectious diseases . Infectious diseases account for almost half of mortality in developing countries .
 The rapid growth in the number of infectious diseases apparently resistant to antimicrobial drugs is frightening . What is frightening to many scientists and doctors is the rapid growth of infectious disease resistant to antibiotics .
 Given the speed, ease, and volume of international trade and travel, diseases such as SARS have become a hallmark of globalization . SARS has become a mark of globalization, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 As adults are struck down and children are orphaned, villages become ghost towns, and economic productivity plummets . Overburdened clinics and underfunded clinics and rudimentary health care programs attempt to deal with the disaster .
 Tanzanian researcher: Seven Boeing 747s, filled mostly with children, crash into Mount Kilimanjaro each day . It is equivalent to seven Boeing 747 aircraft crashing into the mountain every day .
 In the 1950s and 1960s, malarial mosquitoes were in retreat in most of Africa and Asia . Malarial mosquitoes are now a major threat in the United States .
 The use of the pesticide DDT involved a trade-off, as it also killed millions of birds and animals and poisoned the environment . It is estimated that hundreds of millions of lives were saved .
 Malaria seems to be flying underneath the radar in terms of global awareness . Malaria is still a problem in the United States .
 At a special session of the UN General Assembly in June 2001, members adopted a Declaration of Commitment and time-bound targets to which governments and the United Nations are supposed to be accountable .
 This battle was given a boost by former President George W Bush, in the 2001 State of the Union speech .
 NGOs like the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation have also taken on this challenge . NGOs like The Gates Foundation are also taking part in the challenge .
 The organization UNAIDS notes that much more money needs to be raised . The organization is committed to raising the funds necessary to meet this challenge .
 Many who could further the development of their countries have been struck down by this plague . Indeed, so many who could . further develop their country have been hit down by it .
 Military spending may create employment in the armed forces and the arms industries tied to them, but it also diverts or reallocates resources away from investment for economic development .
 Less-developed countries are importers, not producers, of advanced weaponry, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Less developed nations are importer of advanced weapons, he says . The U.S. should not rely on military spending to boost its economic growth .
 Their outlays for arms, in effect, help finance further technological development in First World countries . Arms sales for arms in the U.S. help finance technology development in the First World .
 Excessive military spending, engaged in by many less-developed countries, drains important resources that could be used for more productive economic development purposes . Excessive spending is a waste of resources that can be used to boost economic development, say experts .
 Many weapons purchased are used in brutal civil wars, military interventions, and conflicts with neighboring states . Weapons purchased are often used in bloody civil wars and military interventions .
 Most wars now fought are civil wars, and most are in the poorest countries . Most of the wars are now fought in civil wars . Most are now civil war-ravaged countries in the world .
 In almost every case, these wars leave a legacy of persistent poverty and disease in their wake . In almost all of these wars, the legacy of their wars has been left in the wake .
 Wars also destroy capital, particularly in lands where the combat occurs . Wars are also destroying capital, especially in war-torn countries .
 Arms sellers may make money from warfare—“merchants of death” to some antiwar critics . Arms sellers are part of a military-industrial base essential to national security to others to others . Arms sales may be the "merchantants of the death"
 Arab world has highest military expenditure as a percent of overall gross domestic product . Arab world is currently the region with the highest military spending as a percentage of GDP .
 South Asia includes India and Pakistan, while Europe and Central Asia includes Russia . Central Asia and Europe includes Russia, Russia and India .
 If there is insufficient capital available from domestic generation and positive trade balances, capital to finance military purchases has to be borrowed . Purchasers in the already less developed countries more deeply into debt, eroding capital, or diverting it from infrastructure and other investment .
 Armaments competition can draw excessive amounts of national capital and drain precious and often limited monetary reserves in developing countries . Armaments are driven by threats and counterthreats, according to the U.S.
 Given the high national security stakes at risk should war break out, the arms race continues . Each side tries to match or surpass the warmaking capability of the other .
 When wars come to an end, there is new demand for replacement weapons and weapons systems . Weapons systems are expended during armed conflict . The U.S. will continue to develop new weapons systems in the future .
 Liberals and realists may hold differing perspectives as to the utility of aid, loans, investment, trade concessions, technology transfers, and debt forgiveness . Liberals, realists of all persuasions may hold different perspectives on aid and loans, investments and technology .
 Both tend to take for granted the framework within which these economic activities take place . The global capitalist system is the framework for these activities, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There are radical critiques of this system that are theoretically grounded in different assumptions and worldviews . There are, however, radical critiques that are theoretical grounded in quite different assumptions .
 Some of the more provocative work in the economic-structuralist tradition was produced by Latin Americans in the 1960s and 1970s . Dependency Theory is based on the theory of Latin American dependency .
 Latin America and other less-developed countries were not developing as predicted by mainstream economists . They were concerned with the problem of explaining why Latin America had not developed as had been predicted .
 The focus of the ECLA and UNCTAD economists was initially quite narrow . The focus was initially very narrow, with the focus initially being narrow .
 The unequal terms of trade between LDCs that exported raw materials and northern industrialized countries that exported finished manufactured goods were examined . The study was published in the United States and Canada .
 This policy did not result in the anticipated amount of success and, in fact, increased the influence of foreign multinational corporations brought in to facilitate domestic production . This policy has not resulted in the expectation of success, however .
 Some writers cast their recommendations in terms of nationalism and stateguided capitalism . Others say state capitalism is the best way to get around the world's problems .
 Others emphasize political and social factors within the context of the capitalist economic system that binds Latin America to North America . Others emphasize the social and political aspects of the economic system .
 If it occurs at all, it is reflexive—subject to the vagaries and ups and downs of the world’s advanced economies . The world's advanced economies are not immune to these vagaries or downsides, says David Frum .
 Choices of Latin American countries are restricted or constrained as a result of the dictates of capitalism but also due to supporting political, social, and cultural relations . Choices in Latin America are restricted by the dictates or constrained by capitalism .
 This multifaceted web of dependency reinforces unequal exchange between the northern and southern parts of the hemisphere . The web is a 'web of dependency' between the north and south of the world .
 Opportunities for the LDCs are few and far between because they are allocated a subordinate role in world capitalism . The U.S. has been in the spotlight for more than a decade . The United States is in the midst of a global economic crisis .
 This version of class analysis emphasizes how transnational ties within the global bourgeois or capitalist class work to the disadvantage of workers and peasants in the periphery of the world .
 Multinational corporations and international banks, therefore, are viewed from a much different perspective from that of a realist or liberal . Realist views of multinational corporations are different from those of a liberal .
 To the liberal, especially “liberal institutionalists,” MNCs and international banks appear merely as other, potentially benign, actors . To liberals, they say they are merely as potentially benign actors .
 To the realist, they tend to be of secondary importance because of the emphasis on the state-as-actor . The realist is concerned about the state of the state, as well as the state itself .
 To economic structuralists who were part of the dependency perspective, however, they are central players in establishing and maintaining dependency relations . To structuralists, they say dependency relations are important to maintaining dependency relationships .
 One doesn’t hear as much about dependency theory these days, at least not in the U.S. It's not surprising that dependency theory is no longer popular in the United States .
 First, empirical studies have shown that terms of trade have not always deteriorated for producers of commodities . Second, they say, terms have always been good for producers .
 Critics have raised the question of whether dependency creates social and economic backwardness or whether it is economic and social backwardness that leads to a situation of dependency .
 In short, there is the issue of causality—whether dependency is the cause of backwardness or whether it is an effect of this condition . There is the question of whether dependency is a result of the condition .
 Some of the protectionist policies engendered by dependency theory were failures, leading to inefficiency and stifled technological progress . Third, some of these policies were failures and led to inefficiencies .
 In the 1980s Latin America began a period of trade liberalization policies . Latin America has seen a dramatic increase in trade trade since the 1970s . Trade liberalization is a key part of Latin America's history .
 Some sectors thrived, others lagged; some countries experienced dramatic growth, others disasters . Some countries experienced growth, while others suffered disasters .
 In Marxist view, the bourgeoisie or capitalist class uses its base in the capital-rich North to reach out to its class allies in the South for new markets in which to sell and new workers and peasants to exploit . Marxist view: In the North, the capitalists use its base to reach
 The bourgeoisie in the North joins with bourgeois elements at the top of societies in less-developed countries in exploitative joint ventures . In short, the bourgeoisie in North joins forces with elements at top of society in less developed countries .
 In advanced, global capitalism, older colonial forms of imperialism have been replaced by multinational corporations and banks . The present-day agents of the owners of capital are able to use neocolonial ties to facilitate their efforts .
 Karl Marx was born and reared in Trier in present-day Germany . Karl Marx wrote extensively on political-economic history and the practice of capitalism .
 Much of his research and writing took place during his stay in London, where he was able to observe firsthand the kind of labor exploitation in early industrial capitalism . Charles Dickens also inspired the literary contributions of Charles Dickens .
 Marx was both a political-economic theorist and a revolutionary . He challenged the capitalist or bourgeois interests of his time . Marx was a revolutionary who challenged the bourgeois interests in his time.
 Present-day theorists who focus on the South's dependency on the North owe an intellectual debt to Marx . They do not share all of Marx's premises, even if they don't share some of his premises .
 Marxist analyses oversimplify reality by reducing the complexity of political and economic matters to class and class conflict . Marxist analyses are artificial constructions that give us a distorted view of how capitalism and capitalist political economy work .
 "Little regard is given to the independent, instrumental roles" played by international and nongovernmental organizations, interest groups, and individuals."
 All of these are relegated to being agents of a national or international capital-owning class, the bourgeoisie . Instead of being agents, they are agents of the capital-owned class .
 Critics of regimes see them as serving U.S. interests at the expense of less-developed countries . Nevertheless, critics of these regimes continue to see them .
 This perspective is another form of economic structuralism that differs from dependency in at least two ways . This form of structuralism is different from dependency and dependency, says the economist .
 Developed and underdeveloped states, winners and losers, are examined in an attempt to explain the global existence of uneven development . Developed states and winners are examined to explain why uneven development exists .
 The goal is to understand the fate of various parts of the world at various times in history within the larger context of a developing world political economy . Second, the goal of the book is to help people understand the future of the developing world .
 The priority is to understand the global system from a historical perspective . The priority for the U.S. is understanding the world's history, the author says .
 Only then can the fates of particular societies or regions of the globe be understood . Only then, can the fate of societies be understood, says historian .
 Advocates of this view are not necessarily Marxists, and some adherents differ from classical Marxism in key respects . Advocates differ from Marxists in some key respects, such as in some areas .
 World-system theory is essentially grounded in the Marxist conception of social reality . The emphasis is on the primacy of the economic sphere and the role of class struggle . World-System theory is grounded in Marxist theory, but is not Marxist .
 The emphasis is on an international hierarchy and the struggle among states and transnational classes . Rather than focusing on domestic class structure, the focus is on transnational class structure .
 Immanuel Wallerstein's writings represent the most ambitious worldsystem work and have been the catalyst for an extensive amount of subsequent research . Immanuel's work has been the subject of extensive research .
 In attempting to understand the origins and dynamics of the modern world economy and the existence of worldwide uneven development, he aspires to no less than a historically based theory of global development . World-system theory .
 Core areas historically engaged in the most advanced economic activities, such as banking, manufacturing, technologically advanced agriculture, and ship building . The core areas historically have engaged in most advanced activities .
 The periphery has provided raw materials— minerals, timber, and the like—to fuel the core’s economic expansion . The periphery provides raw materials to fuel economic growth .
 Peripheral countries denied advanced technology in those areas that might make them more competitive with core states . Unskilled labor is repressed, and the peripheral countries are denied advanced technologies that might help them compete with core countries .
 The semiperiphery is involved in a mix of production activities, some associated with core areas and others with peripheral areas . It is a mixture of production and production activities .
 The semiperiphery also serves a number of other functions, such as being an outlet for investment when wages in core economies become too high . It is also being used to provide an outlet to invest in the region .
 Over time, particular countries or regions may gravitate between core, peripheral, and semiperipheral status . Over time a country or region can gravitate to core or peripheral status .
 Class structure varies in each zone depending on how the dominant class relates to the world economy .
 This division of labor requires as well as increases inequality between regions . Contrary to the liberal economic notion of specialization based on comparative advantage, this division of work requires as much as increases income inequality .
 States in the periphery are weak, in that they are unable to control their fates, whereas states in the core are economically strong . States in periphery are weaker economically than states in core states, writes David Frum .
 The basic function of the state is to ensure the continuation of the capitalist mode of production . The state's basic function is to protect the capitalist model of production, says David Cameron .
 Given the inexorable nature of capitalism, Wallerstein and his followers were probably less surprised than most theoreticians at the virtual collapse of most of the communist Second World . The inexorable course of capitalism is to blame .
 In a post-Cold War volume, Wallerstein attempts to place the events of 1989-1991 in historical perspective . The events of the Cold War '89-91 were placed in historical context .
 Wallerstein sees a direct connection between deepening of global capitalism, crises of political authority, and increased conflict . Grossly unequal distribution of material gains contributes to multiple strains in the world-system .
 Fostering economic growth and sustaining economic development on a global scale will remain formidable challenges in the coming decades, says the World Economic Council .
 Some have suggested that we must redefine development needs to be more consistent with quality-of-life criteria rather than the quest for economic growth . Some suggest that development development must be more focused on quality of life .
 Whether economic well-being, the environment, social justice, human rights, the natural environment, and the overall improvement of the human condition can be served at lower economic growth rates is not altogether clear .
 Padre Ricardo Sammon can make a difference, even in the face of political obstacles . He says committed individuals such as Sammon are committed to making a difference . Sammon's story is told in this chapter of this chapter .
 Individual practitioners of international relations and world politics do not necessarily have to follow the path of Padre Sammon . They can make contributions in any number of ways, whether working for a government, international organizations, or nongovernmental organizations .
 Realists recognize the reality of poverty in less-developed countries and the developmental gap between North and South . From the perspective of images of international relations, world politics and world politics, realists recognize poverty .
 Most doubt that gap in itself will be major cause of international conflict, the primary realist concern . Most doubt, however, that this gap will be a major cause for international conflict .
 It is still national power and the relative power position of states that matters most to realists . Realists say national power is still the most important issue .
 Development is important to the extent that it alters the distribution of power, the “pecking order” among states . Thus, development is important for the future of nations, says author .
 If developmental problems are to be mitigated, then it will be states that will take the lead and be the final arbiters of whatever global policies are devised . States will be arbiters in the future of global policies, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Liberals usually have a greater interest in international political economy than do most realists, at least in relation to less-developed countries . Liberals have a cosmopolitan view of world politics, given their pluralist, cosmopolitan views .
 States tend to think in terms of short-and medium-term objectives lacking a longer time horizon . For them, states tend to look at short goals rather than long-term goals . States need to think about their objectives for a long time .
 International organizations such as the United Nations and nongovernmental organizations can play a role by institutionalizing the longer-term interests of states . This is where international organizations like the U.N. play a key role in the international community's success .
 Economic structuralists are most at home with issues of global development . They focus on exploitative relations they observe at play in the postcolothe Post-Test & Chapter nial .
 Mypoiisciiab.com is an alternative to theoretical perspectives offered by realists and liberals on the development of the global political economy . Their major contribution has been to highlight an alternative .
 When development is placed in historical context, provocative arguments are put forward that draw our attention to alternative ways of interpreting the poverty of the vast majority of humanity . The provocative arguments were put forward by provocative arguments put forward .
 Global poverty remains one of the most significant 21st-century challenges, says CNN.com's John Defterios . Global poverty is a major challenge for both capital-rich and capital-poor countries, he says .
 Illustrate how the differences between capital-rich and capital-poor, lesseconomically developed countries contribute to the uneven levels of development found around the world .
 As capitalism has become more global, aggregate production and trade of goods and services have expanded dramatically, but distribution remains uneven both globally and within countries . Many are decidedly better off, but many more are still living in varying degrees of poverty .
 UN Development Programme's Human Development Report and the World Bank's World Development Report provide statistical data . UN Human Development Programme and World Bank report provide statistics on human development .
 Capital-poor countries look to capital-rich countries for a better deal . Foreign aid grants, loans at concessionary or below-market rates, trade preferences favoring exports, multinational corporate investment, technology transfers, and debt forgiveness .
 As a practical matter, efforts by capital-rich countries have been less than many had hoped would be the case . Capital-rich nations have been criticized for their lack of efforts to tackle the problem .
 The book explores economic growth and poverty, global warming, ethnic conflict, and the roles women play in a changing Third-World context . Among other issues, the book explores the role of women in the Third World .
 Increasing populations and expanding military establishments both consume more and more of the goods and services produced, thus reducing any surplus that could be invested for development purposes . The U.S. military is expanding and consuming more than ever before .
 Rapid industrialization and other development projects may deplete scarce resources, but also degrade the environment, undermining further growth . The environment is threatened by rapid industrialization projects .
 Poor health and nutrition standards render populations less productive economically, particularly since they often lack education and skills essential to economic development . Poor health, nutrition standards make people less productive and less productive .
 Women play a decisive role in the economic and social development of capital-poor countries . Women play crucial role in economic, social development in capital poor countries .
 Analyzes the global arms trade in which Third World countries are so much a part . Third World is so much of a part in the arms trade that it is illegal in the world .
 U.N. efforts to manage global health and coping with disease . United Nations has been involved in the fight against global health .
 Commentary on health and infectious diseases in the world's poorest continent . World's poorest African continent is Africa's poorest country .
 Marxist analyses were dismissed too quickly as communist regimes collapsed at the end of the Cold War . Some say Marxist analysis was dismissed too soon as communist regime collapsed .
 Economic structuralists have said that the uneven distribution of capital in a few hands at the expense of the many would happen . To these scholars and practitioners, this is precisely what they have said would happen, they say . The uneven distribution in capital is what structuralists say would happen.
 Globalization is no more nor less than the 20thand 21st-century manifestation of continued exploitation, critics say . Globalization to these critics is no less than capital vs. labor or capital rich countries vs. the capital poor .
 A good place to start on economicstructuralist understandings of global capitalism in relation to the developing world . The world's economic structure is a key point of understanding of capitalism .
 Some experts argue that the current world economy is not negatively structured against less-developed countries because of the rise of information technologies and global shipping . The rise of transnational centers of production is also contributing to the growth of multinational corporations .
 Social justice would demand not only sustainable development and economies of scale but also more equitable distribution of wealth . Social justice demands more equitable production and wealth distribution of production .
 Capital-rich countries tend to have all of the following characteristics EXCEPT urbanized. possess economies of scale. likely to invest in high-technology sectors. . likely to avoid social welfare programs. . Likely to be less likely to be more likely to engage in the high-tech sector
 According to the authors,_ is not one of the underlying causes of most premature deaths in less-developed countries . lack of adequate health care malnutrition other environmental factors are other factors .
 According to the authors,_and_describe a large portion of the labor force in the developing world underworked, underpaid overtrained, underworked undereducated, poorly trained undernourished and poorly trained 6.7 million people .
 MNC production centers in less-developed countries are most likely to benefit from MNCs . Capital transfers, currency exchange risk and debt repayments are the most likely benefits of the centers .
 Capital, training, technology transfers, training and domestic consumption . Training, domestic consumption 10.5% of the world's top 10 countries .
 OPEC is an example of a MNC. preferential trade agreement between the U.S. and the Arab world . OPEC is a cartel of oil-producing countries designed to control the price of oil . OPEC offers loans at concessionary rates .
 Diseases can most dramatically affect an economy by causing the disability or death of workers . causing the loss of jobs due to disease burdens . causing productivity gains to be lessened due to decreased education . causing damage to the environment as disease control mechanisms are implemented . causing a decrease in productivity gains due
 The main prescription structuralists advocate is equitable distribution of production . decreasing barriers to entry for domestic competitions . decreasing the economic dependency of lessdeveloped countries. decreasing the role of Europe in global economic decision making. decreasing .
 Capitalist world-systems theorists are primarily interested in the existence of capitalism throughout the world . The global existence of ideologically driven development. further developing a capitalist world system. further .
 Differentiates among strains of liberalism that underlie definitions of human rights in the U.S. and other countries . Differentiate among diverse strains of liberal, individual and collective variants of liberalism, particularly individual .
 Evaluate the American perspective on human rights in relation to those of other societies and cultures . Evaluate U.S. view of human rights as a matter of concern in relation with other cultures .
 Identify universally understood values that transcend diverse cultures and thus provide a common moral or ethical foundation on which human rights rest . Identify the universally understood value that transcends diverse cultures, thus provide the common moral, ethical foundation for human rights .
 Describe the plight of refugees produced by wars, natural disasters, and other cataclysmic causes as well as what can be done to serve their best interests . Describe their plight as a refugee in the U.S.
 The fate of Ai Wei Wei is the fate of the talented Chinese artist who also provided the “bird’s nest” design for the stadium in Beijing used in the 2008 Olympic Games . I ndicative of the human rights challenge is that Ai Wei is still at risk
 His independence of thought, particularly his biting criticism of government officials for their corruption and mismanagement, led to forced shutdown of his widely followed blog, coupled with police assaults against him .
 Ai refused to submit to often arbitrary restrictions on his artistry by the same government and party officials . Ai also refused to comply with restrictions imposed by those in authority . Ai's work has been criticized for depicting Chinese people as downtrodden .
 The government destroyed his new art studio and put him under arrest, the latter on apparently trumped-up allegations of tax evasion . The governmental response was to destroy the studio and arrest the artist .
 China is cracking down on dissenters, labeled as dissidents . The crackdown stems from fears among Chinese elites that unless they are curbed, they might fuel a movement .
 He and other dissenters enjoy widespread support, particularly among Chinese intellectuals and many young professionals . Many young professionals support him .
 The regime’s reaction to any challenges seems always to crack down from the extreme of turning gunfire on dissidents in the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989 to detaining or imprisoning them . The regime has constrained access to Google and other browsers as well as Facebook, Twitter,
 Chinese officials act swiftly and take decisive action when they think conditions warrant . Chinese officials feel threatened by the potential for popular movements to challenge the regime's authority .
 The regime finally took action in 1999 to prohibit and disband the group . The regime reportedly subjected many of its members to human rights abuses . Many of the members of the group were subject to abuses .
 Western churches are prohibited from going outside of the international, “expatriate” community to seek converts or do any other organizational work deemed threatening to the regime . Western churches must not go outside of international community .
 The United States and other governments have used diplomatic and public channels to condemn the regime’s human rights conduct . Given this record, the U.S. and other countries have used .
 Economic and commercial interests of China’s trade and investment partners have kept these governments from pressing Beijing too strongly on these human rights violations . Much to the dismay of many human rights advocates, these governments have not pressed Beijing too strong on these violations .
 The pragmatism driven by governmental and commercial interests often trumps human rights advocacy . The U.S. government is often driven by commercial interests, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We live in a world of almost seven billion people, many of whom suffer from political oppression, social discrimination, poverty, starvation or malnutrition, disease, and early death .
 Freedom from want is an elusive goal in much of the world, where poverty is the norm . Life expectancy is much lower than in highincome countries, and infant mortality is still very high .
 Insecurity reigns supreme, and there is relatively little prospect of eliminating the fact or fear of political and other abuses, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There are relatively little prospects of eliminating either the fact of the fact, or fear, of abuses"
 Many human rights advocates lament how President Franklin Roosevelt’s ‘four freedoms’ are so unattainable for most of the world . The four freedoms include freedom of speech and expression, freedom of religion, freedom from want and freedom from fear .
 We approach the subject of human rights in this chapter by examining how rights or values can be considered universal and not just representations of particular cultural or national preferences . We examine how rights are considered universal, not only representations of cultural and national preferences, but also universal values .
 It is important for Americans to understand the lack of universal agreement on which rights or whose rights ought to be protected . In this regard, it is important to Americans (or the nationals of any country) to understand this .
 We examine the problem of refugees not simply in terms of human rights but also as a potentially destabilizing element in international relations and world politics . We also examine the issue of refugees as a potential destabilizing factor in international politics .
 Victimization of other human beings is at the core of human rights concerns high on the global-governance agenda . Victimization is a key human rights concern in the world's most populous countries .
 A belief in certain inalienable human rights is at the core of our understanding of the human condition, says the author of the book "Human Rights Now"
 Compare and contrast differences in reiigion and cuiture to diverse understandings of human rights and the human condition across the giobe . Unfortunately, universal differences in religion and religion are not universal .
 Refugees may flee or be forced to leave a country, or they may be internally displaced persons within their own state . Principles like respecting life, treating others with dignity, and affording others justice or fairness are interpreted across societies through different cultural lenses .
 The human condition is beset by widespread abuses related to intercommunal strife, politically oppressive regimes, and deeply set prejudices within and across different societies and cultures . As a result of these abuses, the human condition has been beseted by abuses .
 We focus in this section on some of these circumstances that produce widespread human rights violations . We focus on these circumstances . The situation is described as a human rights violation .
 South African apartheid or racial-separation policies were implemented by white-minority governments against the black majority population until the 1990s . The policies were imposed by South African governments until the 1980s .
 Suppression of a majority by a small, powerful minority made the South African case particularly egregious . The case was particularly egregious in South Africa, writes CNN.
 Racial, national, and ethnic prejudices often result in oppression of minority populations . Much more common in various countries, however, are racial and national prejudices that lead to oppression .
 Europe, Japan, and North America offer evidence of discriminatory practices on racial or ethnic lines . Europe and Japan also offer considerable evidence of discrimination .
 Legalized, racially based slavery in the U.S. lasted until President Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 . The Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, passed in 1865, prohibited the practice .
 Legalized racial segregation continued until Supreme Court rulings beginning in 1954 and passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1965 . Segregation was legalized until passage of Supreme Court ruling in 1954 .
 There is still substantial evidence of continuing racial discrimination in various forms . Despite considerable progress toward equal rights, there is still significant evidence of discrimination .
 Some societies value free expression and religious choice, but others do not . Some countries value free speech, religious choice . Others value freedom of expression .
 These incidents gained worldwide attention not just as localized atrocities but also because they are indicative of a pattern of intercommunal violence throughout the world . These incidents were not only as localized but also as indicative of an ongoing pattern of violence .
 Massive numbers of migrant populations have swelled the ranks of other refugees . Most are seeking asylum or protection from various forms of political oppression throughout the world .
 Growing numbers challenge even those countries historically sympathetic to the plight of those in need of aid .
 Widespread national and ethnic strife in Africa, the Balkans, the Persian Gulf, the Transcaucasus, South and Southeast Asia, and the Caribbean have produced literally millions of displaced persons . Millions have been forced, or who have fled, from their home areas .
 In sub-Saharan Africa alone, the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees has counted more than six million displaced persons . More than 10 percent of the region's population is displaced .
 Large-scale immigration pressures typically are balanced by governments that also are concerned about the impact of immigration on the welfare of their own citizens . Governments that also want to balance immigration pressures on their citizens .
 The United States certainly has grappled with this issue, given pressures from populations fleeing regimes in Cuba, Haiti, and other locations in Central America and the Caribbean . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in Haiti and Cuba .
 There are large numbers of employment-driven migrations from Mexico, many of them illegal . In addition, there is also a large number of illegal immigrants from Mexico .
 The term gender discrimination hardly captures the nature of existence for the vast majority of women in the developing world . Culture, laws, and religion not only deprive women of basic human rights but relegate them to almost subhuman status .
 In parts of Latin America, Asia, and Africa, women suffer from endless discrimination that begins even before birth . Forced abortions of female fetuses in some countries are forced to be carried out in some cases .
 Infanticide, the practice of killing newborn girls, is a common rural phenomenon in India and China . Infantide is a practice that kills newborn girls in rural areas of the country .
 Government policies that limit overall family size have had the unintended consequence of encouraging resort to female abortion and infanticide in these circumstances . Government policies have had an unintended consequence, according to the Government .
 As difficult as life may be for the vast majority of humanity, it is even more trying for women and girls . They have led gender discrimination ■ placing people at a disadvantage on the grounds of their sex or their masculine or feminine identity .
 One of every eighteen women in South Asia dies of a pregnancyrelated cause . In South Asia, one of every 18 women dies of pregnancy related causes .
 In Nepal and Bangladesh, one in every five girls dies before age five . One in five girls in Nepal, Bangladesh, die before age 5 . In Bangladesh and Nepal, 1 in every 5 girls in both countries are under five .
 In India, 25 percent of the twelve million girls born each year die by age fifteen . Approximately 25 percent die by the age of 15 . The death toll is 25 percent .
 Improvement in the lot of women and girls in much of the developing world cannot be legislated by U.N. declarations . Improvement cannot be simply legislated .
 The obstacles to overcome are political, social, economic, and cultural and must occur in the context of male-dominated societies, which hold traditional views of the role of women . The obstacles must be overcome, including political, economic and cultural .
 As children, girls were fed less than their brothers, often only table scraps . Girls are fed less often than brothers . Girls were fed more often than their siblings .
 Girls also are provided with less medical care and are less likely to be taken to a hospital for treatment compared to boys . Girls are also provided with more medical care than boys .
 Women are denied educational opportunities afforded to boys and men, the largest obstacle to advancement of women . They are often denied educational opportunity afforded to men and boys, the biggest obstacle .
 Throughout the developing world, even if girls are allowed to attend school, they are often withdrawn sooner than boys so they can carry water, work in the fields, raise younger siblings, and do other domestic chores .
 In Pakistan, where schools are segregated by sex, only one-third are for women . One-third of those schools have no building, and one third of those have no .
 There has also been a recent rise of Islamic fundamentalism in Pakistan . This is in part due to the spillover effect of the Taliban regime that ruled Afghanistan for years .
 Many mullahs have increased in power and preach against any developments meant to improve the status and condition of females . The mullahs preach against such developments .
 Deeply rooted cultural values or prejudices are, of course, not easily changed, even when laws are passed to condemn such practices . "Deeply rooted" cultural values are, for example, are not easily easily changed .
 In some cases, laws have been passed that actively discriminate against women . In some of the world's most restrictive laws, women's rights have been outlawed .
 In India, a woman’s identity is so intertwined with that of her husband that if she should outlive him, she is often treated as a nonentity . If she survives her husband, she will be treated as an 'nonentity'
 In some parts of the country, women are forced to marry the dead husband’s brother so that property stays in the family . The dead husband's brother is the brother of the deceased .
 Women have not achieved equality of opportunity or position in the workplace or in other aspects of social life even in advanced countries . Women also have not reached equality of opportunities or position .
 Women are increasingly rising to higher positions in economic, political and social life . The numbers reaching the highest positions in industry and government are still relatively small .
 UN-sponsored conferences are part of an effort to publicize the problems facing women around the globe . UN conferences are held around the world to highlight the issues facing women .
 One held in Beijing, China, in September 1995 aimed to develop a worldwide strategy to advance the situation of women . One of the world's largest conferences was held in 1995 .
 Non-Government Organizations Forum on Women attracted 35,000 participants, 2,000 organizations, and 4,000 journalists . Parallel to this official conference was a non-government organizations forum on Women .
 This gave the forum perhaps even more press coverage than the official conference received . The forum was attended by members of the U.S. Senate, the Senate, and the Senate .
 As diplomats, other government officials, representatives of international and nongovernmental organizations, have to deal with difficult, controversial issues on human rights agendas . Practitioners must also deal with controversial issues such as human rights issues on their own .
 We present them in as balanced a way as we can, identifying points of consensus, but also where substantial differences remain within the human rights discourse . Rather than sidestep them, we present them here in a balanced way .
 No one challenges genocide or mass murder of a people as a legitimate human rights issue . Virtually no one challenges mass murder as a human rights problem .
 'We underscore, however, that assaults on sexuality ' are not acceptable' See www.gendercide.org.
 The violence discussed in the text that follows is a global matter that poses pressing human rights challenges . Practitioners in international relations and world politics need to understand the issue .
 Female genital mutilation or cutting is a severely damaging ritual often referred to euphemistically as “female circumcision . It is widely practiced, particularly in parts of Africa .
 The euphemism is intended by some to make the practice seem less severe than it actually is . It is a euphemism by some people to make it appear less severe .
 Such actions constitute an assault on a woman’s sexuality, notwithstanding claims to religious grounds for doing so, says the author of the book .
 Most outside observers see the practice as part of a larger cultural frame—the subordination of women in certain male-dominant societies . The practice is often represented as a measure to protect women from predatory men .
 To ensure gender neutrality in this discussion, we also mention practices that affect men or boys . The discussion is gender neutral .
 Human rights advocates are divided on the legitimacy of male circumcision . Male circumcision has much greater acceptance on both religious and cultural grounds . It is, in any event, far less severe than female genital mutilation .
 Those challenging the practice on human rights grounds cite UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and other human rights treaties . They rest their argument primarily on their opposition to any involuntary alteration of a person’s natural physiology .
 FGM is not as commonplace in advanced industrial and postindustrial, high-income societies . Trafficking of girls and women for prostitution or labor-intensive work in slave-like conditions does occur in lower-income countries .
 Trafficking of boys and men also occurs worldwide, but in much smaller numbers . Trafficking is also a problem worldwide, with smaller numbers of trafficked boys .
 Other human rights challenges include discrimination or harm done to people for reasons of their sexual orientation or identity .
 A global trend in recent years, particularly in high-income countries, is the establishment of norms (and passage of laws) mandating acceptance of people regardless of sexual orientation or identity .
 Long-standing prejudices against same-sex relationships in both high and low-income countries remain in place .
 Advocacy groups have made some progress on their agendas, as covered by mainstream media . Advocacy organizations have made progress on some of their agendas .
 In the United States, some states now allow same-sex marriages, others civil unions . In the U.S., some states allow civil unions, others allow civil union partnerships .
 The U.S. military is now integrating openly serving homosexuals and bisexuals, no longer excluding them from military service . This is also commonplace in most European military establishments . The United States military is integrating openly .
 Those who claim a woman’s right to choose to abort a pregnancy with access to medical care and those who claim the unborn has a right to life . Those who say a woman's right to terminate her pregnancy with medical care are those who say the unborn is a human right to
 It is an issue discussed extensively in the UN Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women .
 Roe Wade , provides a woman a legal right to choose, but this has not ended the controversy . Roe Wade provides a legal decision to allow a woman to have a choice .
 Many emphasize that the decision is an extraordinarily difficult one as the woman facing this choice seeks to balance her rights to life, dignity, and justice with concerns she may have for the fetus she carries .
 Even in these circumstance, some very strongly oppose any willful termination of life . Even in this case, some strongly oppose such a willful termination .
 We leave this important human rights question for discussion and debate with others . We leave it for discussion .
 Differentiate among diverse strains of liberaiism that underlie definitions of (and commitments to) human rights in the United States and other countries . Differentiate between human rights and state-sovereignty .
 International or transnational actions in support of human rights often challenge or violate state sovereignty . Indeed, transnational . actions . often directly challenge . or violate . state sovereignty. Human rights activists say .
 NATO’s use of force in 1998 and 1999 against Serbia over Serbian actions in Kosovo seemed to violate state sovereignty . Kosovo was recognized by most states as being a province of Serbia, which still referred to itself as the Yugoslav Republic . For example, NATO used force against Serbia in 1998
 Still, injustices offend the human conscience and cry out for corrective action . Still, injustice still cries out for action, but it's still human .
 UN Security Council authorized intervention in Libya in 2011 to impose a no-fly zone and other actions deemed necessary to protect the civilian population there . The Libyan crisis was the result of the UN's understanding that led to the intervention .
 Libyans who oppose the regime facing the prospect of further military attacks by forces under the government’s command in Tripoli . The possibility that this could spill over borders with Tunisia in the west and Egypt in the east is also a concern .
 UN Security Council can use key phrase to authorize intervention in what otherwise would be a purely domestic matter . If this were so, the matter was not just a human rights question, but also one that “endangered international peace and security” – the key phrase the UN can use
 Of course, not everyone agrees with this more liberal position on the use of force under UN auspices, least of all the leaderships .
 It is an understatement to say that there is no consensus on the answers to these questions . It's an understatement, it is not clear whether there is a consensus on these questions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A traditional response is that sovereign states have an exclusive right to address such questions within their own jurisdictions . The traditional response to such questions is that the sovereign state has a right to answer such questions .
 Others argue universal norms (some of which now are part of international law) apply across national borders . As noted above, others argue that universal norms apply across international borders .
 The existence of human rights from this perspective concerns international or global society as a whole, not just an internal matter for particular states to manage or handle . Human rights are not just internal matters for states, but they are a matter of international society as whole, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 We may be more likely to address human rights or questions of justice in global terms if we see the world as composed of individuals (or tribes, classes, or other groups of people) rather than of states .
 If we adopt a more abstract, state-centric view, we may see demands for justice and respect for human rights in other countries as unwarranted intrusions into their domestic affairs . By contrast, if we adopt an abstract view, it may be unwarranted intrusion into other countries' domestic
 Efforts have been made to define human rights in formal terms, as in the UN Declaration of Human Rights and in the documents of such regional organizations as the Council of Europe .
 The degree of emphasis on human rights in U.S. foreign policy has varied from one governmental administration to another and even within administrations .
 The U.S. approach has been criticized because of its distinctly American point of view . Regardless of the degree of emphasis, the United States approach has often been criticized .
 The American focus on individual rights tends to overlook communitarian, group, or class rights that occupy a more prominent place in other political cultures . American focus is deeply embedded in its classical liberal tradition .
 Americans tend to place more weight on liberty and its relation to order than in other countries . Americans place more emphasis on liberty than on egalitarian and socioeconomic issues emphasized in other nations .
 American foreign policy pronouncements on human rights that project an individually oriented, libertarian focus are sometimes taken as yet another imposition of American values on others . Notwithstanding what may be the best of intentions, U.S. foreign policy .
 Hartz notes that the United States lacked any direct experience with feudalism and its hierarchic authority structure . Hartz: The United States, unlike Europe, lacked direct experience of feudalism .
 European medieval society was dominated by an aristocracy with antidemocratic values . Medieval society dominated by a aristocracy with anti-democratic values . European medieval societies were dominated by aristocracy .
 The term liberal as used by Hartz in its classic meaning should not be confused with contemporary American political usage that places liberals and conservatives into opposing categories . Hartz's classic meaning of the term liberal is not to be confused .
 Social liberals and conservatives differ on many political issues, but share a belief in individualism . They share a commitment to individuals as human beings worthy of regard in themselves, not just as part of larger groups .
 Individualism built further on notions of equality among individuals . However, this egalitarianism would not readily support a redistribution of property or other socialist design .
 Alexis de Tocqueville, an early-19th-century Erench observer of the American scene, commented how the egalitarian spirit in the United States existed among individuals who were part of a very individualistic society .
 Because the U.S. had not experienced feudalism in its national history, the country lacked even vestiges of aristocratic titles and deference to authorities .
 Eeudalism had long since given way to preindustrial market capitalism in Europe . But many of the class inequalities of feudalism had survived into the modern era .
 To many Americans of Tocqueville’s time, government was a necessary evil at best . To many of the Americans of the time, it was the government of the day .
 In the America that Tocqueville observed, it was the “people” who were “the real directing power.” In the U.S. it was not society as a whole but individual “citizens”
 First English translations were published in 1835 and 1840, accompanied by introductions written by John Stuart Mill . The first English translations of the works were published by the English liberal and political philosopher Mill .
 Louis Hartz draws directly from Tocqueville’s observations of early American society . Hartz's thesis is based on the observations of the American society in the early 1800s . The thesis will be published in 2015 .
 Montesquieu developed the idea of separation of powers in his Spirit of the Laws . Following the late Greek historian Polybius he developed the concept of separation .
 The idea was adopted in the United States Constitution as a means of keeping the central government from growing too strong at the expense of the governed . This idea was used in the U.S. Constitution to keep government from becoming too strong .
 Human rights were to be conserved by restricting government’s size and involvement in the private affairs of individual citizens . Government's size was to be limited by limiting government's involvement in individual citizens' affairs .
 Locke advocated an important but relatively minimal role for government at the service of individuals, primarily the protection of their lives, liberties, and property . Locke advocated a relatively minimal but relatively small government role for individuals . Locke: Government should only be in charge of protecting individuals' lives and liberties .
 The United States Constitution explicitly prohibits government infringing on individual rights . Citizens grant their consent to be governed and do not delegate all their rights to government .
 Isaiah Berlin and other political writers have called this a “negative” construction of libertarian rights . Isaiah Berlin has called it a ‘negative’ construction,’ according to Berlin .
 Liberties are negatively maintained by constraining government rather than by empowering it in some positive way to serve individual rights . Liberties should be maintained in a positive way of serving individual rights, the author says .
 The framers of the U.S. Constitution understood that this liberal philosophy of governmental laissez-faire offered the most consistent and effective means of protecting individual liberty . This liberal philosophy offered the best way to protect individual liberty, the author says .
 In the course of its history, American government in practice would depart from this strict laissez-faire philosophy, particularly in the twentieth century . The U.S. government would depart .
 Even the meaning of the term liberal in its American context took on a more positive orientation toward governmental action for social and economic purposes . The term liberal is liberal in the American context .
 American conservatives have articulated greater skepticism toward government activism . Conservatives prefer laissez-faire, preferring to underscore their preference for laissezerfaire .
 The key point is that what survived alongside new and expanded governmental attention to social and economic issues was a tendency for Americans to see and deal with human rights in individualist terms .
 American social liberals and social conservatives have differed on the means by which individuals are to be served and the role government is to play in this regard . Both groups have retained their classical liberal focus on individuals .
 Laws passed since the 1930s have the government do such things for individuals as guarantee a minimum wage, provide for a safer workplace, give unemployment and disability compensation, establish retirement pensions, offer job training, make higher-education loans and grants .
 Keeping the state at bay, opposing tax increases needed to fund programs— “starving the beast ”— is a present-day echo of this 18th-and-19th-century preference for a minimal state . Opponents of tax increases need to be kept at bay
 Reforms are an expansion of the welfare state that date in the United States from the Roosevelt New Deal era in the 1930s . Reforms have long been challenged by social conservatives, including social conservatives . The welfare state has been expanded since the New Deal .
 Social security is part of the expanded state social conservatives want to reduce, if not dismantle . Social security, unemployment insurance, medical care, collective bargaining, government assistance to diverse groups such as farmers and students .
 Advocates of one position or another do not always realize that the threads they are making on their spinning wheels will, in time, become part of a larger cloth . Advocates often don't realize that they are creating threads that will become larger than they imagined .
 Anglo-American tradition historically placed more emphasis on individual rights and liberties . We examine in this discussion two strands of liberal thought . The more libertarian position is a libertarian position .
 Following the French Revolution, the continental tradition has included more in the way of socioeconomic rights, not just for individuals, but also for groups or classes of people . The continental tradition includes more socioeconomic rights for individuals .
 Modernday understandings of human rights are built upon these two traditions in liberal thought . The emphasis each receives varies substantially among human rights advocates . Moderndays understandings are built on these two ideas .
 Fluman rights advocacy should focus on individual rights and liberties . This more libertarian view holds that rights apply to individuals as free agents . Flumum rights advocate says rights should be based on individual liberties .
 Groups are merely a band of individuals who find value in joining with others, but all are still individuals . Groups are just individuals, and groups are merely bands of individuals, not groups .
 The English tradition on civil rights and liberties begins with Magna Carta . The king granted barons and clergymen as individuals a free church, rights to trial, habeas corpus, due process of law, and equitable punishment for offenses .
 Individual rights form the bedrock of Anglo-American law to the present day . Individual rights are the basis for Anglo-U.S. law in the United States . These individual rights are now a bedrock of American law .
 Fluman rights include rights to include concerns with equality not just on an individual, but also on a collective basis . This is a more communitarian and egalitarian French revolutionary tradition on human rights .
 Rousseau's Social Contract says human beings enjoy rights in society subject to the general will . Rousseau not only bound equality to liberty, but in his Social Contract, he underscored that human being enjoy rights . The interest they hold in common is their common interest .
 The French revolutionary slogan ""liberte, egalite, fraternite "" captures the idea that individual rights are integral to —part of—society in which individuals reside . Individual rights should be integral to the community or society that individuals live in .
 Fluman rights are social constructions -- a synthesis of sometimes competing strands that, over time, blend into a larger fabric . Flumum rights are, after all, social constructsions, are social constructs .
 The Universal Declaration of Fiuman Rights was led by UN Ambassador Eleanor Roosevelt . Both the individuai or libertarian and the communitarian understandings of rights were at play in framing the Universal Declaration .
 The wording of the declaration puts greater emphasis on individual rights . Given the position of the United States at the time, the U.S. was the principal advocate of this declaration .
 Do an internet search on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and note the emphasis on individual rights . Do a search for the Declaration of Rights in the U.S. on the internet .
 With few exceptions (e.g., group rights for Native Americans or the right of organized labor to bargain collectively), Americans have been much less comfortable with recognizing rights on a group or class basis .
 Even collective bargaining by labor unions was understood as a tactical means for representing individual worker interests . Groups of individuals were understood as being more effective than individuals standing alone in disputes with managers or owners of firms .
 Arguments in favor of socioeconomic rights for large groups, classes, or society as a whole have enjoyed far less support in American thinking and practice . Arguments for individual political rights and liberties are less popular in America than those for individual liberties . The U.S. has a long history
 Even though the doctrine of eminent domain allows public need to supersede individual property rights, the law upholds individual rights at the same time with specific provisions to assure just compensation .
 No individuals are supposed to receive more favorable or unfair treatment compared to anyone else . Such property is also to be taken in a nondiscriminatory way . Property is also not supposed to be treated in a manner that is fair .
 Americans (whether social liberals or conservatives) tend to view human rights through these individualist and classical liberal lenses . Americans tend to focus more on individual rather than collective rights and liberties . It should not be surprising, therefore, that conservatives tend to see human rights as individual rights .
 There is a lack of consensus on whose rights and what rights are bases for legitimate claims in different cultures . In fact, when we examine the issue as it . is addressed in . different cultures, we find that there are no consensus on who is entitled to what rights should be .
 States claim to be sovereign with rights to exercise complete jurisdiction over their domestic affairs and to be independent or autonomous in the conduct of their foreign affairs . States claim they are sovereign and have the right to exercise full jurisdiction over domestic affairs .
 The existence of rights belonging to the world’s population is a claim quite different from the liberal idea that rights are primarily an individual matter . Human civilization or humankind (to include generations not yet born) is different from liberal idea of individual rights .
 There are no consensus across societies and cultures on this question of whose rights are to take priority when they conflict . Unfortunately there is no consensus on this issue across cultures and cultures .
 Cross-cultural disagreement exists even on what rights are to be considered human rights . Cross cultural disagreement also exists on what human rights should be human rights in the world .
 Americans often fault foreign governments for failure to provide equal rights . Evaluate the American perspective on human rights in relation to those of other societies and cultures .
 This is particularly troublesome for Americans who are traveling abroad . They may not have the same rights to a fair and speedy trial as at home .
 A celebrated case in which Singapore administered severe corporal punishment by caning an American youth who was found guilty of vandalism is by no means unique . Singapore's case is not the first of its kind .
 In any given year, more than 2,500 Americans are incarcerated abroad for crimes or alleged crimes, often involving drug use or trade . In any year, over 2,000 Americans are in prison for crimes .
 Complaints concerning abuses of rights claimed by U.S. citizens in custody abroad are commonplace . Complaints of abuses by these American citizens are commonplace, according to CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Consular officials stationed abroad must rely on persuasion to extricate Americans unjustly implicated or mistreated . The State Department’s Bureau of Consular Affairs monitors the issue .
 The host government and local authorities claim complete jurisdiction or sovereign authority over the acts of individuals committed on their own territory, regardless of the citizenship of these alleged offenders or convicted felons . Host governments claim complete . authority .
 This American focus on legal and political rights (especially relating to life, liberty, and property) is by no means universally shared . It puts much less emphasis on claims to social, cultural, and economic rights, but that is not universal .
 For citizens merely to be equal before the law is considered in many other cultures to be too narrow and a rather abstract construction of human rights . In many cultures, this is considered too narrow .
 If they have human rights sensitivity at all, human welfare or social security may be more highly valued . Social security or human welfare may also be highly valued, say experts . If they are sensitive to human rights, they may be even more sensitive .
 From this perspective, ignoring or doing little about conditions that promote disease, hunger, and high mortality rates are understood as human rights violations of greater consequence than the more abstract legal and political rights .
 This priority stands apart from whether rights are understood in individual terms or as applying to tribes, classes, or other groups in a given society . This priority is not only for individual rights, but for groups in society .
 It is sometimes tempting to adopt a moral or cultural relativism and assert that rights or any other values can't be understood only within their separate cultural contexts . It is also tempting to say rights or values can only be understood within their cultural context .
 Cultural relativists reject claims to human rights as universal, arguing that such universal claims are artificial constructions . They reject claims that human rights are universal as they are not universal .
 It is not hard to show that different cultures (and subcultures within a given society) have different ways of thinking about and doing things . Different cultures have different ideas about how to think about and do things, says author .
 Time of day and the size and content of different meals considered appropriate varies across cultures and subcultures . For example, the size of a meal considered appropriate can vary across cultures .
 Flow one eats—with one’s hands, with chopsticks, or with fork, knife, and spoon—is also quite variable . Flow is also variable, with one's hands, hands, chopsticks or with forks, knife and spoon .
 Even though there may be a correct way to act in a particular cultural context, we usually do not understand the values associated with manners or customs as having moral content . We usually don't understand manners as moral content, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 Other values in a particular cultural context may be part of its moral code . Other values may be in a culture's moral code, such as tolerance and tolerance .
 Respecting the elderly may be seen as a moral obligation in some cultures but not in others . respecting the elderly as a group or as individuals may not be seen a moral duty in some countries . respect for the elderly is not seen as an obligation in others, at least not to the
 Providing for some minimum level of living may be understood in moral terms as social responsibility in some cultures . Others prefer to hold individuals primarily responsible to provide for themselves . Providing a minimum of living is seen as a moral responsibility .
 Exploitation of child labor is widespread, particularly in low-income countries . Child labor is illegal in many countries, such as India and China . The U.S. government says it will not tolerate child labor .
 Many societies hold governments responsible for assuring at least a basic level of living and welfare for their people . This is not a universally held view, but this is not always universally held .
 In American society, there may be a higher value placed on equality of opportunity rather than on fairness of socioeconomic outcomes . In U.S. society, for example, it may be higher value of opportunity than fairness of outcomes .
 Many who are well off may not feel there is any individual or societal obligation to assist those who are not . Americans disagree among themselves on such matters, but many feel it is an obligation to help those who aren't .
 This perspective views charity as properly a voluntary effort undertaken primarily by individuals, not by governments . Charity is voluntary effort done by individuals not governments .
 Value is often placed on the marketplace as the best mechanism for allocating goods and services . Value is challenged, of course, by Americans with greater social-liberal commitments .
 The American approach to such matters differs from that of most other advanced industrial countries, which expect a larger government role in assuring a greater degree of socioeconomic welfare . Lessdeveloped countries have social security systems based on tribal or clan loyalties .
 The more laissez-faire perspective still prevalent in the U.S. is not in any way typical of the rest of the world, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Students of philosophy observe that if we really believe in a strict cultural relativism, values and rights are only to be defined by separate cultures and can have no independent standing of their own . We are saying, in effect, that there is no such thing as morality or ethics, they say
 One significant problem with moral or cultural relativism is that it gives us no universal basis for condemning atrocities and such human tragedies as the Holocaust as a tragedy . The Holocaust was the Holocaust, and the Holocaust was a human tragedy .
 Just because eliminating the Jews as a people may have been considered legitimate within a Nazi political subculture, this belief did not make it right . Just because eliminated the Jews was considered legitimate in a Nazi subculture didn't make it wrong .
 Even if we have difficulty agreeing on many other values, genocide is so offensive to the human spirit that it is condemned as mass murder on universal, not just on cultural grounds . Genocide is condemned on universal grounds, not on cultural, grounds, as such as cultural .
 Any rational human being, regardless of cultural origin, would understand the immorality of such atrocities . Any rational person would understand such atrocities such as this atrocity, he says .
 Islam, Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism, and other religions do not just limit themselves to their followers but frequently also make universally applicable moral claims .
 As a practical matter, rejection of religion by some and the absence of theological consensus even among the followers of various religious groups prevent us from using particular religions as the solitary bases for common, worldwide acceptance of human rights .
 Many writers have tried to identify secular or nonreligious bases for their universalist positions . Instead, many writers have been trying to find a secular basis for their positions .
 Aristotle identified certain virtues exhibited by virtuous persons we might emulate . Aristotle identified these virtues as virtues exhibited in virtuous persons . The virtues of virtuous persons can be traced back to Aristotle .
 Immanuel Kant identified what he called categorical imperatives, or absolute obligations . Kant argued that dutyoriented ethics had applicability to all reasoning human beings, regardless of cultural differences .
 Kantian ethics are said to be deontological, meaning reflective of the human understandings we have of the world around us . Because these understandings of ethical universals come from within ourselves as human beings, they are known through the human reason with which we are endowed .
 Kant said that we should follow only those maxims that we would be willing to make into universal laws . Kant's maxims should be only those that he would make universal laws, Kant said .
 Human beings would not want to legitimize murder, lying, stealing, or other forms of dishonesty by making them into universal “laws” or maxims to guide human conduct . Regardless of cultural or religious identity, rational human beings wouldn’t want them legitimized murder
 Even though human beings engage in such activities, they cannot be considered right by rational human beings in any cultural context . Even though such activities are not right, they are not considered right in any culture context .
 In short, a difference is recognized between how human beings should act and how they do act . In the U.S. it is recognized as a difference between human beings and what they do .
 Kant understood as universal the obligation to treat human beings as ends worthy in themselves, not just as means to other ends . Kant also understood that human beings should be treated as ends of themselves, rather than just ends of others .
 From the Kantian perspective, this categorical imperative is also universally binding as a moral or ethical guide to behavior . Even though it too is often violated, it is also binding to behavior, even though it also violated .
 "Even though the actual conduct of human beings deviates from these norms or maxims, they are not any less morally binding," says the author . "They are not morally binding. They are not necessarily morally binding."
 According to Kant, human beings have a duty to follow those ethical principles that are discoverable through their rational faculties . Kant says that human beings must follow those principles that can be discoverable by their own rational faculties.
 Kant was not the only writer to provide a secular basis for universal norms of right conduct . Kant was also a writer who provided the secular basis of universal norms for human conduct .
 Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill argued that we should act in accordance with the maxim of assuring the greatest good for the greatest number . The 19th-century English utilitarians argued that .
 Utilitarians take this abstract principle and apply it to a wide range of human circumstances, including a defense of liberty and other human rights as representing the greatest good for the greatest number . Utilitaries apply this principle to a variety of human situations, including the defense of freedom and other
 The 17th-century English writer John Locke reasoned that human beings have certain natural rights to life, liberty, and property, which they surrender only as part of a social contract . Locke: Human beings only surrender these rights only to be part of the social contract, and only to surrender
 The citizenry or people who empower governments in the first place must therefore limit the authority of governments to abridge them . Citizens must therefore strictly limit the power of governments in abridgeing them .
 Governments are created in part to guarantee certain civil rights, which are those entitlements that individuals have as members of societies to which they belong . In fact, governments are created part of the guarantee of civil rights in order to protect society .
 Locke and Jefferson clearly put particular emphasis on individual liberties . Another social-contract theorist, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, placed relatively greater emphasis on equality .
 Rousseau found fault with division of property among individuals, believing it to be the source of much that is wrong in society . Rousseau's "Discourse on the Origin of Inequality" was published in 18th century .
 That “the fruits of the earth belong to all and the earth to no one” is at once egalitarian and communitarian, a universalist moral . That ‘the fruits’ belong to . all and ‘no one’s to all’ is at
 Rousseau’s thoughts on such matters are more complex, of course, than merely providing an endorsement of liberty and equality . Rousseau wrote that Rousseau's thoughts on these matters were more complex than merely provide an endorsement .
 He saw human beings as part of a larger community or society in which decisions are to serve the general will or interest of society as a whole, rather than the particular wills of certain individuals .
 Some human rights advocates in Europe and elsewhere have been influenced by this mode of thought . The important point of this discussion is that some human rights activists are influenced by the mode of thinking .
 They have tended to offer a vision of a just world society based on egalitarian and communitarian values than is present in the more individualist, Lockean mode of thought .
 John Rawls, a late-20th-century theorist in the social-contract tradition, comes closer to Rousseau in his focus on equity or fairness we would expect in a just society . Rawls focuses on equity, fairness, fairness in the equity or fairness of a just
 This lack of consensus on human rights underlies the global debate on what commitments and obligations we have to fellow human beings throughout the world . It is how we are to understand rights and values, and what we should do about them .
 Disagreement on what and whose human rights ought to be recognized hinders the construction of a just world society . English, French, and American theories of rights developed in the 17th and 18th centuries .
 The trials of accused Nazi war criminals in Nuremberg, Germany, are the best known and most significant early international efforts to deal with crimes against humanity . The trials were held in Germany in the aftermath of World War II .
 Suu Kyi met with U.S. secretary of state Hillary Clinton in November 2011 . She met with her country's leader during a thaw in relations with the outside world .
 The idea of agreeing on principles of human rights and then declaring them as binding obligations is also consistent with a positivist view . It is consistent with the idea of declaring human rights are binding obligations .
 From this perspective, whether or not rights exist as part of human nature, their existence as civil rights can be declared as a positive act . The U.S. Supreme Court has declared that civil rights are civil rights in the United States as a matter of principle .
 When states ratify treaties to this effect, human rights become binding as part of international law . Human rights are binding in international law when ratified by states, such as Germany .
 The idea of constraining government authority by the positive assertion of rights is contained in the English Magna Carta . The English nobility set limits on their own monarch .
 The English civil war of the 1640s was followed by a period of turmoil that resulted in the restoration of a constitutional monarchy in 1688 . Parliament’s restoration of the constitutional monarchy was proclaimed an English Bill of Rights in 1689 .
 The American understanding of rights was profoundly influenced by the British experience in general and English and Scottish writers, in particular .
 The Declaration of Independence and the addition of a Bill of Rights to those rights specified in the original draft of the U.S. Constitution underscored an American commitment to civil rights and liberties of individuals .
 The Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man was proclaimed in 1789 by the French revolutionary National Assembly . Following in this liberal tradition, the Universal Declaration was proclaimed by the National Assembly of France .
 The 18th-century English writer Thomas Paine provided an eloquent defense of the French position on human rights . Paine was widely read by Americans at the time .
 Paine justified French claims by expounding a theory of natural human rights . Paine defended French claims in a theory that human rights are natural rights .
 Paine provided justification for egalitarian and communitarian claims . Going beyond individual rights and liberties, Paine also provided justification to egalitarian claims .
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and subsequent efforts to codify human rights as treaty obligations owe much to a historical legacy of constitutional liberalism in which governments were constrained and citizen rights were declared .
 A bedrock of predominantly Anglo-American and French ideas has provided the foundation for the universal declaration and international conventions on human rights promulgated since 1945 . Because of their global influence in the 19th and 20th centuries, this bedrock of their ideas has been used in the creation of the universal
 These are part of a growing body of human rights principles, some of which have the binding character of international law . Some of the principles have been established in the UK .
 Many of these rights were specified in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, passed by the UN General Assembly in 1948 . Many of the rights were also specified in Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
 The declaration did not establish these specified rights in international law with the binding force of a treaty . The declaration was not established as a treaty, however .
 Some have argued that the declaration did not give formal recognition to rights as they have come to be accepted in practice and thus have become in effect part of customary international law . Some argue that rights have become part of international law as they come to an accepted practice .
 By vote of the United Nations General Assembly, sovereign states formally acknowledged the legitimacy of human rights as universal rights . Whatever the outcome of this argument among international lawyers, what is most important for our purposes in this chapter is that by vote of U.N. General Assembly .
 Ambassador Roosevelt joined with others seeking to legitimize the idea that rights exist independently of particular sovereign states and their respective societies . Ambassador Roosevelt .
 The declaration conformed more to Western preferences for individual, political rights in liberal tradition . It gave relatively less emphasis to communitarian and socioeconomic interpretations of human rights . Not surprisingly, given the dominant position of the United States .
 Pakistan illustrates the gap between a government's declared commitment to protecting the welfare of its children and its actual policies . Pakistan illustrates a gap between the declared commitment and the actual policies of its government .
 Some eleven to twelve million children work full-time, about half under the age of ten . About half of Pakistan's children are working full time, Human Rights Commission says .
 They are found in virtually every factory, workshop, and field in situations best characterized as indentured servitude . They are often found in factories, workshops and fields .
 UNICEF: Between 500,000 and one million Pakistani children between the ages of four and 14 work long hours as full-time carpet weavers . The children account for up to 90 percent of the workforce, according to the UN .
 Boys at this stage of development are at the peak of their dexterity and endurance, and they're wonderfully obedient . "They'd work around the clock if I asked them," says the author .
 The low cost of child labor allows Pakistan to undersell its foreign competitors that prohibit child labor . Pakistan's child labor rate is low compared to other countries that do not allow child labor.
 Pakistani human rights nongovernmental organization known as Bonded Labor Liberation Front has worked hard since its founding in 1988 against bonded and child labor . Some 30,000 adults and children have been liberated from brick kilns, carpet factories and farms .
 The plight of children in the developing world at times fails to receive the same amount of publicity that other human rights cases receive .
 Reference in later documents to ‘peoples’ indicated some acceptance that rights could be understood in terms of collectivities, not just individuals .
 A Permanent Court of International Justice was established under the League of Nations in 1922 at The Hague in the Netherlands . A permanent court of international justice was established at the The Hague .
 Legal accountability of individuals was left to the courts of individual states . Legal accountability is left to individual states, leaving legal accountability for individuals alone .
 Germany’s invasion of Poland in 1939 marked the de facto end of the PCIJ . The PCIJ was officially disbanded in 1946 .
 ICJ meets only those cases brought voluntarily by states agreeing to submit to its jurisdiction . ICJ also meets to hear only those brought voluntarily brought by states .
 The ICJ does not have jurisdiction in cases involving individuals, the ICJ’s jurisdiction thus fully respects the sovereignty of states, says the judge . Moreover, the court's jurisdiction does not extend to individuals .
 Even the Universal Declaration of Human Rights has been viewed with a certain degree of skepticism . Even the U.S. has been skeptical of the Declaration of Rights .
 It was easy to agree on high principles when the matter of enforcement was left unresolved . It's easy for the parties to agree that enforcement of the law is left unresolved, but it's not easy for enforcement to begin .
 Nowhere in the Declaration was it mandated that a member state had the right to intervene in another country’s affairs to stop human rights abuses . State sovereignty still ruled .
 Individual accountability for such crimes against the law of nations such as piracy on the high seas was established in international legal practice centuries ago . Individual accountability is a key part of international law and international law .
 It was left to the domestic courts of states to try pirates and other alleged offenders of the law of nations .
 We also may consider customary practice, writings of jurists, and general principles established in international law as additional sources .
 The Niirnberg Tribunal was given its authority in 1945 by the victorious “Big Four” allied powers or “united nations” of World War II . The United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and France had just defeated the German Reich .
 War crimes trials were also conducted in Tokyo under United States occupation authority over Japan . The trials were held under the U.S. occupation authority .
 The Nuremberg Tribunal dealt not only with war crimes, but also with two new crimes under international law . Crimes against peace (“planning, preparation, initiation or waging of a war of aggression”) and crimes against humanity (murder, extermination, enslavement)
 The concept of crimes against humanity was affirmed further when the General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in December 1948 . The Convention was adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1948 .
 After adjournment of the Nuremberg Tribunal, states reassumed first jurisdiction in such matters . But a precedent for international hearing of criminal cases involving individuals had been set . The tribunal was adjourned after the conclusion of the case .
 Calls for new international war crimes trials have occurred from time to time . Calls for such a trial have been made in the past .
 The statute establishing the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia was adopted by the UN Security Council in May 1993 . The tribunal was established in 1993 .
 Tribunal is independent body consisting of 16 judges, Office of the Prosecutor, and staff of more than 1,300 persons from eighty-three countries . The tribunal is an independent body of sixteen judges, a prosecutor, and a prosecutor .
 A UN investigative commission reported to the Security Council in 1994 its findings of “crimes against humanity” that “constitute genocide” in Bosnia . A UN panel reported its findings to the United Nations in 1994 . The UN panel found that the crimes against humanity “
 Human rights violations were committed by all sides, but the principal victims were Bosnian Muslims . Bosnian Muslim Muslims were among the main victims .
 The humiliation of women apparently was part of “a systematic rape” campaign . The campaign was designed to break up Muslim families and communities because of the shame rape victims would carry, especially in Muslim communal settings .
 Victimization of innocent rape victims by shunning, ostracizing, or holding them somehow responsible or guilty is common enough in many societies . Further victimization is common in society, but it's common enough to hold victims responsible or not guilty . Rape victims are often shunned, ostr
 Mass rape is a calculated tactic in the destruction of a people, however, is what makes mass rape part of an overall program of genocide . To use this vulnerability as a . calculated tactic is what is making mass rape a part of a . program of . genocide .
 In March 1998, the tribunal’s Office of the Prosecutor announced the extension of its jurisdiction over events also occurring during the armed conflict in Kosovo . The tribunal has jurisdiction also extended over events during the conflict .
 A major weakness of the tribunal was the fact that it had no constabulary to enforce its indictments . The tribunal had no constabulary to enforce its indictment .
 It had to rely on the voluntary cooperation of states, including the very governments whose officials it sought to prosecute . The U.S. government had to depend on voluntary cooperation from the very countries it wanted to prosecute.
 In effect, the tribunal had to rely on NATO forces to enforce its rulings . NATO forces had to enforce the rulings . The tribunal was forced to rely upon NATO forces .
 In the case of Bosnia, NATO forces were given the authorization, but not the responsibility, for apprehending indicted war criminals . NATO forces have been given the authority to apprehend war criminals in Bosnia . In Bosnia, the Bosnian war criminals were indicted .
 The June 1999 peace plan to end the war in Kosovo did not give NATO forces a mandate to arrest Slobodan Milosevic, the president of Serbia and an indicted war criminal . Significantly, the peace plan didn't give NATO a mandate for arrest of the president .
 Milosevic was eventually arrested, and his long, drawn-out trial began in February 2002 . The trial is expected to last for more than a decade .
 The tribunal gained the grudging respect even of its critics . Nevertheless, the tribunal gained some respect even from its critics.
 Milosevic died of a heart attack in 2006 before a verdict was delivered, much less sentencing . The former Yugoslavia leader was sentenced to life in prison .
 Those found guilty of crimes against humanity received sentences ranging between five and forty years of imprisonment . Those convicted receive sentences ranging from five to forty years in prison .
 Specifically listed offenses included widespread murder of civilians, torture, and mass rape . The list also includes widespread murder and torture .
 The first-ever sentencing for the crime of genocide by an international court occurred in 1998 . The first ever sentencing for genocide by the international court was in 1998.
 Two individuals, including the former prime minister of Rwanda, were sentenced to life sentences . Two individuals were given life sentences in the case of Rwanda .
 So-called “hybrid courts’ composed of local and international judges applied a mix of local law to cases in Kosovo, East Timor, and Sierra Leone .
 International Criminal Court with global jurisdiction for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity will be established in Rome in 1998 . The court will be able to bring in a treaty for signature and ratification of the treaty .
 Unlike the International Court of Justice, it is not an organ of the United Nations . Unlike the international court of justice, it's not a United Nations organ .
 The U.S. joined Israel and China in rejecting the new tribunal . Fearing that American soldiers and peacekeepers abroad could be brought before the court on politically motivated charges .
 President George W Bush informed the United Nations that the U.S. would not ratify the Treaty of Rome . The treaty of Rome raised questions about the court’s legitimacy, raising questions .
 U.S. policymakers in the Obama administration have supported use of the ICC, particularly for those committing war crimes, genocide, and other crimes against humanity . The United States was not a participant in the ICC in its first decade of work .
 Since its founding, the court has actively pursued cases in the Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sudan, Kenya, Libya, and Uganda .
 Regional Human Rights Efforts to build upon the base established by the Universal Declaration have continued within the United Nations . Efforts have continued to expand the scope of rights to include social, economic, and cultural concerns that go well beyond the liberal values of the Declaration .
 Further specification of rights by treaty has been achieved by states participating on regional bases in the Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . The European Union and the Organization of American States are participating .
 Regional efforts have made substantial progress in the human rights field . Some of these regional efforts have been successful in the past .
 Members of the Council of Europe are democratically oriented European states seeking to expand civil society and the rule of law . The Council of European states are democratically-oriented European states .
 The council adopted the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in 1950 . In 1950, the council adopted a European Convention on Human Rights .
 The council oversees the work of an executive agency (the European Commission on Human Rights) and the European Court of Human Rights . Both of the council's work are located in Strasbourg .
 Only member states or the commission may actually bring cases before this court . Only members of the commission can bring cases against each other .
 Europeans as individuals, however, may petition the European Commission on Human Rights after exhausting domestic legal remedies . Europeans are individuals, but can petition the EU Commission after exhausting their legal remedies, according to the EU .
 The commission may refer such matters to the European Court of Human Rights . In turn, the European Commission may refer the matter to the commission .
 Individuals do not have direct access to the European Court of Justice . Individual cases deemed worthy by the commission or states belonging to the Council of Europe may be heard .
 The European Court of Human Rights may award compensation to individuals for damages . It may exercise limited judicial review by requiring states to change domestic laws found in violation of the convention .
 Not to be confused with the Council of Europe and its European Court of Human Rights is the European Union’s EU Court of Justice , located in Luxembourg .
 In the European Union’s legal system, ECJ rulings supersede domestic laws of EU members when these laws are in conflict with EU law . EU law supersede EU laws of member states when they are not in compliance with the law .
 Individuals and corporations may take cases directly to the European Court of Justice without having secured the consent of their national authorities . The EU court will also allow individuals and corporations to take cases to the court directly to EU court .
 It has ruled on thousands of cases involving contract and other economic issues, some of which have had human rights aspects . Some of its caseload has grown substantially in recent years .
 International courts in Europe have acquired some jurisdiction for certain civil and criminal cases involving persons . International courts have acquired jurisdiction in certain cases . The cases involve persons involved in the case .
 Regional courts and asserting legal arguments that overrule national courts is mainly a European development . Relying on regional courts and assert legal arguments is a major development in the EU .
 OSCE also includes the United States and Canada and almost all countries in Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals . With more than fifty members, the OSCE has more than 50 members .
 Review conferences allow an opportunity for the airing of human rights violations and the application of public and private pressures for their correction . Review conferences are a chance for the public to voice their views on human rights abuses .
 OSCE commitments made by OSCE participating states to ensure full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms . This refers to commitments made in OSCE countries to respect human rights . OSCE states must respect full respect of human rights, fundamental freedoms, the organisation says .
 Since 1990, the OSCE has developed institutions and mechanisms to promote respect for these commitments, such as the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights . The OSCE also has a body of institutions to promote human rights and human rights .
 The current approach of the OSCE is to assist states in living up to their obligations rather than isolating them . The OSCE's current approach to the situation is to help states live up to obligations, rather than isolate them .
 "Public airing of human rights violations usually contributes very little to correcting these violations," says the OSCE . Public airing of rights violations often contributes little to correct these violations, he says .
 In fact, such publicity often contributes to a hardening of the offending state’s position, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Such publicity contributes to the hardening, he says .
 China, for example, has been reluctant to change its policies despite foreign criticism . China has a history of not changing its policies in response to criticism .
 It is true that accusing states may use human rights to score propaganda points against alleged offenders, but this is use of the human rights issue for other purposes . It is not use of human rights as a tool for political purposes, it's use of it for propaganda .
 U.S. committed to rectifying perceived human rights abuses often find diplomacy more effective . Diplomatic diplomacy is often more effective in dealing with perceived abuses, experts say .
 Positive incentives for compliance may be offered in quiet diplomatic efforts on behalf of human rights . Positive incentives are offered in these quiet, diplomatic efforts to ensure compliance .
 Of course, accusing states may also choose to use the threat of public exposure as a negative tactic . Of course it could also be used as a way to avoid public exposure .
 It may become necessary to act on the threat, however, when quiet efforts have failed . It may be necessary for quiet efforts to keep quiet efforts under wraps .
 In the final analysis, the OSCE and its human rights charter can claim at least some degree of credit for changes since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the demise of the Soviet Union itself .
 democratic reforms and human rights assurances offered by the new governments in many of these countries have enabled them to join the Council of Europe with its more developed legal structure for human rights cases . The new governments have also joined the Council .
 These are modest but still very positive developments that seemed unthinkable just a few years earlier, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Efforts in Latin America and Africa, in contrast to Europe, have been far more modest . Latin American and African human rights efforts have been modest .
 Human rights obligations were specified in 1948 as part of interAmerican law in the OAS Charter and the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man . The United States has a long history of human rights in the United States .
 In 1969 the American Convention on Human Rights established an Inter-American Court of Human Rights . The court was created in I960, I960 . It was created by I960 and established in 1969 .
 The OAS Charter revision in 1970 gave the Inter-American Commission a greater role in human rights matters . OAS approval in 1979 of a revised statute for the commission was approved .
 The commission engages in human rights education and awareness efforts . It receives petitions and complaints, even from private persons .
 It may publicize human rights violations, but it has no real enforcement authority . The U.N. has little power to enforce human rights abuses .
 The human rights structure of the African Union is even less developed on a continent plagued by violence and atrocities committed within and among states . Human rights in Africa is the least developed in the continent .
 The 1981 African Charter on Human and People’s Rights (the “Banjul Declaration’) did enter into force in 1986 . Nevertheless, the 1981 charter entered into force . The 1981 charter was signed by the African Parliament of African nations .
 In addition to individual and collective rights, a list of duties to humanity and to state and society also was prescribed . The list includes rights to humanity, and duties to society .
 The mandate to the African Commission on Human and People’s Rights was explicitly limited to interpretation, promotion, and protection of human rights . The mandate is to interpret, promote and protect human rights in Africa .
 Sudan has played a role in publicizing human rights violations, such as sending a factfinding mission to Darfur region of Sudan in 2004 and establishing a venue for peace talks .
 For some states, pointing out human rights violations in another state may be a matter of principle . It may simply be a way to embarrass a government, or to point out a violation .
 Amnesty International relies heavily on global letter-writing campaigns, press releases, and publications to shame governments into releasing political prisoners . At times a state may issue a condemnatory statement due to the efforts of NGOs such as Amnesty International .
 The origins of Amnesty International date to 1961 when a London lawyer read about a group of students in Portugal who had been arrested for toasting freedom in a restaurant . Amnesty International was founded by Peter Benenson in 1961 .
 This event prompted him to launch an “Appeal for Amnesty,” calling for the release of all people imprisoned because of their peaceful expression of beliefs, politics, race, religion, or national origin .
 Amnesty's initial activities involved letter-writing campaigns on behalf of prisoners of conscience . Amnesty’s initial activities were letter-written campaigns . Amnesty's first activities were to support prisoners of the conscience .
 Groups of volunteers were assigned to a particular prisoner whose fate was closely monitored . The prisoner's fate was monitored by groups of volunteers .
 In the late 1960s adoption groups were formed at the local level . Unfortunately, few of these letters were ever answered, so adoption groups formed .
 These groups adopted a particular prisoner, country, or issue and helped with publicity, education, and fund-raising at grassroots level .
 Outreach activity included churches, schools, businesses, professional organizations, and labor unions . Outreach activities were carried out by churches, businesses and unions .
 The largest human rights organization in the U.S. is Human Rights Watch . Watch is based in Washington, D.C.
 Local human rights groups in Moscow, Warsaw, and Prague had been established in the mid-1970s to monitor their governments’ compliance with the Helsinki accords . Human rights groups were established in Russia, Warsaw .
 Nonviolent resistance was pioneered by Mahatma Gandhi against British imperialism in India . The central question is how effective nonviolent resistance can be against regimes that rely on the coercive power of the state .
 Nonviolence works to effect change when there is a popular support base against the coercive power of state authorities . Nonviolence can work when there are a popular base against coercive power, says the author .
 Aung San Suu Kyi is one of the most famous political activists in the world today . She is the daughter of a former pro-democracy leader in Myanmar . She was elected to the Nobel Peace Prize for her country's democracy .
 She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 . Her defense of human rights and nonviolent opposition to the military regime in Myanmar was her cause .
 She was held under house arrest from July 1989 to July 1995 . Viewed as a threat to state security, she was held in house arrest . She was released from prison in 1995 .
 The daughter of the revered father of Burmese independence, Suu Kyi returned to Burma in 1988 to take care of her dying mother . She is the daughter of Myanmar's former president, who died in 1988 . She returned to the country in 1988 after her mother died of a
 The N LD is the largest legally recognized political party in the country . The military came to power in a bloody military coup in September 1988 . The NLD is currently the country's largest party .
 Nonviolent resistance to martial law led to a series of arrests in 1989 . The arrests were made for non-violent resistance against martial law .
 Suu Kyi and her colleagues had planned a Martyrs' Day March but called it off when extensive military preparations were evident . In July of that year, she had planned to march but called off when it was evident of military preparations .
 During most of her six years of house arrest, she was denied access to the outside world . During her six-year imprisonment, she had to be kept out of the public eye .
 In April 1995 she was finally allowed two visits from her husband and sons, the first in over two years . The first in two years she was allowed to see her family for the first time .
 Her husband, terminally ill with cancer and living in London, applied for a visa in 1999 to pay a farewell visit to his wife in Myanmar, his first in three years . The junta refused, hoping Suu Kyi would go to Britain instead of Myanmar, hoping she would
 Suu Kyi's husband died in March 1999, but she has continued to work for democracy and human rights in Myanmar . She has continued her work in Myanmar despite her husband's death, but her husband is still influential .
 This activism led to a 19-month house arrest between 2000 and 2002 and a three-month imprisonment in 2003 followed by house arrest .
 The regime finally released her in November 2010 . Yielding to both international and domestic pressures, the regime finally freed her .
 Detaining her and putting her under house arrest were intended to curb such activities, but they actually strengthened her base of strong supporters at home and abroad . Although detaining her, putting her on house arrest was meant to curb .
 Even under house arrest she continued to work from behind the scenes . She helped inspire monk-led protests in September 2007 that led to a major roundup of pro-democracy activists .
 Even when there is a popular support base, the coercive military and police power of the state usually is enough to thwart the efforts of nonviolent, popularly supported movements . The state's coercive power is often enough to stop nonviolent movements .
 Actions like those taken by Aung San Suu Kyi, though well-intentioned, accomplish very little in the interest of human rights . Actions only exacerbate conditions in conflict-prone settings, writes John Sutter .
 It would have been better for the safety of her supporters if she had acted quietly from behind the scenes to advance her cause . It's better for her supporters to have acted quietly to advance their cause .
 Unless leaders rise up peacefully to challenge their oppressors, there can't be little hope of change . Leaders must rise up to challenge oppressors to achieve change .
 Regimes that control the military and police forces can continue to repress human rights unless pressure is brought on them by movements led by people like Aung San Suu Kyi . Regimes can continue repressing human rights if pressures are brought on by movements like Suuky .
 She conducts herself in the same nonviolent fashion as Nelson Mandela did against the racist regime in South Africa, Martin Luther King, and Mahatma Gandhi in India against British colonialism .
 Americas Watch was created to monitor human rights abuses in North and South America . Americas Watch is based in the U.S.
 The strategy of Human Rights Watch is straightforward— painstaking documentation of abuses and vigorous advocacy in the media and halls of governments and international organizations . The strategy is to document abuses and vigorously advocate for human rights in the country .
 Amnesty is only the best-known NGO working for human rights . Amnesty International is only one of the best known human rights NGOs working for rights .
 Recent years have seen a veritable explosion in the number of such organizations. Indeed, recent years have been seen a . explosion in such organizations, says author .
 NGOs form coalitions and communication networks to link them together, continuing from the 20th into the 21st century . Not only is the number of groups significant, but also the fact that these NGOs form . The number of NGOs is significant, as is the size of the groups significant .
 Anyone can easily gain access to information about the latest advocacy campaigns or learn how to become directly involved in supporting human rights around the globe . Now anyone can easily access to the latest campaign information .
 Human rights organizations are linked to domestic movements and organizations in countries suffering from human rights abuses . These human rights groups are in turn linked to movements in countries with human rights violations .
 Describe the plight of refugees produced by wars, natural disasters, and other cataclysmic causes as well as what can be done to serve their best interests . Describe migration and refugee issues as a topic of conversation and negotiation among heads of state .
 This is because these issues have generated conflict both within and between states, no matter what the underlying cause for an outflow of migrants might happen to be . This is due to conflict between states and refugees, says David Cameron .
 International migration has implications for sovereignty, stability, and security for a growing number of states . International migration is a key issue for sovereignty and stability in many countries .
 The issue promises to become even more salient due to three political, economic, and environmental trends that cause international migration . In fact, the issue is likely to be even more acute due to the three political and economic trends .
 With the end of the Cold War, barriers to movement were lifted for many people living in former communist states . First, with the end, many people in the former communist countries were able to move freely .
 As the Soviet empire collapsed and independent states came into existence in January 1992, new minorities were created within these borders . New minorities felt less secure within the borders .
 One option was for minorities to create secessionist movements and demand their own states . Another option was to migrate to the U.S. and leave .
 Africa and South Asia have been plagued by civil wars in recent years . This scenario is all too familiar to many people living in areas that have been hit by civil war .
 The huge gap in income and employment opportunities among countries motivated thousands of persons to become economic migrants . Second, the huge gap of income and . employment opportunities . among countries . among those motivated thousands to become . economic migrants.
 Western European countries have remained very concerned over immigration issue . Western European nations have remained concerned over the immigration issue.
 In the 1970s and early 1980s, about 100,000 people left the Warsaw Pact countries for the West for essentially political reasons, and they were welcomed there . In the 1980s and '70s, '80s, the West welcomed them, but they were welcome .
 As communism began to collapse, the number of migrants rose dramatically . Their motivation became economic as well as political as political .
 The economic restructuring and privatization process in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe also increased the number of those who wanted to migrate .
 The mass migration of people westward—many of them among the most skilled or talented—hampered post-Cold War economic development efforts in eastern countries . Many of them were among the best or most skilled .
 Emigration to newly industrializing countries in Asia and oilproducing countries of the Middle East drained important population segments in many less-developed countries . Emigration also drained important populations segments in some less developed countries .
 According to one estimate, three million Africans were displaced at the end of 2005 . Three million African refugees were displaced in 2005, one estimate says .
 This does not even take into account refugees created by conflict in such places as Somalia, Congo, Darfur, Rwanda, and Burundi .
 In this section we focus on refugees, who can be viewed as one type of immigrant . The refugees are one of the most visible forms of immigrants in the world .
 By contrast to immigrants who have some degree of choice on where they will reside, refugees are unwillingly forced from their homes . By contrast, refugees can choose to live in the United States, they can choose their home .
 A refugee is a person who “owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable to avail himself of the protection of that country .
 Refugees are often seen on television screens around the world . The refugees are often featured in the popular television shows .
 The report may come from Africa, Asia, Latin America, or Europe, but the image is always the same . Men, women, and children trudging down dusty roads, their few possessions on their backs .
 Refugee camps share similar characteristics: smoky cooking fires, endless rows of tents, skinny children with saucer-sized eyes . Long lines of the ill and infirm waiting patiently to see a specialist from organizations such as Doctors Without Borders .
 Most media reports include the obligatory thirty-second interview with the representative from the UN Eligh Commissioner for Refugees . The UN once again emphasizes the need for a sustained global response to the latest humanitarian crisis .
 Some refugees are separated from their families and subjected to armed attacks and exploitation . Some refugees have been forced to live with armed men and women in refugee camps .
 The humanitarian response to refugee crises is in part a moral argument . The U.S. has been in the midst of a humanitarian crisis in Syria and Yemen .
 "compassion fatigue" is a numbing of our sensitivities when we become overwhelmed by the dire plight of so many fellow human beings . But watching the endless replay of refugee crises and scenes of famine sometimes induces what has been referred to as “compassion fatigues”
 Eventually, viewers and those linked to these adverse circumstances may feel that investing emotion and money in what seems to be an inalterable fact of life on this planet is pointless .
 Most refugee crises are not a function of ‘acts of God’ or weather, but rather of politics, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Most refugees are a result of politics rather than acts of God .
 Political turmoil is most often at the root cause of the crisis, dictating the type and level of international response . Political turmoil often dictates the type of and amount of response to the crisis .
 The plight of Palestinians displaced in 1948 upon creation of the new state of Israel has yet to be resolved . Palestinians were displaced from their homeland in 1948 .
 In 1971, ten million East Pakistani refugees fled to India, most not returning until the creation of an independent Bangladesh . Most of the refugees did not return until the formation of a new Bangladesh state .
 The disintegration of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s displaced some four million people within the former communist state and scattered another half million across Europe . Some half million people were displaced by the collapse of Yugoslavia .
 Men, women, and children flee their homelands because of armed conflict, intimidation, and repression . Throughout many other areas of the world, men, women and children are forced to flee their homes .
 Modern means of travel allows refugees to travel by sea or air to more distant lands . The refugees can now travel by air or sea, sea or sea .
 Those who manage to reach their destination are often viewed with fear and resentment . Those who get to their destinations are often seen with fear, resentment .
 The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees was established in 1951 . It was primarily in response to the large number of refugees fleeing the oppression of Eastern European communist regimes .
 These refugees were resettled and generally integrated into Western states, aided by sympathy for their plight as well as cultural and ethnic affinities . These refugees are now living in Western states .
 As a result of this experience, international standards concerning the treatment of refugees were adopted and are reflected in the 1951 UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees . The 1951 convention was ratified by the UN .
 Convention states that the international community will treat refugees as a distinct category of human rights victims who should be accorded special protection . This convention states that refugees should be treated as a . distinct category .
 Refugees are defined as people who have been forced for political, racial, or ideological reasons to flee their home countries . As noted above, refugees are defined .
 Host nation should not compel refugees to return to their homes if they are in danger of persecution, convention says . Host nations should not force refugees back into their homes, convention rules say .
 Refugees have the right to apply for asylum and be given a chance to plead the political nature of their plight . Eurthermore, refugees have a right to be given the chance to appeal for asylum . Refugee refugees are allowed to apply to asylum in the UK for political reasons .
 Refugees are to be granted adequate assistance while their appeal is in process . Refugees will be given adequate assistance, says the UK government .
 The convention was essentially written with the European case in mind, but since the United Nations was involved, nods were made toward universalizing these norms . The convention is essentially written in Europe, but it was written with European case .
 In the 1960s, the focus of international efforts began to shift to less developed countries, which had been undergoing the pains of decolonization and wars of national liberation . In the 1970s, international efforts were focused on lessdeveloped countries .
 Many African states shared a common colonial experience . The early reaction of African states and the international community to the displacement of hundreds of thousands went relatively smoothly .
 Regional norms for the treatment of refugees were embodied in a 1969 Organization of African Unity agreement . The 1951 convention added a protocol in 1967 to the 1951 convention .
 In terms of sheer numbers, little can match the ten million refugees from East Pakistan in 1971 . Ten million refugees left East Pakistan for Pakistan in the 1970s .
 The era of decolonization almost over, political conflicts now involve independent developing states . Political conflicts now involved independent developing countries .
 Developed countries increasingly looked askance at asylum seekers from countries that had achieved independence years before . Countries with no historical ties to a European state were looked at as much as those with no history ties to the continent .
 Europe has had to absorb brunt of refugees resulting from the end-of-the-Cold-War fall of communism . Questions and attitudes are found in Europe, but also resonate in the United States and Canada .
 Downturns in the business cycle tend to heighten public awareness of the numbers of refugees and legal or illegal immigrants competing with citizens for employment and other opportunities .
 1951 convention was the first international and transnational response to the refugee problem . As noted, the 1951 convention is the first response to refugee problems .
 Basic norms concerning the treatment of refugees have been institutionalized in refugee-receiving nations and also in the complex structure of international and private transnational organizations that attempt to deal with the problem .
 In other words, we can speak of an international regime, or agreed set of rules, for dealing with refugees . In other . words, the international regime will be set up to deal with refugees, he says . He says .
 As with all such regimes, it requires the support of the major powers that dominate world politics, says the BBC . "As with all . such regimes it requires support of major powers," he says .
 The norms and programs of the regime effectively cannot run counter to the interests of these key states, writes CNN's Peter Bergen . As such, the norms and . programs of regime effectively . cannot run . counter to interests of key states such as Syria, he says .
 The network of international agencies and voluntary organizations is critical if the refugee problem is not going to spin out of control . Over time, however, it has become apparent to most states that the network of agencies is critical .
 Unilateral ad hoc responses to crisis conditions are deemed unsatisfactory . Unilateral response to crises is deemed 'unsatisfactory' by the government .
 The treatment of refugee groups under this international regime varies widely . Nevertheless, the treatment of refugees under this regime is widely varied .
 These conflicts generated large numbers of refugees in the Horn of Africa, southern Africa, and Central America . These conflicts have also generated large number of refugees .
 The United States and other donor countries responded out of humanitarian concern but also for reasons of national interest and broader foreign policy objectives . The U.S. and other countries responded to the crisis out of concern, not only but for national interest .
 In some cases, refugees were armed and sent back to fight their oppressors . In Central America, support for refugees went beyond humanitarian assistance and a desire to score propaganda points .
 In general, states will be more positively disposed toward involvement in refugee crises if they believe their interests and foreign policy objectives are at stake . This is no surprise to a realist, says Julian Zelizer .
 The interests of the major donors to UN programs ultimately decide the nature and extent of the international refugee regime . The U.S. and Western Europe, Japan, Australia, Australia and Canada are the main donors to the programs .
 The UNHCR and voluntary transnational organizations, given limited resources, are constrained in what they can do . The UNHCR says it is working to improve the situation in the region .
 Voluntary organizations in an age of instantaneous global communication, however, can help sway domestic public opinion . Voluntary groups can sway public opinion in the U.S.
 This was evident in the case of the conflict and resultant creation in 1995 of refugee camps in Rwanda, Africa . The camps were created by the Rwandan conflict in 1995 .
 "Little reason to expect United States relief and logistical support to such a country," says President Obama . U.S. national security interests are at stake, says Obama administration .
 The American public and leadership were willing to help, however, in part due to humanitarian concerns . International and transnational refugee-relief organizations appealed to the U.S. for help .
 It is not only foreign policy considerations that influence the attitude of potential host and donor countries, it also factors in host countries' attitudes to potential donors .
 Refugees can also be created by regimes that want to rid themselves of political dissidents or other undesirables . Refugees can be created as refugees by political dissidents, dissidents or those deemed undesirable .
 This was the case in Vietnam’s expulsion of hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese of Chinese origin in the early 1980s . Eidel Castro expelled criminals and mentally ill people in 1980 during the Mariel Castro's expulsion of criminals in 1980 .
 Once such an action occurs, states may attempt to score political points, such as accepting the Vietnamese boat people in the 1980s . Anti-communist states did by accepting the boat people from Vietnam .
 The international refugee regime essentially deals with the appropriate responses expected of states, lOs, and NGOs after a crisis has occurred . It is the international response to a crisis in Syria .
 UNHCR’s mandate prohibits it from protesting against the cause of refugee outflows, allowing it to respond once refugee flight has happened . Indeed, the UNHCR's mandate does not prohibit it from protest .
 Little headway has been made in dealing with the roots of refugee crises, but doing so might help the international community extricate itself from a reactive mode . The international community is in need of a more proactive approach to dealing with refugee crises .
 To prevent refugee crises may require outside powers to intervene before people flee or are expelled from their country even though any such interference violates the sovereignty of such states . To prevent crises, outside powers may need to intervene, but any interference violates state sovereignty .
 In the post-Cold War era the advanced industrial states have relatively little appetite for intervention . Quite apart from legal considerations, legal considerations have been taken into account .
 This is the case in particular with the less-developed countries, where the West sees few if any vital interests . The West sees little if not many vital interests in the less developed countries, he says .
 It is in less-developed countries that refugee crises will most likely continue to occur . Yet it is in the less developed countries that refugees are most likely to continue to be refugees .
 The developing world is the primary setting for armed conflict in the developing world . Developed world has been plagued by drought, famine and armed conflict .
 Between 1945 and 1990, there were over one hundred internal and interstate wars in the developing world . Erom 1945 to 1990, for example, was over one 100 internal or interstate wars .
 Since 1945, nearly twenty million people have died in wars or as a result of civil strife and the use of force . Nearly twenty million have died since 1945, including nearly 20 million people from war or civil strife .
 interstate wars are primarily a developing world phenomenon, and this is where refugee crises will most likely continue to occur . Even taking into account the deaths caused by conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and Chechnya in the Russian Eederation, interstate wars will continue .
 It has also been in the less-developed countries where outside interventions have challenged the concept of sovereignty held by political leaders .
 UN resolutions and state actions regarding Haiti, Rwanda, and Somalia overrode the principle of noninterference in the domestic affairs of states . These conflicts also endangered international peace and security, a condition allowing UN-authorized actions consistent with Article 42 of the UN Charter .
 The West was willing to introduce NATO troops into Bosnia in December 1995 and go to war with Serbia over Kosovo in 1999 . Despite difficulties encountered during the UN peacekeeping effort in Somalia, the West still wanted NATO troops in Bosnia and Kosovo .
 Twenty-first-century wars in Iraq and Afghanistan as well as interventions in the Middle East and Africa have all disrupted the lives of domestic populations .
 Refugee crises have continued to increase in number and severity, leading to the understandable perception that the situation is out of control . Put another way, refugee crises are increasing in number, severity and number of crises .
 Traditional solutions and procedures appear to be inadequate in the current environment . Traditional solutions to the problems of the environment are inadequate, say experts .
 Voluntary repatriation of refugees to their homes is virtually impossible when the country is plagued by continual war and economic devastation . Eor example, voluntary repatriation to their . homes is impossible .
 Few host countries are willing to allow refugees to take up permanent residence in their countries . At the same time, few host countries willing to let refugees into their country .
 UN officials recognize that the success of resettling Vietnamese boat people in the 1980s as well as the expensive long-term assistance programs for refugees in Africa have actually made the global situation worse . States that create refugees believe they have no responsibility for finding viable solutions .
 Thousands of Sunnis fled neighborhoods in Baghdad now occupied by Shias . Or consider the case of Iraq where, for example, thousands fled neighborhoods . The case is not the first time that Sunnis have fled the country .
 Donor states also grumble over the increasing costs of these humanitarian missions . The cost of these missions has increased over the past decade .
 The conventional categories used since the early 1950s have proved inadequate to deal with the refugee crises of the current era . Finally, the conventional categories . used . since the 1950s proved inadequate . to cope with the current crises .
 Traditionally, humanitarian organizations made fairly rigid distinctions among refugees, returnees, internally displaced persons, and the resident population . Humanitarian organizations make rigid distinctions .
 People from all four categories live side by side in similarly appalling circumstances . In border areas of a number of African countries such as Congo, Ethiopia, and Somalia .
 The same situation has existed in parts of the former Yugoslavia and persists in many Middle East and African countries . The situation has also occurred in many other countries .
 UNEICR has provided food and shelter to persons besieged in their own communities . In this case, it has always seen itself as an organization concerned with refugees .
 Little has been done to resolve the legal status of displaced persons, some of whom may be able to return to their homes . Thousands of others cannot or will not return .
 It seems that one continually hears of human rights abuses and refugees crises . The U.S. government has been involved in a refugee crisis in Syria .
 It's understandable that what could be termed ‘compassion fatigue’ may set in . It is understandable that “compassion fatigued’ might set in, but it’s understandable that compassion fatigue may also set in.
 Ai Wei Wei was mentioned at the outset of this chapter . That is why it is important to keep in mind the fate of real individuals such as Ai Wei Wei who was mentioned .
 His independence of thought poses challenges to the Chinese government and party officials .
 There are thousands of others who live in oppressive conditions, but are not often well known outside human rights circles .
 International human rights efforts and attempts to deal with refugee crises in recent years need to be assessed not just for what they have accomplished in concrete terms, but rather in terms of the contribution to developing a universal consensus on human rights and proper responses .
 The UN-sponsored World Conference on Human Rights held in Vienna in 1993 illustrated the different interpretations of human rights concepts . The conference was held in Austria in 1993 .
 There was an obvious gap between Western norms and those of many developing countries . In particular, there was a gap in Western norms compared to those of developing nations .
 The difficulty in pursuing international human rights is particularly evident when it is discussed in the context of some of the other themes addressed in this book . The difficulties in pursuing human rights are evident in the book .
 By definition, a concern for human rights raises the basic issue of what the term sovereignty means today . By definition of human rights, it raises the question of what it means .
 The internal aspect of sovereignty traditionally has meant that how a state treats its own citizens is a matter of domestic jurisdiction . Criticizing a state on the grounds of human rights violations undermines the concept of sovereignty .
 China and Myanmar may continue to claim that no state, international organization, or transnational organization has the right to criticize how it treats its dissidents . But the reality of the world today is that they do, whether they have a “right” to do so or not, says
 AIDS epidemic in Africa changed the international debate about human rights of these victims . Consider, for example, how AIDS epidemic changed the world's view of human rights in Africa .
 AIDS can not only devastate a country's workforce and worsen its economic prospects, but also weaken its military forces . AIDS can also weaken the country's military forces, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 In Cuba, mandatory testing, immigration controls, and quarantine were implemented, testing Western human rights precepts about an individual’s dignity and privacy . In the case of Cuba, for example, mandatory tests and immigration controls were implemented . The Cuban government has been accused of testing and immigration
 Post-test a chapter human rights enforcement in global terms . Reconciling diverse interpretations of human rights is not an easy task .
 Examatmypoiisciiab.com diplomats and NGOs are involved in the quest to find out the truth . This quest is pursued by such NGOs as Asia Watch and Americas Watch .
 Even if states are reluctant to act, such NGOs and movements continue to give human rights issues a high profile . They contribute in their own way to the development of human rights norms in an emerging global civil society .
 The idea that basic human rights of individuals are not the exclusive domain of a state but also are a legitimate concern of the larger international community will be strengthened .
 Compare and contrast differences in religion and culture to diverse understandings of human rights and the human condition across the globe . Use this article to help students understand and understand the world's view of religion .
 Those concerned with advancing human rights globally find substantial differences across cultures on the way women and men, girls and boys are treated . Women and men are treated differently in different cultures .
 Human rights concerns are violence and other forms of victimization of fellow human beings that are high on the global-governance agenda . At the core of human rights concerns, violence and victimization is a form of human victimization that is important to human rights .
 Human rights advocates seek a global civil society that respects life, treats fellow human beings with dignity, and affords others justice or fairness . The U.N. Human Rights Act is based in New York City, New York .
 The author of two books on human rights: From Ancient Times to the Globalization Era, 2nd ed. Routledge, 1997, 2007 .
 Both social liberals and social conservatives are liberals in the classic meaning of the term . Both groups emphasize the importance of individuals and what they do . Social conservatives and social liberals are liberals .
 Social liberals tend to see government as a helping hand . Conservatives tend to reduce the role of government, seeing individuals as helping themselves . Social conservatives tend to think of the government as helping individuals .
 What they have in common in the United States, however, is a commitment to individual rights and liberties . What is common in both countries is that they support individual rights .
 Many other countries tend to be more communitarian, prone as well to favor socioeconomic rights . Many other communitarian nations tend to support socioeconomic rights, such as Brazil .
 Discusses evolution of human rights regimes and human rights as a field of study . Discusses the evolution of the human rights field in the modern world .
 What remains unchanged is a moral or ethical obligation to treat others with the dignity due fellow human beings . The dignity of others is due to be due to fellow human being .
 No matter how some cultures rationalize practices like PGM, it violates life, undermines a woman's dignity, and is inherently unfair—unjust to the victim . PGM violates life and undermines dignity of a woman .
 On defining and balancing rights as well as an overview of different kinds of human rights violations . On defining, balancing rights and balancing human rights as a human rights expert .
 Respect for life, human dignity, and justice as fairness as fairness are foundational values underlying human rights . Respect for human dignity and justice is fundamental to human rights in the world, says Amnesty International .
 We reaffirm their compelling quality every time we learn of yet another human rights violation whether genocide, a war crime, or something less extreme .
 When rights or obligations conflict, we try to find a just or fair balance among these competing imperatives . We try as best we can find a fair balance between rights and obligations . We are trying to find the balance of rights and obligation .
 War and intercommunal strife tear the fabric of human societies, dislocating noncombatants from their dwellings, cities, towns, and other settlements . Quite apart from what nature may do to the human condition, war and strife tear apart human societies .
 These are the very real and enduring costs of armed conflict . These are an ongoing, ongoing, global-governance challenge on human rights agendas . The United States is one of the world's most powerful statesmen .
 The challenges facing refugees and the countries seeking to accommodate their needs . The challenges include accommodation for refugees in the refugee camps .
 Infanticide 2. 2. Lack of educational opportunities . Lack of education . Patriarchal societies infanticide . Infantile 2. 1. Infanticide 2. Female circumcision .
 Since infants do not remember the pain they experience, it is acceptable after all . Infant pain is fine, since infants don't remember it .
 Parents should not alter the physiology of a child—leaving such decisions to him or her upon reaching adulthood . Parents shouldn't alter the physiological decisions to children, leaving them to decide their fate .
 Society must accept circumcision as a practice in order for it to be legitimate . Society must also accept circumcision in order to accept it as a legitimate practice .
 Cultural values/prejudices are often superseded by legislative law in most regions . Cultural values often supersede by legislation in most areas of the world .
 There is no interaction between cultural values/prejudices and legislative law . There are no interactions between culture and law, and there are cultural values .
 Cultural values/prejudices often supersede legislative law in many regions . Cultural values supersede law in the many regions of the world .
 Countries accepting immigrants try to balance human rights values with the ability to defend immigrants and provide adequate services for immigrants and native citizens . The ability to transport immigrants to inaccessible areas was a driving cause to impose a no-fly zone in Libya in 2011 .
 Possible spillover of corruption into world oil markets, thus endangering international peace and security . Possible spillovers of terrorism from Libya into France and Italy . Possible spills of violence into neighboring countries, thus ending international peace .
 Those who view the world as composed of individuals are more likely to view human rights and justice questions on a global scale . Those who see the world in terms of individual individuals are likely to see human rights on a scale of 8.8 .
 Those who have a state-centric view of the world are more likely to view human rights and justice questions as the purview of . national supranational global grassroots 9.5% .
 A communitarian view of human rights takes into account human rights that an individualistic view overlooks . The human rights are a universal global, international group, class 10. natural, systematic inalienable, universal global .
 National, what National, global Cultural, universal Community, individual 14. 14. Whose, what . what National . Cultural, cultural, individual, individual .
 Americans tend to focus on rights over social, cultural, or economic rights . Property, speech legal, political extrajudicial, extralegal individual, individual, communitarian .
 Defining human rights depends in large part on determining the complexity nature of analysis . 16.5% of human rights are human rights in the U.S.
 Kant argued that we should only follow principles that we would be willing to proselytize to others. adhere to under all conditions. set aside in the face of new evidence. make into universal maxims. Admiting principles that are set aside under new circumstances. admiting
 Individuals should follow principles that realize the greatest good for the greatest number of people, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Individuals should be guided by principles that are just as good as good for others"
 The greater or greatest good is the best option only if it does not interfere with personal preference, the author says . The greater good is best if it doesn't interfere with your preference, he says .
 Individuals should apply cultural norms to determine the greater or greatest good, says author . Culture norms should not be applied to determine greater or greater good, he says .
 The greater or greatest good should be overlooked in favor of personal accountability . The greater good should not be overlooked for the greater good, says CNN.com .
 Many social contract theorists believe human beings are subject to government authority . Governments should shape the debate on human rights, says social contract theorist .
 Human rights can be declared by a positive act such as in a treaty or convention . Human rights are declared by the act of declaring a human right to freedom of expression .
 All human beings are born with a blank slate and can adopt whatever rights they believe in . All human being is born with the right to believe in their own rights .
 1951 UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees states that the international community will mitigate the flow of refugees . Issue ID cards to all refugees and treat them fairly . Treat refugees as a distinct category of human rights victims . Treat them fairly and give political asylum to all .
 Flis career has been devoted to studying, documenting, and promoting policies to mitigate the impact of fisheries on the world’s marine ecosystems . His research and Ecopath modeling approach and software have been adopted by other research institutes and NGOs .
 Pauly and various lOs and NGOs have documented, this is clearly not the case . Pauly: "This is clearly the case. Pauly"
 Cod, once so plentiful off the coast of Newfoundland, Canada, are now scarce . Halibut, haddock, swordfish, marlin, and skate are also scarce .
 One reason for this state of affairs is the global spread of technology, says CNN.com's John Defterios . He says it's a result of the spread of the technology in the world .
 Purse seines, introduced in the 1930s, are giant nets that surround entire schools of fish . They are then gathered up with drawstrings, like huge laundry bags, like laundry bags .
 Factory freezer trawlers are now so large and efficient they have become virtually seafaring towns . They are so large that they can be virtually seafared towns .
 Fishing fleets utilize echo-sounding sonar, which can detect fish schools long before they surface . Fishing fleets use echo sounding sonar to detect schools of fish long before surface .
 Buoys known as “fish aggregating devices,” or FADs, attract species like yellowfin tuna and blue marlin . Buoys are known as "fish aggregator devices" or "fads"
 In the late 1980s, the total world catch topped out at around eighty-five million tons . The catch is estimated to be around 80,000 tons .
 Over the past twenty years, the global catch has been steadily declining . Global catch has declined steadily in the past 20 years .
 As the size of the catch has fallen, so, too, has the number of creatures caught . Meanwhile, as the size has also fallen, as has the amount of the creatures being caught .
 ‘Fishing down the food web’ was first identified by Pauly in his book . This phenomenon has become known as ‘fishing down food web . Pauly first identified the phenomenon in Pauly’s book .
 Pauly follows this trend to its logical conclusion . All that will be left in the oceans are organisms that people won't, or can’t, consume, like sea slugs and algae .
 Humans have become such a dominant force on the planet that we’ve ushered in a new geological epoch . Humans have ushered in an unprecedented geological epoch, according to scientists .
 The term comes from the Greek muxa, meaning “slime”^ collective or public goods athe allocation of, and payment for, goods that, once provided, cannot easily be denied to others . Imagine a village in England. Imagine a Village in England . imagine a
 On the edge of the village is a pasture or commons owned by the local herdsmen . The area is owned by herdsmen who live there .
 It is a peaceful scene, as cows contentedly munch the grass and produce milk and calves . It is the peaceful scene of cows contentiously munching the grass . The cows are happy to munch and produce their calves .
 As long as there is enough grass for the number of grazing cows, the carrying capacity of the commons is fine . The carrying capacity is fine, as long as enough grass is enough for grazing cows .
 Everyone sees that, at the current rate, the entire commons will be destroyed, and all will suffer . The entire commons is being destroyed, says the author . "All will suffer," he says .
 The commons represents a collective or public good, meaning one cannot be withheld from any member of the group . The commons is a public good that can't be withheld, meaning it is a collective good .
 The tragedy of the commons is that the situation encourages short-term consumption of a good, even though it will undermine the value of the good in the long term . The tragedy is that short-lived consumption of good will undermine its value in long-term, he says .
 In this chapter we provide a brief overview of key global environmental challenges and how the impact of economic considerations must be weighed by policymakers . We will first provide an overview of the challenges we face in this chapter .
 LOs and NGOs have contributed to the policy debate on the global environment . We then turn to the contentious matter of the relation between environmental issues and political-military conflict, and end with an assessment of how practitioners in lOs have contributed .
 Explain the environmental challenges the world faces in terms of the atmosphere, land, biodiversity, freshwater, coastal and marine areas, and fisheries and associated economic considerations . Explain the world's environmental challenges to include the atmosphere and land .
 Everyone agrees that the environment should be protected, and it is recognized that this is a collective action problem . This is a problem that is not just about protecting the environment, but it is also a problem .
 Some see the environment as an international security problem, others take a more expansive view and see it as a human security issue . Others see the issue as an issue of human security .
 A particular challenge is the trade-off between concern for the environment and concern for economic well-being of persons, particularly in the developing world . The challenge is to balance concern for environment and the economic well being of persons .
 The discovery of the ozone ‘hole’ in the atmosphere in 1985 led to many years of debate over its importance and what to do about it . The hole was discovered in 1985 and has led to much debate about its importance .
 The ozone layer absorbs most of the harmful ultraviolet-B radiation from the sun . The layer absorbs the most harmful UVB radiation in the world .
 Depletion of the ozone layer allows more harmful rays to reach Earth, resulting in more skin cancer, eye cataracts, weakened immune systems, reduced plant yields, and damage to ocean ecosystems . The loss of ozone layer will lead to increased skin cancer and eye cancer .
 International agreements aim to reduce and eventually eliminate CFC production . International agreements aimed at reducing CFCs production .
 CFCs already produced (e.g., freon in old air conditioners, refrigerators, and spray cans) will continue to pollute the upper atmosphere . Many of these are rusting in garbage dumps, many of them rusting .
 Measurements taken of the ozone layer over the Antarctic show a weakening of the layer . Measurements show the layer has weakened in the past decade .
 The first general ozone agreement, the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Fayer, was simply a pledge to protect the ozone layer . The Vienna Convention was the first .
 Scientists believe the ozone will remain particularly vulnerable for at least the next decade . Even with full compliance of the Montreal Protocol, scientists say it will remain vulnerable for the next 10 years . The Montreal Protocol is now in full compliance .
 Industrial societies consume enormous quantities of oil, gas, coal, or wood in factories, households, and transportation vehicles . Industrial society consume enormous amounts of oil and gas .
 Burning hydrocarbon fuels contributes to acid rain . Carbonic, hydrochloric, and sulfuric acids that fall to Earth mixed with rainwater . Acid rain kills fish, trees, and other forest plant life .
 States have taken some steps to reduce the atmospheric pollution that contributes to acid rain . States have tried to deacidify affected areas by adding calcium carbonate or other bases to lakes .
 The problem remains an enormous one as scientists try to identify more precisely the causes of undesired effects and suggest possible remedies or approaches to policymakers . The problem, however, remains a huge one, as scientists say .
 Even more devastating in terms of climatic consequences is the degree to which burning hydrocarbon fuels contributes to global warming . Burning hydrocarbons contributes to the global warming of the planet, scientists say .
 If atmospheric scientists are correct, burning such fuels over many decades increases the overall volume of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere . This creates a greenhouse effect or thermal blanket that keeps more heat from escaping into space .
 Clearing rain forests and other forested areas exacerbates problems by removing an important natural recycling mechanism . Trees and other plant life take carbon dioxide in and release oxygen as part of the photosynthesis process .
 Such catastrophic climate change would cause rising sea levels, declines in food production, water shortages, irreversible damage to ecosystems including the Amazon rain forest, and shutdown of the Gulf Stream that gives Europe temperate climate .
 China and India resent being told by Western countries that they should curtail their dramatic economic rise when those same Western states rose to economic prominence with scant concern for the environmental impact . This domestic consideration is compounded by the fact that countries such as India and China resent Western countries .
 The main driving force leading to pressure on land resources has been increasing food production . Food production has been the main driver for pressure on the land resources .
 Today food is needed for two billion more people than lived on the Earth three decades ago . Food is needed to feed the world's 2bn more people who live on the planet today .
 Inefficient irrigation schemes can cause salinization and alkalization of soil, resulting in an estimated ten million hectares of irrigated land abandoned annually .
 Elumans contribute to land degradation through poor soil management practices, deforestation, removal of natural vegetation, use of heavy machinery, overgrazing of livestock, and improper crop rotation . They also contribute to deforestation through deforestation and deforestation .
 Deforestation is caused by the expansion of agricultural land; overharvesting of industrial wood, fuel wood, and other forest products; and overgrazing . Deforestation caused by expanding agricultural land and industrial wood harvest .
 Underlying these practices are such factors as poverty, population growth, markets, and trade in forest products . Underlying this practice is poverty and population growth .
 Eorests also can suffer from natural factors such as insect pests, diseases, and fire . The trees are also vulnerable to fire, fire and pests .
 The net loss of the global forest area (deforestation plus reforestation) in the last decade of the 20th century was about 94 million hectares . This is the equivalent of 2.3 percent of total world forests . The loss of this area is about 2.5 percent of the
 The 1972 UN-sponsored conference in Stockholm, Sweden, recognized forests as the largest and most complex and self-perpetuating of all ecosystems . The conference was held in 1972 .
 The need for sound landand forest-use policies was emphasized as well as the introduction of forest management planning, the government said .
 Most of these recommendations remain unfulfilled, particularly due to the competing demands for environmental conservation and economic development and subsistence .
 Population in these areas is growing at 3.5 percent per year, more than double the world average . Population in the areas are growing at three times the world's average rate of growth .
 The rate of deforestation in Brazil’s Amazon has dropped in recent years . More encouraging is the fact that deforestation in the area has dropped .
 Thompson noted uncertainties can make decision making difficult for practitioners . Thompson noted how uncertainties make decision-making difficult . Thompson said uncertainty can make it difficult to make decisions .
 If we apply his insights to environmental problems like global warming, we find uncertainty among atmospheric scientists about possible outcomes as well as the relative importance of different causes for global climate change .
 Given this uncertainty, it is extraordinarily difficult to form a global political consensus on what is to be done . proposed remedies are usually very costly .
 The case of increased acidification of precipitation —acid rain . The acid rain has increased in some areas of the world .
 The primary problem in dealing with many global environmental challenges is not so much the issue of scientific consensus to achieve a plan of action, it is not the issue .
 The problem is that some states have understandably made economic development the primary goal of economic development . Some states are understandably making economic development a primary goal, but others are not .
 In countries with a large youth population with few prospects, creating jobs is the concern . Creating jobs is a key concern for many young people in countries with few opportunities .
 Life prospects even for educated young people was one reason for the protests in Tunisia and Egypt that brought down the regimes . Indeed, dismal life prospects for young people is one reason to protest in Tunisia, Egypt .
 While the long-term effects of global environmental degradation may be recognized, it is the challenges of the here and now that are of immediate concern to policymakers . It is the challenge of policymakers to take action to tackle the problem of climate change .
 Thompson's matrix below may help us understand environmental problems analytically as we explore building political consensus nationally and globally on appropriate remedies . The matrix below shows the political trade-offs between concern for the environment and economic development .
 The only notable success of the Copenhagen climate-change conference was a commitment to pay people in developing countries to leave trees standing .
 Four and a half billion dollars was promised by a half dozen rich countries including Norway, the United States, and the United Kingdom . The United States and Norway are among the countries promised the money .
 The extent of the loss of biodiversity is calculated against what is termed the natural rate of extinction . Biodiversity is a measure of biodiversity in the wild .
 The loss of biodiversity is many times higher due to land conversion, climate change, pollution, and the harvesting of natural resources . Land conversion and climate change are many times more likely to cause the loss of wildlife .
 Land conversion is most intensive in tropical forests . Other contributing factors to loss of biodiversity include waste and pollution, urban development, and wars .
 As much as 40 percent of our modern pharmaceutical medicines are derived from plants or animals . Yet as much of the modern pharmaceutical medicine is derived from animals and plants .
 Madagascar produces substances effective in fighting Flodgkin’s disease and leukemia . The rosy periwinkle from Madagascar is effective in two types of cancers .
 The environment is being destroyed to supply firewood and farmland to impoverished people . But it is rapidly disappearing as its environment is destroyed to feed firewood .
 Scientists have noted an apparent increase in the decline and extinction of species over the past thirty years . Species have been found to be declining and dying in the past 30 years .
 It is estimated that 24 percent of mammals and 12 percent of bird species are currently globally threatened . Lack of data does not allow for a precise determination of how many species have become extinct in the past decades .
 Some estimate the extinction of as many as half of the Earth’s species of plants and animals in a matter of decades . With continued global warming that upsets ecosystems throughout the world, some estimate that many of the world's species could be extinct in a few decades .
 Approximately one-third of the world’s population lives in countries that suffer from moderate-to-high water stress . Approximately one third of the population in countries suffering from moderate to high water stress, scientists say .
 Water consumption is more than 10 percent of renewable freshwater resources . This is defined as a situation where water consumption is higher than 10% of renewable resources .
 By the mid-1990s, eighty countries, constituting 40 percent of the world’s population, suffered from serious water shortages . The water shortage is estimated to be the world's largest water shortage .
 With population growth comes industrial development and the expansion of irrigated agriculture, resulting in increased water demands . With industrial development, water demands will also increase .
 About 1. billion persons lack access to safe water, and 2. billion lack adequate sanitation . About 1 billion persons in the world have no access to adequate water or sanitation .
 The result is hundreds of millions of cases each year of water-related diseases and more than 5 million deaths . Water-related disease is a huge problem in the world, with more than 500 million deaths a year .
 Water management programs vary from place to place, and there has been a move in some countries to emphasize demand as opposed to supply management . Some countries have introduced pricing policies to increase demand .
 The root causes are increased population growth, urbanization, industrialization, and tourism in coastal areas . The roots of the problem are urbanization and tourism .
 Some 37 percent of the world’s population lives within 60 kilometers of the coast . It is estimated that some 37 percent live within 60 km of the coastline .
 Sewage remains the largest source of global ocean contamination . Coastal sewage discharges have increased dramatically in the past three decades . Sewage discharges are highest in the country's history .
 Toxic phytoplankton blooms are increasing in frequency, intensity, and geographic location . Blooms of toxic phyopopton are increasing frequency and intensity of blooms .
 In several enclosed or semienclosed seas, including the Black Sea, plant and animal life is dying . Plants and animals are dying in enclosed seas .
 There is particular concern about the possible effects of global warming on coral reefs . There are also concerns about the effects of climate change .
 During the intense weather of El Nino in 1997-1998, extensive coral bleaching occurred worldwide . The intense weather caused extensive bleaching of coral .
 Some reefs in the Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia, the far western Pacific, and the Caribbean suffered high mortality rates . Some reefs recovered quickly, but others in some cases more than 90 percent .
 Global demand for seafood and other fish-related products has put great pressure on fish stocks . Some species, including tuna, sea turtles, and sharks, are endangering some species .
 Some environmental advocates would halt many, if not all, forms of deep-sea fishing to allow the natural populations to recover from overfishing .
 Another approach favored by others is managing both the intensity and modalities of fishing . Another approach is managing the intensity of fishing and managing the modalities .
 Of course, prohibiting or putting restrictions on fishing tuna or hunting whales requires international agreement and enforcement measures . Policymakers must also agree adequate enforcement measures to assure compliance .
 Even fish farms at sea and their freshwater counterparts on land pose additional environmental challenges . Fish farms also pose additional challenges for the environment .
 Raising fish in sea pens often requires extensive fishing to feed them . genetically altered fish that escape breeding areas at sea threaten natural populations . Fish that escape their breeding area at sea are threatened by genetic altered fish .
 Sanitary conditions in these pens may also be problematic, not to mention feed residues and antibiotic effects on fish populations . Feed residues and antibiotics may also have an impact on fish population .
 Yet to further restrict fishing comes at the expense of even further reduction in employment in the fishing industry . The decision to restrict fishing will further reduce the number of jobs in the industry .
 Global population is the key underlying factor in stress on the global environment . The world's population has caused a number of factors to stress the environment, including climate change .
 Some demographers project that within three decades of so world population will have passed nine billion persons . Some believe the population will reach nine billion people within the next few decades .
 The concern, however, over the carrying capacity of the Earth is certainly not new . The concern over the Earth's carrying capacity is not new, but it's not new.
 Thomas Malthus published “An Essay on the Principle of Population” on the eve of the 19th century in 1798 .
 He worried that food supplies would not keep pace with population growth . He said he worried about food supplies not being able to feed the population .
 Malthus acknowledged that technology would contribute to increased food production . He said technology would help increase production of food by 2050 .
 At some point, he believed that human ingenuity would run up against the Earth’s limits to produce, resulting in awful consequences for the human condition .
 Global population has grown dramatically from the hundreds of millions of his time to more than six billion people today . In the almost two centuries since Malthus made these predictions, global population has .
 Through industrialization and modern medicine, population has continued to grow even more significantly . The population has increased significantly in recent years .
 From the 1820s to the 1920s, the global population doubled and reached two billion . The population doubled in the early 1900s and the population grew to 2 billion .
 Doubling populations when numbers are in the millions is challenging enough; doubling when the base is in billions is potentially catastrophic . Doubling the base of the population in billions would be potentially catastrophic, experts say .
 Current estimates for the end of the 21st century put the numbers in a wide range from about 11 billion to more than 15 billion people . Current estimates put the number of people in a range of about 11 to 15 billion .
 A convenient way to estimate the impact of population growth rate is the ""Rule of 72,"" which is also used by financial analysts as a quick rule of thumb in estimating the effect of compound interest rates on the growth of principal over time .
 The length of time in years that a population can be expected to double is 72 divided by the growth rate . The rate of growth is based on the length of years in years the population can expect to double, 72 divided into 72 .
 A 2 percent growth rate means that population can be expected to double in 36 years . That's assuming that the 2 percent rate remains constant over the period .
 It is easy to overestimate future population size by projecting present growth rates . It is also easy to underestimate future population growth rates by projecting future growth rates at present rates .
 There is a danger in projecting present population growth rates for developing countries too far into the future . Population growth rates tend to decline as societies industrialize, say experts .
 Unexpected catastrophes due to natural disasters, widespread famine, disease, or warfare will also have a negative impact .
 If assumptions on reduced population growth rates are too optimistic, future population size can just as easily be underestimated . On the other hand, if assumptions on population growth rate are too high, future size can also be underestimated, experts say .
 The push for industrial development in Europe and North America in the 19th-century world of Thomas Malthus had enormous impact on the environment as forests were cleared, resources mined, and factories put into operation .
 Consumption of nonrenewable energy resources and other minerals increased dramatically, reducing stocks and adding to ground, sea, and air pollution levels . Consumption of other minerals and energy resources increased dramatically .
 Production of goods and services for increasing numbers of peoples has had adverse environmental impact, but continued development thus far has still been sustainable . Production has had an adverse impact on the environment, but it is still sustainable .
 The negative environmental impact of the Industrial Revolution was less than it would have been had population levels been as high as they are today . However, the negative impact on the environment was less likely to have been the result of population growth .
 Resource depletion and environmental degradation on a global scale could undermine any capacity to continue producing at ever-increasing levels . Resource depletion is a global problem, according to experts .
 Renewable resources would also suffer from growing scarcity as demand grows . The implications for arable land, fisheries, and the degradation of aquifers, rivers, and lakes .
 As a result of desertification, the poor often travel great distances to secure potable water . The poor often have to travel great distance to secure water .
 Some observers of international relations and world politics are concerned resource wars might become more likely in the near future . Some observers say resource wars are likely to be more likely .
 Major cities in the developing world are ringed with slums as a result of migration from the countryside . Slums are a sign of environmental degradation in the world .
 As population growth outpaces available public services, the quality of life including the physical environment inevitably suffers . As population grows, public services are scarce and services are under pressure .
 Whatever the causes of the incremental rise in global temperature, the impact is evident around the globe . I SLIDESHOW: The impact of climate change is evident across the world .
 In this photo a slab of ice falls from a glacier in Disko Bay, Greenland, Greenland . The photo was taken by a helicopter over Greenland .
 Scarcity of renewable resources such as forests and cropland rarely cause resource wars between states . But scarcity of these resources rarely causes resource wars, experts say .
 Japan’s attempts to secure oil, minerals, and other resources in China and Southeast Asia during World War II and, in part, Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 to secure disputed oil fields . Examples include Japan's attempts to . secure oil and minerals in China, Southeast Asia
 Oil and minerals are understandably of greater concern to states, as they can more easily be converted into state power . Land, fish, and forests are more easily converted to state power than land, fish and forests .
 Most likely resource to generate conflict among states is freshwater in lakes, rivers, and aquifers shared by two or more states . The most likely renewable resource is freshwater .
 Shared water resources that have caused disputes include the Nile, Jordan, and Euphrates rivers in the Middle East . The Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra rivers in south Asia; and the Rio Grande, Colorado, and Parana rivers in Americas .
 States upstream may not only pollute the water; as a means of coercive diplomacy, they may also threaten to dam the river, thus reducing downstream flow . States upstream can pollute water, as a result of threatening to dam it .
 North Korea announced it would build a hydroelectric dam on a tributary of the Han River . The Han River flows down to South Korea’s capital of Seoul .
 In the Middle East, the Euphrates flows from Turkey through Syria and Iraq and into the Persian Gulf . In the region, it flows through Syria, Iraq and Syria .
 Syria and Iraq both rely on the Euphrates for drinking water, irrigation, industrial use, and hydroelectric power . The Euphrates is the source of drinking water for drinking, irrigation and industrial use .
 In 1974, Iraq threatened to bomb the al-Thawra Dam in Syria, claiming the dam had reduced Iraq’s share of the water . Iraq also threatened to attack the dam in 1974, claiming it had reduced its share of water .
 Turkey completed the Ataturk Dam in 1990, the largest of twenty-one proposed dams in a major water supply plan to improve hydroelectric power and irrigation . In 1990, Turkey completed a major project to improve the country's water supply and power supply .
 Both Syria and Iraq protested, viewing the project as a potential source of Turkish coercive diplomacy . The project has been criticized by both countries for being too close to Turkey .
 In mid-1990 Turkey threatened to restrict water flow to Syria in the hope of forcing Syria to end support for Kurdish rebels operating in southern Turkey . The fears were perhaps not unwarranted, but they were perhaps unwarranted .
 completion of the Turkish projects reduces water to Syria by up to 40 percent and to Iraq by 80 percent . The projects will also reduce water to Iraq and Syria by 40 percent .
 Numerous other states also depend on surface water from outside their borders . The U.S. also relies heavily on surface waters from outside its borders .
 Egypt and Ethiopia have been quarreling over Nile River water . More recently, they have been feuding over Nile water .
 The world’s longest river, the Blue Nile tributary, begins in the Ethiopian highlands . The Blue Nile is the longest river in the world, with the world's longest river .
 Egypt is the largest consumer of the water, but now Ethiopia and also the upstream countries of the White Nile have banded together to rewrite the 1959 water treaty that favors Egypt . The treaty favors Egypt, but Ethiopia, Burundi, Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda
 Ethiopia has overtaken Egypt as Africa’s second-most populous state . Ethiopia needs not just water but also hydroelectric power . Ethiopia is now Africa's second most populous state and needs more water and power .
 Chinese banks are underwriting part of the cost of the turbines and electrical equipment . Chinese banks will also be underwriting some of the costs .
 The second question is whether there is a link between group-identity conflicts and large-scale migration caused by environmental stress . Group-Identity Conflicts is supported by substantial empirical evidence, authors say .
 Environmental factors that may lead people to migrate occur slowly over time . Social and political problems that arise in a host country also may take time to develop . There is no sudden explosion of ethnic conflict. The link in any particular case has to be carefully traced .
 In fact, ethnic conflict may not even occur, as in many cases immigrants simply suffer quietly in isolated misery . In some cases, immigrants suffer quietly, isolated misery.
 The situation is quite different in such cases as Bangladesh and northeast India . But the situation is different in Bangladesh and Northeast India, says CNN.com . Bangladesh is one of India's most populous countries .
 Large numbers of Bangladeshi have moved to India, causing group-identity conflicts . Over the years, large numbers of Bangladeshis have moved .
 Degradation of the soil is less problematic than the increasing size of the Bangladeshi population . Degradation is less problem than the increase of the population .
 Almost all of the arable land in the country is already under cultivation . Land scarcity and poverty is exacerbated by flooding, says experts .
 It is estimated that migrants from Bangladesh have increased the population of neighboring regions of India by 12 to 17 million . At most 2 million accounted for by migration resulting from the 1971 war between India and Pakistan that created Bangladesh .
 This massive influx of peoples has affected land distribution patterns, economic relations, and the balance of political power among ethnic and religious groups . Land distribution patterns and economic relations have been affected by the influx .
 In Assam, members of the Lalung tribe have accused Bengali immigrants of taking the best farmland . In the state of Assam they have accused them of taking their farmland .
 In 1983, during an election campaign, nearly 1,700 Bengali were massacred in the village of Nellie . The massacre took place during the election campaign in 1983 .
 Bengali influx has reduced the original Buddhist and Christian inhabitants to less than 30 percent of the population . Similar tensions exist in Tripura, where the original Buddhists and Christians are reduced to just about 30 percent .
 An insurgency between 1980 and 1988 ended only after the central government agreed to return land to the native Tripuris and work to stop the influx of Bangladeshi . This change in the local balance of power led to an insurgency .
 The third question is whether severe environmental scarcity increases economic deprivation, disrupts key institutions, and hence contributes directly to civil strife . The answer is partially supported by empirical evidence .
 The first part of the equation is environmental scarcity leading to economic deprivation . The second part is economic deprivation, and the first part is the scarcity .
 Soil erosion in upland Indonesia costs the agricultural economy about half a billion dollars in loss of income per year . The country's agricultural economy is estimated to be worth $500 million a year .
 The destruction of the dry land in Burkina Faso in Africa reduces the country’s gross domestic product by an estimated 9 percent a year due to fuel-wood loss, lower yields of crops, and reduction in numbers of livestock .
 China provides an interesting example as it is best known for its booming economy . Over the past thirty years, China has seen a boom in the coastal regions of China .
 The combined costs of environmental degradation are estimated to be 15 percent of China’s gross national product . It is estimated that the combined costs are about 15 percent . China is the world's largest economy .
 The cost derives from such factors as lower crop yields because of water, soil, and air pollution . Loss of farmland caused by soil erosion and construction; flooding and loss of soil nutrients from erosion .
 The last part of the equation concerning the political effects of environmental scarcity and economic deprivation applies to the state . The state is suffering from environmental scarcity, economic deprivation and environmental deprivation .
 The loss of water, soil, and forests results in demands for new dams, irrigation systems, and reforestation programs . Given the precarious finances of many governments, many governments demand new dams .
 If those living in the countryside do not receive adequate government support, rural poverty increases . Rural poverty increases if rural poverty does not receive enough government support .
 This may lead to an exodus to the city in the often vain hope of finding a better livelihood . This may be the first time people have left the country for a better life .
 The demands then take the form of calls for housing, transportation, food, and employment . The demands include housing, transport, food and housing .
 With the increase in urban population come subsidies that strain financial coffers and misallocate capital . Subsidies strain the coffers and strain the government's resources .
 State intervention often breeds corruption and tends to concentrate financial and political power in the hands of a small elite . Such state intervention tends to breed corruption and concentrates power in small elite, says CNN.com .
 When elites are drawn from one ethnic group, urban unrest is possible, if not likely . Urban unrest could be possible, but it's not likely likely, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Urban unrest is not likely"
 This is not to suggest that conflict in the Third World is simply a function of environmental scarcity and economic deprivation . It is not the only reason for conflict that has occurred in the Middle East .
 "The idea that poverty in and of itself leads to political violence has proven simply to be untrue," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Other factors such as conceptions of what is economically just, perceptions of economic and political opportunities, the coercive power of the state, and the ability of political elites to exploit and politicize the poverty issue, all play a role .
 In 2000, a UN report was issued on illicit ‘blood diamond’ trafficking and arms procurement by the UNITA rebel group in Angola . The report was published in 2000 on illicit 'blood diamond' trafficking .
 A World Bank study was issued on the relation between natural resource predation and the incidence of civil war in 2007 . That same year, a World Bank report was issued .
 The greatest risk factor for civil war was not ethnic antagonism, but the availability of easily procured “lootable” resources, study finds .
 The population explosion will occur in the developing regions of the world, those least able to deal with such a development . Population explosion will be in developing regions, says the author .
 Realists claim the anarchic structure of the international system makes it difficult for states to work together . Nonrenewable resources such as precious minerals will continue to be fought over to finance wars .
 National interests and anarchy emphasize what divides states and people from one another, says John Defterios . He says anarchy and national interests are what divides people .
 Describe the limitations of UN-sponsored environmental conferences and the roles played by nongovernmental organizations in attempts to establish international norms and environmental regimes . In the case of the physical environment, however, it is apparent to even the most obtuse leader that environmental concerns transcend state .
 Paul Collier, “Economic Causes of Civil Conflict and Their Implications for Policy,” unpublished paper. S/200/203, March 10, 2000; . Collier: ‘Economic causes of civil conflict and their implications for policy.’
 Industrial pollution in one country can drift downstream or blow across borders . Environmental degradation can lead to economic refugees looking for a better life . The implications of global warming and ozone-layer depletion affect people around the world .
 liberal institutionalists have been particularly interested in tracking the drafting and implementation of environmental international agreements . Liberal institutionalists are interested in analyzing the evolution of international norms and their role in the construction of environmental regimes .
 Even when the environmental implications of industrial and economic practices are accepted, agreement on what needs to be done can be difficult to achieve . As noted at the outset of this chapter, even when the implications are accepted it can be hard to achieve.
 Sustainable development is based on the premise that there needs to be a balance between consumption and population size within overall limits imposed by nature . The U.N. and its various affiliate organizations call sustainable development a "balance"
 Environmental degradation can also impede production of food and other goods and services needed to sustain increasing populations . Environmental degradation is also a problem for the future of the planet .
 Without an improvement in resource and environmental stewardship, development ultimately will be undermined . Eventually there will be little or nothing left of nature to be exploited, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Without accelerated economic growth in the poorest countries in the near term, environmental policies will fail . Poor peasants are likely to exploit the land to the maximum merely in order to survive . But without economic growth, environmental policy will fail, says David Cameron .
 The U.N. recognizes that trying to implement such a balancing act is not a function of the ‘ignorant’ poor failing to understand the implications of their actions . Developed countries often also focus on the near term, tending to discount considerations that lie in the future
 The advanced economies in wealthier countries have the greatest adverse impact on resource depletion, pollution, and other forms of environmental degradation .
 Hard thinking has to take place on the trade-offs between protecting the environment and economic development . In any event, to avoid turning the concept of sustainable development into a buzzword or slogan lacking meaningful content .
 Such a dialogue is not simply a matter of scientific evidence, but political debate as well, as well as political debate . It is through politics that policies will be decided, and policies are decided .
 UN-sponsored conferences have addressed many of these issues . UN conferences have been held in the past .
 The UN Conference on Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 1992 is a good example of a forum that brought diverse governmental and nongovernmental actors together . The conference on environment and development was held in 1992 .
 The key to successful environmental agreements is not policymakers signing protocols, but creating enforcement and monitoring mechanisms that encourage or shame states to keep their written commitments . International Environmental Regime Agreements are selected from selected countries .
 Do an internet search on three of these agreements and try to determine what has actually been done to solve the problems that are supposedly being addressed by the international community . Try to find out what has been done by the world to solve these problems .
 The Rio Declaration was later endorsed by the UN General Assembly and the creation of the Commission on Sustainable Development . Commission is an intergovernmental body of some fifty-two members that serves as a focal point within the UN system for coordination of various UN programs .
 Much of Rio Conference consisted of world leaders posturing and mouthing platitudes about their concern for the environment . From the perspective of some environmental activists, much of the Rio conference consisted of posturing .
 Hundreds of pages of proposals for international and national action were produced, but not much has happened . Hundreds of proposals were produced but little has happened so far .
 For the poorest countries, the problem is not simply lack of will but lack of resources to implement a program of sustainable development that balances economic and environmental needs at a time when population continues to grow .
 Environmental activists note that the sustainable development concept also places developed countries on the hook . Environmentalists note that sustainable development concepts also place developed countries at the bottom .
 These countries consume more both per capita and in the aggregate than do those in the developing world . These countries, after all, far and away consume more per capita than do any of the world's developing countries .
 It is not always certain whether developing world population growth rates or the expanding appetites for the consumption of raw materials on the part of the industrial nations is the greater danger . Industrial nations are more concerned about the impact of population growth .
 A related international effort was undertaken in 1994 at a meeting under UN auspices in Cairo, Egypt, to address global population growth in relation to economic development, the environment and social concerns .
 A Cairo declaration addressing measures to slow population growth rates eventually passed . Some Islamic countries even refused to send representatives to the conference .
 International conferences may well reflect the absence of consensus among the parties . As such, some international conferences may be held without consensus among parties .
 UN Conference Diplomacy on Global Political Economy and Society diplomacy . Conference diplomacy under UN auspices has brought states, nongovernmental organizations and individuals together to address issues of common concern in the global economy and society .
 In a number of cases the recurrent problem has been lack of follow-through to verbal commitments, as was the case in the 2009 Copenhagen conference on the environment .
 A global fund was pledged to help poor countries adapt to climate change . The fund will be set up to help them adapt to the climate change in poor countries .
 Domestic political processes may preclude ratification of treaties and other agreements reached . Even when an international consensus is worked out, international consensus may not be worked out . The Law of the Sea negotiations in the late 1970s dealt with navigation rights and economic uses of offshore waters .
 Treaties could go for decades without ratification when effective domestic opposition is in place . Treaties may go for years without ratification without effective opposition to them .
 Reservations or interpretations appended to international agreements can alter concessions made by negotiators or change substantial portions of agreements made in the give-and-take of international negotiations . Reservations and interpretations can even alter concessions .
 The impact of transnational nongovernmental organizations on environmental issues is perhaps more evident than in any other area of global politics . Of course, other parties may not accept such changes made unilaterally by individual countries .
 Private transnational organizations influenced the agenda at Rio and Cairo conferences . Private organizations pressured states to hold these conferences in the first place, writes CNN.com .
 They have also played an important watchdog role in a wide variety of functional areas, ranging from environmental protection of the oceans and forests, Antarctica and the ozone layer .
 The World Wildlife Fund, Greenpeace, Conservation International, Friends of the Earth, World Business Council for Sustainable Development, Earth Council exemplify diversity of actors that compose global civil society .
 Transnational organizations demonstrate that instruments of power are not solely available to the state . Transnational groups demonstrate they are not only available to state, they say .
 Greenpeace has its own media facilities, allowing it to produce video spots and photographs for news organizations . Greenpeace has been in contact with the U.S. government for more than 30 years . Greenpeace says it has no plans to use the facilities for the media .
 Greenpeace and other environmental organizations can change public perceptions of the activities of states as well as nonstate actors . Greenpeace says it hopes to change the public's view of states' activities .
 They have changed whaling’s original image of man versus vicious, Moby Dick-like monsters of the deep . They have replaced the image of rapacious hunters slaughtering peaceful, nurturing mammals with rapacious hunting .
 Using the power of modern communications to alter how people view topics of potential international concern requires money . Money is an obvious source of power in the world .
 Since the 1970s the budgets of the largest transnational environmental groups have been greater than the amount spent by most states on environmental issues . Most states have spent more than $1.5 billion a year on environmental causes .
 Some of these organizations have budgets that are quite impressive even compared to the UN Environment Programme . Some of the organizations' budgets are bigger than the UN's .
 Greenpeace International took in $290 million in 2010 and the World Wildlife Fund $224 million . UNEP’s 2010-11 budget was $446 million .
 Initial successes of such organizations are often followed by further successes . First successes of these organizations will be followed by success .
 Greenpeace and the World Wildlife Fund have enrolled over seven million members around the globe . Greenpeace has a well-developed staff and cadre of scientific experts able to contest the arguments and evidence .
 Experts often provide input into the development of programs such as the Global Environment Outlook, sponsored by the UN Environment Programme . These experts often provide insight into the programs .
 Such NGOs illustrate that the state is not the only focus for collective efforts to affect world politics . Such NGOs are examples of how they can influence world politics, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Transnational environmental organizations contribute to global governance through their influence on how publics, states, and corporations perceive international issues . Transnational organizations as practitioners contribute to . global governance .
 Such organizations rely not on force but rather on persuasion to help change and define the boundaries and conceptions of what are considered “good’s ecological policies . Such organizations use persuasion not force to change what is considered ‘good” ecological policies.
 Environmental policies are framed by politicizing such actions as whaling or pollution, such as pollution, they say . In other words, they work to restructure the “environment” within which environmental policies are . The issues historically have been viewed as simply economic in nature .
 Interaction of transnational actors aimed at solving global problems that affect more than one state or region . Most important, transnational environmental organizations have used this noncoercive power in efforts designed to change the behavior of states and corporations governance .
 Access to natural resources has always been of concern to realists analyzing competition among states . Fish and ozone depletion, biodiversity, and water pollution seem to many realists to border on the trendy or faddish topics .
 Environmental issues are directly tied to economic and development concerns . They may also stimulate conflict among states and groups . Environmental issues may also spark conflict among groups .
 To pursue a policy based on a narrow definition of “national security, may be counterproductive . The issue at hand transcends borders and requires international cooperation, says Julian Zelizer .
 ‘International security’ or ‘human security” may be the most appropriate concept when discussing the global environment . If so, ‘international security' or “human security' may be appropriate .
 Explain the world's environmental challenges in terms of the atmosphere, land, biodiversity, freshwater, coastal and marine areas, and fisheries . Explain the environmental challenges the world faces . Use this information to help students understand the issues facing them .
 Garrett Hardin's famous ""Tragedy of the Commons"" makes an important point about the difficuity of achieving collective action . The commons—the environmentcan be understood as a collective or public good .
 In each case practitioners and policymakers often have to weigh a concern for the environment with economic considerations such as jobs . The environment and jobs are important issues for policymakers .
 The former United States vice president and senator focuses global attention on climate change . The former U.S. vice president says climate change is the future of America .
 Both volumes take up other aspects of the environmental crisis predictions on the global agenda .
 Describe the argument that environmental issues undermine international security by impacting resources and precipitating group-identity conflicts . Describe and evaluate the argument for environmental issues to undermine international .
 Conflict is most likely over nonrenewable resources such as oil and minerals . The most likely source of conflict over a renewable asset is freshwater . Conflict is likely to be over freshwater, not oil or minerals .
 Ethnic conflict may occur due to environmental stress . Evidence partially supports the hypothesis that economic deprivation contributes to civil strife .
 Describe the limitations of UN-sponsored environmental conferences and the roles played by nongovernmental organizations in attempts to establish international norms and environmental regimes . The New Landscape explores the role of NGOs in setting up international norms .
 International conferences sponsored by international organizations draw attention to global environmental problems . International conferences are held in the United States and Canada .
 Transgovernmental organizations play an important role in publicizing environmental issues . But they are often long on rhetoric and planning documents, but fail due to conflicting state interests and lack of follow-through .
 Greenpeace and the World Wildlife Fund are transnational organizations such as Greenpeace and World Wildlife . Greenpeace is a transnational organization that supports transnational environmental causes . Greenpeace says it's a good example of how transnational groups can be trusted to protect wildlife .
 The tragedy of the commons illustrates the danger of mad cow disease . The dangers of collaboration. the challenge of collective action. the impact of high population growth rates in the Third World. The impact of the . impact of . high . population growth . in the . Third World .
 A major issue concerning the atmosphere involves pollution caused by highaltitude jets . high-energy radon emissions . nuclear leakage from satellites. a hole in the ozone layer. high-altitude .
 Burning fossil fuels over many decades increases the overall volume of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and oceans . Burning fossil fuel increases the volume of lead in the planet's atmosphere and ocean water .
 The extent of the loss of biodiversity is calculated against what is termed the tragedy of the commons . the stag hunt outcome. the CFC index. the natural rate of extinction. the . CFC Index .
 Approximately one-third of the world’s population lives in countries that suffer from what scientists term little or low water stress. moderate water stress . moderate-to-high water stress is no water stress, scientists say . moderate to high water stress can be seen in some countries .
 Thomas Malthus wrote about population growth. environmental degradation. The causes of war. pollution in the British Isles.
 Countries involved in disputes over water include all of the following EXCEPT Syria . Syria is one of the most populous countries in the world with water disputes .
 The premise that there needs to be a balance between consumption and population size within the overall limits imposed by the environment is referred to as ecological awareness. sustainable development. environmental protocol. .
 International environmental agreements have addressed all of the following EXCEPT whaling . tropical timber, water levels in underground aquifers and biodiversity are among them . Whaling has been addressed by international agreements .
 The conference in Cairo, Egypt, that addressed population issues achieved a consensus on the nature of the problem . A consensus was reached on the goals to be reached, but little if any consensus then or subsequently .
 Transnational organizations concerned with environmental issues include all of the following . World Wildlife Eund. Eund . The organization is concerned about environmental issues .
 One of Greenpeace's most famous campaigns involved whaling . coral reefs . the launching of satellites into space . nuclear testing on Pacific atolls in the 1950s .
 Balance of power is a key concept among realists that is often defined as a condition of equilibrium among states . Balance of trade is the difference between the goods and services a country exports and what it imports .
 A negative value is the amount by which imports exceed exports . A positive value is a positive value by which exports exceed imports . The value is based on the amount of imports and exports by country's exports .
 Causes, causality, causal factors that occur prior to and appear to produce certain outcomes or effects . Factors that occur before or appear to have produced certain outcomes . Causes, causes, causes and consequences of causes .
 Some causes may be necessary, but not sufficient to produce a given effect . Others are permissive underlying causes that allow or pose no effective obstacle to certain outcomes or effects to occur . International anarchy is said to pose no obstacle to the onset of war between or among them .
 What is to be explained causally (for example, war) is the dependent variable, the factors explaining it referred to as independent variables . The factors explaining what is to explain causally are the independent variables, such as war . The independent variables are the dependent variables .
 Factors that may facilitate, constrain, or block the effect of an independent variable are referred to as intervening variables . In intervening variables are factors that can facilitate or constrain the effects of independent variables . For more information on intervening variables, visit http://www.jenn.com/
 neoclassical economists would see value as a function of supply and demand . Eater Eater Eater: Neoclassical economics sees value based on supply, demand .
 The grand strategy of the United States to deal with the Soviet Union during the Cold War . Containment was the U.S. strategy to contain the USSR .
 Containing enemies or would-be adversaries through diplomatic means backed up by the threat of force remains an alternative to actually having to use force in armed interventions .
 Crisis is characterized by surprise, high threat to a state’s values or interest, and short decision time . Argues that theory must be connected to practice. Crisis A situation characterized by . surprise, . high threat . to state's values or interests .
 Critical theorists claim all knowledge is historical and political in nature . This also entails a critique of positivist-empiricist approaches to knowledge . Critical theorists say all knowledge should be historical, political and historical .
 When violence becomes commonplace, it may acquire acceptance or legitimacy in a community . Cultural relativism is belief that moral or ethical principles are not universal, but rather are tied to particular situational or cultural contexts .
 Customs union states have agreed to eliminate tariffs on imports and other barriers to trade among themselves . States also have established a common external tariff imposed on imports from nonmembers . Customary international law found in the common practice of states established over time .
 While conventionally focusing on the state, it can also be applied to the economic well-being of individuals . The state is responsible for the state's welfare, not just the state .
 Variants include unipolar, bipolar, bipolar or dual hegemony, and multipolar or collective hegemony . Variants of hegemony are unipolar or bipolar, dual or dual .
 It may be associated with a state, religion, or ethnicity, and have political implications . It may also have a political meaning .
 Just-war theory Arguments as to the accepted circumstances in which states can go to war and conduct warfare . Legal and political rights A narrow construction of rights . Legitimacy A right to govern and exercise power based on popular acceptance . Levels of analysis framework A way to organize thinking
 Under international law such seizures should be nondiscriminatory and accompanied by fair compensation, says the U.N.N.-based government .
 Neoclassical economics departed from the labor theory of value held by Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and Karl Marx by focusing on price as a function of supply and demand . It introduced such market-related concepts as utility, marginal utility, and marginal revenue .
 Realists tend to hold a pessimistic view, emphasizing the struggle for power and influence among political units acting in a rational, unitary manner in pursuit of objectives grounded in their separate, often divergent interests .
 Refugee is displaced because of war or other political or economic causes . Realpolitik is a German term for power politics . Refugee is a refugee displaced from war .
 Refugees may flee or be forced to leave a country, or they may be internally displaced persons within their own state . Refugees may have been forced to flee or forced to .
 World subject to influence of one great power is unipolar, to two principal powers is bipolar, bipolar, and to three or more is multipolar . Three or more great powers are multipolar; to three great powers is unipolar .