 The question of America’s intentions in Cuba may sound simple, yet the answers are not . Cite This Essay . Download this essay to help you understand the complexities of the situation in Cuba .
 The essay will attempt to make the reader understand why America spent decades trying to intervene in Cuba and overthrow the Castro government . The essay attempts to explain why the U.S. spent years trying to overthrow the Cuban government .
 Numerous American presidents launched covert operations in Cuba to destabilize the government and failed . Numerous presidents have tried to destabilise the government but failed .
 The first section of the essay is about the role of businessmen and other interest groups that had a monumental stake in Cuba . The second section is about how American business was negatively affected by the reforms undertaken by the Cuban government .
 The second section of the essay is about the threat of communism spreading in Latin America . The essay concludes that communism is spreading in the region .
 The third section is about Castro turning to communism and the Soviet Union . Castro turned to communism in the 1960s, according to the book .
 The fourth section is about the Kennedys’ obsession with Cuba relating to the Bay of Pigs and the Cuban missile crisis . The book is also about the Kennedy family's obsession with the island nation .
 The purpose of the Central Intelligence Agency was to undertake the dirty work of U.S. foreign policy . The CIA was created to do the "dirty work of American foreign policy"
 Various actors in Washington had stake in Cuba, like the U.S. ambassador to Brazil and Peru, who owned a gas company in Havana . The United States ambassador to . Brazil and . Peru owned a company in Cuba .
 He was closely associated with executives working at United Fruit Company, who also had stake in Cuba . The company also had a stake in the country .
 To understand the extent of penetration of U.S. businesses in Cuba, this essay explores some figures . This essay explores the figures .
 President Kennedy once remarked that U.S. companies owned 40% of Cuban sugar lands . President Kennedy said that United States companies owned . 40% Cuban sugar land .
 American investments in public utilities in Cuba was $316 million in 1956, which comprised 90% of stake in public utility companies . The U.S. investments in Cuban utilities in 1956 comprised 90 per cent of stake .
 American capital controlled 50% of the stake in public service railways in Cuba and American banks had 25% of bank deposits . American banks controlled 25% deposits in Cuba .
 U.S. supplied arms and advisors to Batista, especially to crush the rebellion . Batista represented stability to American interests despite engaging nationalistic rhetoric .
 To secure their business interests in Cuba, it was necessary to maintain internal stability . To secure business interests, the Cuban government needed to maintain stability .
 Most of Cuba was under the influence of the ‘Sugar King’ and the American market . Most of the Cuban population was under influence of American influence .
 American-owned industries received nearly 40% of the profit from the sugar industry . The sugar industry is one of the largest in the world .
 A minority of the population owned and controlled most of the resources and part of this minority were American citizens . Part of the American citizens of the U.S. are American citizens.
 This contributed to a sense of resentment among the Cubans, as many were suffering in extreme poverty . Many Cubans were suffering from extreme poverty, according to CNN.com .
 Large cities in Cuba were cleaned up and Havana was safer than it was a few years before Castro came to power . Havana is safer now than it is before Castro took power .
 The proposed land reforms were not taken seriously at first by American businessmen . The land reform proposals were taken seriously by the U.S. in the 1930s .
 In June 1959, Castro was determined to make Cuba less reliant on the United States . Castro wanted to make the country less dependent on the U.S.
 In October 1958, a meeting was conducted at the State Department regarding the Cuban political situation and consequences for American interests . The meeting was held in October 1958 .
 Some of the people in attendance included representatives from Lone Star Cement, Freeport Sulphur, United Fruit Company, etc. The event was held in Freeport, Texas, on October 1 .
 Corporate interests that were present in a meeting with the FBI in 1958 included King Ranch, The Texas Company, Chase Manhattan Bank, Manati Sugar Company, among many others .
 Large prostitution and gambling rings had come to a halt following the revolution . They would find unlikely allies in the Mafia, whose large prostitution rings had stopped .
 Certain businessmen who were worried about communism in the Castro movement raised their concerns . But the State Department seemed unperturbed at that point in time .
 Satellite King Ranches were joint ventures spread out in Latin America and other parts of the world . Satellite King Ranch Ranches are joint ventures with satellite owners . Satellite king ranches are spread across the globe .
 J Kleberg, Jr. was the president of King Ranch, the largest private ranch in America . Kleberg was the owner of the largest ranch in the country .
 Becerra in Cuba was the satellite ranch that was the most important in the eyes of Kleberg . The ranch in Cuba is one of the largest in the world .
 Castro confiscated many of the properties he confiscated in Cuba were US-owned properties . Castro confiscated the properties in Cuba in order to keep Cuba from Cuba .
 It was determined by the State Department that American-owned property expropriated was worth $5 to $6 million . The State Department determined that the expropriation was worth about $5-6 million.
 American businessmen were against the land reform program and communicated their dissatisfaction to the U.S. government . American businessmen protested against land reform .
 The Cuban expropriation program and development of friendly relations with the Communist bloc gave President Eisenhower the justification to cut the sugar quota .
 In Washington, the president formed the “Special Group’s . The group consisted of the Foreign Advisory Intelligence Board and the Forty Committee .
 This was required for approving covert actions for which the President would be otherwise accountable for. This is required for approval of covert actions . This was needed to approve covert actions that would otherwise be otherwise held accountable for .
 This way, the President would not be held accountable for the illegal actions of the U.S. President. This way of the President, he would not have been held accountable, he said .
 The Special Group was a medium that enabled the CIA to participate in policy-making under an official cover . The group was created by the CIA under the cover of the CIA .
 Kleberg pursued a resolution to finish Castro politically, and in a CIA document, it is revealed that Kleberg and other American businessmen had been willing to fund an assassination attempt of Fidel Castro .
 Malone met with Romualdi, the chief agent for labour operations in Latin America, who was leading CIA-managed ‘Free Trade Union of the American Federation of Labour’ which prepared people to challenge communism .
 Business interests lobbied for U.S. intervention to topple Cuban government so as to further their respective agendas . It is clear from the opposition from various business interests who possessed influence with the higher level that they lobbied for American intervention .
 Cuban agents were suspected at that time to have instigated revolutions in nearly every Latin American country during the 1960s . According to Robbins, Cuban agents instigated revolution in Latin American countries .
 The activities included guerrilla operations in Argentina, devising assassination plots in Colombia, transporting arms to Venezuela and provoking student riots in Puerto Rico .
 Guerrilla training schools based in Cuba produced thousands of Latin American insurgents who went back to their respective countries to lead revolutions .
 Reagan Administration’s reports detailed the threats Cuba posed to the security of America . Reagan Administration: Cuba posed the threats to the U.S.
 Havana was supplying weapons, training and guiding revolutionaries in Nicaragua and El Salvador, according to reports . Havana supplied weapons, trained and guided revolutionaries in both countries . Havana is believed to have been supplying weapons and training to revolutionaries .
 It was also believed that Castro’s government was providing guerrilla training and asylum to rebels and terrorists from various countries of Central and South America . Castro's government is believed to be providing guerillas with guerrilla training .
 A State Department report accuses Cuba of organizing a drug-smuggling ring based out of Columbia to ensure finance for guerrilla activities in these countries . The report says Cuba organized the drug ring to finance guerrilla activities . Cuba has been accused of organizing the drug smuggling ring .
 Washington’s perception of Cuba as a threat is more likely to be exaggerated . However, these charges were more likely exaggerations due to Washington's perception of the Cuban threat .
 Castro’s government did not possess the military capabilities or the support of allies necessary to conduct a major campaign to launch revolutionaries across Latin America . Castro's government didn’t possess the . military capabilities, the . support of . allies needed to launch a major . campaign, the
 During the 1970s, various American intelligence analysts came to admit that these charges were exaggerated greatly . The charges were later found to be exaggerated greatly by U.S. analysts .
 During the period between 1961-1969, there was a maximum of 1,500 guerrillas trained in Cuba, which did not match the estimate of 2,500-2,500 per year .
 The threat of such revolutions was manufactured by America for overthrowing Castro’s government . America spent millions of dollars to supply weapons to the rest of the hemisphere . The threat was made by the U.S. to overthrow Castro's government .
 America employed various weapons in its arsenal to overthrow Castro from economic and political destabilisation . America employed propaganda and even assassination attempts to overthrow Fidel Castro .
 This is regarded as one of the most large-scale campaigns which was ultimately ineffective . This was regarded as the most successful of the campaigns which were unsuccessful .
 The U.S. hostility towards Castro’s government can be explained as a combination of the Monroe Doctrine and the Cold war . The United States hostility towards the Castro government is a result of the Cold War and Monroe Doctrine, according to the author .
 U.S. covert operators were wary of the domestic policies in Cuba, especially the land reform and nationalization of most American companies . According to Robbins, one of the reasons United States was obsessed with Cuba was because they were wary .
 Castro openly adopting Marxist-Leninism and merging with the socialist bloc . America could not accept the revolution’s foreign policies, Castro said . Castro's foreign policies were the result of the revolution, he said .
 Robbins: These were the strongest reasons why America viewed Cuba as a threat that must be contained . As per Robbins, these were the strong reasons why the U.S. viewed Cuba a threat .
 The Soviets sent a trade mission to Cuba only 13 months after Castro in power, signing an agreement in which they would buy 5 million tons of sugar for the next 5 years . Further, the Soviets signed a deal to buy sugar for five years .
 This signalled to the American government that Cuba was willing to risk trading with the Soviet despite the tensions with America at that point of time . The Cuban government signed a deal with the U.S. despite tensions with the US .
 U.S. effectively deprived America of possible economic sanctions they could use against Cuba as a weapon . They also effectively deprived the U.K. of possible diplomatic and economic sanctions .
 The trade agreement also included sale of crude oil by the Soviet in exchange for Cuban sugar . The deal was part of the Soviet-Cuban trade agreement .
 The American and British refineries notified Castro that they would not refine Soviet oil and were threatened with consequences by Castro . Castro threatened the refineries with consequences if they refined Soviet oil . The refineries were threatened by the Castro regime .
 In response, America cut its sugar quota by 700,000 tons and the Soviet Union offered to purchase the sugar . America cut the sugar quota in response, and the USSR offered to buy it .
 USSR promised Soviet missiles for Cuban defense in case of any future U.S. intervention by America . Soviet missiles were also promised by the Soviet Union in response to American intervention .
 Cuba’s continuous alliance with the Soviet Union was enough evidence to America that it was a threat to U.S. interests . The Cuban government was a constant threat to the United States in the 1950s .
 There was a persistent concern for the straits vulnerable and threatened by German boats and of a Cuba-Germany alignment . Prior to the second world war and throughout the period, there was also a persistent .
 Soviet Union was keen to further its relationship with Cuba due to its strategic location . Cuba was a key ally of the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 It was not solely about nuclear missiles but also the 90 miles distance from the United States, which was a major sea lane . The U.S. was 90 miles from the North Korea .
 There was an influx of Soviet ships onto Cuban shores who appeared to be transporting construction equipment and weaponry on almost daily basis .
 CIA analysts concluded that Moscow was enhancing Cuba’s air defense system . CIA analysts who assessed the data concluded the data . Moscow is enhancing Cuba's air defenses, analysts said .
 While America was concerned about the development, it could not protest these defense measures, especially in the light of the then-recent Bay of Pigs fiasco . America was not able to protest these measures .
 Washington received inputs from the Cuban refugee community regarding the construction of nuclear missile sites . Such reports were received for well over a year and a half without any proof .
 The CIA doubted if these informants could legitimately differentiate between an offensive and defensive missile . The CIA doubts if they could legitimately distinguish between the missile and a missile .
 Kennedy ordered increased surveillance and photographs were taken that showed surprising activity in San Cristóbal . It was only in late August when the truth was discovered .
 Cuba was effectively the base for Soviet Union’s nuclear missiles and it was dangerously close to U.S. shores . The Cuban island nation is now home to a range of nuclear missiles .
 The authority for covert option was a command from the National Security Council, NSC 5412/2 . The authority to covert option is a command that was issued by the NSC .
 The instructions to the CIA were to tackle, minimise and discredit ‘International Communism’ all over the world in a way that was in line with American foreign policies . The CIA was tasked with tackling, minimising and discrediting 'International Communism' in a manner that was
 It was deemed necessary in the cold war era to battle communism with any means necessary . In the Cold War era, the government was seen as a tool to combat communism .
 With the emergence of Castro, the communist threat was no longer a battle in a distant land, but from an alarmingly close one to U.S. soil . With Castro's rise, the threat was not only a threat in the distant land but a threat to American soil .
 Eisenhower sought the help and direction of the CIA to tackle Castro . President Eisenhower sought CIA's help to tackle the Cuban dictator .
 While there wasn’t enough evidence that Castro was actually a Communist, U.S. officials were convinced that he was steadily under Communist influence .
 President Eisenhower approved an assassination plot to overthrow Castro Castro in 1960 . Eisenhower approved the plot to kill Castro in order to overthrow him .
 The Bay of Pigs was a failed military operation of the CIA to invade Cuba . The failed operation failed to stop the CIA from invading Cuba .
 Cuba’s proximity to the U.S. and the comparably small size showed what a significant victory it was . Cuba is a relatively small country compared to the United States .
 It seemed that the imperial power of America was collapsing, and even small countries could count on the Soviet Union against imperialism . The Soviet Union was the only country to rely on the USSR against imperialism.
 Castro stated that America could not tolerate that Cubans were undergoing a socialist revolution that they could not control . Castro said that the U.S. was not willing to tolerate that Cuba was undergoing a revolution that the United States could't control .
 The Soviets promised the necessary aid required for Cuba during the progress of the Bay of Pigs . The Soviet Union promised to provide the aid necessary for Cuba in advance of Bay of the Pigs .
 After the victory of Cuba at Bay of Pigs, the Soviet could afford to offer more nationalist leaders support if they desired to revolt against the imperialist system . The Soviet was able to re-evaluate the balance of forces and offer more support .
 The Kennedy administration reluctantly had to swallow this bitter pill of defeat and humiliation . Kennedy administration was humiliated by the loss of the Vietnam War .
 The first serious CIA plan to assassinate Fidel Castro included members from the Mafia with contacts in Cuba . It was noted in a report ordered by the CIA director, Richard Helms, that the first serious plan included members of the Mafia .
 The effort to topple the Castro government was a build-up to the Bay of Pigs invasion . There are conflicting accounts of how this was exactly linked to the invasion .
 After the failure of the invasion, President Kennedy publicly accepted blame . President Kennedy accepted blame for the failure .
 In private, he was furious at the CIA, blaming them for the failure . He accused the agency of providing him with incomplete information . In private he was angry at the agency .
 President Kennedy did not approve an attack on Cuba’s air force to occur simultaneously with the landing of the commandos . The agency believed that it was President Kennedy's actions that were to blame .
 To understand America’s obsession with Cuba at that period of time, one must be aware of the nature of the Kennedy brothers, particularly Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 From their vantage point, Castro has one up over them and they could not accept the embarrassing outcome . The Castro family is not happy with the outcome, but they are happy with Castro's victory .
 They wanted to exact revenge as it had become shameful for them personally . The desperation drove them to do whatever it takes to oust Castro from power . They wanted revenge as they wanted to .
 The aim of the Kennedy brothers was to harass Castro in any way possible . Kennedy brothers were trying to get Castro to cooperate with the CIA .
 A multiagency covert action programme for subversion was formulated by the Kennedy administration called Operation Mongoose . Only six months after that, a multiagency programme was formed by the . Kennedy administration . Six months later, a . multiagency . covert action . programme was created by the JFK administration
 Unlike Bay of Pigs, it was a small-level covert operation of economic sabotage, infiltration and propaganda . The operation was small-scale covert operation . It was the first of its kind in the U.S.
 The goal was to contribute to the breakdown of the Castro government . While it wasn’t the final plan itself, the plan was to help the government break up .
 Robert Kennedy took control over this small-time covert operation . The atmosphere in the White House left little doubt for compromise in ensuring Castro would not remain in the neighbourhood .
 Moscow’s project Operation Anadyr was being transported to Cuba discreetly . missiles were being transported under the cover of Russia’S secret operation . Moscow was involved in the operation to transport missiles to Cuba .
 The increased threat of a U.S. invasion of Cuba required Cuba and Soviet to work together to redress the nuclear missile imbalance . Cuba and the Soviet Union worked together to reverse the imbalance .
 This operation lasted went on for a year till the missile crisis and accomplished nothing substantial for the amount of $50 million in expenditure . The operation lasted a year and went on in a year .
 Months after approving a focused “sabotage and harassment” program, he was assassinated . Months later, he approved a focused program, which he approved .
 In handling Cuba, Kennedy would be remembered for his inexperience that led to disastrous consequences which almost triggered a nuclear war . Kennedy would still be remembered as a leader of the Cuban Revolution .
 After the Bay of Pigs, Castro was convinced that the Americans were going to try to invade again . Castro convinced himself that the U.S. was going to attack again after the Bay .
 Castro accepted offer from Khrushchev to bolster his country with nuclear missiles . Fearful that he may be overthrown, Castro accepted the offer . Castro was afraid he may have been overthrown .
 The Cuban missile crisis was one of the most dangerous situations the world had experienced . It was the first time the U.S. had seen such a crisis in the world's history .
 As Cuba gravitated towards communism, the Soviet missiles were transported into Cuba . The missiles were brought into Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev and Castro did not anticipate that placing missiles in Cuba would lead to a nuclear war . They did consider that America would attempt to invade the country, although they did not expect that the country would be invaded .
 With the Soviet standing firm in its commitment to Cuba’s defense, America was forced to act . The Soviet stand-in-defense of Cuba was the reason for the U.S. action .
 President Kennedy decided to place a naval quarantine on Cuba to block off any further shipments . President Kennedy placed the quarantine in order to prevent further shipments of food .
 America and Soviet Union came close to nuclear war after increased tension in exchanges . America and the Soviet Union were at risk of nuclear war in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev decided to withdraw the missiles placed in Cuba back to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union decided to return the missiles to Cuba after negotiations .
 There was an unshakable fear of the dangers of the Cold War after a situation they had both misjudged . There was a greater agreement on the need to reduce the probability that the arms race could lead to nuclear conflict .
 America was forced to publicly state that it would not engage in military intervention in Cuba . While Castro was displeased with the withdrawal of the Soviets, the U.S. refused to engage in any military intervention .
 Hundreds of middle-class Cubans moved to the U.S. in search of former jobs they lost in the revolution . Cubans migrated to the United States .
 There, they unleashed a propaganda campaign condemning communism in Cuba . The Cuban government has spent millions of dollars on Cuba's economy .
 Cubans lived in the Florida region and there was constant communication with the CIA and they acted as informants . These Cubans were informants for the CIA . They lived in Florida and were informants .
 The counterrevolutionaries in Cuba engaged in criminal behaviour to manufacture a chaotic atmosphere similar to a civil war so that America could justify military intervention . U.S. justified military intervention in Cuba in order to justify intervention .
 Counterrevolutionary leaders coordinated with the CIA regarding arms supply and other support . CIA provided arms supply, other support to the rebels in the 1980s . CIA also provided support for the rebels .
 Air and sea movements between Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Guatemala and Florida were frequent in the 1960s .
 U.S. and Cuban people began to trade illegal weapons in the guise of fight for liberty . Soon, American and Cuba people began trading illegal weapons . The two nations traded illegal weapons for freedom .
 Escalante states that the CIA and their partners were at the forefront of the drug trade, transporting thousands of tons of marijuana, cocaine, and other drugs . Escalantes: The CIA and its partners transported thousands of tonnes of marijuana and cocaine .
 U.S. Central Intelligence Agency officials enriched themselves through drug trade in the process of overthrowing the Cuban government, he says . He also states that the United States Central Intelligence . Agency officials enrich themselves through the drug trade .
 The reasons as to why U.S. covert operations were obsessed with Cuba are many . Conclusion: The reasons for the CIA's obsession with Cuba were many .
 American business interests clearly had a huge role to play in covert operations . American interests had a big role in various covert operations in the U.S.
 The scope of the CIA is not limited but evidently involves protecting interests well beyond the traditional realm of intelligence and operations detail . It is not only a matter of protecting interests but also protecting interests beyond intelligence .
 The spread of communism in Latin America in the form of revolutions has been a fear for America . America has been apprehensive of communism so close to its shores .
 America was fearful that Castro's influence would spread with Castro’s influence . Since parts of Latin America were underdeveloped, it made them more susceptible to communism . America was worried that it would spread .
 Castro’s conversion to communism and movement to the Soviet bloc was worrisome for America, as any Soviet presence in Cuba was unacceptable to America’S. security . Castro's conversion to Communism and movement was worrisome .
 Robert Kennedy and President Kennedy were determined to oust Castro so much that they launched Operation Mongoose, which didn't achieve anything significant . Robert Kennedy was determined and obsessed with overthrowing Castro .
 The Missile Crisis was a moment in history when America was confronted with nuclear war so close to sovereign territory . The missile crisis was one of the most significant moments in American history .
 Kennedy vowed to continue to harass the Cuban government in spite of publicly stating that America would not intervene in Cuba any longer . Kennedy said he would continue to do so despite publicly stating he would not interfere in Cuba anymore .
 America is losing grip on the countries that it could once control without question. America is an imperial power that was losing grip . America's imperial power was losing control of the countries it once controlled without question .
 Cuba was a country that challenged America’s imperial ambitions and America used every justification to quell the rise of Castro . Cuba was used as a nation that challenged American imperial ambitions .
 U.S. covert operators were obsessed with Cuba in the 1950s and '60s . The Cuban government was obsessed with the island nation . Cuba was the focus of American covert operations in Cuba .
 Throughout history political parties, sports teams, and pretty much anyone who wanted to bring down an opposition or competitor has used propaganda of some sort .
 Please do not hesitate to contact us via support@edubirdie.com .
 This essay is available online and was probably used by another student . It is available for purchase by students at the University of Cambridge .
 You can order a unique, plagiarism-free paper written by a professional writer . You can also buy a copy of this article for free .