 It was fought in the ideology, military posturing, coalitions, political inﬂuIS ence, technological development, and space and military stockpiling .
 The reason for this new and sublimated form of war was the advent of the nuclear age . The war was a sublimation of war, the author says .
 Any ﬁrst strike would lead to retaliation and mutually assured destruction . Any strike would be followed by retaliation and mutual assured destruction.
 You can regard us with distrust, but, in any case, you can be calm in this regard, that we are of sound mind . You can understand perfectly well that if we attack you, you will respond the same way . IB: "You can regard them with distrust"
 Nuclear stockpiling grew out of distrust, the outcome of mutually assured destruction was a degree of trust . D Although the nuclear stockpiling . grew . out of trust, the . outcome was mutual assured destruction .
 In an attempt to halt the importation of nuclear warheads into Cuba, Kennedy instituted a naval blockade . Kennedy instituted the blockade in an effort to stop nuclear weapons being brought into Cuba .
 The U.S. was on the verge of an invasion when a diplomatic solution was reached on 28th October . Knowing this fact with hindsight is chilling, it is chilling to think of .
 Any substantial or systematic reproduction, re-distribution, . re-selling, or . systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden .
 In the midst of this crisis the world found itself hostage to interpretations, communications, and miscommunications arising between these two groups, and to the communication channels which existed between these groups, which, as we shall see, included a bicycle .
 There are full transcripts for many of the discussions that took place in the White House between President Kennedy and his advisors – the group known as TI ExComm – in which they met in Moscow .
 President Kennedy had the system upgraded in 1962, only months before the Crisis, IS and was particularly keen on using the system during the Crisis .
 The following analysis focuses upon the discussions of Kennedy and his advisors as they tried to deal with the puzzling and threatening actions being underU taken by the USSR in Cuba . IB The analysis focuses on Kennedy's discussions with his advisors about the actions of the USSR .
 In the absence of direct verbal communication with Moscow, Kennedy and his advisors had to work hard to interpret the signiﬁcance of the Soviet actions they observed, the public statements Khrushchev made, and the letters he sent to Kennedy .
 On this limited basis, Kennedy and his advisors had to decide how to respond . They struggled to understand how their potential responses would be interpreted by Moscow and the world .
 Khrushchev’s moves were meant to be seen as an attempt to counterbalance each other . The Soviets were forced to reﬂect upon possible ulterior motives for each move .
 O Representing the mind of Khrushchev N. One of the most striking features of the White House transcripts concerns the way in which Kennedy and his advisors represent the USSR in general . O Representation of the mind .
 Much of the social psychological research on intergroup Trust and Conflict has been conducted by social psychologists . Much of this is based on the findings of a social psychologist .
 The differentiation between ingroup and outgroup usually entails denigrating the outgroup and positively afﬁrming the ingroup . The differentiation usually involves denigration of outgroup .
 Outgroup denigration was widespread in Allied propaganda during the Cold War . Certainly during the 1950s, it was widespread .
 No such denigration is evident in the White House transcripts, according to the transcripts . The transcripts show no denigration of the Obama administration .
 He calls upon his “demonologists’ not because he wants to denigrate the outgroup, but because he . wants to understand the perspective of the . outgroup . Indeed, he calls upon . his ‘demonologists,’ he says, not . because he
 The rupture needs elaboration and thematisation . The effort to make meaning reveals an uncertain but nuanced understanding of Khrushchev’s motives and situation .
 Mr President possibly use it to try to trade something in Berlin, say he'll disarm Cuba if we’ll yield some of our interests in Berlin and some arrangement for it. Several possibilities, Mr . President possibly using it to . possibly use . possibly try to . try to try
 I'm sure his generals have been telling him for a year and a half that he was missing a golden opportunity to add to his strategic capability . I’m sure he was telling him that he should have been adding to his national security .
 A second consideration is that it is simply a trading ploy, that he wants this in so that he can – Trust and Conflict . A third is that he is simply trying to trade in trust and conflict with the public .
 Each of the reasons put forward assumes that Khrushchev is a rational actor . Each of these reasons assume that the reasons for Khrushchevchev's actions are rational .
 Khrushchev aims to trade his N new-found advantage in Cuba for a development in Berlin .
 A second explanation is that Khrushchev may be trying to do what the USA had done a number of years earlier . Alexis Johnson: Khruschev may have tried to do the same thing .
 Previously in the Cold War, the USA felt threatened by the Soviet long-range rockets . The U.S. felt threatened in the 1950s and 1960s .
 By the early sixties it had become clear that instead of the USA fearing a ‘missile gap’ it was in fact the USSR which was behind . The USSR was behind the missile gap .
 Both the IB USA and the USSR were aware of this . Thus the tables had turned and both the USSR and the USA knew this .
 Social identity theory underlies social categorisation underlies intergroup conﬂict, says social identity theory . Social categorisation leads to an exaggeration of the differences between groups, says theory .
 In the present case, D the evidence does not support such an account, D . However, in the case, the evidence is not supported, he said .
 Johnson’s argument that Khrushchev R may be trying to gain a strategic advantage is based on identifying with the Soviet position . Johnson: ‘Krushchev’ R may have been trying to get a strategic edge .’
 T They, no more than we, can let these things go by without doing something. T They can't let them go by, they must do something, they say . T they can't be let go by .
 The U.S. can't permit us to take out their missiles, kill a lot of Russians, and then do nothing . They can’t, after all their statements, permit us O to kill Russians, he says . He says .
 N. Kennedy’s concern is that an invasion of Cuba might force the Soviets into a situation in which launching the missiles becomes necessary . N Kennedy is concerned that a Cuban invasion might force an invasion .
 The USSR had made public its commitment to protect Cuba in the same way that the USA had made Trust and Conflict . The USSR made the same pledge as the U.S. did in the 1950s .
 These public commitments are difﬁcult to renege upon, precisely because they are public . These commitments are public commitments, not to be reneged upon, it is public .
 Kennedy’s insight into Khrushchev's situation comes through identiﬁcation not differentiation . Kennedy's insight comes from identi ﬁcitation, not differentiation, as well as differentiation .
 Simplistic denigration is a luxury born of distance N and non-engagement, says Nader . Nader: "Simplistic denigrations are a luxury made of distance and distance"
 When one needs to engage and interact with a distrustful other, either in negotiation or in battle, then it is advantageous to try and understand the mind of the other . However, when one must interact with the distrustful others, it's advantageous to understand the other's mind .
 Given that Kennedy and his advisors could not take the word or actions of Khrushchev at face value, they were forced to elaborate an intricate representation of his motivation . Given that . Kennedy and . his advisors couldn't take the words or actions at face . value of the words of Kh
 It would be naïve to simply categorise Khrushchev as an outgroup member, and dismiss IS him as mad or bad . In such a context it would be naive to dismiss him as a bad or mad person .
 Positive self-differentiation would only lead to hubris and over-conventionality . And positive self-identidentity would only be hubris, over-confidentity .
 In order to out-manoeuvre Khrushchev, Kennedy and his advisors had to understand him as accurately as possible . Distrust in this context implies that the other has an ulterior motive, and that in turn implies that in order to do so, Kennedy had to be wary
 Both the USA and the USSR were facing similar political, international, external and technological constraints in IB the Cold War . In this particular context, identiﬁcident enabled perspective-taking because both the U.S. and USSR were in very similar positions .
 This similarity became, through identiﬁcation, a useful resource in understanding and thematising the untrustworthy mind of Khrushchev . This similarity was used as an important resource in U understanding and U understanding of the mind .
 The Soviet administration insisted that the missiles were only for defensive purposes . Then, once the missile was discovered, the Soviet administration said it was only for defense purposes .
 T Kennedy and Khrushchev's relationship is characterised only by distrust . However, it would be overly simplistic to say that the relationship was only based on distrust . It would be over-simplified to say the relationship between Kennedy and the Soviet Union was only distrust .
 O there is the implicit assumption that Khrushchev is a rational actor . Speciﬁcally, O there are the implicit assumptions that Khruschev is an irrational actor .
 If he were totally irrational, then he could not be negotiated with, and thus the only course of action would have been violence . If he had been totally irrational then he would not be negotiating with, he would have had to be killed .
 The full extent of this communicative trust in Khrushchev as a reasonable and rational Trust and Conflict. The full . extent of the . communicative . trust in the . trust is not known as the full extent . of the trust .
 President Kennedy opted for a blockade because he was worried about a direct attack providing justiﬁcation for a Soviet incursion into Berlin . However, President Kennedy instead opted to a blockade .
 Khrushchev drew an equivalence between the nuclear missiles which the U.S. had in Turkey and the missiles in Cuba . The missiles in Turkey were the missiles that the USA had in Cuba were the ones in Cuba, according to the Soviet Union .
 If Soviet missiles should not be in Cuba, he argued, then it followed that the American missiles shouldn't be in Turkey . He argued that the U.S. missile bases in Turkey should be removed from Turkey .
 President Kennedy offered to withdraw missiles from Cuba if Kennedy withdrew the missiles from Turkey . Kennedy also offered to pull missiles out of Turkey if he withdrew them from Cuba . Kennedy's offer was rejected .
 Kennedy is quick to recognise this as a deft O TI political move because it sounds reasonable . Kennedy says this is a deft move because of the fact that it is reasonable .
 "Emotionally, people will think this is a rather even trade and we ought to take advantage of it," he says . "We ought to be able to use it. Emotionally I think it's an even trade"
 "It makes it much more difﬁcult for us to move U.S. with world support. Therefore, it makes it . much more . more than a million people support us in the United States. therefore, it is more important to have world support for us
 The only thing we’ve got him on is the fact that, while they put forward varying proposals in short periods of time, all of which are complicated, under that shield this work goes on . That being so, I think that .
 The USA could even argue that the messy negotiations are merely a “shield” providing cover from an invasion while the missiles are made operational . The U.S. could argue that it is merely a "shield" providing cover for an invasion .
 He suggests N responding to Khrushchev’s proposed deal by insisting that nothing can’t be discussed until work on missile sites ceases .
 Kennedy and his advisors suspect that such a statement will appear reasonable, and they also speculate that Khrushchev will be Trust and Conflict . Kennedy and advisors suspect such a remark will appearreasonable .
 President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the U.S. House of Representatives . He has been accused of being too secretive about his decision to step down .
 Kennedy hopes to position IS Khrushchev unfavourably in world opinion, and thus occupy the moral high ground . TI: By making KHrushchev reject a reasonable deal, Kennedy wants to position himself in the world opinion .
 This would help reposition the USA as a rational TR actor in the eyes of the world . However, it would not enable the USA to invade Cuba, because if they did invade then Khrushchev would still have a ‘blank check’ for invading Turkey .
 Robert McNamara, the Secretary of Defence, proposes the following course of action . IB proposes a new approach to dealing with the situation .
 He suggests secretly removing the nuclear missiles from Turkey and then, at the same time as invading Cuba, U.S. announces that the missiles have been removed from Turkey .
 D might be able to either shift the area in which they would apply their military force, or give them no excuse to apply military force . The Turkish Jupiters and the Italian Jupitsers might be taken out before we attack Cuba .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were constrained by the need to act rationally, to act with justiﬁcation and to appear reasonable . O A major constraint operating on both Kennedy and . Kennedy is not the president of the Soviet Union, he says . O
 Invading another country, whether Cuba or Turkey, is not simply a question of military ability, it is just a matter of justiﬁcation . Invading a country is not just a military challenge, it's also a question for the country itself .
 The White House transcripts reveal strenuous efforts to guard the justiﬁcation for an invasion of Cuba and deny a Soviet invasion of Turkey . The transcripts also show strenuous attempts to both guard and deny an invasion .
 World opinion as the guarantor of the rationality of Kennedy’s and of Khrushchev’�s actions, is world opinion as a superaddressee (Bakhtin, 1986; see also Marková, Introduction, and Psaltis, Chapter 5
 Often this superaddressee is objectiﬁed in the UN or a particular nation’s point of view . Often this is object to the view of the UN .
 No matter how tempting an invasion or an air strike on Cuba may be to Kennedy, N. N he cannot initiate these measures if they will appear unreasonable or unjustiﬁed according to world opinion .
 Kennedy assumes that KhrushO chev too is subject to the gaze of world opinion, and Kennedy uses this knowledge TI to interpret and predict Khrushchev’s actions .
 Kennedy and his advisors are sceptical of Khrushchev’s moves and his motives . At a non-reﬂective level they assume, and trust in a predictive sense, that IS Khrushche will act in a way which is deemed reasonable by the normative standards
 World opinion seems to be a guarantor for world leaders to trust each other to act rationally . In the same way that mutually TR assured destruction is the guarantor of not initiating a strike, world opinion is also guarantor . World leaders seem to be more likely to be willing to
 The new mode of U.S. war was fought more in the political arena than in the battleﬁeld, yet the weapons of the battle ﬁld provided necessary weight to threats, guarantees and political posturing .
 Neither the USSR nor the USA wanted a nuclear war . This new form of war, the Cold War, ﬁnds its peculiar dynamic in the fact .
 Fear of nuclear war D made each side cautious, but paradoxically the knowledge of that caution emboldened each side as they attempted to bully the other into backing down . Each side was emboldened by the knowledge that the risk of war made them more cautious .
 Bertrand Russell scathingly compared brinkmanship to playing a game of chicken, where opponents drive cars directly towards each other to see who will swerve away from each other with nuclear weapons . Russell compares brinkmanship with playing of chicken where opponents play a game .
 In brinkmanship the aim is to push the other far enough so that they back down, O but not so far that a war results . O'Neill: "In brinkmanship, in brinkmanship you push the others far enough to push them back down" O'
 I don’t think I can give a deﬁnitive view today as to what the real attitude of the Trust and Conflict is . But I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to give the real view today .
 "There is no conﬁrmed frozen Soviet reaction to the situation, as yet. In other words, I think that we can report that there is no . There is no frozen reaction to . the situation as yet, as well .
 N Rusk is uncertain about how close Khrushchev is to the brink . He draws into the O TI analysis a communication from Khrushchechev to Bertrand Russell . The OTI analysis is based on a communication between Russell and Khrushsche .
 Russell at this time was very involved in nuclear disarmament . Russell had written letters to both Kennedy and Khrushchev about the crisis . Russell was involved in the disarmament of nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev’s IS response to Russell suggests that he is some distance from the brink and that if pushed to the brink he would back down . Rusk points out that the IS response suggests both that .
 Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy offering to remove the missiles in exchange for a guarantee from the USA not to invade or interfere with Cuba . On the night of the 26th, Kennedy offered to remove missiles in a deal .
 IB asked not only for a guarantee of Cuba’s sovereignty but also for the removal of the missiles in Turkey . Then on the morning of the 27th a second letter arrived which was more assertive and which asked for a . guarantee .
 One is T that Khrushchev is engaging in brinkmanship, trying to get more out of the USA and conﬁdent that they will back down . Another is that the U.S. is not going to back down, one is that it is trying to gain
 O Thompson suggests taking some “forceful action” may make the Soviets change their minds . If this is the interpretation, then the Soviets may change their mind, he says .
 The alternative interpretation is that somebody is forcing Khrushchev to take this action . Vice President Johnson suggests that maybe somebody forced him to take action .
 If brinkmanship presupposes a rational opponent, it should be an effective move within N this communicative activity type . Convinced one’s opponent that his actions are no longer rational should be effective move .
 One way of doing this is to try and convince O one’s opponent that one is crazy and without concern for the future . One way is to convince your opponent that you’re crazy and have no concern for future .
 Such a strategy would have been effective for either Kennedy or Khrushchev to pursue, it would have the unintended consequence of a widespread loss of public support . Such a policy would have led to a widespread public loss of support .
 Neither political system could tolerate a leader who attempted to appear unstable and unpredictable – neither national nor international opinion IS would tolerate it . IS would not tolerate such an attempt to appear instability and unpredictable .
 Robert Kennedy hit upon an alternative strategy for convincing Khrushchev that President Kennedy’s actions might cease being rational . President Kennedy's actions might stop being rational, he said .
 Khrushchev should no longer assume that USA policy in Cuba would be rational and bound to world opinion, he said . The implication was that Khruschev should not assume that U.S. policy was rational . The U.K. should not have assumed that world opinion would be
 The occasion of this self-presentation was at the height of the Crisis, on the night of the 27th October . IB: The occasion was the moment when the crisis was at its peak .
 President Kennedy sent his brother to meet U Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador in Washington . President Kennedy's brother was sent to meet the Soviet ambassador in Washington, D.C.
 President Kennedy would guarantee the sovereignty of Cuba in exchange for the D USSR withdrawing its missiles . First, there would be a public announcement in which President Kennedy promised the Cuban sovereignty . The USSR withdrew its missiles from Cuba .
 This second message was never written down, and was to be considered void if it was leaked to the public . The second message would be considered null if it were to be leaked to public .
 This third message was not meant to appear as a communication. That is to say, this is not intended to be a communication . That is not the first message, but it was meant to be .
 Although an implicit communication, the message certainly reached Khrushchev . Although an O.S. message was implicit, it was not the only message to be sent . The message was sent to the world's most powerful politician .
 ‘The President is in a grave situation,’ Robert Kennedy said, ‘and does not know how to get out of it.’ ‘He is in the grave situation. He said. ‘I don’t know how I’m going
 President appealed directly to Chairman Khrushchev for his help in liquidating this conﬂict. That is why the President is appealing directly to him .
 It is possible that Khrushchev’s account is unreliable, that it is a post-hoc rationalisation for the fact that he agreed to back down and remove the missiles O from Cuba .
 President Kennedy succeeded in creating the impression for both Dobrynin and Khrushchev that President Kennedy brinked . What is important is that he succeeded in .
 TR might be losing control, and thus that the USA might actually be sliding over Robert Kennedy’s third communication, which was ‘given off’ was an unconventional, but nonetheless highly effective communicative move within the IB .
 Given that brinkmanship assumes a rational U.S. opponent, convincing one’s opponent that one is no longer able to act rationally because one is trapped in a situation compels one's opponent to back down . Given that a rational opponent would back down, it would be
 The key R to this move is to shatter one’s . trust that one .'s action is volitional and thus that one is able to conform to rational expectation . The key to the move is that it shatter one's . opponent's trust . that one's actions is vol
 The Cuban government is seeking a guarantee for Cuba and the removal of missiles in Turkey . The two sides have been inked out a deal to remove missiles from Turkey .
 Kennedy’s advisors wondered whether the ﬁrst letter had been written by Khrushchev and the second one by some hardliners within the Politburo . Kennedy's advisors wondered if the second letter was written by hardliners .
 A U-2 spy plane was shot down by SAM missiles while ﬂying over Cuba . Other planes had been shot at with ﬁak guns . The U.S. has been unable to communicate with the Cuban government .
 N O President Kennedy and his advisors try to interpret the shooting as a rational act . I don’t know how to interpret it. (27th October 1962, Zelikow & May, 2001b, 446)
 "They assume that the act is communicative, and they try to reconcile it with the letters they had received from Khrushchev," she says . They assume that they assume that . They try to reconcil .
 Both the second letter and the shooting are interpreted in the light of each other, and the U is interpreted in terms of brinkmanship . Both are interpreted as a threat to the U.
 It is argued that the Soviets will take the advantage and become more strident in their demands . OtherD wise, it is argued, it was argued, the Soviets would take advantage .
 This act gained such signiﬁcance in the minds of Kennedy and his advisors as a hard-line communication from Khrushchev that it was a hard line communication . Kennedy believed the act was the basis for an invasion of Cuba . The act was seen in Kennedy's
 T Fears and suspicions thus gain support from ambiguous communications . Fears, suspicions gain support of ambiguous communications. Fears or suspicions are supported by ambiguous communication. T
 First, there was the formal channel, in the form of letters sent by telegram usually via embassies . Then, there were the formal channels, such as telegram and telegram, which sent by embassies .
 This channel was slow, with letters often taking 12 hours to get from one leader to the other . In a number of instances the letter arrived disjointed with some hours delay between parts .
 These interactions occurred between proxies who reported back directly to the leaders . These interactions are said to have happened between proxies and leaders .
 Dobrynin’s memo on the crucial meeting was collected by bicycle courier who sent it by Western Union telegram . In fact, the memo was sent by a bicycle courier . Dobrynins' memo was collected on a bicycle by a Western Union courier .
 This means of communication was often speedier than the formal and informal channels, and thus was used frequently .
 Public communications have the problem of reaching too wide an audiU ence. However, public communications often reach too far an audience .
 Robert Kennedy's communication that President Kennedy D might be losing control would not have been suited to the public channel . Similarly Robert Kennedy’s communication that . President Kennedy . D might have been losing control .
 None of these three channels is suited to resolving the kind of misunderstanding which arose out of the shooting down of the U-2 spy plane . None of the three channels are suited to solving the sort of misunderstanding that arose .
 The formal and R informal channels were too slow and the public channel was too public . The formal channel was 'too slow' and 'too public' to use .
 The first implementation of the hot line did not have any voice component .
 The architects of the system feared that direct voice communication, with direct translation, might be too rapid, potentially leading to misunderstanding . They feared that the system might lead to mistranslation or misunderstood intonation .
 The ﬁrst system was a teletype system that could transmit a page of text in three N minutes . The system was the first teletype to be used in the U.S.
 The message would then be veriﬁed by the President, before being encrypted and transmitted to the Kremlin in English . The message was then encrypted and then transmitted to Russia in English.
 The hot line was ﬁrst used in 1967 during the Arab–Israel war, when Israel launched a surprise attack on Egypt . The line was used in the Arab-Israeli war .
 Fearing that the situation might escalate and that there would be a retaliatory attack on Israel, perhaps by the Syrians, the U.S. military deployed an aircraft carrier to be ready to defend Israel .
 The Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin interpreted the move as offensive . The move was interpreted as offensive by the Soviet Premier who had links with Egypt and Syria .
 The message caused a stir, not least because it was the ﬁrst time that the hot line had been used .
 Using the hot line, President Johnson was able to reasTI sure Premier Kosygin that the USA did not want a war . President Johnson used the line to make sure that the U.S. was not going to war .
 It is manned on both sides 24 hours a day, and it is tested every TR hour . It's tested every hour and is manned 24 hours every day .
 IB Kennedy and his advisors were distrustful of Khrushchev because they didn't know his mind or his motivations . Kennedy was distrustful because he did not know what his mind was going on .
 The means of communication between the leaders was limited, and, because of the distrust, much emphasis was placed on military manoeuvres . Moreover, the means of communicating between the two countries was limited .
 D information can have dangerous interpretations, as was the case with the U-2 spy plane . And in the context of limited D information, such actions can have a dangerous interpretation .
 The hot line, on R the other hand, enables interrogating the mind of the other, and holding the actions of the the other to communicative account . The line allows interrogators to interrogate the mind and hold the other's actions to account .
 In a context of highly reﬂective distrust where there is a necessity to engage with the other and try to outsmart the other, the dynamics of social cateO gorisation do not hold . T
 Social categorisation assumes that intergroup conﬂict is based upon the positive differentiation of the ingroup from the outgroup . Social categorisation assists that social categorisation is based on positive differentiation .
 Kennedy and his advisors would be foolish to simply denigrate their opponent or to dismiss his perspective . However, they would be wise to simply deny their opponent's perspective .
 One particularly useful resource is Trust and Conflict, which recurs several Trusts and Conflict .
 Kennedy is deeply distrustful of Khrushchev and his motivations, but at a more implicit and taken-for-granted level there is a remarkable degree of trust in him as a rational actor . Kennedy is a great admirer of the Soviet leader, but not a great believer in
 Analysis of the actual negotiation process shows both Khrushchev and Kennedy trying to impale each other . The Cold War fought out, like much of the Cold War, in the ﬁeld of public opinion .
 Neither set of negotiators could risk actually assuming that the other was irrational . Yet neither would risk actually thinking that the others were irrational .
 Each side sought to justify their own actions while undermining any justiﬁcation for the actions of the other . Each side seeks to justify its own actions, undermining the justi ﬁcation for the other.
 The guarantor of this rationality was the superaddressee of world opinion, says David Cameron . Cameron: "The guarantor for this rationality is the supreme supreme power in the world"
 IS Third, brinkmanship presupposes that the other is a rational being – otherwise TR one would not be willing to risk pushing them to the brink . IS Third and IS Third: brinkmanship requires that the two are rational being . IS
 The powerful effect that Robert Kennedy’s appeal had on Khrushchev can be explained in terms of breaking this taken for granted assumption . Robert Kennedy's appeal had the powerful effect of breaking that assumption, he says .
 Khrushchev believed that President Kennedy might be losing control, then he could not presuppose rational IB actions from the White House . He needed to quickly accept the terms offered to him, and quickly accept to him .
 distrust and ambiguous communications are dangerous companions, especially in the context of brinkmanship . U.S. should not engage in brinkmanship, it says .
 Kennedy and his advisors thought that this was a communication of escalation coming from Khrushchev . Castro initiated shooting at U.S. military planes, but Kennedy thought it was a signal of escalation . Kennedy and advisors thought this was an escalation .
 It is this potentially catastrophic miscommunication that instigated the construction of the ‘hot line’ between the Kremlin R and the White House .
 The hot line is arguably, arguably, trust building because it makes each leader available for interrogation almost instantly . It is arguably the most effective way to build trust in the world .
 The very immediacy of the medium is a counterbalance to misunderstandT standing and distrust, the author says . The medium's immediacy is the counterbalance of distrust, he says .
 The O blockade, the move to DEFCON 2 at the peak of the Crisis, and arguably even the attempt to install missiles in Cuba were all primarily acts of communication within a context of brinkmanship . The blockade, move to DeFCON2 at the height of the crisis,
 In such a context it would always remain possible for the hot line to become another prop in brinkmanship . The hot line will always remain a prop in the game .
 If the above analysis is correct, the most important move in the game of brinkmanship occurred not on the international stage or with any new military mobilisation . Trust and Conflict.
 TI inter-subjectivity and the interplay of culturally shared and situation speciﬁc knowledge . TI intersubjectivity is a play of culture and situation knowledge .TI interplay is the play of cultures and situations .
 O lbjlib.utexas.hom/oralhistory.hom: "McNamaraR/Mcnamara-sp1" Retrieved 1st November 2007 .