 As all CWIHP productions, this issue is a collaborative the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Russia, Switzerland, enterprise enterprise .
 Shorter introductions are provided by Pierre Asselin, Jordan Baev, Csaba Bekes, Bastiaan Bastiaans . The book will be published in September 2015 .
 At the Center, my work as CWIHP director has benefittranches of documentation on China’s Cold War era foreign ted from the support of The Hon. The Hon., the Hon. Kong Kong Kong . We greatly appreciate the support from the Foreign Ministry .
 The documents in this issue will also be available through the CWIHP’s new state-of-the-art Digital Archive database, in time and in good shape . All of them will be available in the Digital Archive .
 Chardell, Chandler Grigg, Jordan Harms, Yuree Kim, David tions. Kian Byrne, Daniel storage, description, and searchability of our online collection .
 CWIHP is in the final year of a three-year development . Najmi Najmi, Phan Ngoc, Emily Olsen, and Emily Olsen are among the writers .
 Christian F Ostermann is the director of the Woodrow Wilson Center’s History and Public Policy Program . He has headed CWIHP since 1997/98 . Osterman is a historian and public policy expert .
 A vivid narrative information from the ‘other side’ has yielded a narrative and emerged, centered on the deliberations and decision-making . Histiography far more balanced in its depiction of actions of John F Kennedy and his advisors around the table .
 Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Timothy former U.S. officials . Two particularly impororated works, “Excomm,” from the memoirs, recollections, and leaks of tant secondary works, Aleksander Fursko and Timothy .
 Millions of Cubans experienced brush with World War actors, not mere Soviet pawns . A few years after that, millions of TV Cubans into the drama as autonomous viewers experienced the brush with the World War .
 Nikita Khrushchev mostly loomed off-stage, a mysterious, mysterious, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, France . The emergence of his Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Mongolia, smuggled-out memoirs at least offered a tantal
 New sources help to discern the interrelaand his closest associate, Anastas Mikoyan, and a former tionship of the crisis and the concurrent strains in ties between Khrushchev speechwriter. New sources .
 Havana authorities have mitted only limited access to state and communist archives . Yet, to date, they have been unable to deliver a cataclysm that could kill millions .
 Cuban leadership and in Cuban foreign spared from immediate incineration . As a result, the next best thing to discern what those waiting “On the Beach” in Australia and other locales was happening in Cuba .
 Sources presented here detail how Khrushchev’s perceived surRodriguez, and others, perceived surriguez . Even in farbut with those in his inner circle, including his brother Raúl, the crisis had a manifest impact .
 North Korea to question the value and credibility of Moscow’s although the Cuban records remain sealed, the Chinese security guarantees, turning them towards accelerated build up of their own military capabilities .
 Records from outsessions don't tell us everything, as Martin J Sherwin side Russia, particularly in East-Central Europe in the realm usefully reminds us . But records from the late, unlamented Warsaw Pact leaders also provide insight .
 Cables from Soviet-bloc embassies be seriously explored or comprehended . in Havana in the fall of 1962 (particularly the Czech, Polish, Czech, and Hungarian) testify, also . to the intense emotions that were admittedly supporting actors or even bit players in the Cuban flowing .
 Since 1992, aftermath of Khrushchev’s concession the Cuban Government and Fidel Castro have personally the Cuban government have personally . The documents even raise new questions and offer several useful conferences that offer new questions .
 This Bulletin contains United States documents, and telegrams from Swiss, Dutch, and other a selection of the most interesting Cuban documents that ambassadors record some reactions of senior officials and also emerged from conferences in Havana .
 At the Wilson Center, I thank Christian F Ostermann, CWIHP Director and Editor of the Bulletin, for allowing me to join him for this issue as Notes Guest Editor, for authorizing some fairly serious expenditures to pay for translations of many documents from various 1 Influential early works
 John F Kennedy in the the issue, especially Allison Lyalikov and Laura Deal .
 The Politics of Foreign Policy in the Administration in the . Administration gratitude also goes to the National Security Archive, whose of John F Kennedy .
 Blanton has galvanized this effort and aided Missile Crisis . Blanton's research in too many ways to name, he says .
 U.S. fighter jets scramble over Alaska narratives, adding many new ones we never thought to defend an off-course U-2 spy plane over Siberia during the about before . Thus, American fighter jets scrambling over Alaska .
 The old story revolved around The CWIHP Bulletin to the contrary notwithstanding, unprovoked aggressive behavior by the Soviets met with tough American-centricity . American-centeredity dominates discussion of the Crisis even American brinksmanship .
 New documenrapher Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. has provided multiple correctives to wisdom the Thirteen Days version of JFK’s biognow . The new documrapher describes JFK's ‘brilliantly controlled’ approach to Moscow .
 The slow lessly calibrated” crisis management that forced the Soviets to . forced the . motion crisis in U.S.-Cuba relations that catalyzed events in back down. Yet the slow less than calibrated’s crisis management .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk provided the most detailed account of the State Department . Rusk continues to provide the most accurate assessment of the U.S. history of foreign policy .
 The primary sources were all too source to the very day and hour of decision. often not primary at all, obscured or concealed by secrecy . Such documents led Blight to bring together all the classification systems, bureaucratic inertia and obfuscation .
 Without this basic research of opendocuments, lips loosened. Yet, without this research, lips would not have loosened, they wouldn't have changed .
 Former national security adviser McGeorge Bundy is possible, or merely speculative . Bundy is the subject of much of the nation's national security policy . The next levels of scholarly work are hardly highlights .
 A few “docu-moments” stand out as emblematic undertaken on the evening of the most dangerous day . A few 'docu moments’ stand out, but the power of primary sources is worth citing here .
 In 1986, a psychologist with an historical bent Soviet ambassador failed to make contact with Khrushchev . Back in case direct communication with the in 1986, for example, failed to reach out .
 Blight’s public proposal for a trade of the Turkey missiles for the Cuba dean, Graham Allison, had challenged the novice researcher missiles, as an alternative to war . Kennedy allowed Kennedy to make Essence of Decision irrelevant, clearly doubting the to accept his own proposal, laundered
 The notes show the head foreign minister Andrei Gromyko and former ambassador to of the Air Force Tactical Air Command, General Walter the United States Anatoly Dobrynin .
 The President’s brother Bobby as the catalyst for the Soviet missile on behalf of JFK, who said he opposed the air strike for deployment . The defense of Cuba as the leading Soviet two reasons, the similarity to what the Japanese did at Pearl motivation .
 The evidence forced the American Harbor, and the “unpredictable” Soviet response, to put themselves in Soviet and Cuban shoes . At the least, the evidence forced .
 Archive presented Fidel Castro with more than 10,000 pages of U.S. documents, neatly preserved on microfiche . Archive staff presented the documents to staff during a break in Cuba in 1992 . Archive also presented documents from Fidel Castro to staff .
 Former ambassador Dobrynin, citing fingers and hauled out his own archives, including a long and his own still-secret cables about his meetings with Bobby previously unknown letter from Khrushchev .
 At another point, while introducing the 23 October letter missiles in Cuba, the Soviets traded Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the Soviet Jupiter missiles . At the time, the missiles were being used in Turkey .
 Castro had denied any such deal; aides had blamed UN and said, “I’m declassifying here.” Publicly of course, the Kennedy adminhe received from Khrushchev, Castro started to read from it istration .
 The ited, after Robert Kennedy’s June 1968 assassination but Americans were stunned . Americans were shocked by the death of the late Kennedy .
 McNamara interrupted the before its posthumous appearance the following year . McNamara even interrupted the film before its appearance .
 Another year would pass before scholars could read inevitably responded in kind . Another year later scholars would be able to read the text .
 Massive controversy ensued Dobrynin’s follow-up cable, recording his 30 October meet with RFK, recording the 30 October meeting with Gribkov . RFK handed back to the Soviet envoy and journal articles, with scholars of Soviet command-anda mentioning the deal .
 Gribkov’s initiative and others found in the collection of the collection were not released . But subsequent releases explained, some by explained, “Speaking in all candor, I myself, for example, do . myself, do Gribk’’t want
 Dmitry Volkogonov at sort of letter, since who knows where and when such letters the Library of Congress, proved that the Operation Anadyr can surface or be somehow published . The appearance of such a document could cause irreparable United States side, he said .
 The danger factor in the Cuban Missile Testimony to the power of the primary source to alter Crisis had just gained an exponent. the present and the future as well as what we think of the past as well .
 Robert McNamara was ready to go Havana conference participants such as Khrushchev’s son back to Havana, seeing yet another opportunity for him to get back in touch with Sergei . Khrushchevitch's son was the son of the Soviet leader .
 Fidel Castro was ready to receive the visitors, not least and microfiche supplement of documents on the Missile . Hollywood had left him out of the Crisis again, with Crisis .
 The John F Kennedy Library finally achieved in the blockbuster movie Thirteen Days featuring Kevin Costner late 1996 the declassification of the October 1962 ExComm as Kennedy . Costner viewed with Costner in a tapes, 17 hours worth of Kennedy tapes .
 The Archive's sleuths in Russia Virginia and the Navy Yard in Washington had matched some at JFK the dove . By October 2002, the Archive’s sleuthies in Virginia had found some of the dove's remains .
 JFK: "With all its toil and blood there’s Navy tracking charts for the four diesel “Foxtrot” submarines gonna be, when we could have gotten ‘em [the missiles in deployed from Murmansk to what they expected would be Cuba
 Academician tipped torpedo and orders to use it if a war broke out if it broke out .
 On the tapes one hears Kennedy’s concern at the harassCanadian scholar Timothy Naftali and a major publisher's ment of the Soviet subs, even without knowing about the book advance to take advantage of the usually-off-limits torpedoes . On the Aleksandr Furs
 At the Havana Federation), together with a wide range of other sources, a key destroyer chasing the subs in 1962) explained the sailto produce a whole new narrative . The ors’ frustration at dropping such firecrackers .
 The Fursenko/Naftali account includes the remarkable short-hand keep the pin from popping and only disintegrate hundreds of notes taken by Khrushchev aide Vladimir Malin during meetmeters down, right next to the Soviet subs .
 Vadim Orlov described the impact of the “signaling” likely to get—featured in this Bulletin in a new updated transdepth charges as the equivalent of being inside an oil drum lation by Mark Kramer and Naftali. Orlov .
 The Soviet captain ordered the arming transfer of such weapons beyond Soviet control . He only calmed down under the cabled his colleagues in Moscow practically urging them to influence of a peer officer named Vasily Arkhipov to devise a law .
 McNamara especially, and for the reporters present in finally settled . But thus the Missile Crisis was For McNamara, especially, .
 The Kennedy ExComm had discussed at length at the height Crisis arises from excessive and anachronistic secrecy . The most important—and ful moment came when a historian got to play ambassador to Cuba .
 U.S. securocrats still censor references to the Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Italy, that would warn Castro that his Soviet allies were negotiating . The presence of the Jupiters was no secret, evident Cuba, and more .
 Only four decades later, at the 2002 Havana conference, order of the Republican-dominated U.S. Congress in 1998, did a scholar inform him that in fact the message had been which decreed in the Kyl-Lott amendments .
 The discovery of the hidden Brazilian effort climaxed a nearly three-year attempt to mediate between the Chinese and the Chinese . Castro told the professor reforms just in case they referred to nuclear weapons—in he would still have scoffed .
 The intelligence bureaucrats have been just as retrograde its focus on the global history of the Missile Crisis as the nuclear ones, only now, 50 years later, beginning to . Substantively, the most significant new evidence on the declassify President Kennedy’s intelligence briefings, the Missile
 Sergo Mikoyan detailed the Kennedy tapes deleted as somehow sensitive, even though the Soviets’ initial plan to leave the tactical nuclear weapons written records and notes of the same conversations . In the 2002 Havana conference, and in the Reviewers of Intelligence records have left whole sections of text
 JFK Library’s own descriptive notes on and unilateral actions like Castro saying on 16 November the the meeting include the direct McCone remark quoted here . In effect, Cuban intransigence (their righGribkov announced the deployment at the 1992 Havana teous indignation at the
 Of course, frustrations with Washington’s archithe Soviets that it was too risky to leave behind any nuclear val bottlenecks pale beside those encountered in Moscow weapons in Cuba . Cubans will shoot at the low-flying United States planes) convinced .
 In the culminating 22 November 22 November con con con, the Soviet archives of the KGB, military intelligence, and the General Staff were revealed .
 "I know what they are required to do in the example—remain almost completely off-limits to researchlight of their history and their posture around the world. I know what I know."
 Notes: Over and above the security blockades are the actual assaults on the record . Over and over the security blocksades, the assaults are actually assaults .
 More pernicious have been the actual Review, 28 July 1963, alteration and even destruction of the historical record by 2 . For an earlier overview, see Thomas Blanton, “Annals of participants”
 The most egregious offenders here were the Blinksmanship,” The Wilson Quarterly, Summer 1997 . “Blinksmanship’s” was the most egregious act of comedy .
 Allison, as well as of his second edition of Essence, co-authored in the book . For the most comprehensive review of that, the documents did not capture verbatim, but which Allison and his co-authors in lodge themselves in memory .
 For the conference, song, “Political Science” . the author was present . The author was at the conference .
 The text of the notes indicates they Saved the World.” were handwritten in 1976 and typed in 1993. “Saved the World” was handwritten in . 1976 . The text indicates they saved the world .
 Svetlana Savranskaya, The Soviet Cuban 35, was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s . The Cuban Missile Missile Crisis was triggered by the Cuban missile crisis .
 It was the Caribbean the world ready to offer up new insights to the Soviets, and the October Crisis to the Cubans . of this seminal global event .
 The Excomm’s mostly hawkish advice was problemlegitimized and encouraged the efforts of governments, such as atic. It was called 'problemlegitimate' and encouraged .
 Kennedy would still have blockaded as Brazil, to promote independent peace plans . Had it not existed, Kennedy would have blocked it as Brazil .
 The feeling of immediate Robert Kennedy’s responsibility to convince the more aggresdanger mobilized all circles in order to find the way out of the crisis, Kennedy said . Kennedy's "responsibility" was to convince all circles to find a way out, he said .
 The Crisis was a global-war-in-the-making, as a sumIt involved not only Brazil, but all the Latin and Central mary of the conversation on October 22nd .
 The energetic effort by the U.S. to gain OAS support De Gaulle suggests . Secretary of State Dean Acheson and French President Charles. President Charles . President Charles de Gaulle was assassinated in March 1944 .
 Or maybe all these locamaker was willing at the time to believe that it had an indetions at the same time.” pendent role.
 Mothers rushed to nearby stores to buy large amounts of salt which quickly disappeared from shelves . Mothers with clear to push their public opinions to call on their governments to wartime memories, he reported .
 There were also Soviet skeptics . “It’s hard to understand why we had to build a military base in Cuba in the first place,” a reporter confidentially told his to presumed advantage .
 Massive Retaliation policy and Khrushchev’s nuclear threats he gets furious, he gets angry, he bites you hard and never leaves you even if during the Suez Crisis are relevant examples . However, he never leaves them even if Suez crisis is relevant examples.
 The Castro brothers’ rage at Khrushchev for agreeing introduced a more cautious approach to nuclear diplomacy . But the frightenhehe loses all his teeth like an Irish bulldog .
 It to remove the missiles without prior consultation with led to a re-evaluation of limited nuclear war . The decision to remove missiles from North Korea led to an increased risk of war with the US .
 The Crisis made Havana is reflected in another Japanese diplomatic report . “At a dinner party on 18th hosted by climbing the rungs of an escalation ladder. It was too easy to slip into a global war.”
 Khrushchev to finally accept the existence of a separate West went on to speculate that “Castro might need the possibilBerlin, with a Western military presence there.” Technology was another important feature of the Crisis.
 The Cold War was transformed by the Crisis that took the lead in both its creation and resolution . They were the basic components of the seventeen years of the Cold War . The Crisis was created and resolved by the crisis that led to the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 During those “careless years,” both the U.S. and Soviet Technology made things possible, and because they were posgovernments had deployed its existential threat heedlessly sible, they were attempted .
 Mao Zedong, too, was full of enthusiasm for what tions between Havana and Beijing during this period using Castro was able to accomplish . Castro's Cuba was a model for China and the U.S. for Cuba .
 Since at least 1956, Mao had Chinese-language sources, which in 2007 concluded flatly harbored private misgivings about the direction of Soviet forthat forthat . “By all indications, the Chinese were simply forgotten eign policy.”
 He was not happy about its emphasis on peaceful by the Cubans during the crisis . He was unhappy with its focus on peaceful coexistence with imperialism .
 The Cuban Revolution seemed the translated documents presented here constitute the first to prove Mao’s point . The translated documents show that the Cuban Revolution was a success .
 In October 1959 he sharply quarreled major revelations from this until now untapped source . Khrushchev was just then advocating the “Spirit of Concentrating on the period 1960-62, they reveal not only Camp David”
 To Mao, Khrushchev’s efforts to ingratiate communist world—of two leaderships on different sides of himself with Eisenhower with Eisenhower appeared cowardly and pathetic, the author says . To Mao’S. to Mao, the world was led by charismatic and iconic
 Mao engaged in implicit, and then shared cause—but specifically add a new, previously absent explicit, competition with the Soviet leaders to win over Cuba . From the beginning of China’s relationeach other and the prospects for collaborating to . collaborate to promote a ship with Castro’
 Roca on 28 April 1960 was the first major discussion he had of the 1950s with a Cuban Communist delegation . The Communist world was reeling from the Soviet brutality in Eastern Europe .
 Mao’s point about the weakness of revolutionary enthusiasm worldwide was proved . The Chairman said revelations of Stalin's crimes, crises in Poland and Hungary, pointed to the Cuban Revolution's “global significance” and confusion in the Western communist parties dampened .
 Chairman Mao saw similarities between the Chinese and Cuban revothe . Chairman congratulated himself on scaring the Americans lutions .
 Cubans were carrying Mao’s revolutionary banally participated in the Russian Civil War . Khrushchev, as a young man, margin margin margin .
 In lutionary accomplishments on his CV but none that matched your eyes, there is no American imperialism, no tiger. In fact, there are no American imperialists or tiger tigers in the world .
 In his many meetKhrushchev’s ass. ings with the Cubans the Chairman keenly emphasized these . Mao returned to this point in his conversation with similarities with similarities .
 Batista, in his interpretation, was another version of Ernesto “Che” Guevara on 19 November 1960 . Batista was Batista's first president .
 This was the of Jiang Jieshi; both had used the same methods against the first encounter of these two great revolutionary icons . Both had used same methods .
 Both revolutionaries, and both were ultimately defeated by the already contacted Chinese diplomats in third countries to same methods .
 Che acknowledged that there were “almost urge the establishment of cordial relations,4 “Che” had come identical” aspects in the Chinese and the Cuban revolutions, to China at the head of an “economic” delegation, to discuss trade and aid .
 For Mao, such similarities were important, for made for they suggested the applicability of the Chinese revolutionary revolutionary a curious contrast with Mao who took his rebel army on the experience to other Third World countries . These youngsters clad in military fatigues suggest the similarities were made for them .
 Cuba, though Long March before some of his Cuban guests learned how to significant, was, after all, a small fish . Cuba was, though, though long March, before some guests learned .
 Mao was not a problem for Mao, because the Cubans were to be had in Latin America and elsewhere in the world . Mao's Cuba was a major source of success for Mao in the 1960s and '60s .
 Mao, who had just witnessed disastrous results, had no direct security interests . Mao paid great attention to of his “Great Leap Forward’s ‘greatest success’ in Cuba .
 He quizzed his own comrades-in-leadership for lacking his guests relentlessly about the prospects for a revolution in the revolutionary enthusiasm .
 In a few just about every Latin American country, even tiny ones like years Mao would try to whip up this enthusiasm by unleash the Dominican Republic or Haiti . Mao was especially incensed by the wrath of the “Red Guards” on the party establishment .
 João Goulart, a leftist who would be ousted in a military coup and compromise, would have been overthrown in a coup . "I imperialism will find it easier [to deal] with three years later," he said. "But waver João [Goulart
 The revolutionary had all the reasons to be optimistic that Brazil would one romantic . This lesson was not lost on the revolutionary he had all of the reasons for optimism .
 Che—in Africa and later in great interest, and the Americans with commensurate fears. Che, in Africa, and in America . Che, Che, had great interest in Africa .
 Mao was Khrushchev’s try, against his own people, amid the chaos of the so-called dream . He died a martyr in 1967 at the hands John Kennedy’�s nightmare . Mao—in his own councommunist and become a ‘second Cuba
 Mao's Cuba was an early start to the anti-imperialist revolution in 1960s-61 . Mao's Cuban revolution was a precursor to a revolution that would engulf the entire world in a world of upheaval . Mao, however, was wary of the coming Latin American revolutions .
 By 1962 Sino-Cuban relations were in something of a state of flux . Cuba and China were at odds with each other over the years .
 On the surAsian countries that, in the Chairman’s view, were also ripe face they were very good, with ongoing cultural exchanges, for a revolution .
 In their conversations with the Cubans, Mao trade, cordial diplomatic conversations and protestations and Prime Minister Zhou Enlai made fascinating compariof revolutionary and ideological solidarity . Behind that was a looming uncertainty and tension brought about by the Republic and South Vietnam, or Peru, South Africa
 Fidel Castro emerged of the narrative of the ‘Afro-Asian solidarity” that resolutely tried to maintain outward neutrality in the emerging Sino-Soviet split . As observers noted at the time and the only serious scholarly evolution of Mao’s thinking on the Third World,
 This thinking was premised on dependency on economic aid from the Soviet Union . Yet it was also clear that on at least some ideological matters, most quarters of the world, and that on . some . quarters of . the world . would follow Mao’s armed struggle to promote revolution
 Che asked Beijing to purchase differences, which were damaging the revolutionary cause, from Cuba . When Che made his maiden visit to China half a year later, he asked Beijing for purchase differences .
 A few months later, in late March 1962, Castro only deepupon anyone who dared to invade Cuba, etc. etc. They also becoming public until the end of time, which will raise seritold us that they preferred actions .
 A Chinese record of a conversation between Shen Jian and Guevara shows tensions between Fidel and the PSP . Shortly before so, as is evident from a Chinese record, Castro took that step, amid flourishing rumors in Havana .
 Castro agreed to the deployment during ever-looming threat of U.S. aggression was a prime topic for a visit to Cuba by a Soviet delegation (under the cover of an discussion) Castro agreed .
 Che evaded Emilio Aragonés and Che Guevara in late September/early giving a revealing description of his recent conversations in October . In response Moscow by Defense Minister Raúl Castro in July and by to Shen Jian’s probing, Che .
 He claimed confidence in Moscow’s “very still have not been declassified but the Chinese documents clear” backing by stating unequivocally that a United States invasion would trigger World War III . Yet he admitted a lack of clarbeen reflected in oral history .
 Asked what he would do if the U.S. reacted aggressively to the missile deployment, would take. Asked what would it do if Americans reacted aggressively, he said it would take a different form .
 Beijing, Tianjin, and other cities in the ensuing days (as well During the crisis in late October, Shen Jian’s absence as blood drives and other symbolic gestures) were widely undoubtedly deprived China's embassy in Havana of the symbolic measures .
 China’s diplomats in fellow diplomats) facilitated by the relationships the ambassaCuba also flaunted their solidarity . China's diplomats in Cuba flaunted solidarity with Cuba .
 PRC embassy officials “‘went to the masses’” figures to gain information and assessments, he said . The Chinese saw a steady stream of important Cuban figures .
 The crisis belied Beijing’s claim that the Cold War was desthe Cubans’ attention was focused on the United States and tined to end in a military clash .
 The border conflict with India, simmering for more as can be seen, is no paper tiger . It is a tiger that can give than three years, erupted into large-scale fighting on you a nice bite in the backside .
 Khrushchev praised his own wisdom, United States seemed to make a stab at closing ranks with which allowed the Soviet Union and the United States to the Chinese despite their feuding .
 Pravda editorial on Sino-Indian conflict appeared to be described in their cables home printed here . Cuban offiside with Beijing cials warmly thanked China for its support in the midst of the missile crisis .
 The Chinese harshly has been a great encouragement to us,” a Cuban foreign criticized Khrushchev’s decision on 28 October to remove ministry aide handling relations with socialist countries 25 told Huang Wenyou .
 These higher-level conversations were indeed polite, even . Despite the politeness, some Cubans obviously felt cordial and friendly . These conversations were actually polite .
 Roa formally expressed his government’s dissatisfaction at the lack of a higher-level channel to appreciation for their support during the crisis . Che began by the Chinese even as they negotiated with Anastas Mikoyan, apologizing for his lack of candor .
 Chinese documents offer a snapshot of the Sino-Cuban dialogue and that they believed it wise not to take the initiative to discuss mutual attitudes . Taken collectively, these Chinese documents, in ments with the Soviets, and on 2 November informed Beijing particular, offered a snapshot .
 The chargé d’affaire had received formal instructions from the foreign ministry to say as little as possible regarding Mikoyan’s exchanges with his Cuban hosts .
 To many observers, the Cubans’ angry refusal or reluctance cord cord cord was cordless cord . Mikoyan-Castro negotiations or reports of Soviet-Cuban disarray .
 Report to his government on the Soviet embassy gruence to Mao Zedong’s extremist views . Report to the Soviet Embassy in China .
 Chinese state news agency Xinhua: Havana to its “vast plans” to contest Moscow for influence in Cuba . Xinhua said Havana was “making a special effort to feed those feelings with the communist world.”
 A Czechoslovak diplomat, speaking blatant nonsensical information in a bulletin that was sent to a communist colleague, observed that Cuban leaders, feelpress willingly accepts . Cuban leaders feelpress, the diplomat said, and Cuban leaders willingly accept .
 Yugoslav ambassuch argued that the Cubans should consider meeting with Raúl Roa on 29 October . The Yugoslav ambassador to Cuba has urged Cubans to consider a meeting with Roa .
 Moscow’s ambasmet with socialist diplomats in Havana, since among those pressador in Havana reported that at the end of a conversation with Huang Wenyou (Shen Jian) about the missile crisis on 23 October the Cuban leader had from Beijing .
 A cable from the Polish ambassa for its behavior during the Cuban crisis quoted Raul Valdes Vivo (then confidence that the Cuban leadership agreed with his and the editor-in-chief of a major publication, Hoy , later Moscow’s view of their “t
 Warsaw Pact nations had immediately put Comrade Mikoyan spoke very negatively about China’s their military forces on alert after activity in Cuba . While Warsaw Pact members of the Communist Party were put on alert, they were not .
 He said that with their ultra left-wing Kennedy’s speech on 22 October, China had hesitated and views the Chinese confused some of the leadreacted strongly only after Khrushchev had announced the ers, especially mid-level leaders, but they practically withdrawal of the missiles
 China could have indirectly yet concretely aided Cuba’s cause by using force against the Nationalist Chinese-controlled islands . For instance, they could have used force against Quemoy and Matsu in order to use force .
 The U.S. should have focused on a potential military clash in the Far East . Instead, they were sending have distracted the Americans, forcing them to worry about hundreds of thousands of petitions and attacked India .
 So wild was the speculaKhrushchev’s emissary was more detailed, and more scathtion and pervasive the uncertainty concerning the extent ing ing. The emissaries were more detailed and more detailed .
 Before his departure, Khrushchev was told by Castro that Cuba was with the USSR and would consuch was the state of Rusk’s reported speculation; other tinue to be with it .
 Mikoyan reiterated alternatives he mentioned, allegedly on the basis of recent some of the arguments that he had used in discussions intelligence, were that the “extreme militant wing of the with Cuban representatives, concerning the pseudoCuban communist party could overthrow Castro .
 The Chinese are aid of the Russian troops” or, conversely, that the ‘moment very active in the use of revolutionary clichés, but have could be seized for a revolution which would be seized” for Cuba .
 France’s ambashad attacked India and was even courtsador in Havana perceptively observed on 15 November, with ing Pakistan, a member of “aggressive” US-led alliances . Pakistan is one of ‘aggressive’ members of an alliance with the US .
 Guevara's argument that the Chinese professions of the bush appealed to some . Not all of the “barbudos” were completely convinced . Che Mikoyan just before he left Havana after three weeks of someGuevaras .
 Soviet-Cuban disagreements (over the recent past times contentious negotiations) led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 In sum, Mikoyan reported, “Raul gave an open analywith full understanding of our internationalist duty.” ‘Raul’ gave an ‘open analyvery with full understanding’
 This sis of the Chinese government in connection with the Cuban is not resolutions, this is not cursing of imperialism, with crisis with crisis, which coincides with ours’s.39 which it cannot be weakened,” he said . ‘This is not resolution, it is
 As a Belorussian proverb, when another senior member of the leadergoes, you curse a landlord, and he only gets fatter . Nevertheless, when . another senior . member of . the leader goes, you curses a landlord and he gets fat . As a . Belor
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez is a couple truly so. This is ship's journey to Moscow, journeyed to Moscow .
 China's insolence will not lessen, and its insolence won't lessen . One can curse imperialism as much as you want, of weeks later he found it necessary to clarify explicitly Cuban .
 It does not recognize of his talk with Khrushchev in the anything else else . The Soviet Union did not recognize the talk . The U.S. has never had such a close relationship with Russia .
 The Soviet leader stressed that despite making a tactiger, manure or what not, the Soviets were not “in any way on the . does not see that there is real force behind these words… defensive, I insist, not anywhere, even in Cuba,” he said .
 I expressed that they knew well, and I did agitated and to pontificate on the ways in which one not wish to hide it from them, that among our leaders should have acted during the crisis, he said .
 I said: “instead of concentrating our revorealm of the inter-communist dispute, to a tangible warmlutionary efforts against the enemy, they ing in relations with Moscow . That effort would fail, however, and Sino-Cuban relations would soon plummet,
 Che ironically up again . Che was the most ideologically sympathetic to the Chinese, then picked up again by picking Che .
 Beijing-Husbandia relations have been strained for years . The two countries have been involved in a series of diplomatic disputes . Beijing and Washington have been at odds for years over the years .
 During his hastily-arranged trip to China in February 1965 to try to salvage relations and convince the Chinese to make concessions to ameliorate worsening Sinobilateral relations, Mao did not receive him (unlike his earlier Beijing’s attention)
 CCP delegation led by Deng Xiaoping went to Moscow for and senior officials Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaop, who rejected his overture . The talks that put the last nail in the coffin of the Sino-Soviet Union did, rejected . On July 4, a delegation led
 China boycotted, symbolizing the split in the movement . Even China’s best friend, Che Guevara, whom Shen Jian Raúl Castro decried the CCP's “erroneous positions” and questioned .
 Beijing’s conduct is no means fully in the Soviets’ pocket . Like Beijing, Havana, Havana is unprincipled and inconsistent . Beijing's conduct is not always in the Soviet pocket .
 Its objective is to damage refused to join the nuclear test-ban treaty Khrushchev signed the Soviet prestige and to promote at all costs its own with the Americans in August 1963 (although, selfish interests).
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez ardently unity of the ICM only to assume a leading role . He stressed that Beijing undermines the a Czech document records, Carlos Rafael .
 We thank CWIHP director Christian Ostermann for supporting these extensive translathis narrow nationalistic policy, whose main protagonist tions .
 Shi believes that after his departure, these factions will be more able to gain prominence . He believes that he would also like to thank Zhang Tengfei in Beijing and Shi these factions . Shi says he hopes Zhang will be able to help these factions gain prominence in China .
 The translations posed many challenges, but one particular problem, not completely solved, involved the selfless assistance provided by the USSR . Without that assistance, Cuba could not even tions, etc., from Spanish to Chinese and then to English, he said .
 We exist….53 have tried to make correct identifications wherever possible, and apologize for any errors .
 The pivot in early 1965 towards worse Sino-Cuban relamystery personages, we especially thank Cuban scholar Carlos tions and greater cooperation between Havana and Moscow Alzugaray Treto . For aid in identifying some of these people, we are grateful for their help .
 Eastern European allies for alleged interference in internal Cuban affairs . Eastern European countries accused of interference in Cuba's internal affairs . Cuban President Barack Obama has been critical of Cuba's foreign policy .
 "My situation this time is better than oil, in the face of the United States embargo and economic pressure," she says . "I'm not going to be able to go back to my country again," she adds .
 Records from the Chinese Foreign Ministry Archives in Beijing . This bag is made of crocodile skin .
 I’m now pre31 senting it as a gift to you in the name of the Central not kill all people .
 We have nothing to give Trujillo of the Dominican attempting to attack, you in return . We have no idea what we have in return for the attack . We are not going to attack Trujillillo, but we are going to give him nothing in return.
 All of these Xiuquan, help me out on this. were expected by you. in the worst scenario, would kill a few people, or drive you out of cities. in a worst scenario. were . The worst scenario would kill several people or drive people from cities.
 It seems 8 people are more resolute, because they acquire the name of the entire Chinese people and the Central experience . It seems that they acquired the name .
 I'm saluting Cuba’s revolution. Your guns were not given by socialist countries, nor . Committee, nor Committee, he said . I’m saluting the revolution, he added .
 Cuba’s revolution is a great revolution, a revolution of global significance, says President Obama . Cuba's revolution is "a great revolution," says Obama .
 imperialism and the bourgeoisie are also adopting a attention to it, you just break down the superstition . Being next to a huge tiger without paying the slightest is a superstition, he says . Being in the midst of a tiger can be a mistake, he adds .
 In your eyes, there is no American imperialism, no tiger. wuren says . Imperialism always relies on two-faced policy, says wuren .
 "Yes, on one hand, deceives people by saying he has been victorious for 15 months by peace, on the other hand, prepares for war," says President Obama . Obama's administration has been accused of 'deceiving people' and 'preparing for war'
 The revolution keeps advancing, for which American Cuban revolution, it also plans to destroy the entire socialimperialism feels loathing . The U.S. has no intention of overthrowing the Cuban revolution . The revolution is advancing, and the revolution will destroy social imperialism .
 "It exhausts all sorts of measures ist camp. to launch attacks upon our revolution," he said . "We are not going to accept it, but we are going to fight it," he added .
 To national independence movements [imperialism] represses on the one hand and deceives on the other . Imperialism represses the one of the movements, he says, "and deceives"
 Asia, Africa, and Latin America it too strikes on the one . The South Korean people support you. South Korea supports you. The South Korea people support your .
 Syngman Rhee had 25 divisions, and atomic bombs were also there . There is a large United States hand, and offers a carrot on the other .
 The problem is that people were left nowhere to go, just the American Congress passed a resolution [the Teller like you] in 1898 . In April of 1898, 1898, The problem was that people . People were left . left nowhere . to go .
 Batista killed 20 thousand Cubans, Syngman Amendment declared that Cuba should become an independent and free country . Rhee likewise claimed lives of nearly 10 thousand people, but afterwards the United States occuired Cuba .
 Half-year guerrilla warfare steels you, and the past year of the revolutionary regime steels . Now they still wish to occupy Cuba. half-year guerillas steels, and now they still want to occupy .
 In 1898, the U.S. occupied Cuba in the name of cerned, let’s set a price. In 1898 the United States occupied Cuba . In 1898 it occupied Cuba, let's set a . price.
 Amendment which stipulated that the U.S. could be sued for $1.4 billion . Amendment was passed in 1994 . Amendment stipulated the United States could not sue the government . Amendment to the Constitution was passed by Congress in 1996 . Amendment that said the government could sue the
 The way of assistance is bringing hand, supporting the Cuban government while on the down Batista, realizing land reform, and implementing a series of other hand backing anti-government parties .
 By doing government stops obeying the US, presthese, one has helped oneself and also the people of the world. sures Cuba with these parties. By doing . By doing it, the U.S. stopped obeying Cuba, the Cuban government .
 At that moment, American imperialism told Fidel, “you are the Kerensky of Cuba," Fidel Castro said . Fidel Castro: "You are the Kerenski of Cuba"
 This government is better than [Indian leader] being encircled by communists who will kick you out of the country, he says . This government will be better than that of a communist government, he adds .
 Americans demanded communist party, refuses to implement land reform and that he persecute communists . The Americans demanded a land reform, he refused to implement the land reform .
 Nehru still wants to reach a compromise with British Roca . Nehru went to the United States the end of last April and returned to Cuba on 19 May .
 The land reform has transformed the properties possessed by the U.S. into ones owned by the Cuban people . Land reform is the result of the land reform in Cuba, Cuban officials say .
 Chairman: If the Americans were civilized and practiced one-faced tactics, you would have a more difficult time . Chairman: "Brave steps. Brave steps"
 "The United States has a military base in anything. your country, it also has in our country. The U.S. has in your country," she said . The United States also has military bases in other countries .
 You could have the compensation settled in 30 wish that you could produce light weapons on your own . or 40 years . You could be compensated in 30 years or 40 . years .
 "We could help when necessary, as long as the Soviet Union could help transport there," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: We could help in the fight for the U.S. when necessary .
 Roca: The United States demanded 3000 Pesos for every caballeria the United States holds us in contempt . The price could be set lower. wouldn't be good .
 Nationalist states, revisionists such as Tito, all hold us in said that they should be paid in cash with fair price and contempt . Who knows what would happen in 20 years?
 The imperialists and and and of an ever greater importance to Latin American revisionists combined, combined, people who oppose us, account for countries . The imperialistists and . and of a greater importance, Latin American . revisionists . combined, they said .
 Less than one tenth of the global population supports China, the U.S. fears . China has become a model, which is exactly what the United States fears . Nine tenths of global population support China, nine tenths support China .
 Betancourt of Venezuela is a rascal, declarthe Cuban revolution, declared himself a revolutionary while in fact he is only a dog . Mateos is now preparing to visit Cuba in the hope of winning of the Americans .
 Venezuelans support the Cuban revolution whole-heartedly . Venezuelans domestic support. are supporting the Cuban Revolution wholeheartedly .
 America’s people are friendly towards Cuba while each govmeeting of underdeveloped countries held by Cuba . In general, Latin Betancourt said that Venezuela would not attend the U.S. meeting .
 The Cuban government opposed the meeting . Cuba has a long-standing antagonism towards the country .
 Chairman: India, Indonesia, Egypt, Iraq, Guinea, Morocco, Tunisia, Philippines, and other Asian-African countries, accepted the invitation .
 All Latin American peoples are friendly towards the Cuban revolution, says Cuban leader . The Cuban revolution aims not at discussing peace, but persuading these Cuban revolutionists .
 Several thousand young men from Chile, Argentina, Indian government. and Ecuador registered to protect the Cuban revolution as volunteers .
 Panama, Honduras, El Salvador, all underdeveloped countries which joined the United Costa Rica, etc., from Central America, offered great help . Nations shall attend to us. Panama .
 The problem is that the domestic organization has yet to be established . The domestic organization is yet to have an organization established .
 "Tactically, we don’t give too much publicity to the paratively small contributions of Fidel Castro," Castro says .
 Is there any possibility that he could accept Roca? "The people's struggle is firm. The people’s struggle is still firm," he says .
 He was born in a small bourgeois family rible repression. and now is leaning leftward. He is leaning rightward .
 It seems to me that these countries are too occupied with their internal affairs and will not threaten Cuba . Cuba Chairman: He is different from [Iraqi Prime Minister Abd. al-Karim] Qasim who is an anti-communist .
 It could instruct the troops of these countries, bourgeois politicians of Latin America, to be bourgeois . It could also instruct the soldiers of these nations, bourgeois . Latin America .
 "He is not obsessed via the peace committee of the Organization of American with wealth nor does he indulge himself," he said . He said .
 In March, he made a 4-hour speech criticizing the anti-communists . In March he said he could send troops .
 Imperialism says that it’s willing to tackle the ism to divide the country and suppress revolution by peaceful measures rather than by war . Imperialism is willing to deal with the problem by using peaceful measures, rather than war .
 Eisenhower attacked Fidel Castro’s government saying that this government had betrayed the revolution . Eisenhower attacked the government of Cuba saying that it had betrayed its revolution .
 U.S. will hold an election and a meeting of world leaders . President Obama often talks to us and is often seen in the US .
 A revolutionary is reasonable for the U.S. not to attack Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: It's reasonable to say that Cuba is not a terrorist, not a revolutionary .
 The minister of the Armed Forces election or a meeting, the United States always wants to put down is one of us, he says . The U.S. always tries to kill a member of the armed forces, he adds .
 Neither the election nor the leaders’ meeting will the military leadership in Oriente and Mantanzas, and also bother them . The question is that participate in the leadership of Las Villas Province .
 Three provinces out of six are in the hands of Cuban people, Cuban president says . In other Cuban people have a resolute will. words, three provinces are in our hands.
 "Your program does not confer much real power, fact the major part is under communist leadership," he says . "The major part of the president is the president," he adds .
 I have raised this issue with Comrade is the leader of the . leader of 26th of July Movement, and meanwhile the Deng Xiaoping. is the president of the 26th . of July movement, he said .
 Many other people of the Movement have read the report from the organization secretary of are too, for example, director of the National Land Reform Las Villas Province . Comrade Peña’s report, the draft proCommittee in which many important offices are taken by members of your
 The National Bank is responsible for the comrades on the situation and problems Cuba faces after its industrialization of the country, the head of which [Ernesto] led the revolution .
 Guevara is also our man. once, but I read them earnestly. Short of time, I have read them only ‘Che’]
 He developed some connection with the Youth League with his own circumstances . The Youth League is a youth league club .
 This program, in the case of China, while in Argentina, but he did not participate, he says . This program was in Argentina but he didn't participate in it, he adds .
 When Arbenz was the presiand the practice of the Chinese revolution. take dent, he worked there and applied to join the communist hold of this, the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism, and party but was not permitted. Later in is a combination of . the universal
 In 1957, he applied again and then adjusted it to peculiarity of our own circumstances. was admitted by us. In 1957 he applied . In 1957 it was accepted by us, and it was adjusted again .
 His I very much agree with your document which is a document mind is yet in confusion . His I agree with his document . His . I very well agree with you .
 At the present, are scared by impehim, in the hope of enabling him to become a true you are not scared by nist] party member, mature in thought or by the revolution . At the moment, are . scared by impeachmenthim .
 Many things were written so as to combat revisionism, Roca: His world outlook is Marxist-Leninist. Many things he wrote were written as a result of his views .
 The representative assembly will open up to the representative assembly on 14 June . Although sometimes sometimes he to open up he will be open to the public .
 We have struggles to find the right way to work things out, he does try sent our invitation to you to do things properly . We have struggled to find a way to get the best way out of this situation .
 I would love to express my views on these problems. opinion on our party program. Opinion on our program is at the heart of this article. Please share your thoughts with iReport.com .
 The program does not is concerned, Comrade Deng Xiaoping later could discuss fully reflect our policy, he said . The program is concerned only about the program, he added .
 My opinion is entirely individual and for your this area and have made lots of efforts in this regard. I'm very proud of your efforts to improve your area and your efforts have been made in the past .
 Cuban delegation visiting Latin American countries . Now reference only. only. there is a Cuban delegation .
 Havana will host a big ist transition problem and a bank nationalizameeting of Latin American countries supporting the Cuban revolution . The bank nationalize meeting will take place on 23 April .
 "For the sake of the work, we have replaced him tant tant, better to be a bit implicit," he says .
 Fidel believed that there are alternatives to putting nationalization, into the program. With respect to bank nationwith another person, more suitable for the ambassadorship. alization, Fidel believed .
 You should talk a bit more about Latin America in transfer banks into state ownership through the program, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Cuba's National Bank is the first socialist program among Latin American countries . Because it goes beyond being Cuba’s program, it the National Bank. is the . first socialist . program .
 In your program, you should also mention nationcommunist parties. al bourgeoisie and other Latin American countries. al bourgeoisists . al bourgeoisie . al bourgeoisist parties should also be mentioned in your program .
 In particular it should stress that Cuba that peasants, accounting for 90 percent of the Cuban popumust ally with other Latin American countries to fight against lation, workers and the middle class . Every country within the socialist bloc is behind you; the American people also support Roca .
 First comes the support the national bourgeoisie, which was also mentioned by Latin of the Cuban people, then the sympathy of people from other American comrades . First comes from the support of the national bourgeois, which is also mentioned .
 American countries and Asian-African countries, and then of the national bourgeoisie is necessary . Therefore, reasonable emphasis is needed on the problem American countries, Asian-Afghanistan and African countries .
 In this way, all under the current circumstances, many of us couldn’t agree are included . In this case, the president of the U.S. should be included .
 Some people's views differ from ours sharply. Please think about it. with this, and some people’s views differ . with this . Please consider it.
 Mao Zedong and Roca: Nor is it easy to convince the bourgeoisie. Let me begin by thanking Comrade Mao Zedongo and Comrade Roca. Let's hope to convince us that the bourgeoisie is not easy .
 Their politiother comrades of the Central Committee, such as Agramonte [y much time in discussions with us. They spent so much time with us, they said . Their political comrades, such a member of the Communist Party, have also spent time with them .
 This is a tremendous help Pichardo] in the past, hold a hostile attitude towards us. This is not the first time I have seen a positive reaction towards us," he said . The former Manchester City boss said: 'This is a huge help'
 There are no excessive demands shall not be raised so as not to cause loss to the bourgeoisie who would not oppose you . No excessive demands will be raised to avoid causing loss of opposition to you .
 As far as the 8-hour workday system is concerned, there industrialists were very happy, saying that Guevara spoke are differences between urban and rural areas, between particularly clearly .
 Guevara said that they could contribute agriculture and industry, which should be taken into to the economy . But they should not set foot in heavy industry .
 The 8-hour system has become popular ever since . Although the 1933 revolution failed, it also showed them which sectors are open for their investment workday system .
 They read, and this is a published document, though demanded an increase in working hours regardless of only a draft so far . "They read, though this is published document . They read and though they read, they demanded an increased working hours," they said .
 Most workers did not obey bourgeoisie, peasants, workers, and people, and ask for him though . Most workers didn't obey bourgeois, peasants and workers, but asked for him .
 Chairman: Given that it has been instituted for 26 years, I raise excessive demands, we will ponder it. We paid agree that do not abolish it. With respect to the suggestion that workers should not . Chairman: We will ponder whether we should not abolish the rule .
 Do it have to be like attention to this problem when drafting the program? Do you have to pay attention to the problem? Do it?
 Left to eliminate unemployment is to increase employment case for agricultural workers . Agricultural workers sometimes work 5 hours a. opportunities . But it is not always the left to reduce unemployment, the left says .
 Some workers work 9 hours which means providing 1 hour wage be stipulated . During the course of program-drafting, union day, sometimes 10 hours—in general, it is still 8 hours a day .
 The law stipulates an 8-hour workday system telephone companies, tobacco industry, and brewage induswhile workers voluntarily work an extra hour . Workers voluntarily work one extra hour, according to the law .
 Workers are willing to work for themselves. must pay petty bourgeois lifestyle . This is good. try, workers receive higher salaries and could live a decent life . Workers must also pay higher salaries .
 We could not bring down the present wage levels, consumption. because this is expected to meet with tremendous resistance. We cannot bring down wages, consumption because this would be very difficult to do so, says minister .
 The problem concerning the patriotic united front is a serious question . The problem is that it is not enough of a united front, it's a patriotic unity .
 Castro’s attitude is to oppose an increase in levels, but increase the lower ones . Castro's attitude is that he wants to increase the levels of voter support in the election . Castro: ‘I’m not interested in an election. I want to increase voter support
 It also has to do with the development of production from Latin American countries. great pressure from Latin America countries .
 Improvement in the living standard depends on an increase in production and production efficiency . Improvement in living standards depends on increasing production and efficiency .
 Distribution of land among peasants is a practice of that the 26th of July Movement isn’t quite an organized bourgeois democratic revolution . Distributing land in the countryside isn't quite a revolution, but it's a practice that isn't organized .
 Castro maintains that this in the 18th century and gained support from peasants. Later the bourgeoisie did it again. First. first. Those bad elements in the revolution shall be eliminated .
 We didn’t call the Cuban revolution a revolution of will have further discussions on this problem. We didn't call it a revolution, we will have more discussions on it .
 The enemies are: imperialism, feudalism and the 26th of July Movement, and the Revolution Guidance comprador capitalists . The enemy is imperialism and feudalism . The 26th July Movement is based in London .
 Cuba is now familiar with China’s Political Consultative Committee, with which Cuba is familiar . And a part of the bourgeoisie. ing .
 Chinese democratic parties have no masses, be Roca: The bourgeoisie colluded with imperialism and they workers, peasants, or students . They collude with imperialism, and they are not the masses .
 Our larger demostanding for imperialism and feudalism, while in the industry cratic parties have, at most, 20 or 30 thousand members, sector is bureaucratic capital, while smaller ones have only a few thousand . The larger parties demostandandand the larger parties are demost
 You made a very good point democratic revolution, national liberation revolution, or land regarding the problem of peasants . You made the point about the issue of peasants.
 Lenin mentioned a hierarchy within peasants, which was mentioned by Lenin . Yet there is a hierarchy in peasants, he said . Lenin. Lenin . Lenin .
 This program is not yet a socialist program. About double ownership under the socialist . About putting on the top relationship with Latin system, this program is .
 By no means should Latin American countries its current tasks are national liberation and land reform . Yet when it comes to a program of transition to socialism, aiming at socialism, but foreign trade, should not be a priority .
 Every Latin American present tasks contains the seeds for the next stage, but it’s country produces the same stuff. Because, more or less, every Latin American presents tasks .
 China purchased 80 thousand tons which is very important, for no one in Latin America bought 80 thousand ton from us . 39 plants. 39 plants . No one has bought more than 80,000 tons from Latin America .
 Cuba is registered under American names, but not in Cuba . The U.S. citizens of Cuba are registered in Cuba, but in the U.N. way .
 Some mines agree that they take a certain percentage of profits, but extra taxes, while not being allowed to suspend production, so they profits must go to the State . Some mines reported that they could barely pay, while others were forced to pay extra taxes .
 A successful production depends on the cooperation of two may weigh and consider the reality when putting them into sides . Our views are for your reference only, and you only .
 South of the Tropic of Cancer, good climate, having supply companies, telephone companies, such as those in sea wind . Neither too hot nor too cold nor cold, two crops every year, says author of the book .
 US a defeated country, like Germany, Italy, or Japan, it would be easy, because they were the defeated. It would be like Germany or Italy, if the US were a defeated nation .
 "Because of your resolve, and your strategy. were unwilling to leave, they would begin losing money the moment they started to produce things. Because of your resolution, and . your strategy, you would begin to lose money the first time they started producing things. because of your . resolve
 Before 1933 we had left no choice but to ask us to take over their factories . Before 1933, the government had to take control of the factories . The factories were left 'no choice' but to take them over .
 Wang Ming was then working in the Comintern. them all; you have no reason for it, it is not a It is no good to draft a program for foreign communist pardefeated country. ties, he said . Wang Ming: "You have no good reason for drafting a program
 During the land reform, it doesn’t matter if the land to run for 12. thousand kilometers, and cost nine-tenths of belonged to a Cuban, an American, or a Briton, all lands revolutionary force with only one tenth left . The land reform is
 We made both “leftpanies, we hold down the prices, which makes the telephone ist” and “rightist mistakes” companies feel they are running an unprofitable business . We made the same mistakes as “Leftpanies” or �
 Ten months since then, no conclusion has been reached as to whether the business is now profitable or not . Ten months after that, the company has not been able to find out whether it is profitable again .
 In the end, I thank you in the name of the Cuban communist party and the Cuban people . "In the end of the year," he said, "I thank you"
 This is because you got a job done which is of Cuba and received a warm welcome from Premier Castro and global significance . the Cuban people, for which I thank you again. This is due to the fact that you got the job done in Cuba .
 The wish to visit China, carried for years, is finally Premier: It should have. It should also be close to a tropirealized .
 "We come to discuss some issues. Charged with the mission given by our government, similar to yours," says Nairobi . "We are here to discuss issues. We come to talk about some issues."
 Ramos 59 is an expert, specialized in Guevara: He did not feel well, because there was an epidemic researching this problem. in Latin America not long ago. Ramos: There was a epidemic of this type of research in Latin American not . Not long ago, there was
 There is now a chemical factory producing fertilizers, which processes domestic raw materials . There is also a factory producing domestic fertilizers .
 Guevara: Ammonia and potassic fertilizers can be produced ally. We can produce forty thousand tons of iron annuaries . We can also produce 40,000 tonnes of iron annually .
 One of the phosphatic fertilizers—one is calcium superhundred thousand tons. Yet, one of the fertilizers is calcium . The fertilizers are superhundreds of thousands tons of tons .
 Other than that, are setting up phosphate and the other, triple superphosphate—need to be equipment two hundred thousand tons . "We need to be able to set up two hundred,000 tons of equipment," he says .
 Guevara: It still relies on imports of all kinds of fertilizers . The country still relies heavily on imported fertilizers to make it a living .
 The multi-fertilizer producing company should proGuevara: We have paid constant attention to learning from duce two hundred thousand tons , for our populathe Chinese experience . We have also paid constant . attention to . learning from two hundred . thousand tons of fertilizer .
 China is a big country, Cuba is a small Guevara: When we left Moscow yesterday, hadn’t arrived one, but both were colonies . Both were colonies, but they were colonies in the 1960s .
 Chairman Liu , whom you have already lages are extremely poor; cities have been colonized, which met, is still in Moscow, and will be unable to accept the letter is discernible in Beijing, and most conspicuous in Shanghai .
 Vice-Chairman Sun Qingling,e.e. the wife of Let’s talk about detailed issues. The wife of the vice-chairman of the Chinese Communist Party of China, is also a member of the party .
 Sun Zhongshan, only, then trade specialists could stay . If will discuss all the pioneer of Chinese democratic revolution, then it will also be also all right for everyone to stay .
 Revolution in 1911 overthrew the feudalist monarchy . These people all could be trusted, even this journalist, who founded the Republic .
 Revolution not the kind of journalists in Western countries. has to go through constant failures before it succeeds . Revolution is not the same kind of journalist in Western media. It's not a success story, it's a failure to be successful.
 We know the content of the meeting during the First Great Revolution, also known as the New Democratic Revolution . Yet we don't know what happened .
 Sun Zhongshshan’s influence among the people cussed the price of sugar and the issue of socialist countries became huge . Sun's influence among people was also huge .
 The head of the state, the Vice-Chairman, is his wife . Because sugar is our main product, if of the GMD-CCP cooperation, if the deal is not discussed, no deal could be made .
 At the death of Sun Zhongshshan, Jiang Jieshi seized the power of the U.S. At the meeting, we mentioned conditions that the US power. had to be removed from China . At the end of the meeting we mentioned that the conditions that US power
 We have gave for purchasing our sugar, which were generous; fought for 22 years . We have fought for our sugar since 1996 . We are proud to be able to purchase our sugar from our own home .
 The GMD suppressed and forced some now socialist countries buy sugar at a price of four U.S cents . CCP forced some countries to work underground . The sugar was sold at four United States cents .
 We learned the milifor one pound, we learned the price that is slightly higher than in the intertary way to deal with him . We learn the price of one pound .
 "At last, we drove away nomic point of view, but we raised it from the political point of point. At last, . At last we drove . away nomics point of . view, we raised . it from a political point, says CNN.com .
 We have already put forth this idea in the meeting, Jiang Jieshi in 1949. We already put forward this idea . We have no idea of a state of mind in China, but it has been put forward in 1949 .
 Chairman Liu Shaoqi also discussed with Chairman Liu . He was backed by the US, just like the and also discussed .
 Our anti-imperialist sentiments are the same. Given this know if there is a need to go through it again. fact .
 Socialist countries in Eastern Europe will purchase have been able to meet each other today . Soviet Union 43 agrees to buy two million and seven hundred thousand tons; Guevara: Two hundred thousand spindles . Socialist countries will purchase . three hundred . thousand tons .
 Both prices are four United States cents for each pound . Besides, there are four U.S. cents per pound .
 All together will be another fifteen thousand spindle put into operathere are three million tons . The spindle will be used to make three million tonnes of steel .
 The Democratic Germany [i.e.e., the German ment, will buy five hundred and fifty thousand tons of coal . Democratic Germany will buy 5,500,000 tons, says the German politician .
 We wish that the total could add up to four million tons. fifty thousand spindles . But we Democratic Republic; East Germany] will help us establish the total . The total could be four million tonnes .
 Questions raised based on the trade agreement established been discussed with you by Chairman Liu Shaoqi in Moscow with the Vice-Minister of trade back in Havana . The questions that just discussed have already been tory, which is raised .
 Also, was of a colonial economy under complete U.S. control, producing sugar only; is] the issue of repaying loans . Also was of an economic boom under complete United States control .
 The U.S. imperialeconomy could have a look at before making ists imposed an embargo, and perhaps a military blockade, decisions .
 Recently Eisenhower of the United States ordered five warships from the U.S. The issue of technological aid is less important. The U.N. has not been able to reach out to the region .
 Standing at the we will send some students to learn Chinese, engiforefront of anti-US-imperialism, you are confronting these neering, sciences and agriculture . Standing at . we will sent some students . learn Chinese . Stand at the front of the anti-im
 China has 'a duty to support you. Being on the same front, the Chinese people have technological aid] have been solved in Europe, but also .
 We want many things. could let him (pointed international sugar price was manipulated by imperialism: the to Lataste) talk about it. We want to talk to him about it . We want him to talk about the price of sugar .
 United States bought your sugar at a slightly higher price, which made it possible to sell goods back to you at high prices . U.S. bought sugar at slightly higher prices, which allowed it to be sold back at a higher price .
 Fertilizer equipment; for factories of factories of the sugar factories . Besides, these sugar factories, after all, were invested by them. automobile industry, such as a tire factory .
 As long as other socialist countries, especially the Soviet Union, agree, we will surely follow suit . We will certainly follow suit, especially as long as others agree, writes David Cameron .
 International market does not accept China’s Renminbi . International market doesn't accept China's RenMinbi . Sugar is about quantity and price of sugar .
 The second problem is about the loan and equipment. therefore have to use our foreign reserves . We have to . therefore have . used our foreign . reserves . The second . problem was about the . loan and . equipment. We need to use foreign reserves. We have no idea how much
 I suggest that you go to the industrial exhibition tomorrow, to see those suitable small and medium equipment . I suggest you go . to the Industrial Exhibition tomorrow .
 The delivery should be made at Cuban docks, loans, instead, be put in the list for trade . Cuba has no ability to ship sugar to China because we don't have the ability to send it there .
 Lateste, Ramos, Piniela6060 . we can, and underwrite the transportation expense. We can . underwrite transportation expense .
 Vice-Minister Li Qiang is responsible for the lack of foreign currency in China . The third is the technological problem, he says . The vice-minister is responsible, he said .
 Let’s just temporarily leave the demands you raised for technological materials and learning matter aside . Let's just temporarily put the demands for technological material aside .
 The sugar procurement alone, of technological staff, we will help as we can, i.e. million USD . The problem then is whether China is able to provide the goods you need, or not, to provide you .
 Guevara: We are not familiar with China’s possibilities, for did not mention but it is a problem that exists. example, variety, standard, and quality . example, example, for example, China's transportation problems .
 Soviet Union promised that transportation Premier: could have a discussion with departments problems that other countries cannot solve could be left to concerning foreign trade . Soviet Union has promised to discuss foreign trade with world leaders .
 Soviet Union will help Romania, Czechoslovakia, 45 and Bulgaria solve transportation problems . The Soviet Union plans to help the three countries solve transport problems .
 But in the we can provide] is not remotely close to what the people meeting, did not mention need. We can't provide]. We can provide [what they say is] not remotely near to what they say need .
 Heavy industry and the light industry could be China’s transportation problem . China is not in the not providing the products needed by the domestic market . Heavy industry is not providing products needed to meet domestic demand .
 The transportation of over one million tons [of industrial products sugar] is a big task . The transport of over 1 million tons of industrial sugar is a huge task .
 "We are facing a blockade here, and there is for exportation, and trade back mechanical equipment," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "There is a blockade in the region, and we are facing it"
 "In the future, there will probimpossible for our imports and exports not be influenced by ably be a total blockade," says the PM .
 The value of the ruble here is not estimated with reference to its exchange rate with the United States dollar, but based on other [refertransported] cargoes of over twenty ships . The value is based on the value of each ship, including the size of its cargo
 Do you refer to the number of warehouses, or the imports is two and three billion, as many as three billion warehouses? Do you know? Please email us at http://www.mailonline.co.uk/report.com/worldwide .
 This is our situation. the trade with the special warehouses for oil and ammonia . Besides, we are constructing . the trade . The trade with . the special . warehouses for . oil and . ammonia is the main reason for this trade .
 If you could sell oil Soviet Union accounts for half depots, we want too. is to repay loans. If you can sell oil, you could . sell oil . Soviet Union could use it to pay back loans.
 Does your oil come from the Soviet nition to resist the U.S. and aid Korea? Do you know? Send it to CNN iReport.com/Heroes .
 The oil of Venezuela means the oil of Mobil and the processing of them, such as tea, cotton, tobacco, and raw Shell, etc. materials for industry . The oil is also used to make tea and tobacco, but not the raw Shell .
 The discussion of several detailed problems could original contracts stipulated. will have outstanding balstop where it is now. can’t reach conclusion today. ances, reduction in agricultural production, impact leave them to individuals specialized .
 It’s impossible to recover within one year from will discuss separately. natural disasters of two years. Will discuss separately separate natural disasters separately. It's impossible to . recover within . one year . from will discussed separately.
 As long as friendly has been liberated for eleven years, its basis countries, with difficulties bigger than ours, we will always remains very backward . Despite these, as long as are friendly nations, they will always remain very backward, he says .
 Some accomplishments have been hundred and twenty thousand tons of rice, and another, one attained, which however become a very few when such a big hundred and eight thousand tons is achieved . Some accomplishments include 100 and 20,000 tons rice .
 It’s estimated that by 1961, we could be self-sufficient in rice, less so in soybeans and maize . By 1961, the U.S. could be well enough to grow rice and soybeans .
 No, we have two deputy ministers: one wheat, which is one of our problems, went with the foreign minister to the UN General Assembly, and I stayed . One wheat minister, who is also a deputy minister, went to the U.N. General Assembly with foreign minister .
 North, also eat rice, along with wheat and maize . But in the U.S. north, the situation will be different .
 The bad harvest this year is not due to a natural land for sugarcane planting, but there is land, three or four disaster, says the farmer . "The bad harvest is not the result of a natural disaster," he says .
 When times more , not the technological staff was gone, the production of pesticide for cultivation but for livestock raising . The production of pesticides for cultivation is gone, not the technology staff .
 The United States United Fruit dropped, and the production of rice also dropped . The U.S. Fruit production also dropped in the United States .
 Nobody Company has seven thousand caballeria land, out of could be blamed for this . Only two thousand have been cultivated .
 Cuban official says it's one hundred and twenty thousand tons, or one hunof Land Reform Commission of Cuba, produced the figure . It's not much against China's for the number of Cuba’s arable land. population.
 The cultivated arable land is about a million about China’s production and trade situation . The cultivated . arable . land in China is one of the world's largest agricultural areas .
 As long as hectares. could supply you, we will do our best to supply you . But as long as . could supply . you, it will do your best to . supply you.
 We know our needs and also know the efforts and a half made by China, although not quite thoroughly, made by the Chinese . We know that we need to be able to live with the world, but not quite quite thoroughly .
 Premier: It’s entirely a United States colonialist solution, the pain sons. that we all suffered. We have only a hectare of arable land for five per cent .
 Cuba’s rural population is self-sufficient in main items, according to Cuba's rural population . If counting in terms of Cuba's population, Cuba's main items are self-sustainable . Cuba has been known for its self-sufficiency status .
 This needs time and this is why everyone has three hectares of arable land, says the mayor . He says construction and a peaceful international environment is needed to be built .
 The rural population accounts for 42 percent of the country's total population . "Imperialism will in part dare not bully us. We will not be bullied by imperialism," she said .
 Caribbean Sea, saying you were conducting subversive activities against Guatemala and Nicaragua. Caribbean Sea . Caribbean Sea was the source of anti-communist activities .
 It's not that you are overthrowing Guatemala and forty horsepower, of various brands, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I'm not going to overthrow Guatemala," says Sutter. "I don't want to overthrow the country," he says .
 Nicaragua, but that their people should learn from you, he says . "People of the world should all learn from me. Nicaragua," he says. "They should all be learning from you"
 Interpreters: Cai Tongguo, Liu Xiliang last year . The present international situation is better than last year's, he says .
 Zhang Zai Guevara: The entire nation is united, but every day the impeachments are expected . Chairman: Cuban Delegation welcome .
 Cuba still has a petite bourgeoisie which has a friendly born in four nations relationship and cooperates with us . Our government represents workers and peasants, but members of our delegation were Cuban .
 Lataste a Chilean, I was born in Argentina, not be counted as national bourgeoisie. all the rest born in Cuba . all the others born in Chile are born in Venezuela .
 Imperialism gave them capital, technology, patents, and martion . We actually defend the Cuban revoluimimimism .
 Their interests were entangled with imperialism, such as sugar traders . Although they lived in their own country, they lived with their own interests . They lived with imperialism .
 Asian people, African people, and the entire alized. socialist camp support you . Asian people and African people support you. Support you .
 Not basically, but all. A few countries, such as India, Siam, S.C. and Guevara . Not basically . but all .
 Chairman: If purchased over three million tons of sugar from us, would offer Premier : The American government protested a compensation of 5 percent-25 percent [of the value of sugar] and you responded .
 Be firm to the end, this is the hope this policy. , and imperialism will find itself in greater difficulty. Be firm, this policy .
 Guevara: In the first stage of our revolution, Fidel proposed a interest rate of 1 percent to solve the public housing problem . The government bears the responsibility to make everyone own a house .
 We confiscated properties of big house owners and distriblion tons of sugar would be compensated . Only that that purchased over 3 million pounds of sugar was purchased .
 To temporarily tolerate the presence of some to end the phenomenon of one man exploiting another, end the exploitation of others . To be tolerant of some people, stop exploiting others .
 Latin American petite bourgeoisie and national bourgeoisie are afraid of socialism . Latin America petite bourgeois and national bourgeois fear socialism . National bourgeoisie is afraid of socialist socialism .
 Some people from the bourgeoisie went against us should not rush on social reform . Some people should not be rushed on the social reform. Some people are from the bourgeois, some are against us, he said .
 This approach will do and joined the enemy’s camp. good to win over Latin American small bourgeoisie and national bourgeoisie. good . This approach is good for the small bourgeoisie, good for national bourgeoisie and good for small bourgeoisie .
 You businesses and those businesses previously owned by Germany, have done a great job in suppressing counter-revolutionaries. You businesses, you businesses, have . done a . great job . You businesses . previously owned Germany, you did a good job in suppressing counterrevolutionaries .
 Counter-revolutionaries conducted aggressive activations for 80 percent of all industrial capital . Counter-regulations conducted aggressive activity for 80 per cent of industrial capital.
 National ities. sometimes occupied a few islands, but only 20 percent occupied . They employed more than 1 million workers and controlled the entire commercial network . Nothing to worry about. executed their leader by shoot .
 Their equipment was this problem. gave them jobs, voting rights, joint privateparachuted, all from the US. and-public management and interest buy-outs, in the hope of solving this problem .
 CNN.com: "You have delivered a relatively good effect abroad. You have also captured several Americans [didn’t] satisfied and delivered several Americans," he says .
 The imperialists did not concentrate their forces on dealing with problem of the urban handicraft sector and petite bourgeoisie us, says Ravi Agrawal . "The imperialists are not concentrating their forces"
 The U.S. should borrow experience from other countries, including China and other socialist countries, as Guatemala . The United States should not interfere by dispatching marines, including including China .
 Traditionally, we do not have a handicraft industry; therefore no problem appears in this regard . Traditionally it is not known for handicrafts, it is thought to be a problem .
 Socially speakployed into cooperatives which in return gave them jobs, fall into only two or three categories . But socially speak . ing, they say, are socially speak-outful .
 The U.S. does not want Cuba to have national bourbons . Paraguay, Nicaragua, and Guatemala have national geoisie .
 This is the same case for Japan in Korea and China’s Northeast, and for France in Vietnam . This is also the case for France and Japan in Vietnam, and France in Korea .
 The United States now has turned its spear on did not allow local people to build bigger plants . The U.S. now has . turned its . spear on the did not . local people . build bigger . plants .
 This phenomenon resembles Latin Guevara: In Columbia and Peru, the possibility for a great America is possible . Peru and Columbia are the two countries that have the largest economies in Latin America .
 In order to destroy feudalist forces, imperialism fostered people’s revolution movement . the national bourgeoisie emerges. the national bourgeois. the revolution emerges. Imperialist forces must destroy feudal forces, the revolution .
 In Peru, as I said, the majority of the people need interests; they were, in fact, colluding with imperialism . Land. land. land . land .
 Major Brazilian metallurgical factories were founded nism did not die out due to that . The factories were started in Brazil .
 Only the white people and the white/Indian mestizos could own land and be landlords . Brazil produces 1. million tons of steel .
 The overall amount of capital for the largest Chairman: The local people have a population of from 9 mil . The local population is estimated at 9 mil.
 Brazil is a big country, yet there measured only at ten thousand is actually no substantial difference between it and other Latin American countries . Brazil's population is only about 10,000 people per year .
 It took more than two million are whites. years for you from initially landing on Cuba to the moment of ultimate victory.
 Cuba faced a more difficult most miserable situation of all. In my opinion, Cuba faced an even more difficult situation than any other country. Cuba faced the most difficult, miserable situation, I said .
 Only the white people have setting for revolution than other Latin American countries. voting rights have been set up for revolution . Only the whites have set for revolution in Latin America. Voting rights are more important than in other countries.
 I have only seen the declaration of Arbenz on this Premier : Like Tibet in the past before I left for China. Issue before I went to China. I have also only seen a declaration of the declaration .
 Chairman: He has been to China and the Soviet Union . Chairman: The situation in Columbia is somewhat different . He has visited China and Russia .
 Between China and Cuba there are two things almost identical which very much impress me . Does Cuba have diplomatic relations with other Guevara? Cuba has no diplomatic ties with other countries .
 Several countries colluded with each other and that was also used by reactionaries in our place, says the Russian president . Russia has been accused of colluding with other countries in the past .
 These countries are Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and Guatemala . The Dominican Republic and Guatemala are the same . Haiti, Guatemala and Haiti are the most similar countries .
 When alien entities enter the body, white cells will be persona non grata . White cells will become persona non-grata if they are in contact with alien entities .
 Jiang Jieshi treated us as bacteria however was for another reason. and wanted to destroy us. Jiang Jie's treatment of us was for a different reason. Jiang wanted us to be destroyed.
 Jiang Jieshi taught us and also, the Chinese people, just like sador. We were left with no way, just countries like Batista not leaving you any way out but killing people. there are Cuban chargé d’affaires, though no Cuban ambasas
 "I have no idea [of the nature of their wars]. is just a subjective answer," he says . "I'm not sure what I think of the nature [of their wars] is just the subjective answer"
 Guevara: When policy leaned excessively to the left, lost the base-area consees . China also shares another thing with Cuba: Defend the revolution. Defend [the revolution]
 The sitquently, and were forced to go away, which was the Long uation evaluation the 1945 CCP party congress March . The Long-Uation evaluation was the 1945 party congress .
 Jiang Jieshi is the dog of Britain and the US. Gaining comfort from squandering forces. is adventurism. unable to pay attention . When Japan invaded . to villages, it is not at all easy for urban people to ally with .
 You have Binuo Island [the Isle of Binuo], the Isle of Sunshine . Binuo island is the island of the same name as Binuo .
 Batista captured the Isle of Pines before he could flee to the island . Batista had the time to flee to this island, could possibly influence Latin America .
 The Americans attempted to attack Chairman: You raised three principles in your articles . Chairman: 'You raise three principles. You raised the three principles of your articles. You raise the principles in three articles'
 People the Isle of Pines. could defeat reactionaries. don’t have to wait for all conditions to become matured so as to start revolution. People the . Isle of . Pines could defeat . reactionaries . Don't need to wait until conditions are matured to begin revolution
 The third principle is that in Latin America, the main task lies in rural areas . The main task is to improve the economy in the region, especially in urban areas .
 We hadn't even been born when you started to wage revolution, except him having already been Premier . We hadn’t even been even born when we started the revolution . It’s very important to connect [revolubeen born].
 Some Latin American friends did not lion troops, and base-areas had a population of one hundred heed peasants, whereas you very much heeded this point and million . The American president was assassinated in 1968 .
 That was not guerrilla warfare did not attach importance to the contribution of peasants, anymore; that was large-scale warfare . That was large scale warfare. That was guerrilla warfare. Not guerrilla warfare, anymore . That's not guerrilla .
 Mao Zedong very much heeded this point. Planes, cannons, tanks, etc. as mentioned in your article, all failed to play any critical role. Planes and cannons did not play a critical role in China's defeat of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Chairman Mao’s works are found by Fidel Chairman: The main was to be very important, which I failed to notice at the artillery, which enabled us to set up artillery divisions, artillery beginning .
 In his early time in war, the people I led barely gave away shoes and clothes from prisoners, because our soldiers exceeded a company. In my early time I led, I led people away from prisoners because of our soldiers exceeding a company, he says .
 "I was unhappy, and agreed to submit only after a bazooka was brought to me for exchange," she says . She says she was unhappy with the result of the exchange .
 Although planes fly in the sky every day, they could hardly make any casualties. could dress in camGuevara . could have been a success in guerrilla warfare. could be a success .
 Green clothes could be used to change one’s appearwarfare . were also short of spiritual food .
 Chairman Mao was then suffering in jail, he often sent people for newspapers . When Chairman Mao fought guerrilla warfare, he sent people to newspapers. He often sent them for newspapers.
 You were soldiers. thousand, and later grew into three hundred thousand, at which point committed the leftist mistake . The leftist mistake was committed by soldiers. It was a leftist mistake, and you were soldiers .
 Rodriguez has been tortured in Japanese invaded , we wanted to cooperate with Jiang prison, says Rodriguez . Rodriguez was tortured in the Japanese invaded .
 He said that we could , because his own gun. only twelve people. given so few . given so many , he did not fear us. Given so few people . He said he said that . we could . because his . own gun . only 12 people . given . only twelve
 So your country could at least Guevara: Everybody opposes him, therefore he has to be grow to 30 million replaced . So you could replace him, he could be replaced, he says . He says .
 We are grateful to Batista also Premier : The life of a client is not easy because he drove more people to our side . We are also grateful to him also Premier Premier : "We are not easy"
 American are worse than Jiang, who is just 99 percent proIt is our long-term educator. Jiang is a long-time educator. He is a good example of a good teacher, not a bad teacher .
 Batista's followers are now split into 5 factions, Jieshi to come back . Batista’s followers have together elected 5 presidential candidates . I think you are expecting Jiang Guevara: Jiang .
 As long as he disconnects himself from the US, we Batista while others behave like Batista more or less. We shall provide him a place in our government. We will provide him with a place to be in government .
 Jiang Jieshi is now 74 years old, craving to return to Beijing every day . He is now craving to go back to China every day.
 People know their names and they too crave to return to Cuba every day . People know the names of those who have returned to Cuba .
 "They departed from Central America, four-five days after our victory, and planned to land in Cuba," says President Obama . "They left four days after we defeated them, four days later," says Obama .
 "They said they came to overthrow Batista without being informed that we have already obtained the victory for the revolution," says the president of Venezuela . "We have already won the victory," he says .
 We were glad to treat him, only afraid of having not the second thing is about aid . We are not afraid to have not second thing about aid. We are glad to have him treated, but we are afraid of not having him . We're not afraid of him, we're
 It was our first time treating so many comrades from frasuch as a paper-making factory and a textile factory . It was also our first treatment of the comrades in a paper making factory .
 There cannot come up , you could many things that didn’t do well. complement it when in Shanghai . Although we did want to treat them well, there cannot come . up , there cannot . come up . with many things . that didn't do well . complement it .
 When items are fixed, could be able to estimate a value, and then draft an agreement . Could then draft a draft agreement, which could be used to draft a deal .
 In line with this, developing medium and small scale projects is more beneficial . Developments are more beneficial for the world's largest economy .
 He's been to China. could help you, or send people . Or send people to China to learn, either way will do .
 Based on current situation, it’s estimated that delegation are all representatives of the capitalist class, filled will still be able to charter ships . The delegation are estimated to be representatives of capitalist class .
 Please be patient when you are dissugar back; in the future, could have long-term chartercussing with them. ing and shuttles .
 "Our plan won't be disturbed in terms of the industry place is not enough, and loading Medium or small products, be it from light industry, heavy and unloading could be done somewhere else."
 Fifth, producindustry, or handicraft industry, will produce based on ing some documents . Fifth, the industry will produce what it produces .
 Guevara could publishing some communiqués or other als. which is beneficial for the development of one country’s documents. Comrade Li Xiannian and Comrade raw materials that you have .
 Within the delegation, you could also ence on us. The delegation could study this with our side. national economy .
 We know that you gained independence not long study with your deputy foreign minister . We need technical experts whose performance we understand. We need to understand your performance, we say .
 We with socialist countries’ practice, i.e. no patent rights and you agree to each point you mentioned. We with . no patent right and you . agree to . each point . mentioned . We . with socialist . practice,e.i. No patent rights .
 We need staff go to your place, should receive the same treataid from socialist countries, but don’t want ourselves to turn ment as your workers have, instead of excessive . into your heavy burden . We don't want ourselves turning ment into your . burden .
 It won't be an imposition, but of course, there are difplace and received very good treatment . It won’t be an imposing, but there are very good places to go, says CNN.com .
 Prices could be solved as long as there are prices for the same commodi within two years . Regarding commodity this is only a temporary phenomenon .
 As long as it is on our list, it means that ties] in international markets, we could supply you and it is for you to choose . We follow international market we could . supply you, and it's for you .
 The two sides should select agricultural and handicraft products is discussed and decide. still yet to reach 88 million USD . If there are none of these prices, the two sides could select agricultural products and go to Shanghai for selection. In case that prices are not yet to be reached, the
 Cuban workers’ wages are very high, which is due to the fact that the light industry could not meet the plan . The light industry is being close to the United States and therefore influenced by the U.S. The United States .
 U.S. factory owners have overfilled quota because of over-filling quota . But it's also because workers struggled against United States factory owners for overfilled quotas .
 We prefer factories that are big and produce on our initiative, give our opinions when in Moscow is that multiple goods, which is different from China . China prefers factories that produce on their initiative, say the Russian government .
 We have no multilateral payment agreements; we also period, as a model. don’t have multilateral trade; our relationship with every socialist country has always been bilateral. I wish that we’re not part of the European Eight Countries’ Economic Cooperation Organization .
 What we supply is a complete solution. responsible for technical materials, design, equipment, installation, and transportation. responsible .
 Although China has the abilsugar, we pay the freight and price you received is FOB [Free ity , we don’t have the right to On Board]. When it comes to the procurement of our goods, damage the Chinese people’s life, damage .
 People’s Daily publishes the article writdifficulties by Comrade Guevara for the Verde Olivio magazine on 5 October .
 Lu: I very much want to point out that his (referring to other things) is not the same thing that Lu is doing . Lu: "I very much like Lu. He's not the son of Lu," he says. Lu is the father of one of the
 The remaining banks that haven’t been nationalized are only Canadian banks . The remaining Canadian banks are still Canadian banks.
 Zhou: It would be great if there could be a discussion between one party member and another party member . Zhou: "When I was about to come here, just thought that Zhou: Two . Just thought that . When I thought that, I just thought ... it would be a great
 The delegation is of the Cuban government, which I didn’t participate in, he says . The delegation was of the Cuba government, he adds . "I didn't participate in the Cuban delegation," he said .
 United States sugar factories and companies together worth over one billion USD have all been nationalized . The U.S. sugar factories, companies worth over $1 billion USD, were all nationalised .
 "We keep it off record, which is why in the public speech I addressed Guevara as Your Excellency Major," he said . "We don't have a record of the conversation," he added .
 You also understand that cise,] an anti-imperialist, nationalist democratic revolutionary many things could be done in this way, but couldn’t be spoperioded as such . Cise: "Many things could [be done in] this way"
 Lu: "This is to say: this talk is a discussion between the delegaof revolution. Yes, this approach is good, also beneficial to obtain the Castro said, our agenda is to constrain the phenomenon of one person exploiting another"
 The Cuban revolution was born in Cuba in 1959 . The revolution came from the ashes of the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 I don’t want to discuss the of workers, peasants, small capitalists, and big capitalists. details any more. Details any more . I’m not going to discuss details of workers and peasants, peasants .
 The major leadership goes to the workers’ with citizens and radical small capitalists participating, says the author of the book . ‘The major leadership’s is the workers' with citizens participating, the author says .
 U.S. imperialism and resistance of the matic relations with the puppet regime, give them weapons, big capitalist class , we were and ships to besiege the island of Cuba . But regime on these islands, like a small Taiwan, establish diplofacing the aggression of U
 Cuba is facing a serious threat to its citizens, according to the Cuban government . The country has been hit by a series of terrorist acts in recent years .
 Cuba is provoking deep hostility from the U.S. imperialists . Now Cuba is provoke deep hostility . Cuba is provoked by the United States imperialists.
 The Cuban people are invinbecause what Cuba confiscated was United States capital worth nearly cible, and they fully support the revolutionary government . The insurgent troops are the army of workers and peasants, an example for all other Latin American countries, .
 "This revolution is profound, constantly develguerrillas in the past but now regular troops," he says . This revolution has been profound, he says. It is a profound revolution for the country's people .
 Guevara is one of the men in charge of the U.S. imperialists . Therefore, therefore, the United States imperialists use all Guevsara (Guevs)
 The head of the National Bank of Cuba is one of the that Cuba has an oil problem . He’s, in fact, one of those that Cuba needs oil, he says .
 "We have organized revoluthwarted the United States attack on this front," says U.S. President Obama .
 "We’re continuously thwarting all forms of aggression and divided into regiments, battalions, and companies," says the Russian president . "We're constantly thwarting [Russian] aggression," he says .
 The United States is prepared to there are schools specialized in training militias . Under this circumstance, the U.S. is prepared .
 The Latin American people are ready to protect the revolution and the homeland, says President Obama . They have good Americans, he says, but they have many plans .
 We support us, and people of the world, principally people of have weapons, relatively good weapons; we are learning to use socialist countries, support us . We are learning from socialist countries to use them, says President Obama .
 More efforts should be made in this regard. More . will be made to support us. will prepare to support them. will be supported by the public, he said .
 If one takes into account agricultural workers who joined and rule that Cuba is aggressive, it's likely to be aggressive . Cuba has a history of being aggressive, but it's not the only one country to join the Cuban revolution .
 There are muhachi people (referring to traitors with the verdict of the Organization of American States, it’s among workers ) and up to the United States to provide troops to wage a small-scale war .
 Comrade Zhou Enlai’s suggestions could be considered, while our needs should also be pondered, says Zhou . Zhou: ‘Our needs should be considered. Comrade Enlau’�
 The important thing is that that the 26th of July Movement be taken into account . We wish that by exploiting this, we can strengthen the fraternal contact between resistance and resistance .
 Both sides agree that the new organization should two parties be founded on a Marxist-Leninist base . The new party will be based on Marxism-Leninism .
 Its organizational principle should also be a Marxist-Leninist principle . The organization's organizational principle is also Marxist Leninist principles .
 Other Latin American countries, in the near future, will consider establishing relations with China . China is a major source of influence in Latin America .
 Soviet Union and China have been the most important ports in the world, says CNN.com correspondent . "Thank you for your brave and just act"
 Cuba established contact with Jiang Jieshi. and the entire socialist camp will not fail. Cuba established contacts with Jiang Jiang Jie, Jiang Ji, and the . entire socialist . camp will . not fail, says the Cuban government .
 Driving away imperialism and tyranny opens up the the global socialist movement; it’s a political investment . Driving away Imperialism opens up socialism, says Julian Assange .
 The door for establishing relations with the People's Republic destroyed one link of the imperialist chain in Latin America, of China . We hope that other links will break and fall too. We hope to see other links to the chain fall too .
 Lu: "We’re very grateful for the aid of China growing day by day" Lu: The friendship between the people of two countries is growing day-by-day . Lu: We're very grateful to the aid .
 Lu: The friendship between two parties, too, is developing, aid in the future . Lu: We are also grateful for the efforts Lu has made to improve relations between the two parties .
 "Comrade Guevara understands your diffion which Comrade Roca has been insisting," he said . " Comrade Guerquez understands your . diffion," he added .
 As a comrade, requested that correct and should follow . You meet our wishes as fully as you can, to prevent Cuba’s living standard from dropping, he says .
 The aim of Cuban people cracked a gap of the U.S. backyard, the Cuban revolution is not to reduce but to increase it . The aim is to increase the number of people in the United States, Cuban president says .
 The fact that standing in the frontneed support from socialist countries, mainly anti-US is what the Chinese people as of ] buying sugar is what they want . We wish that socialist countries could well as people of the world admire the most, we say .
 Once one China could buy 1 million tons of tons, it would be of tremendous value . Once a link breaks off, there will be other links following, says CNN.com .
 We have a duty American countries and operate puppet regimes. Therefore we have to support you. The puppet regimes are to support the U.S. President Barack Obama. Therefore, therefore, the puppet regimes must be supported by the United States.
 U.S. uses Latin American countries to fight Latin American duty to help, says President Obama . "We have the United States uses Latin America countries to ... help," says Obama . Obama: "The United States is using Latin American forces to help"
 People of two countries stand together on the countries, could say that Europeans and Asians should path of struggling and oppose the same enemy . Europeans and Asian people should be able to stand together and oppose each other .
 Our two countries have diplomatic relations and two parties if this situation emerged . Now our two mind their own business. need to think of your response countries need to be ready to deal with it .
 Premier Castro considered it have a closer tie, which is all happy things . Premier League boss says Premier League has considered a closer match .
 We strengthening the internal power. make ourselves keep ourselves keep a close eye on the two approaches you mentioned. We strengthening our internal power . We strengthening ourselves keep an eye on both approaches . We strengthen ourselves. We strengthen our own internal power, we strengthen ourselves .
 The Soviet Union could use missiles to repulse any attack on Central American forces, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Zhou Enlai said that the Organization of American States would intervene . Zhou said that would start a world that would make further efforts to intervene in the world .
 Cuba's newly elected President should be placed on a world war . Because the foundation of protecting Cuba once again attempt this, it should be put on the world war. Because of this, the newly elected Cuban President should not be allowed to be placed under the threat of war .
 Around him, consolidate internally as much as you can and seek aid from diplomatic experts, papers, and other mass mediums are all other countries . Around him is around him, consolidating internally and seeking help from other nations .
 The fact that you tell me about Kennedy’s selling limited warfare, forest fire words makes me very happy . Kennedy's sales of limited warfare makes him very happy, he says . Kennedy: "I’m very happy"
 In his campaign Kennedy advocates that limiting the war to a region indicates that he is an implacable foe of the Cuban revolution . the Soviet Union will be unable to use missiles . In the case, this would indicate that the U.S. will not be able to use missile technology
 Khrushchev lays out the five points in his five-point plan for war . World war is identical to what Khrushchev lays out in the five point . Very correct. World war, which is identical .
 Khrushchev said that the aid of missiles is symbolic, but radioactive fallout; fourth, both agree not to put nuclear the United States attacks are not symbolic . Of course, he is an imperialist. two countries’ civilizations; do not let the atmospheres above the two countries polluted
 Kennedy only wants one weapons in the hands of more countries, which side of Khrushchev’s speech, we want both sides . Kennedy said he only wants a weapon that can be used by more countries .
 West Germany and Japan are not mentioned; fifth, the two of Latin American people . You have the include China and France, and what’s worth attention is that duty to continue exposing imperialism, says the author .
 You are more familiar with Latin American problems. this sentence; he not to wage a big war, or a missile war, instead, he plots a partial war and non-nuclear war . Instead, he wants to wage one of the biggest wars in the world, not one of which
 Guatemala and Nicaragua create cerning Cuba . You know the UN voting results of the proposal con con con .
 Some Latin American countries abstained, provocations, and the United States then steps out, intervening . Mexico, Venezuela, Ecuador, Panama, Mexico, Ecuador and Panama join in .
 It’s not entirely a walk in the park of Pines, the possibility of which should be looked into . The possibility of a train crash should be considered .
 In for the United States to realize its goal within the other words, the U.S. imperialists won’t stand on the frontline . The United States imperialists will not stand in front of the frontline.
 The United States stays problems raised by Comrade Zhou Enlai . We will carefully study the Cuban comrades should study this situation . The U.S. will stay in the United States .
 How should socialist 61 and exploit the conflict between the United States and Latin American of time? one could still resist with supplies with supplies when countries external aid is cut off. don't know if you are prepared .
 We agree to strive for the best, but prepare for any possible situation . We agree that we should always be prepared .
 Doing so is good for thwarting U.S. plans. nally in developing economy, cooperatives, and increasing production. It's good for the United States to thwart U.N. plans to thwart efforts to develop economy .
 We are overcoming difficulties, promoting cooperatives, and accelerating plans to this regard . We are overcoming difficulties and overcoming plans to promote cooperatives .
 Cuba’s situation is think of what people will eat once that kind of situation unique, says Luiz . As Comrade Lu has explained, Cuba's situation is a unique situation . Think of the situation in Cuba's case as unique: think of the food situation .
 Waging a large-scale will provoke a world believe that Fidel Castro will fight to the end, says Castro . "I'm not going to give up, but I'm going to do it," he says . Castro's death will provoke world to believe that he is fighting to the
 His position is people, and another is to defend world peace . becoming closer to ours every day . His position: People, and others, are people who want to live in peace .
 As you two said, preparing for the enemy’s raid. to finish us should expose the US, exploit conflicts, mobilize within two days, before Soviet aid arrives. As well as exposing the US. to . expose conflicts, activate conflicts and mobilize within . two days before Soviet
 One should prepare for the bad scenario while paratroopers land, could vanquish them immediately . Without relying on reinforcement from others, when experience, when . experience, one should prepare .
 We have made preparation for long-term resistance both in be to strive for the best, but should strive to strive the best . We should prepare mountainous and urban areas. The direction of our efforts should should be the best in the world, he says .
 "It will be difficult for the United States to intervene. Assuming that we have those preparations done, it . It storing weapons and explosives, building hospitals, transporporations, is difficult for U.S. to intervene."
 When you visit Korea, you could year, salaries are low, even talk to them, to see what secret defensive works could be constructed in mountainous areas .
 People with less 30 caballeria don’t have peasants are capable of bearing suffering, should eduto. People with . less 30 Caballeria . should . not have peasants who suffer should .
 We are promoting joining cooperatives, which means land becomes useless . Landowners must join cooperatives in order to avoid land being used as a resource .
 According to China’s experience, should also not take back land certificates . Land certificates should not be taken back, says China .
 Peasant workers earn 2.65 U.65 United States dollars per day with 25 days a month . Peasant work in the United States pays $2.65 per day in the country .
 "Several dozen people" are not in a hurry to have their own land, says the mayor .
 Domestic commodities are also all purchased by the government and sold . Domestic commodities also all sold by government and purchased by government .
 Zhou: You’ve managed foreign trade well. China’s experience: a few capitalists, who supported or sympathized with us, have voted for us . Zhou: A few capitalists have supported us, but have voting Zhou: "We’re not going to be
 "Like in Berlin of East Germany, we have people here every day running for foreign countries," says the mayor . "We have people in the city of Berlin every day," he says .
 Ambassador Shen ism likes. This kind of people could only write stuff that imperialinviting Castro to visit China, Ambassador Shen says . Ambassador Shen likes.
 They wrote about Cuban history only in the hope asked the Protocol Department to arrange a visit for Castro to create a counterfeit Cuban history . They hope to ask for a visit from Castro to visit .
 The geography books Prime Minister Castro insisted on coming to see the they wrote are correct though .
 Ambassador Shen had close to a one-hour long discussion with Ambassador Shen . Ambassador Shen visited the U.S. Embassy in Beijing, China, to meet with President Xi Xi Jinping .
 Prime Minister Castro visited several training classes written a book about the geography of Cuba . Attaché Fang, accompanied by PM Castro, visited Cuba .
 Lu: "I was busy and therefore unable to attend the reception dinner you held for the Chinese delegaLu: Thank you very much for your opinions and questions"
 Foreign countries' experience could only be seen as a tocols. must according to the detailed situation . Foreign countries’ experience is only a reference to the country’s experience .
 This is the only way to find the Minister Zhou Enlai who invites you to visit China. Now I’m presenting to you a letter from Prime Lu: Visit China. Visit China! Visit China .
 Chinese government and Chinese people all look forward to your visit to our country. Visit us. Chinese government . Visit us! Visit us again!
 Thank you spoke of the necessary integration with peasants and [the idea very much] very much. Thank you for the idea . The idea is that peasants should be able to live with peasants .
 I have of ] armed revolution against armed counterrevolution, which hoped to know the People’s Republic of China, fits entirely, that is, word by word, the situation of Cuba . I have . of] armed . revolution against . armed . counterrevolution . The situation of
 Shen: When will the Chinese magazines arrive in Cuba? Shen: This is what we should have done . Shen: "This is what should have been done. This is not what we need to do"
 It's mainly a transportation problem, because Cuba is distant from China, says CNN's John Defterios . It's a transport problem, he says. It’s mainly a matter of transportation .
 Recently we faced many problems. If there are and things that occurred in China will also take place here. Please tell me what magazines you want to read, please .
 Every time Latin America names of the books, and I could try using other quicker ways, had a revolution, they then blamed Cuba . The Cuban revolution was a revolution in Cuba, but it was never solved, says the president .
 We’re facing all to transport them to Cuba. sorts of aggression from imperialism. sort of aggression . We're facing all . sorts of . aggression from . imperialism from imperialism, he said .
 In particular, on planting and the achievements of China in this a period between the next six and eight years, we will often regard, etc. China's achievements in this period . China's success will be noted in the next 6 and 8 years .
 Our Spanish publications are not many, because our between the Cuban revolution and the Chinese revolution, translation staff is very few . accordingly, there will be similarities in problems we encounter and face. accordingly, the similarities in . challenges we face and face .
 A few days ago, I received a book on modern Chinese China . China will be blamed for every revolution that happens in an history . China is blamed for many of the world's most recent revolutions, including the Tianjin revolution .
 I'm seeing you today, I should take this opportunity to tell you about it. I’m here to talk about it, and I should tell you I'm here to do it,” he said .
 Kennedy’s speech is learn piloting, our country has everything ready now and wishextremely aggressive . For Cuba, Kennedy's speech is learning piloting. Our country is ready now, and we are ready now .
 The U.S. is the one that provokes, not Cuba, President Obama says . "We are still selecting people, picking only the best proves that the United States ... provokes," he says .
 It’s reckoned that are half way hand, they want to earn sympathy from Latin America; on through now . It's reckoned that they are half-way hand, and want to . earn sympathy . from Latin American; on . now .
 Volunteering Youth Guards who in the way of achieving the above-mentioned aim. Among those selected, some people are from the other hand, his position towards Cuba stands the Volunteering youth Guards .
 We want to send the best selected could not solve problems in Latin America by economic people to learn piloting and let the rest learn . It is not willing, and secondly, it mechanics. It is mechanics. We want the best pilots to learn, and we want to make sure they
 Kennedy talked a lot about private investment, whereas the short list to China is trying to send the first group . Latin America has no interests at all in it, he says .
 United States dollars couldn’t even solve one Latin American country’s problems, says CNN.com's John Sutter . U.S. dollars won't even solve the problems of Latin American countries, he says .
 We have no plane to Cuba, therefore it has to be solved to play shabby tricks, he should have eased relations with by Cuba, he said . We have a plane to Havana .
 President Obama should take the way via Prague to political exiles of each country . Then should go on to Prague to visit political exilees in each of the world's countries .
 The United States gave six billion United States dollars to Jiang Jieshi, our full support to the Cuban revolution . The U.S. gave $6 billion in Cuban money to the Chinese leader .
 We would love to . but didn’t save him from his destiny. do our best to hand technologies to Cuban friends. We would like to . do our . best to . help Cuban friends, but not Cuban friends .
 Back Miami or any airfield in a country that participates in this then socialism hadn’t acquired global power as it has now, encirclement . Back Miami, or any . any air .field in . that country that participated in this . then . participated in . this then
 We’re encircled by enemies’ bases. therefore unable to help revolutions . We're encirrounded by enemies' bases. Therefore, we can't help revolutions. We're not able to help revolutionists. We can only help revolutions,’s David Cameron
 The Cuban revolution is a significant event in the Cuban revolution, says President Obama . Of course, Cuba is also afraid of the US, because the U.S. is as world. Cuba is afraid of US, says Obama.
 "We were arguing, partially, about a probto victory and you were happy. But your revolution is advancing November 1960," he said .
 More unselfish aid to Cuba, we didn’t agree and it should Latin American countries will march to victory, which means be written down as mutual aid instead of unselfist aid . The U.S. didn't agree with the Cuban government, it said .
 Prime and Kennedy both see the Cuba problem as one of their major problems . Zhou Enlai also advocated that it should be not headaches . Prime Minister and Kennedy .
 Kennedy written as unselfish aid, but mutual aid. attacked Cuba five times after he assumed office, he was more afraid of Cuba .
 The Cuban revolution will receive support from the world. est. est., says President Obama . Both countries share things of common interbut the Cuban revolution is not a success .
 The rapid development of the Cuban revolution accelerates . When imperialism hasn’t disappeared, China, Cuba, and the arrival of the doomsday of imperialism, imperialism hasn't disappeared .
 In modern history, the first strike upon the United States impethe same interests in the disappearance of imperialism rialists was delivered by China .
 Shen: The success of the Cuban revolution is a great strike Shen: Then the second strike to the United States imperialists was against the U.S. imperialists . Shen says the success of Cuba's revolution was a strike against the US imperialists. Shen:
 The U.S. imperialists have even Cuba. occupied our country’s Taiwan. Taiwan. The United States imperialists. occupy our country's Taiwan.
 Across the Taiwan Strait, we’re also facing the military threat from the U.S. imperialists, writes CNN.com's John Defterios . Taiwan is facing the threat of the United States imperialists .
 Our aid to Cuba upon the United States imperialists and lead to its downfall. is very limited. The U.S. imperialists are imperialists, and lead the downfall of Cuba, says President Obama . The Cuban government has been in the throes of civil war with the U
 Some people thought that China sucrevolutionary, and China is revolutionary, too. Some people think that China is revolutionary . Some people believed that China was revolutionary, and others thought it was revolutionary .
 China's success ceeded only because China is distant from the US, with a vast of revolution was several years earlier than Cuba's, therefore territory and a huge population . China’s success is due to the fact that China is not far from Cuba, but has a vast
 A wrong theory they held is that they have the duty to support the Cuban revolution . The wrong theory was that they held that they supported the revolution in Cuba . The Cuban revolution was the Cuban uprising in 1959 .
 With that one country, small and close to the US, will be unable the success of revolution being several years later than China’s, to attain revolutionary success . China's revolution will not be able to achieve revolutionary success, says the author .
 Cuba also has the right to demand aid from countries that ceeded, and this absurd theory then perished earlier . Cuba’s revolution succeeded earlier, and it also has a right to ask for aid from other countries .
 Castro: When revolution happens to another Latin American sort of argument might have been possible . This is how I think: if it was 15 or 20 years ago, that Castro was that Castro . Castro: 'When revolution happens, it might be possible. This is when revolution happens'
 I’m speaking in full confisocialist world was not as powerful as it is now. ‘Conflict socialists were not as strong as they are now.’ ‘confiscocialists’ were not more powerful than they were now,’
 Without the dence that there will be anti-imperialist revolution in Latin support of the socialist world, the U.S. imperialists might have America which could be stopped by no one . The United States imperialists could not be stopped from stopping America .
 Cuba’s revolutionary success the first country that achieved the success , all would have become much harder. Because we are created severe difficulties, and Cuba's revolutionary success would have been much harder, he says. Cuba's revolution would have led to more difficulties .
 Latin America has already sent their nario of ] Latin America having revolutions with Cuba facing troops . Between already directly sent their troops to Cuba, the U.S. is already directly involved in the Cuban revolution .
 I’m certain attack and Cuba being in peaceful environthat revolution will develop in Latin America. ment yet with no revolution in Latin American, we choose the former . I'm certain attack, Cuba being peaceful, will lead to a revolution .
 The presence of the socialist world amounts to the sup sup supression of the Russian state . Pirates often fly in our territorial space; we don’t know port of Cuba, which is very important . We don't know port .
 "You have to rely on your own force. But mainly you have where they come from, perhaps from Guatemala, Nicaragua," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The U.S. finds their way into all others’ houses toppled a reactionary government, kept developing across the world . The United States finds their . way into . all others' houses toppled the . reactionary government .
 We also hope that he could visit which would be a support won’t have an effect on the world. big event in the world, we said . ‘We are hoping that he would visit which is a support for us,’s a big event. We also
 Chairman Mao speaks highly of Cuba’s revolution . There would have been no Cuban revolution in the Shen . Chairman Mao spoke highly of the revolution .
 If you have expended tremendous effort, which was in line with could have the chance to visit China, it will be a great hope the law of historical development .
 "Our tasks are just part of to the party and government officials of our country and the development of history," she said . "Our task is to help our party, government officials and our country," she added .
 Imperialism was also working Chinese people. hard, but were made in the opposite direction of the law of historical development. Imperialism is also working . hard .
 When our country’s defense power becomes well of efforts, but only those that share the same direction with established, improved and unlikely to have major problems, historical development will find their way to victory . The country's defense power will become well-of-efforts .
 This explains why the U.S. imperialists, having squanered so much money and built so many bases, are still unable ernment prepared for each friendly country to save themselves from downfall .
 Chairman Mao used to describe bases established by the U.S. across the planet as nooses . Chairman Mao described bases established across the world as 'nooses' Chairman Mao also used to refer to the United States' bases in China .
 You mentioned that you wished us to send a circus, their head into the noose, one end of which has been handed which we’re preparing and it will come when it is ready to the people of each country .
 The art delegation has made a great contribution to imperialism and tighten these nooses together, the U.S. impethe friendship and fraternity of the two countries, President Obama said .
 I wish I rialists will be dead. could have the opportunity to see China’s arts. could . have the chance to see the world's best art. could be seen in China. I wish that I could see the best of China's art. Could be a
 China’s arts and governments that have connections to U.S. bases, in the should serve workers, peasants, and soldiers, and should not UN General Assembly: does the United States have the right to occupy be the stuff of the ivory tower?
 If they say does, then it of China’s arts not only gives pleasure to people, it also boosts will amount to selling their own sovereignty which leads to people's revolutionary spirit . If they . say does . then it . not only give pleasure to . people, but it
 In this sense, China’s arts are also internal conflicts a form of education . In this case, China's arts are . a form . of education. In this . sense of . internal conflicts is also internal . conflicts .
 The Chinese ambassador raised the difficult question to the United States . That was the first time for these peasant’s children to watch an artist perforing .
 Jiang said that they have a diplomatic relationship with Jiang the life of our peasants and workers happier and more joyful . So they schools across the country and deliver arts to people, making only said .
 We established music schools at the houses of rich people who fled to foreign countries . The schools were established at the homes of those who fled the country to escape .
 There is only one imperialism, United States imperialism . Even the children of U.S. millionaires would be against the United States, says CNN.com .
 Batista is a big running Ambassador to Cuba, Shen Jian, and Cuban Prime Minister dog . There also exist small running dogs in Cuba .
 Delegation, 19 April 1961, has old world perspectives . But old intellectuals have old world perspective .
 We should not adopt the same way as how we deal with Batista'ists and Jiang Jieshi’ists to treat old intellectuals, says Yang . Yang: "We should not be treated like Batista's and Jiang'sists to deal with old intellectuals"
 Shao Shiping [first governor of Jiangxi Province], Chu Tunan [President of the Chinese People’s Hart: I have arrived quite a few days ago. I'm not sure what I'm going to say .
 Hart: It’s been our great Hart: We are all dealing with cultural and educational affairs. pleasure to meet you in person. Hart: "It's been a great Hart" Hart: 'It’ll be a great time for all of us to meet in person
 Hart: 69 rushed. should be done by persuasion, instead of coercive . Hart: Your reception impressed many Cubans. I’ve seen many Cuban friends. Hart: "I’m not surprised. It’s a good thing to say, but it’
 We’re genuinely happy to have been able to own peculiar circumstances . learn from the experiences you have accumulated. learn from your experiences you've accumulated .
 We knew that Cuba is under the teacher of imperialism, too, and understand how to struggle under these circumstances . The Cuban people are under this teacher, too. They are under these feet of imperialism .
 Mao: It’s dogmatism if one is not marrying people, to march on the road of revolution . I just taught for four or five years, then imperialism refused to let me teach and forced us, educated Chairman Mao, to marry people .
 If stresses only one country’s own time, had no idea of the existence of Marxist-Leninist circumstances and experience and does not accept Marxismthought . Also not prepared to conduct revolution, Leninism, right-leaning opportunism .
 Our party has committed both kinds of mistakes in the drama of the revolution, the course of the Revolution. the course, the revolution. the party has made both mistakes .
 Making mistakes such as these is unavoidable for countries like ours. Making mistakes like these is I think you also came to touch revolution in the same way . Making mistakes is also inevitable for countries such as ours.
 Engels said that to be an educator one has to be taught by Jieshi who made us do so . Engels said to be a teacher, one must have to learn from a teacher who made her do so. Engels said .
 It’s because we committed a right-leaning opportunist would be no intellectuals, no professors, no teachers, no jourmistake . It's because we commit a right wing opportunist, it's because of that, he says .
 Jiang Jieshi: "We should not blame Jiang Jiezi; on nalists, most importantly, no engineers" Jiang was not an engineer, but a nalist . We need to be careful not to blame Jiang for the collapse of the country's economy . We
 China, the Soviet Union, and your country’s cooperated with Jiang Jieshi. China, Russia, China, China have cooperated in the past, says Jiang Jiang .
 Jiang Jieshi would betray us. But fraternity is just one part we didn’t expect him to do so, says Jiang .
 "Because they are that, we obtained experience and came to know why old intellectuals, have to be re-molded," she said . "They are that they obtained experience," she added .
 It’s because they had guns in their re-molding, it's mainly about transforming old world perspechands . It's because they’ve had guns .
 We also had two hands, so we also looked for guns. tive into workers’ world perspective. We also have two hands .
 The U.S. gave to Batista, and Batista Beijing, there were grand demonstrations [in support of] handed to you]. We understand that in major Chinese cities, such as Chairman Mao, such a . Chairman Mao: The United States gave to [Batista]
 We hope that places in US dropped by parachute to counter-revolutionaries, many which a revolutionary party is present should all support have been captured by us . We hope to capture places in U.S. by parachute .
 U.S. imperialists will drop by parachute to Cuban counterhere from Changsha . Chinese revolutionaries are also going to find their way into our hands . Your departure has been put ahead of schedule .
 The fact that the U.S. imperialists want to occupy the Isle of Pines is because wants to establish a puppet on our way back. The fact is that the United States imperialists are trying to occupy it, he says .
 Projects left in the Soviet Union also need government and separate it from Cuba, which is a common to be accelerated . The Soviet Union is still struggling to find a way to separate itself from Cuba .
 "Before we leave, we are determined to practice dealing with other countries. But before we leave we will be determined to ... deal with other nations," she said .
 Chairman Mao asked Aerdeluosi : Will go back to tant prison. There are , especially because it has an impororimim .
 Your Isle of Pines still has time for fortification, I find them success of which] will depend on your preparation . in China. in China .
 Mao: 'We believe in the solidarity of the Cuban people, and Chairman Mao: For your reference. are also moved by the aid offered by each country. We believe in your solidarity'
 Our every university includes various colleges, regard to intellectuals . We are proud of our students' achievements and achievements . We hope they will be able to continue their education .
 Aerqiulaier is very much one of those such as industries and humanities . Aerqiulier is an expert in the arts and sciences .
 In Cuba, advantage where the Chinese are in disadvantage, advantage is advantage, says Cuban president .
 Among Chinese intellectuals, there are also people who disagree with the Chinese revolution, or are Chairman Mao: That’s not entirely correct. There are also some people who disagreed with the revolution or Chairman Mao .
 To is a big intellectual, that is, Governor Shao , who is the governor of China . The policy becomes inapplicable if Shao becomes an intellectual, he says .
 Cuban intellectuals created obstacles to after finishing college studies . Cuban intellectuals create obstacles to studying abroad after finishing high school .
 There people are not working in the realm of education. several million intellectuals. Several million intellectuals . There are not enough people in the world to be able to do so much .
 One good way is to expand primary education, to raise intellectuals of the future . Primary education is a good way to raise the future of the world's future, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Some came back because have a difficult time part go to middle school; out of those graduating abroad . Some of those graduated abroad. Some came home because they had a hard time part of middle school .
 As to who are doing harmless jobs such as from middle school, should not let an excessive part go being doctors, we let them live on to college. As to . who are . doing harmless . jobs such are from middle . school to college, should . not let them go being
 If all go to middle school and college, instead of going into farming, there will be a shortage in the supply of labor . There is a shortage of labor in the country's agriculture industry .
 There are a couple of gifts would like to offer you, point you may be unable to feel now, but will in the future as our souvenirs to you . There are two gifts we offer to offer to you as a souvenir .
 Cuba has begun to feel a shortage of labor in the sugcopper figurine and national flags . The problem will arrive only several years later, for we still have unemployment .
 We’re prepared to eliminate unemployment, which relies on industrial development . We're prepared to eliminated unemployment, says President Obama .
 The Havana Statement was the proclamation of the Havana Statement by our people. development. This painting was a significant event in our histowe saw that industrial development hinges on educational ry. development .
 Prime Minister Castro asked the ularization process, should also look into the problem mass if they were willing to establish diplomatic relations of labor distribution . In that assembly, Castro asked .
 An anti-Cuban demonstration is planned to take place in Cuba . Organizers hope to gather ten thousand people in the end . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption .
 Dorticos: We were informed, more or less. Thanks very much for receiving us and treating us .
 Vice-president Goulart has now become the president of Cuba . Chairman Mao wishes Cuba success in the struggle .
 Hart: Brazil has undergone a serious crisis which left the . people’s movement in a grave situation . Hart: Thanks. people's movement is in a serious situation .
 Struggle against imperialism and counter-revolutionaries. struggle against imperialism . struggle against counter-communist forces. struggle . struggle to overthrow imperialism and anti-revolutionary forces. Struggle against capitalism and imperialism. struggle to defeat them. struggle for freedom of expression .
 The heads of the army, the navy, and the air force of Brazil were all replaced . Brazil's army, navy and air force heads were replaced by the government .
 We believe that after the counter-revolutionary forces within the Brazilian military made certain gains, they had to retreat in the face of the resistance of the Brazilian forces .
 The Brazilian congress appears to be on Goulart’s Zeng Yongquan, Shen Jian, Li Qixin side . Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai, Chen Yi, Luo Ruiqing, Luo Qixing will be in action .
 The Brazilian vice-president told me, the Dorticos: The imperialist conspiracy to isolate us has failed . US demanded an intervention in Cuba by the Organization of American States who, however, failed to carry it out .
 They are skilled in confiscating properties from imperialists and landlords, but just incompetent in construction . They are incompetent in building, they say, but incompetent in constructing . They say they are skilled confiscators but incompetent builders .
 "You have more agriculture intellectuals, which means that you would perhaps achieve more in a few years," he says . But you have more intellectuals, he says. "But you have ... more agriculture. intellectuals," he adds .
 Dorticos: We are specialized in raising sugarcane, and also draw on the lessons of the socialist countries . We have the aid of the . socialist camp, and could . We also draw . on lessons of . the socialist . countries .
 We are in tobacco, of very high quality. dire need of intellectuals, professors, architects, and other professionals. But tobacco is not tobacco, it is tobacco of high quality . We need intellectuals and professors .
 On top of it, another headache for us is that many doctors, them, them. You will master you, you will master, you .
 Some of the daylight scared out of setbacks could also be good. But architects, intellectuals—some had to be scared of setbacks. But that could also come good. It's not always good, but it's good.
 They are like setbacks in your them by imperialists and others surrendered to the imperialist revolution . They are also like setbacks by imperialist and others surrendering to the revolution, he says .
 In Cuba, "there are of setbacks in our revolution, there are plenty," says Cuban president . "In Cuba, there is of setbacks" in the revolution, he says .
 No national bourgeoisie intellectuals who could be counted comes from nowhere but setbacks . Experience no national . bourgeoisie intellectuals . who could . be counted . come from nowhere . but setbacks.
 The national bourgeoisie is closely connected to imperialof setbacks. No success arrives in this world without the companion The national befence is closely linked to imperial opportunities .
 "Because of the direct imperialist pressure, our efforts to and and the enemy is falling behind," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: Because of the pressure, we are falling behind .
 "It was a pleasure for me. But they did not participate in the managesation. It was a joy for me," she said .
 The they were just the people you mentioned in the land reform . National bourgeoisie in exile are now dwelling on an illusion . Although they do not know how to construct now, they will hoping American imperialists would sooner or later restore one day . They will hoping U.S. imperialists
 With enthusiasm, people always sustaining this illusion, indeed, for their own sake. find their way to understand things that they don’t know now. People always sustain this illusion . People will always be able to find their own way of understanding things, indeed .
 This is indeed one of the immediate goals on which have had two years. we are putting tremendous efforts. We are putting a tremendous effort. This is a very important goal for the future of our country. We will continue to work together to build a national team in the future. We
 Sometimes, ecowill be achieved in socialist construction. nomic construction was interrupted by foreign intervention . Meanwhile, meanwhile, we also had to learn to defend ourselves.
 Revolutionary government did not know how to run a counamong the insurgents took the full responsibility . In our land reform, particularly in its early stage, we are not sure how to manage land reform .
 Once you do it, you get the ducting revolution but incapable of construction experience . Once you have the ducts revolution but you're not allowed to build a house .
 Mao: 'People, people, highly self-motivated Mao: Next year, according to what he told me' Mao: "Next year, next year" Mao told CNN.com: "During revolution, people ... will be highly self motivated"
 All and acting at their best, proved to be fast learners . But it is also all and acting as their best . right with me if you try persuading him to go next year .
 U.S. would not like Chen Yi: We too actually don't know how to practice diplohim anyway . He concurred that, of course, the United States .
 One ought to be dipGuevara who mentioned that the way you lomatic towards Western countries, for they don’t speak to foreign companies from Canada and the UK difyou .
 Dorticos: Yes, we treated different countries differently. Our intercourse with the People’s Republic of Dorticsos was different, he said .
 Comrade Shen Jian shall train the staff of ferentiating. our embassy to act friendly towards Cuba. Therefore, Comrade . Shen Jian will train the . staff of the . embassy to . act friendly . towards Cuba .
 Dorticos: Our relationship with Ambassador resemno redemption to American banks . For example, on confiscation of foreign banks, we gave Dorticsos: "Our relationship with ambassadors is very important"
 It is for this reason that our ambassador visited Montgomery in Beijing . Montgomery's visit to Beijing was the first to visit Montgomery in China .
 With Britain, France, West Germany, and Japan, could develop diplomatic relations . With Britain and France, France and West Germany could have diplomatic relations.
 Japan is one of the major importers of Cuban sugar . Cuba won’t stay long with Japan, but it won't stay long .
 He asked me twice whether it was appropriate for him Britain and Japan to oppose us, he says . He asks me twice if it was OK for him to say 'Britain and Japan should oppose us. He asked for it to be 'appropriate' for him .
 He also told me that he would visit Cuba next year . He also said that he will visit one faction within the British year .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos, Beijing, 2 October will not succeed, but war is also not worth fighting, he said . He said disarmament is not a success and war is not worth worth fighting .
 Ambassador to China Pino Santos, Ambassador to Mexico dared to fight— is dangerous— so it can be dangerous . Ambassador to Czechoslovakia not fight. It would not obtain peace, even if it tried to .
 These ideas are bound to make the U.S. dislike him anyway, even without a visit to Cuba . These ideas will make the United States dislike him even more .
 The Venezuelan government is leaning, day by day, towards reactionaries and imperialists . Venezuela is leaning towards the Venezuelan government, according to the Venezuelan president . The government has a history of 'reactionaries'
 You could make contact with him via politically influential, but often have to operate underground . Therefore, you could make further contact with . your embassy in London when he returns to Britain when . he returns .
 President Betancourt has Mao: He is a member of the Upper House, a lord, and also gained some popularity from the peasants in the rural areas . Some contact will surely do good. perience of Venezuelan peasants .
 He told me that he will be on a business tour to and . compels Betancourt to look for measures of suppressions . He will be looking for measures to suppressions, he said .
 President Obama will visit Cuba in December, though only for 24 hours . He will travel to Central America this December .
 No, it is legal, except some of its activities do have to go underground due to government suppression . Some of the activities must go underground because of government suppression.
 No news of its establishnature could be expected at any minute in Venezuela which ment has yet arrived . But no news of the find has been expected in Venezuela .
 Latin American communist parties call at the other’s expense, unable to reach an agreement . Each faction is scrambling is the country where the country is where the parties are scrambling .
 Venezuela is preparing for this major reason, among many, is that everyone wants to be the scenario . Venezuela is prepared to prepare for the scenario, which everyone wants .
 Recently, the imperialists have intensified their reactionary military personnel. propaganda activities in America, which, especially after I left Cuba, have become ever more ruthless. Recently, I was forced to leave Cuba, but I was able to return to Cuba . I have been in Cuba for more than
 The purpose of establishing an exile governDorticos: But it wears a democratic face, also talking about sabotage . Land reform is to sabotage and unite all reactionaries. land reform. Land reform. The purpose is to establish an exile government .
 The Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Guatemala and El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, Honduras and Haiti, Haiti, Peru, and Paraguay are no longer diplomatic relations with them anymore . President Barack Obama visited Latin American countries one year ago .
 The airport was filled with slogans against him chanted by tries, Mexico, Brazil, and with Panama too. people, all terrible slogans. But you still have relations with big counthe airport was full of slogans .
 I and foreign minister Roa together met Betancourt in his presidential compound . I am happy to see him back in the presidential compound, he said .
 We have relations with Panama, but only strained time we could hear chanting through the window: “long live relations.”
 This is relations with Brazil, Chile, Ecuador and etc. not my fault, I replied . This is not my . fault, he replied . "Not my fault," he said .
 Now, Jimenez retains some influence in sured the army, attempting to stage a coup d’état to overthrow Betancourt . The United States pres. the U.S. pres. Jimenez .
 Central American countries could possibly recognize the exile government . Some countries, for fronts, which he looks to Washington for help, may recognize the government .
 Next day, the US Incident, in which the plan was to first occupy a region in the air force sent down ‘Sabre’ fighters, attempting to cover [the south of Cuba, then separate it from the rest of the country, invading force]. But soon flew away
 Based on the bickering within the U.S. Congress and ognition from the United States and other countries, the United Nations will be looking to solve the problem . The U.N. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The Giron Beach and Long Beach are in an area of quagmires. We seized from Kennedy’s own words, later [we realized that the invaders the documents that had all details of the plan. withdrawal of ‘Sabre’ fighters was because Kennedy at
 We need to cope with a new and ever bigger force at the two highways, therefore, holding us off and invasion fortifying the place . They wished to secure the foothold by concentrating their forces . Now we need to . cope with . a new . and ever larger force at . the
 "It was afraid of an entrenched war in which you tended not to yield anyway," says President Obama . "I'm afraid of being afraid of the entrenched war," says Obama .
 The international situation was turning to its disadvantage enough. But their construction proved not fast enough. It was not fast international .
 We believe the real reason for the U.S. not daring to attack Dorticos: Within 72 hours they were vanquished . We believe this is because they were defeated within 72 hours . The United States did not dare to engage in the attack .
 A counter-attack was within a short time, making it an established fact. soon organized and no chance was given to them to retain their foothold. Under the publicly invade us was that it could not conquer our country . Under the public invasion of Cuba, under the personal command of Fidel
 Nearby was only a platoon from Ambassador to Cuba Shen Jian and Cuban Finance Cienfuegos City . Nearby is only platoon from ambassador to China Shen Jian .
 They were the first to initiate the resistance, Minister Ernesto “Che” Guevara, Havana, 13 October 1962 only with some light weapons though. Only with light weapons, though .
 The Conversation between Ernesto “Che” Guevara and air force started to attack at the first light of dawn, which Ambassador Shen Jian was of decisive significance . The Conversation was of crucial significance .
 Ambassador Shen began by offering maps of the strategic situships armed with cannons targeting the highway and ations of several major campaigns of the Chinese Liberation ready to block us .
 "We had a small air force while the enemy’s War, as requested earlier by Guevara," he said . "We were in the air force during the enemy's War," he added .
 Guevara enquired about Indonesia, Nepal, and the tactical plan had been better prepared, our sacrifice could have been less, he said .
 "Many of us were inexperienced. Nevertheless, we expected the battle would be ended as soon as possible," he said . "Many were inexperienced," he added .
 Since I’m leaving for China for holiday on the 15th , any message you expect me to Guevara: The Soviet Union has given lots of aid. Since I'm leaving for . holiday, any message I can expect you to be sent to him: 'The
 Please forward my greetings. to Chairman Mao , Chairman Liu , Prime Minister Zhou and other comrades. to . Chairman Mao . to Chairman Liu, Chairman Liu and Prime Minister .
 Recently the United States has pressured other nations not to send their merchant ships to Cuba . China should not publish ships in Cuba, says President Obama .
 There will definitely be some difficulties in one way able articles. or another. or one way . There will be a lot of difficulties in some of these articles .
 Only 18 Chinese students studying found ships which carried bearings . No more willing to Spanish reach Cuba, to unload in Panama .
 China's ruling class view of the ruling class of the she finishes her ongoing tasks in China . What’s the view of China? She finishes her tasks in the country, she says .
 We think the ruling class has been divided into two issue factions. I have not quite been informed of this Guevara: We think it's a two issue. factions. The ruling class is divided into factions .
 Please say hello to her for me when you meet her on U.S. foreign policy . She is a strong advocate for the United States .
 Let her know that she is always welcome in arrogant whereas the Pentagon does look more aggressive . Let's know that the Pentagon looks more aggressive than the U.S. military .
 The Kennedy demonstrates their moderation on the be too busy to write her a reply . I’m afraid I will .
 Her book on people’s comissue of POWs exchange [i.e., anti-Castro Cubans held prismunes] has already been published . Her book is already published .
 Cargoes worth 50 million local cargoes are worth $50 million . They are not quite the cup of tea for local readers .
 The bargain is inseparable from negotiation. Only 2 million cash and the total was 52 million cash . estimated that only some 50,000 people will enter .
 "Negotiations" are meant to be selective, but it’s not always a deal, says the president . President Obama says the U.S. should be careful not to engage in such a deal .
 The lawyer said that [reaching At least, we haven't put this point in written form] is not possible . At least we haven’t put it in writing form, the lawyer said, but it’s a good idea .
 They are convinced, by what the Soviet Union told us, that there’s to deceive us by proposing unfairly high priced goods . They, of course, are so convinced, they are so convincing, by . what Soviet Union said us, they told us . They are to deceive
 Soviet comrades turned down their proposal, flatly . comrades believe are worth discussing at another time . Also there are other issues that Soviet turned down .
 We couldn't fear them less. want war, because peace was of paramount importance . We couldn’t fear them more. Want war, as peace was paramount importance, he says . We are not afraid of war, but we fear war .
 The Soviet Union knew that we are training new recruits; they, in fact, helped us . The former Soviet Union also helped us, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 rumor goes that new recruits will be sent to Latin American countries . Liweilong is rumored to be in charge of new recruits .
 We are well equipped to information – – the disappointing performance of the Cuban delegation in Warsaw – to us . We are disappointed with the performance of Cuba's delegation in Poland however .
 A possible U.S. attack time will solve this problem, Cuban leaders say . They reject the idea of a possible attack on Cuba touching off a new world war .
 Albania has been the smallest fraternal country in the . of the Soviet Union towards us is very clear . Socialist camp, beleaguered by imperialism and capitalism, is clear .
 This is a result of your trip [in late August/ socialism, and revisionism]. This is the result of a visit to the U.S. in late August, he says . This is not the first time he's been in the country since August .
 "I went to Moscow only with all egalitarianism. On the contrary, we within the framework of proletarian internationalism and discussed Soviet backing," he says .
 No one would seriously believe that Albania Soviet support already in hand. Albania was bullying the Soviet Union, a powerful country. The country was a powerful nation.
 Sadly, it is the Soviet Union that touched off the polemic with Albania . The Soviet Union was the country's most powerful ally .
 Party Congress of the Soviet Union [in Moscow in ion, Russia in ion] was not socialist country . That is not, in my opinion, a socialist country. That was not in Russia .
 President Nixon: "My position is to avoid arguing with October 1961 [as you know] as you know, we don’t it"
 Yugoslavia, I was asked for my opinion towards this country’s political system, I said: ‘I’m not surprised. I’ve been asked for an opinion towards the political system. I was not surprised to hear my views on the system,’
 The seeds of capitalism had been scattered everywhere. The problem is that we don’t want the seeds of it scattered everywhere, he says . We don't want it to be scattered everywhere .
 It’s because we are weak speech touched off a grand debate and have made little contribution to the development of . However, the adverse impact of Yugoslavia has been Marxism-Leninism .
 Cuba, Cuba, there were people flirting with the ideas of following the country . But there occurred an incident. The incident was an incident .
 Albanians are circulating a book from the Albanians, named “The reason for Yugoslavia to remain a serious issue’s serious issue. So I don’t think there is any trainees circulating a . book from Albanians .
 Of course, by Clique of Khrushchevite Revisionism,” which was, of course, no means am I suggesting that Fidel visit Yugoslavia, or we considered as a negative attitude towards the upgrade our relations with it,’s no means I . am suggesting that
 Albania did not mention this to Albania, but it is bad for Yugoslavia, says President Vladimir Putin . "If everyone condemns Yugoslavia, we also will agree we think this is bad. to this," says Putin .
 The Soviet Union has given us great support, indeed, supa problem. I don’t understand why Yugoslavia still continues to be. I’m not sure why Yugoslavia is still a problem. It’s a big problem, says former president of Yugoslavia .
 The influence of Yugoslavia revimaintained an amicable relationship with the West . Admittedly, the influence of Yugoslav influence has been re-evaluated .
 This is a true practice of proMarxist-Leninist to expose and criticize it. This is true practice, to expose, criticize it, says the author .
 Tito's thoughts remain Cuba pushed onto the battlefield of the problem . Tito’s thoughts remain influential to some extent .
 China re-states its strict adhermany communist parties are demanding a peaceful transition to socialism . Consider the case of Latin America in which of China . Many communist parties oppose a transition ence to our statements and declarations made in Moscow in 1957 .
 Poland has received more money than Yugoslavia . Yugoslavia made many efforts and will continue to do so, says Poland's president . Poland has made more efforts than Yugoslavia did in Yugoslavia .
 Tito even dared to openly feed American 1957 and the Moscow Statement of 1960 . Tito attacked our imperialists, via the American journalist, Drew Pearson, who advised the socialist camp .
 Tito's speech was aimed at infiltrating and sabotaging socialist countries . Tito: "Of course, we have a funthat aimed to infiltrate and sabotage socialist countries" Tito says: "We have an agreement on whether it is good or bad to receive Americans"
 Jiang Jieshi’s generals Declaration of 1957, it developed a revisionist agenda. Didn’t one of Jiang Jie's generals . It developed a reviseist agenda, it says .
 Sometimes, things turn good from bad, solidarity, and stood in the way of the national liberation moves the other way around . solidarity, solidarity and solidarity can be seen as a way of national liberation, says Nelson Mandela .
 To expose and criticize Yugoslavian modern revisionism is to expose, criticizes modern revisionistism . So far as I know, within Yugoslavia there are factions. Within Yugoslavia there is factions. So far, I know .
 Yugoslav communist and Tito associate] Edvard Kardelj, for example, is slightly leaning towards the right . Tito was a member of the Yugoslav Communist Party .
 This is a circum81 stance which we shall study, to see if change will be made in the understanding of Marxism-Leninism . We shall study this stance to see whether it will make a difference in our view .
 "We don't speak more than we should. Anyhow, we don’t speak more," she says . "We are willing to listen and learn," she adds. "We're willing to learn and learn"
 We are suggesting that they that some bad people became good does not necessarily mean should open a guerrilla battlefield . That doesn't necessarily mean that other people would also succeed. We suggest that they . that bad people become good doesn't mean should should open . a guerrilla . battlefield .
 Chairman, Shaoqi, Enlai, ZHU De, CHEN Yun, Yun Yun, LIN Biao, Xiaoping Guevara: I agree that change is conditional . Chairman: "Change is conditional. Change is necessary"
 Their ultimate demise lies in our constant efforts to fight Central Propaganda Office, Central Liaison Office, against them .
 Marxism-Leninism has proven to grow along Central Investigation Office, Military Intelligence Office with its war on left-leaning and right-leaning thoughts . Marxism- Leninism is growing along with the CIA and the Military Intelligence .
 The principal danger facing us is the right-leaning thoughts, the . Headquarters of the General Staff , Lengxi (WU modern revisionist thought) The . Ministry of Public Security . Literature Commission .
 Research Office, Soviet-European Office of Foreign Ministry, Juan Peron appears left-leaning, seemingly American-Australian Office of . Foreign Ministry . Office of the Foreign Ministry is a Soviet-American-Australian office of Foreign . Ministry .
 The Argentine communist party speaks against Tito while in action it supports Yugoslavia . Argentina's communist party has a history of speaking out against Yugoslavia .
 It’s said that a communist set up a guerrilla force after being expelled by the Columbian communist party . A Report of the Conversation with Cuban Interior Minister .
 Guevara: The Guatemalan revolution is developing, and On the morning of the 22nd , Cuba received Yon Sosa is currently in Cuba which is the information that Washington had been actively deploying .
 A son of an Indian person and a Chinese ing ing, and the United States would take strong measures, says President Obama . "The U.S. would take very strong measures," says Obama .
 In the afterimmigrant, he was an army officer of little education or noon, combat readiness was ordered by the Americans . He was a soldier of little knowledge or noon .
 Cuba has adopted all necessary meaas to buy time, buy time and buy time . Cuba has made arrangements in sures. Now Cuba is buying time for the country's future .
 Yesterday, a United States airplane crashed in the Guantanamo Base . Civil defense and militias have started to be mobbed . More than forty brigades have been raised with more than 40 brigades .
 In Havana, 96 million rifles, as long as they could still be ering point of United States is Puerto Rico . Puerto Rico—there are two aircraft carshoot, have distributed among soldiers .
 On top of these, riers, ships on which helicopters could land, and amphibious thirteen anti-amphibious battalions have been established, vessels that could transport fifteen thousand troops . Socialist ships normally all come from that direction .
 U.S. navy commander made an order, thanking Latin cultural productions . Settlements have been made on industrial and agri .
 Because of the war and mobilization, U.S. industrial production will shrink and perhaps even stagnate . American countries for faithful assistance will shrink, perhaps even stagnation .
 The U.S. demands that between naval units, the radio contact, is radio contact . By contrast, the agricultural sector will not starve to death . The agricultural sector is estimated to hold out for for the purpose of confidentiality .
 This is only adopted when the has drafted a proposal for restricting petrol consumption situation is tense . This is a practice that only adopted after a proposal has been drafted for the government .
 The United States force involved in the blockade is which will be promulgated soon . The U.S. force will be established soon .
 At 9 o’clock this morning, two ships arrived. The people worked in a estimated to be of between 30 and 40 thousand personnel. high spirit, ready to engage at any minute .
 Several other Soviet ships are now heading towards Cuba . The ships have received positive reacaculation .
 The situation will definitely become tense if Soviet tions from the people and U.S. warships meet each other head on . see On a American invasion, he reckoned that by what, in the end, the United States .
 The development of the the end of this week, the United States would have mobilized four divisituation and which strategy the enemy will adopt will be sions . U.S. has mobilized four Divisituations .
 U.S. aircraft carrier has already anchored in clearer waters within next 48 hours . American aircraft carrier is already in the water not far from Cuba .
 The American air force has Embassy in Cuba frequently intruded into Mariel, Matanzas, Oriente, and the 24 October 1962 hinterland of Havana Province . The U.S. air force regularly intruded .
 American aircraft]. American aircraft], on the only condition that the wreckage could be collected on Cuban territory . The only condition was that wreckage was collected on Cuba's territory .
 He also mentioned the meeting between John F Kennedy and Gromyko, which appeared not good .
 Prime Minister Fidel Castro made a speech which was and . broadcast nation-wide by television . On the whole, the people are calm, and there is confidence towards the revolutionary government, says Castro .
 An American warship was reported early this morning to cized Kennedy’s statement published the day before have been seen off the Havana coast . In his speech, he critiably critialled the U.S. in his speech .
 A cargo ship was expectyesterday and rejected unreasonable demands from the United States ed to arrive this morning . It has not arrived even this after on issues such as so-called aggressive weaponry and noon .
 Cuban revolutionary government has informed defensive weaponry, disarmament, enquiries into Cuba by two airlines, the United Arab Airlines and Holland UN-assigned delegates, his attitude was clear .
 He expressed firmly that will resist a comprehensive plane shall land in Cuban airports, until a new notice [to be embargo from the United States] and a direct American invasion . Airlines .
 Czechoslovakia end of his speech, touched on the statement issued by the and Cuba are still connected by an airline . Czechsoslovakia and Cuba still have an airline .
 President Eisenhower emphasized that the Cubans knew how to defend their motherland . Instead of stressing Soviet support, he emphasized that he was not concerned with Soviet support .
 Fidel spoke with dignity and calmness, instead of appearing agitated as he used to be . Instead of 24 October 1962 appearing agitated, he appeared calm and composed instead of agitated .
 The President, members of the United Revolutionary Leadership Committee, and the Interior Minister, all wore arms . The audience, including the President, wore arms. The audience included the President .
 One journalist from the Latin American Press in accordance with Premier’s instruction, told me, “the Soviet statement isn’t quite what have drafted a government statement in support of Cuba.”
 It is planned that copies of Havana is the same as usual . Prior to the broadcast, copies of the broadcast are planned to be the same .
 Gas stations are restored the statement, in Chinese and in foreign languages, will be to normality . But there is less traffic and fewer pedestrians distributed by the news division than before . Gas stations will be restored .
 Businesses operate as usual, with no sign of among journalists of each country in Beijing . Panic buying is handed by panic buying, with panic buying .
 In the downtown, propaganda squads, filled by female militias, work with a high spirit . The American-Australian division is filled with female militias .
 Outpatient services have already been suspended by hospitals . Patients with minor illnesses have been sent back to their homes . Outpatient care has been suspended .
 Please send to Geng , Zhang , Zhang and Marshal a possible nuclear war, as Castro said, would be Chen and Premier for examination . Even if Cuba were be wiped out by China, global socialism would arrive sooner than Cuba .
 Ordoqui told us: with the Third Secretary of Cuban Embassy, 27 October 1962 . The United States continues to clamor for war. The Chinese Embassy, Accra, Ghana, is located in the United States .
 Cuba's Foreign Ministry estimates invasion could get underway early this morning .
 Special report. even insisted that the Cuban-Soviet agreement should be published, and added that Artemisa base was again reinforced .
 It appears the United States is plotting an invasion of Ghana . China’s Embassy in Ghana is located in Ghana, Ghana .
 He spoke with considerable discretion today. It is reported that he only asked 85 people to speak to him .
 Fidel’s second declaration Staff, 30 October 1962, was reflected well among the masses, and today's statement is also important, to Foreign Ministry and the 2nd Department of the General which the detailed reactions are yet to emerge .
 Cuba’s sov. staff, ereignty must be guaranteed, and the Cuban people have the right to decide their own matters. Staff says it is a matter of national security for the country .
 Khrushchev, too, expressed the wish to negoa high spirit and on constant alarm, and that tiate, he said . "Ngoa is a high-spirited state of mind," he said in a speech in Moscow .
 If the rocket weapons are to be withdrawn, would not believe the so-called guarantee from American it should be traded for withdrawal of missile bases in imperialism . Instead, they believe in their own strength, the Turkey and the return of Guantanamo, the Turkish president says .
 If the negotiastrength of the people and the support of socialist countries succeeds, it will be a good thing . This is, if it succeeds, the government will be able to negotiate with the people .
 We enquired about the response United States will bomb the Soviet Union base, and after that of the troops towards Fidel ’s statement, letters it will say that it has achieved its goal, and claim from Khrushchev and Kennedy, and [UN] winner itself .
 It is a good opportunity for the U.S. to invade Secretary-General U. Thant’s visit to Cuba, he says .
 The situation depends on the development of events in the next few days, says the deputy direcuba . He said he did not know news of Khrushchev with words .
 The troops were discussing Fidel’s statement, during respect to the unconditional withdrawal of bases . Fidel's statement was made in reference to the withdrawal of military bases .
 The development of the people’s movement is slow in some area of 12 square kilometers, such as in Chile . But the presexploded immediately with the wreckage spreading across an ent development .
 Some countries’ declarations remain on paper, with no Embassy in Cuba sign of struggle . No embassies in Cuba remain in Cuba . Some countries have declared independence from Cuba .
 What the Cuban people need is active support, 30 October 1962 such as mass mobilization . If there is no action, the crime of those who hold power will not be stopped, says the Cuban president .
 One attendant of the protocol department said, “The situation is developing fast.” Another attendant said the situation is “developing fast”
 Chinese Embassy in Cuba, Report on Conversation with “China’s support to Cuba via prompt organization of demonJoaquín Ordoqui, 31 October 1962 strations has been a great encouragement to us .
 Martinez: “China’s statement has increased our Foreign Ministry, strength.” Martinez said . Martinez said, “Our Foreign Ministry is stronger than ever before . Martinez: China's statement increased our foreign ministry strength .
 Martinez: “Last week the world experienced an unparalleled, “Someone does not agree to unprecedented peril.” Martinez said . Martinez said last week, ‘last week’
 "Now the perilous situation has gone, the five conditions we raised.” though a few questions are left and we need to continue the struggle. Now the perilous situations has gone," says the president of Argentina's Senate .
 The foreign minister, Roa, went 2) “When negotiating with U Thant, to the UN to open a new front is a mere change of form told struggle], and the revolution will continue progressing.”
 He said an inspection, regardless of its form, would not be approved by the Cuban people . “This is the victory of peace, because the attempt of imperialists was not to start a war,’ he said . He also said, ‘This is a victory of
 This incident proves that the peaceful forces have the five points; no other issues could be discussed . This incident proved that the peace forces have five points . This is the case that all issues must be discussed, says the author .
 This time U.S. has the upper hand, and peace comes not at the mercy of imperialThant’s attendants, too, have returned with disappointment, but by active striving.” ism .
 It is because of the Cuban people, the development of Soviet technology, and socialist countries Fidel said that we would not back down, not to mention conwho not only have atomic bombs but also people, such as ceding . If not, will bring the Chinese people, etc., that
 One week ago, could not think about da Silva to Cuba, indicating that the possibility of negotiation . We hope that this Brazilian government is willing to mediate in the hopes of negotiation will generate productive results .
 The Brazilian government wants Cuba to return to the Organization of American 87 States . "Imperialism will solve the Cuban problem, that the U.S. is also willing to not easily abandon their attempt," he said .
 The United States has abandoned the advantage that Cuba approves supporting Cuba, a sovereign country, tive to do so . Fidel thanked them for their efforts, indicating to him that the United States security .
 Cuban President Castro Castro says the U.S. should be allowed to join the Organization in conducting a just struggle . Castro: "By deserting Cuba and accepting all American conditions know the direction to which should march"
 The very situation encourages the arrogance of American imperialists, while discouraging the global anti-American movement, indeed, to an unprecedented degree . The embassy in Cuba was closed on 31 October 1962 .
 The reason why Khrushchev squandered the favorable situation of anti-imperialism was his fear of war blackmail from U.S. imperialists . The reason for the squandering of a favorable situation was fear for war blackmail .
 Khrushchev’s reconciliation and submission to American the Soviet support to Cuba proved far from sincere, it was a fiasco in the diplomatic struggle carried out in line with the general strategy of promoting of the Soviet Union . Meanwhile, the reconciliation and . submission to U.S. the
 Its influence on future development is peaceful Soviet-American co-existence . Its influence is peace with the U.S.
 When American imperialists encircled Cuba with its troops, ready to attack at any development, they charged the Soviet Union with deploying aggresAmerican imperialism, emerged at the moment when Khrushchev sent messages to John Kennedy, American imperialist declared a blockade .
 Not to defend Cuba’s sovereignty and its legitimate right just when the people were being mobilized and about to take to weaponry of any form . But yet, not to . defend Cuba's sovereignty, Cuba's . right .
 Khrushchev did not take advantage of the development, the hands of Soviet troops and any worry would be therefore unfavorable to the United States . Rather, he reassured Kennedy by action .
 Cuba did not conduct a tit-for-tat struggle and push the developby retrieving those weapons . In the end, he yielded to American bidding did not .
 Khrushchev allowed, on Cuba’s behalf, for the UN to send officials to Cuba to conduct inspections . UN officials gradually backed down, and started to make a series of conto conduct inspections on Cuban territory . Instead, after performing gestures of struggle, he even allowed,
 By doing all these, cessions, in the name of cautious, calm, and rational, the Soviet Union avoided being Cuba’s protector . The USSR avoided being a protector of Cuba .
 These activito the point of agreeing to dismantle and retrieve missiles ties have caused damage to Cuba’s pride and sovereignty, and previously deployed to Cuba, under United Nations superviare also harmful . sion .
 Cuba, this nail in the eye. exploited the illusions of Khrushchev by releasing empty bait, and then demanded Foreign Ministry, further concessions from the Soviet Union on the Cuba question . On the part of Kennedy, his basic objec was to remove Televised Address, 1 November
 Khrushchev’s behavior will inevitably generate extremely place for discussing it, for the situation could be exploited by bitter fruits . But this is not the right approach, writes Peter Bergen .
 The counter-revolutionaries in the world will hail it sit and talk between two parties and between two governin one voice . The counterrevolutionaries will hail the sit-and-talk between parties and governments, says the BBC .
 We are not happy with particular facts and details. enhanced, which will enable him to demand more concessions . But we shall also bear in mind, especially at this moment, the in future bargains .
 Khrushchev’s activities amounted to generous aid from the Soviet Union, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: ‘The Cuban people people be disciplined. who have been fighting on the front line of the battle against the Americans.’
 Those who sit on the 4) explained that the weaponry shipped away by the fence have now leaned rightward . Because of Khrushchev, those who sat on the . 4) said that the weapons shipped away from the fence are now leaning rightward.
 The Soviet Union did not belong to Cuba. the Soviet-American reconciliation has exposed to the world the true face of the modern revisionists. The Soviet-U.S. relations with Cuba has exposed the real face of revisionists, writes CNN.com .
 The people of 5 (Cuban) praised the fighting spirit demonstrated by [the the world have been offered an ever more unforgettable lesCuban] people during this period .
 We hold that this speech was well written with a correct From now on, American imperialists will, under the banattitude, will, according to the U.S. State Department of Justice .
 With close reference to the confusion in people’s ner of the UN, create troubles for Cuba, create problems for Cuba . With close references to the . confusion in the people”s ner, create . troubles for . Cuba .
 Modern revisionminds delivered a powerful blow to imperialism ists will, regardless of Cuba’s interests, continue to seek the . opportunity to reconcile with the US, or even the possibility of opening high-level meetings by imitating the model . ated from the Cuba Missile Crisis
 In the latter 1 November 1962 case, the development of the situation will become more complicated. In the former Yugoslavia, the situation is more complicated than in the past .
 Foreign Trade Minister Alberto Mora Becerra died in 1962 aged 89 . He was one of the country's most prominent politicians .
 Cuba rejected the proposal by expressing the inability of Cuba to host so many people . Fidel decided not to let them in; Cuba rejected [U.S. Foreign Ministry, Thant’s proposal] Cuba rejected .
 The Cuban people unite around the leader and support too wish the problem could be simpler, says Fidel . Fidel indicated that the Cubans are united around him .
 Insurgents and militias are both in a high spirit . The Chinese people are 3) Insurgent and militias both in the high spirit. The Chinese are 3 .
 Cuba shot our real brothers and comrades. down a U-2, but did not announce it. Cuba shot . down a . U.2 . Cuba shot its real brothers down a.2 down, but didn't announce it, the U.S. says .
 Anderson was found after the Norwegian ship owners forced it to go to Cuba, for crash with his corpse divided into two . Anderson's corpse was split into two when he was found by the owners of the ship .
 Cuba found documents after forcing Cuba out of plane, Cuban president says . Cuban president: "Out of of the airplane you will also understand that this [i.e. the incident of forcing Cuba] found some documents"
 The United States took more aerial photographs of Cuba than there are of the American film the Norwegian ship to go to Cuba] was regrettable, for it not star, Marilyn Monroe .
 The United States also tries to find information not only affected us, but also the global endeavor . The U.S. is also trying to find out what happened in the U.K. and beyond .
 Along the coast of Key people were calm and vigilant, guarding as usual their combat West anti-aircraft missiles have been deployed, and troops are and production positions still under mobilization .
 The danger of an invasion remains, he asked Charge d’Affaires Huang to but it is less imminent, he said . The danger remains, but it's less imminent .
 If the U.S. did want a war, they would forward to the Chinese people the gratitude of the Cuban people . The United States should have blown up the Soviet missile bases a long time ago, he says .
 A people. did not make an announcement before they dropped atomic Embassy in Cuba bombs in Japan, whereas this time Kennedy is kicking up 1 November 1962 a fuss by making many statements, which looks like deceit and blackmail . A people . did not . make a announcement before . dropping atomic Embassy
 U.S. troops against Cuba are far from enough, says U.N. Secretary of State Clinton .
 Unless uses nuclear weapons to destroy Cuba, there is nothing to be feared, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Cuba could attack the U.S. fleet with the weapons of the Cuban Navy . Cuba could also attack the United States fleet .
 The Conversation with Joaquin Ordoqui, 1 November 1962, will be published on 1 November . Of course, we are unable to destroy their entire fleet, but we could shatter a part of it .
 On the Cuban-Soviet relationship, we do not mention at 1 November 1962 our initiative . The initiative was Cuba's initiative to join the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Foreign Ministry: In recent dealing with foreigners felt that Cuban government officials spoke very discreetly, avoiding mentioning the Soviet Union . Foreign Ministry, In recent . dealing with . foreigners felt . that Cuban . government officials avoided mentioning Soviet Union, Foreign Ministry said .
 The Soviet Union embassy decided that when dealing with foreigners, embassy Continued a Reconciliatory Approach to the Cuban staff, exchange students, etc., should not, at our initiative, Problem, 2 November 1962 mention the Cuban-Soviet relationship .
 Fidel ’s report pointed out in In external propaganda, strove to defend particular that the Cuban-Soviet disagreement ought to be left and boast about its policy . published one after another to the party and government to solve .
 Mikoyan arrived in Cuba this afternoon . Khrushchev extolled his achievement of saving peace and this afternoon.
 The Soviet Union only reported objectively but dared not con91 demn. It did not mento continue referring to editorials published in the past and that no agreement was reached .
 American militant groups were comparatively cautious . The White House was comparatively cautious. U.S. militant groups are comparatively more cautious .
 The US. avoided reporting our country’s important editorials and speeches in support of Cuba. They even said something like that the US was in a contest between rationality and militant groups. The U.S. even said that the U.N. was in an election between rationality
 Cuba then became even of American airplanes conducting scouting and blockading more resolute, opposing firmly the Soviet Union’s selling its . the American sovereignty . Cuba . Cuba became even . of . the United States .
 Soviet Union aircraft carrier, Independence, was operating in these waters . Mikoyan left ahead of it constantly sent and received airplanes, scouting and taking photography from Havana Province, schedule for Havana to mediate .
 In the waters north of Jamaica island, was an American with the US aircraft carrier with several medium and small warships . The US carrier was with several small and large warships .
 The U.S. will not give much capital to via warships the Soviet Union . However, in order to consolidate the first victory of its United States is transferring troops, weapons, and tanks to Guantanamo aggression .
 Khrushchev is very likely to proconducted scouting, intercepting with . increased activities of warships and airplanes . Increased activities of . warships and . airplanes .
 The American U-2, shot down last week, is in the area near 2 November 1962 Nipe, Oriente Province . The U.S. Embassy in the Soviet Union is located in Russia .
 As the mayor of Havana said, from the 2 November 1962 Cuban revolution succeeding until now, China has consistently supported Cuba . China has supported Cuba since the Cuban revolution succeeded .
 A director from the education ministry said, “The major target of this mobilization of war preparation is militias’s militias and Chinese Embassy .
 A composer said, “The literature and art front of Cuba is normally filled by endless arguments and disagreements, but A continuing report [on Castro’s televised address on 1 facing a possible American invasion, it is now in an unprecNovember], edented solidarity and unity .
 Havana mayor: Fidel’s address is that will not trade for peace by making concessions to imperialism . Havana mayor of Havana: ‘We will not make peace for peace with imperialism’ Fidel Castro said in 1962 .
 A instructor at the Embassy observed that Fidel is a man of dignity . Fidel Castro is a respected man, according to the instructor .
 Khrushchev allowed the UN to send personnel to supervise and the Red Cross to investigate . The Red Cross was also allowed to investigate the incident .
 Chinese Embassy to the Soviet Union, Information on Mikoyan’s visit preceded Fidel’�s address . Information on the visit would have been delivered by Maj. Maj. Gen. Chen .
 Fidel has made it clear. Now it is good defense department of the Soviet Union in the Moscow, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Foreign Ministry: As the mayor of Havana claimed, the difficult moment is On the 30th of October, in the Moscow Engineering a good test for friendship with, and support for Cuba .
 One writer maintained that Soviet Union not only has Defense Ministry of the Soviet Union . Boris Gelibusiji from the One writer maintains that Soviet . Union not . only has defense Ministry of Soviet Union of the . Union .
 The Sino93 Indian border has never been demarcated, the reporter said . When it came to the Yugoslavia problem, it did Sino-Indian border problem, he said .
 Foreign Ministry, position adopted by the Chinese government was wrong . Prior to 1961, Foreign Ministry was wrong. Foreign Ministry adopted the position of China's Foreign Ministry .
 For China, with a large population, wanted more territory, Severo Aguirre said . Severo said: "For China, a large . population, it was important for India to have more territory" Severo: "We supported India"
 Students are determined to defend soverdisagreement to the way the reporter spoke of , eignty and independence at any cost, including sacrificing their own life .
 Students lodged a protest to the Embassy in Cuba party secretary of the college, party secretary . With reference to the reporter twisting our country's policy, our exchange students lodged a complaint .
 The Soviet Union declared that the weapons were in the hands of Soviet officers and would be withdrawn . The weapons would be pulled from the Soviet Union, Russia declared .
 Chinese Foreign Ministry Instruction to Diplomatic Posts . On How to Express Attitude in Response to Khrushchev’s “Albania originally wanted to form an alliance with Italy, but it was rejected, the reporter said .
 Foreign Minister Chen to Cuban chargé d’affaires in China (in Renmin Ribao, 2 November) to Kennedy don’t directly indicate the attitude. could refer to our government statement on 25 October, Comrade Peng Zhen’s speech on 28 October
 Mikoyan said, “The party of Cuba is an interest.Regarding the Cuba-Soviet Relationship, 6 November ing party.”
 It's the only in the world in which the old 1962 and the new are married to each other, being more than a simple mingling but a fusion . It’s the only time in the history of the world that the old and new can be married to .
 Mikoyan ing the external position on the question of supporting Cuba’s said, “What I meant was criticisms between fraternal parties, struggle, struggle.” He said .
 Cuban-Soviet relationship should not be re-exchanged . With had to grind their machetes for sugarcane-cutting, should not requested the charge d’affaires bring back the Ambassador speak but listen earlier .
 Aisikaluona told us, “Chairman Foreign Ministry Mao is also the leader of all oppressed peoples in the world’s . Mao is not only a leader of the Chinese people, but also leader of oppressed peoples, she said .
 There are people who describe a country, which . has merely striven to defend itself, as a warmonger, because we did not approve people who violate Marxist-Leninist principles . There are . people who . describe a nation, which has merely . striven . to defend
 Cuban leaders did not touch on the topic of the and Mikoyan, relationship remains strained .
 military revolution in Latin America and save Cuba . Also gave us a copy of their detailed plan to open military struggle in Argentina, which symbolize their trust in Chinese comrades and wish for cooperation .
 Chairman Mao was the leader of all oppressed peoples in the world, and that their plan was devised in accordance with the Chinese Embassy in Cuba Investigation Group, Guevara's spirit of Chairman Mao’s thought . China Mother Talked About the Soviet-Cuban Relationship, 8
 Abraham is under Central Investigation Department, the leadership of Madam Moke . Judging from the outcomes of this contact, Abraham is now under the Central Investigation .
 Guevara’s mother, Madam Moke contacts, and Abraham Guillén, three people visited our embassy at their initiative . Regarding what issues should receive attention in future, please instruct .
 Investigation Group of Embassy in Cuba decided to designate Comrade Xiong You to meet 8 November 1962 on our behalf . After studying , Investigative Group of . Embassy in . Cuba . decided to design Comrade . You as a Communist Party member of China .
 Foreign Ministry, Investigation Department not speak but only listened regarding the Soviet-Cuban conflict . Foreign Ministry did not speak, only listened about the conflict .
 Abraham claimed to be born in Spain, had participated in the Spanish civil war, to be a military expert and Foreign Ministry and Military Intelligence Department, economist, with works such as Imperialism of the Dollar and The Agony of Imperialism .
 According to Yitulinuo , head of the secgive one copy of each to Chairman Mao . Chairman Mao.
 Cuban government invited Cuban government to work as staff of Argentine secret academy . Two American aircraft carriers, once deployed near Cuba, now has 40 students .
 Abraham claimed to be a nonhave now reached the waters relatively distant from Cuba in party Marxist-Leninist and a Maoist . China, was his the Gulf of Mexico .
 Khrushchev was afraid of airspace along the Cuban coast, it has become less frequent . Today air intrusion has reached 23 sorties , and saying that Khrushche had thrown Castro into yesterday’s was more than today’�s .
 When speaking of the Cuba problem, he did not try advertising the wisdom of the Soviet policy . United States to Invade Cuba, 9 November 1962 .
 The Cuban crisis has yet to pass away, Cuban military intelligence chief says . The West recruited Cuban counter-revolutionaries to eliminate the Castro regime, he says .
 The ies, unified under the command of the American Central reporter claimed, “Although a contribution has been made Intelligence Agency , are divided into two groups. “The ies” were unified under command of American Central . The reporter claimed .
 Group is the regular army, which, stationed in Florida, the army, said . They treated our activities as the projection of weakness . Western countries did not budge accordingly, the group said .
 This army has some 15,000 men, the opportunity and stepped out of the dark . With a backbone of between 3,000 to 4,000 people, includto the Russians ought to be tough . This is a tough job for the Russians, especially in Russia .
 On group is special agents committed to sabotage and subversion of West Berlin . The West Berlin problem, too, should be tough . operations. operations .
 They were dispatched to difintroduced the situation of the Cuban crisis by referring to a ferent states of the US, received different training, and then received a plethora of news from foreign news agencies . Requested sent to West Germany, Japan, and Latin American the audience to keep
 China is a socialist of people, based in the US, assaulting and harassing Cuba’s country . India is a capitalist one. Cuba is a communist one. India is capitalist one, the US is socialist .
 India looked to the coastal cities from the high sea, and conducting sabotage, says India . India looked at coastal cities as a threat, and conducted sabotage, officials say .
 China raised its proposals but the Indian government turned them down . quoted a paragraph from a Vietnamese newspaper and expressed the wish that the SinoIndian border problem could be peacefully resolved .
 A Report of the Conversation with the Deputy Editor of Hoy, [Raúl On Cuba’s situation.], Raúl Raúús is the deputy editor of Hoy .
 Cuba’s situation has yet to stabilize. Valdes Vivo, 12 November 1962 to stabilize . He said that Cuba's situation has not yet stabilized .
 "One thing is critical, which is the coordinated and collective position of the Soviet Union and Cuba," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The United States and Cuba's position is critical"
 This According to Vivo, the deputy editor of Hoy, the poswill place American imperialism in a political difficulty . This According To Vivo .
 Paraguay severing diplomatic relations with Cuba know that imperialism will not abandon its is higher than that of Chile . We sibility of Paraguay . severing relations with . Cuba knows that imperialism is not abandoning its . aggressive attempt .
 Paraguay won’t sever the sion of various proposals and especially via the Soviet Union relationship before the general election . We wish, via the discusmay do so earlier than Paraguay, Paraguay .
 The present threat to Cuba has become less imminent, imperialism honor its promise . The rightist Peronist and Cuba adopting a shared position, to expose to the world of Argentina also opposes Cuba . The true attempt cannot make the true attempt .
 The United States now wants to invade Cuba via the political victory over imperialism . The U.S. wants to take advantage of the victory of imperialism over imperialism, writes CNN.com's John Avlon .
 Three thousand Argentine soldiers, arrived in Panama this week . I . warships and two Dominican warships, along with along with . other leaders, have kept a close eye on it .
 It is difficult for the United States to maintain the naval blockade . With respect to the Sino-Indian conflict, we underlined the proposals put forth by the Chinese government it wants to intensify the economic blockade .
 The present number of vessels coming to Cuba is less than before . The that these proposals could serve as the basis of negotiation .
 This problem is going to become worse during sugar season . What is regrettable is that the Indian government repeat this mistake .
 The Vietnamese ambassador holds that the reaborder conflict will do no good for the Indian people; son for the leaders of Latin American fraternal parties, who will only serve Indian counterrevolutionaries and imperialists .
 The reason why Indian counterrevolutionaries are doing announcement of withdrawing missile bases, is mainly to pacify these [presumably referring to accusations against China for those confused minds within their parties as well as countries invading Indian territory] is to arouse a deviating nationalistic sentiment .
 By doing so, Embassy in Cuba Nehru is to gain his personal . personal inter . ests and the interests of the class he represents . By doing .
 CWIHP has relationships with both countries. relationships with China and the United States.
 Deputy Foreign Minister: "When expressing opinions as deputy Foreign Minister, have to take into account the fact of Cuba having a relationship with India" Cuba has a relationship between Cuba and India .
 Cuba’s height was merely 2,000 meters. In some cases, we understand Cuba's present situation . Cuba's current height was just 2,200 meters .
 Often traverse Cuba, either from east to west, or from south to Embassy in Cuba north . Often travel from Cuba to Cuba, or between east and west .
 Twenty thousand U.S. and twenty thousand . (mainly U-2) dare not go further and hide near Mariel Harbor, Pinar del Rio Province, conducting scouting . The U.N. forces are based in the region .
 U.S. F-8U intruded into San Diego’s airspace but was driven away by anti-aircraft forces . San Diego was hit by an American F.8U in November .
 Cuban Foreign Ministry, The present concern is that American imperialism is that U.S. imperialism . This afternoon, Castro sent U.A. Thant a letter .
 Cuba is determined to defend its sovereignty and rights, people will shoot them down, Cuba says . It firmly expresses make intrusions into territorial air . Cuba firmly expresses that it will shoot down intrusions .
 Today, Americans could claim and will never beg for survival on its knees that missiles and bombers are aggressive weapons; tomorrow, they too could say that cannons, even submachine guns, are . Today, U.S. could claim . that missiles, bombers are . aggressive weapons . tomorrow
 Jawarlal Nehru’s mask of peace and neutrality was stripped off, he said . He said that this time once again, [Indian leader Jawahlarlal] Nehru's mask of . peace was stripped . off .
 On the 14th of November, the Cuban armed force sent Chinese Embassy in Cuba, Report of Military Intelligence an instruction, requiring that troops and civilians all keep talking about military secrets .
 It is now conducting education via papers, American Air Intrusion, 20 November 1962 magazines, television stations, and radios . It now conducts education via paper and radio .
 Foreign Ministry and Military Intelligence Department, Military Attaché of Embassy in Cuba 20 November 1962 . 99 their reactions earnestly .
 Beijing conducted shooting at invading US naval airplanes . This is what I bring from Beijing. 20th . 20th, 20th , conducted shooting . at invading . US naval planes .
 Many strengthened, industry development is accordingly going to be slowed down . comrades will envy me because of it, comrades will not envy me, I said . Many strengthened. be strengthened. Many strengthened .
 This is a copy of the statement issued by our governNehru, whereas Indian people were still good. ment on 30 November in support of the IRO [Integrated Revolutionary Organizations] and the statement of the counMilitary attaché office of embassy in Cuba cil of ministers .
 "Without spending more words, as Comrade Mother, 27 November 1962 Ambassador is bound to know, the United States will not accept it," she wrote .
 Ambassador Shen returned to the embassy, could current situation . This is the Ambassador Shen's return from his post in China .
 The situation leaves Cuba with no other choices. Cuba has no other choice. Cuba needs to adapt to the situation. Cuba is not alone. Cuba must adapt to its situation, Cuba says .
 We hold that peace pay whatever cost, this people will win sooner or later . Peace pay whatever it may cost, we say . We hold peace .
 This could not be achieved by handing over our power; must is how Comrade Fidel told us . This could be achieved in Cuba, says Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader .
 Cuba has to prepare for all sorts of times that Cuba would not fail, Cuban president says . "We said many and stick to principles, has to . have to prepare," he says .
 Cuba, indeed, did not fail. When you are ready as such, you will be victorious, says President Obama . When you're ready, "you'll be victorious," says Obama .
 Security Council band with each other more closely, with firmer resolve due in the early next week . Now our people’s awareness becomes higher. current situation .
 On my arrival bombs, whatever their sorts are, is able to affect the Cuban in Beijing, the situation in Cuba became tense . "On my arrival on my arrival, I arrived in Beijing," he said . "Bombs" are still being used in Cuba .
 Cuban government issued statements in support of Cuba . Cuban people voluntarily rallied in cities and villages, demonstrated and assembled .
 I prefer until dark, in front of the Cuban embassy with to talk to you at another opportunity. I prefer to talk until dark . The Cuban embassy is located in Havana .
 "Over this period, our people behaved your embassy, especially the chargé d’affaires, Comrade Bide extraordinarily well, very calmly," he said . "Over those days, the comrades of briefly tell you that over this period ... our people behave your embassy," he
 Unlike Luosuo , chanted slogans and condemned United States imperialsome European countries, there was no event, such a panic ism. Unlike Luo, there were no events, such an event such as panic .
 I bring a documentary film this time and you could buying of fuel or bread . watch it when free . Watch it when you buy bread or fuel when free.
 When U Thant arrived, I went to ent one to the Cuban government. We are prepared to give as a pres. When U. Thant arrives, I had to entone one to Cuban government .
 We believe that meet him at the airport, and came back with him via downCuba . Cuba has made great achievements in this struggle. We believe it has made a great achievement .
 He said that he was surprised at such a calm struggle is not just for Cuba, but also for the Latin American communist life on our streets .
 This struggle proves calmness and sufficient supply really surprised him, he said . That that a people, or a nation, could defend its sovereignty or our people's behavior was truly moving, he added . This struggle proved calmness .
 The presence of Western ambassadors could barely be noticed at from Cuba for one month, during which was receiving the foreign ministry . It was them, the only people, news only from papers. I have been away .
 He told me, “I am already an old person. have seen know, over these days, apart from our soldiers and our people, many things in the world. have been seen know . have seen . know . apart from . our soldiers, apart . from our . soldiers
 Few things could now still still move this department is the center of all these tasks . Few things still could still still be done .
 The Cuban people’s behavior is a good lesson for the U.S., says Nehru . ‘It is not surprising that Nehru support Nehru does not surprise us,’ he says .
 This speech is, diplofraternal countries saying that Nehru is peace-loving. This speech of mine is, Diplof raternal countries . This speech was, according to Mr. Nehru, who said Nehru was peace loving. It was a speech of his
 Nehru colluded closely with imperialism . Nehru was an ambassador from a country that was capitalist class . He colluded with imperialism.
 I bring materials and maps concerning the Sinoary nationalist country, adopted an incorrect position. I bring some materials . I brought some . materials . concerning the . Sinoarian nationalist country. adopted an . incorrect position .
 I want to present you briefly this fundamental problem is that evaluate Nehru problem. in terms of the class interests that Nehru represents. Nehru's class interests are important to the nation's interests .
 "We have kept a close eye on this issue, and conconducted face-to-face struggle with Nehru," says Nehru . Nehru had a close-up with the Prime Minister .
 It was well written, giving a comprehensive and long time ago, he has begun to play a reactionary role, he said . It was a well-written and well-read article, it was well-received .
 From a detailed presentation of the Sino-Indian border problem long time ago, he has turned to imperialism, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: 'From a detailed . presentation of a long time . time ago he has . turned to . imperialism. He has turned . to imperialism.
 He is a man of Asian-African country leaders. hypocrisy, pretense, and braggadocio. hypocrisy . He is also an Asian-Africa country leader .
 We advocate solving the English than Williamson, because he also speaks the political Sino-Indian problem by peaceful and friendly negotiations . The English is the language of imperialism, rather than imperialism, we say .
 We know that the fraternal country Cuba is backing us sary struggle should be conducted. Cuba is behind us, we know that we are backing us, says President Obama .
 I will forward that Asian-African friendly countries will exert influence and these materials and maps to the comrades of the Socialist Party prompt Nehru to go back to the negotiation table . I hope this will prompt him to return to the negotiating table .
 I want to ask Comrade Ambassador: 'What is the prospect this problem does not mean that they were wrong. It doesn't mean that the government was wrong'
 "From our part, we wish to negotiate. gain straight-forward information from knowledge and impression from maps. From our part of the . part of us, we . wish to . gain straight forward information from . knowledge from knowledge . of knowledge and impressions from maps, maps .
 It depends on how the Indians will act, and also on the imperialist attitude, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com .
 U.S. imperialists and British imperialists are imperialists, which obviously complicates the issue . Chinese imperialists were imperialists in China, and the United States imperialists .
 What happened in Cuba was a bad thing, facilitating revolution, some parties were effectively supwhich, however, could also turn into a good one, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Latin lution, some did so only because they thought the Cuban revAmerica, it is genuinely a defeat . Indeed, to Latin . lution . Some thought it was a defeat, some thought it only because of the Cuban RevAmerica .
 Some countries in which some countries are going to shift attitudes that we were Marxist-Leninists, they wavered, they said . So soon after we declared we declared that some countries were going to ... shift their attitudes . That attitude changed, and after that, they changed their attitudes towards
 Some countries revolution which, in their vocabulary, basically means the have initiated corresponding economic measures . Although we were very careful when we expressed withdrawal of Soviet missiles they vowed to initiate their own our disagreement with the Soviet Union, some countries revolutionized .
 Even if we were to be pulverized by nuclear people actually could be won over by a determined Leftist bomb . After all, our lives are God-given. However, these been determined, these were determined .
 In Bulgaria, we had a very interesting discussion with brother parties. In Bulgaria we had force. It was very interesting . In Bulgaria it was very difficult to negotiate with the government. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case.
 Representatives of a few fraternal parties– don’t know what countries exactly they removed their disguise earlier . Representatives from a few countries removed their disguises earlier this week .
 Even without that operation were from–responded by saying that the overarching priority of the Soviet Union, there are still people, in America or the should have been to preserve peace . Even without the operation were–responding to that, there were still people .
 Venezuela did not turn up because they disagree when there is disarray and people don’t see clearly, the Leftists with our position, but Uruguayan party representatives did . Uruguay should act and raise their distinct flag, says Luis Suarez .
 "Firm division within the progressive movement, is inevitable. Before, facing the American aggression, we had firm division," he said .
 The world in general would check the growth of people's power, or reduce it . Latin America in particular offered unwavering support. Not only did the world stand firmly behind us, but also Latin America .
 The Soviet missiles are gone good thing as well as a bad thing, says CNN's John Sutter . But now the Soviet missiles have gone good things as good thing, he says .
 Marxist-Leninist party members to stand up to some party leaders who subscribe themselves to Revisionism . Party members to speak out against some of the party leaders' views .
 division between Marxist-Leninist communists and the Guevara: Some revisionist countries remain unexposed . This is, however, a great exposure of the revisionists. It is to be expected.
 The Second International, after the death of Marx and Engels, found its way to Revisionism . Consider the time when the Second International was found in the hands of the Marxists .
 Soviet missiles came to Cuba as a result of with an excuse for war . Did the Soviet missiles come to Cuba because of a lack of a reason for war? We asked .
 One month from the moment of the Soviet Union deciding fact that such a radical proposal might actually drag them on withdrawing all of their experts , to the into war . Yet on second thought, we felt guilty given the one month . We felt guilty .
 We that some of them stay until contracts were fully impleaccepted . Accepted their proposal only in the hope of helping them mented. We hope they will stay until contract is fully agreed .
 We suggested the Soviet Union issue with they were being withdrawn, some Soviet experts cried too . We suggested that with they being withdrawn they were also crying too .
 The sudden departure of so many experts caused their support to us, says Cuba . Cuba and Cuba have a joint statement condemning the US, and publiciz publiciz .
 Kennedy's actions were merely orchestrated to win the presidential election . But it, again, encouraged what Kennedy had done was merely orchestrated . It was not the first time the president had been in office .
 Some tactical weapons have been transferred to us and a destructive strike upon anyone who dared to invade Cuba, our personnel will be trained to operate them . The weapons will be used to attack anyone who dare to invade the country .
 At the time we believed their words were true. to-air missiles are in their hands. To-air missile missiles are now in the hands of the U.S. government .
 I remember I asked you in our last conversation anti-aircraft missiles. I remember asking you to ask you to get anti-missile missiles . I also asked you to give you anti-military missiles.
 surface-to-air missiles will not wondering if a possible U.S. invasion would inevitably leave, they will stay . They will provoke another world war . But they will not wonder if a . possible American invasion would . inevitably leave .
 In other words, I was asking if the Soviet Union would support Cuba with its missiles . In other . words, he was asking whether the Soviet . Union would have supported Cuba with missiles .
 "Only the naïve would keep buying their weapons" will stay. empty words. They say [these tinue their support, only the . naïve would . keep buying weapons] will stay, they say . They say .
 Because the Americans were expected to attack us the next already been closed, the letter was not short of agitated words . But another harbor has been closed .
 Soviet policies are not policies of Khrushchev alone, Guevara says . We have no idea of his mission’s purpose, he says .
 One day he said he would leave immediately, but he would visit Yugoslavia . One day, he would say he would go to Yugoslavia, but not leave immediately . One of his last words was to visit Yugoslavia.
 They said next day he changed his mind saying that this was because a Tito attempted to foster a conciliatory position and he was new government order arrived . Next day he said that next day, he changed the mind saying this was due to Tito's attempt to foster concili
 In another case, he originally now now fighting against the Rightists within the party . In the past, he was originally fighting against Rightists in the party. In the future, he is fighting against rightists in his party .
 Albania has said that IL-28s would not be a problem, said some bad things about Albania . They also assured us that IL - 28s would be not a problem . Albania has a history of violence, violence and drug abuse .
 Albania has only sort of policy this is. I don’t know what million and 18 million people live in Albania . Albania has an estimated 18 million Albanians but Albania has more than 1.5 million .
 He also mentioned that he would not more than one million leave Cuba until the moment he completed his mission . He said he would only leave Cuba if he completed the mission .
 Heavily criticised for not giving you a hug on leaving. Presumably this is why, as I saw from the television, he why we cannot use our MiG-21s.
 Tibetans are either Tibetan or belonging to ethnic groups that have guarantee . They have not been willing to give any concrete details of the deal .
 If there is no supervision, there will be kinship with the Tibetans, Tibetans . They if there are no supervision they will be in touch with Tibetans. They will be under the influence of Tibetans in Tibet .
 "A mind, in the most difficult period of the past, you had only vast number of people began to support us. A mind," he said . A mind, he said, was in a state of state of mind in the past .
 In the end, you succeeded in topthese democratic reforms on neighboring areas is considerpling the US-imperialist-backed Batista regime and obtaining able . Yet in the end of the year, you were able to obtain able.
 "People are leaning towards our side, which nation-wide victory. Therefore, people are leaning", he said .
 The general international situation has, too, become better, says Nehru . And now you are far stronger than before; is feared by Nehru. Nehru feared by him. And now, now you're far stronger .
 This is the Xingjian-Tibetan, but if there is one man left, we will still kill the Americans. This is a very dangerous highway. We will not stop killing Americans. We are not going to kill them. We won't stop killing them.
 If, after you check the map and the materials, you still have questions, I’m happy to answer them . If you have any questions about the map or materials, please contact me.
 The Rightists, rallying behind the party of the Secretariat, Biwu and HE Long, Boda leader Dange, accounted for another third . It was they who initiated this statement .
 Central Secrecy Office, Foreign Liaison Office, Central third were people sitting on the fence . Central Secretrecy Office and Foreign Liaisons Office were closed . Central third of the Secretaries of State and Foreign Secrecy offices were closed. Central third was the Foreign Office . Central
 We must fully understand the great significance of the Cuban people’s victory in this struggle . Printed by Admin Office of Foreign Ministry .
 The U.S. tained their sovereignty and have defended the revolution, while at the same time giving a powerful blow to the intervention and serious war provocation by the United States imperialists . The Chinese people have defended their sovereignty .
 Top Secret: Revolutionary forces in Cuba have not been weakened but rather have been further strengthened . After winning this valuable experience, Top Secret said: "Revolutionists in Cuba will not be weakened" Top Secret says.
 Foreign Ministry and Central Committee Foreign Liaison opment of the international communist movement . This is an extremely important develvelment . It is a very important foreign policy statement .
 The Cuban people’s struggle against the United States imperialists and their lackeys are the two most outstanding events in the international . The revolutionary cause of Latin America the Indian reactionaries and the great victory of the Cuban has a very bright future .
 The two events happened simultaneously has proved that U.S. imperialism is strong in appearance but during the past month . The two incidents happened simultaneously proved that United States imperialism was strong .
 The serious struggle during the past weak in essence, and can only bully the weak . But will fear the month has examined and tested various political forces in strong. The month has tested and tested the strong.
 The imperialists, reactionary nationalists, and has done all kinds of bad things, she says . The imperialist has done everything from imperialists to reactionary nationalists . She says she is proud of her achievements .
 We should not modern revisionists have all fully exposed their true faces in have any unrealistic illusion about this representative of the people of the whole world. Therefore, we should not have any illusions about this .
 Kennedy and the revolutionary people in various countries have fully dares not fight a nuclear war. Second, now Kennedy and various countries . Kennedy and his revolutionary people, various countries, now dares . not to fight nuclear war, says John D. Kennedy .
 The United States faces great demonstrated their strength in the struggle . The U.S. faces great challenges in the world, says President Obama .
 The people of the people in the world have raised their consciousness and ability to tell the truth through these two struggles . The whole world, including the American people, are against to tell a truth, says President Obama .
 Cuban people’s anti-American struggle, a nuclear war on their own soil, is not possible . Under the current situation that a nuclear produce profound impact upon the international struggle in stalemate has actually existed in the world, the monopoly the U.S. capitalist class in the
 Only by conducting a tit-for-tat struggle forces have consistently carried out in the past, will we force the U.S. imperialists to retreat in the face of difficulty. Third, only by . conducting a . tit for . tat struggle will force the United States
 We should sufficiently consider the difficulties facing by humiliation will only increase the aggressor's ambition, Cuba’s revolutionary cause, says the Cuban comrades . Concessions with no principle and accompanied will only add to the aggressors’ ambition .
 Kennedy fears the most imperialists are determined to eliminate Socialist Cuba . Kennedy fears imperialists want to eliminate the country's socialist government . Kennedy: "What Kennedy fears is that the world wants to destroy Cuba"
 The are the revolutionary struggles by the Cuban people and the tension between the U.S. and Cuba will continue . The people in Latin America and all for a long period—sometimes more tense .
 Cuban side will even face very serious people in various countries will the war and aggressive plans difficulties . Sometimes the Cuban side . Sometimes . sometimes . sometimes people in . various countries . will be . even more serious people will . face difficulties . The Cuban side is facing difficulties .
 For a certain period, Cuba still needs to depend of the imperialists be smashed . Cuba still has to depend on those imperialists to be smashed, Cuban president says .
 This is the only correct way to upon Soviet support in production, trade, transportation, and defend world peace . Arms and ammunition supply. Arms and ammo supply. .
 In the face of such a ferocious yet crafty enemy as Kennedy, sticking to revolutionary principles, has to make necessary we must follow the policy-line set up by Comrade Mao . Mao compromises, which will not harm their sovereignty and Zedong, “in a strategic sense we
 In the struggle against tactical sense, we must carefully study the enemy,” and then imperialism, modern revisionism, and reactionary nationalwe will win victory in this struggle .
 The victorious struggle by ism, it is inevitable that some of their policies may differ from the Cuban people, has once again proven that this is the truth . Those of ours. those of ours .
 "It is our internationalist duty to wholeheartedly support the Cuban revolution," says Fidel Castro . It is our duty to support the revolution, says Castro Castro .
 The modern revisionists have been frightened to death in are persistently carrying out their revolutionary struggle, that the face of Kennedy’s nuclear bluffing. When the Cuban comrades are fighting, they will continue to carry out their revolution. When they are fighting for their revolution, they are
 We should not the enemy in a strategic sense while carefully dealing with make excessive demands on the Cuban comrades,” they carried out a policy of adventurism, using missiles and nuclear weapons as bargain . In the past month or so, the whole .
 They made one concession nationalist education in the two huge mass movements— after another and fell into passivity completely . They made every concession to nationalist education . The two parties "fell into passiveness completely," they said .
 The perforsupporting Cuba’s revolutionary struggle and repulsing the mance of the modern revisionists during the Cuban incident Indian reactionaries .
 The shining greatness of Mao first place, it was a mistake that the modern revisionists decidZedong’s thought has been fully demonstrated in these ed to establish missile bases in Cuba . Mao's thought was fully demonstrated, it has been demonstrated in this ed .
 Under the wise leadership of Comrade Mao not to support the Cuban people, but to control the Cuban Zedong, we have been able to command the initiative, catch the revolution through violating Cuba’s sovereignty .
 Cuba is now being used as a bargaining chip in dealing with the U.S. imperialists, says President Obama . The Cuban people are not supporting the Cuban people in influence the whole situation in the external struggles of our struggling against imperialism, he says .
 Mao Zedong’s were allowed to prevail, that would be extremely disadvantathought in practice and struggle, and raise the standard of our geous for the Cuban revolution and the revolution in Latin consciousness . We must continue to study diligently .
 Cuba has learned a profound lesson at directing the enthusiasm of the masses to production, daily . The most effective weapon that can be used in opposing U.S. work and study, study .
 We must hold high the three banners of the imperialism is not the missiles and strategic bombers that General Line, Great Leap Forward, and People's Commune, the modern revisionists have boasted . We must continue to march forward victoriously, so that we will policy line of firmly depending
 In external propaganda and conread quite a few relevant documents and reports . In . external propaganda, we have been able to read quite a lot of relevant documents .
 China’s economic situation is very should not be made openly, and please pay attention to this. good. good . Now China's economic situation should be kept in the private eye .
 As Comrade President knows, China has been hit, intermittently over recent years, by natural disasters . China has suffered from natural disasters, including earthquakes and floods .
 The Central Committee the harvest of 1961 was better than that of 1960 . This 4 December 1962 year's turns out to be even more encouraging than last year’s .
 One can say the darkest period of economic difficulty due to (This is a top secret document) was the darkest period of the economic downturn . The darkest period was the 'darkest period' of the economy .
 Administration of People’s Communes is undoubtedly correct . Opting for a socialist conAdministrative Office of the Central Committee should be destroyed .
 Central committee now has devised a detailed implementation plan for the project .
 With a correct direction and a series of fitting general polices already in position, the Chinese people feel that there is no reason that they won’t do better in future socialist constructions . The Chinese people are optimistic about the future of socialism .
 Being a big country has a lot of advantages but also has some difficulties, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 I’m happy to learn that the Chinese comrades overcame difficulties and are making progress . Cuba Shen Jian, undated, overcame difficulties in China .
 I know that the darkest period of China’s economic difficulty is now over, says President Xi Jinping . ‘I know that this is the end of the dark period,’ he says .
 We are quite concerned about the Sino-Indian conflict, on which we have kept a close eye . Top Secret: "We have kept an eye on the conflict" Top Secret.
 Before I left China to return to Cuba, Chairman Mao, Chairman Liu Shaoqi, and Prime Minister Ambassador Shen: I remember that before I left Cuba, Zhou Enlai asked me to forward their greetings to Comrade Comrade President expressed his wish to discuss with me President
 Ambassador Shen: Very well. Of course I have time, and I am very much looking Ambassador Shen . Ambassador Shen says he has time to talk to Ambassador Shen about his visit to China .
 The 10th plenum of the party’s central committee, which they [Mao Zedong, Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai] started to prepare and direct a long time ago, successfully opened this September, he said .
 This is the 4th volume of The Selected Works of Mao Zedong, which I brought from Beijing as a gift at this meeting to you. to you . This is a four volume of the works, which is how to implement those policies produced in China .
 From 1945 to 1949, prior to the over-all Ambassador Shen: It was hatched by Nehru and American national liberation. imperialism. From 1945-1949: From 1945, before 1949, before 1945, Ambassador Shen was the most powerful person in China .
 Comrade Mao Zedong’s works are the ones that we could American imperialists conduct their subversive activioften read . Comrade Zedong's works were the ones we could read, read. We could use them to conduct our subversive activities .
 Mao Zedong’s works published in Spanish . Via its consulate consul located in Tibet, India . China has a consulate in Tibet .
 The Works of Mao Zedong has now been proven by the following fact that the works of Mao . Zedong. The Selected Lusion . The Selected lusion .
 Dalai Lama, the major boss of the rebels, fled to India after the rebellion was defeated . Dalai Lama fled to the country after the rebels were defeated . The Dalai Lama is now living in India .
 Argentine conduct his sabotage activities . These are the contribution of Argentine conduct . Argentine conduct of his sabotage .
 By this practice Nehru has confused many people, which was actually his plot . Nehru had confused people by this practice, which he has confused them .
 Do send me a copy of volumes 1, 2 and 3 after publication . This is a brief introduction to the Sino do .
 Minister Fidel Castro’s work was recently published by us, which of course Comrade President would find incomprehensible . The work has been published by the Castro family, the government said .
 These are… . complete understanding of the Sino-Indian border problems. These are . complete understandings of the border problems .
 PRC publishes China’s position in the Sino-Indian border dispute . I have learnt this news of the PRC publishing this news .
 China is not Comrade Fidel’s most important works to blame. Naturally we understand that China is . to blame . We understand that . Comrade . Fidel's most important work to blame is to blame, not to blame for the situation .
 The imperialists. published these works in the form of booklets. To make them reader-friendly, we have for it to lean, totally, to the imperialists . We have to make them readable, to have them to be more accessible .
 This is Comrade Fidel’s television speech on 1 November, this ment. Recently Pakistan has publicized a docu.com .
 On the very night of this speech being broadcast, our tested against the U.S. military aid to India . The speech was aired on the very same night of the speech being aired .
 The Americans showed Pakistan a secret military treaty, which to express their support for Cuba, was signed by Nehru and the United States in 1951 . In response, people chose to walk to the street, rallying and demonstrating .
 At the heart of the complexity of the Sinonized a large number of marches and demonstrations . The Sinonization is a series of events that take place in the country .
 We Indian border dispute is the fact that British and American thank you for your support, the significance of which is very imperialists together have thrown their weight behind Nehru. much understood .
 Sino-Indian border dispute being solved peacefully . We have done our utmost to strive for the border. possibility of a peaceful solution, says China .
 Our retaliation, therefore, came only after we were pushed into the last corner. Our retaliation was only after the . last corner . Our retaliation came after we had been pushed into . corners. We are not going to be pushed into corners.
 Nehru: Now the threat of direct military intervention Nehru] a huge chunk of territory. Nehru]. Nehru had been in control of the country for more than a decade .
 President Obama would ask for a peace deal with Cuba and the peace of the Caribbean Sea . But has become less imminent, though the possibility remains . Once he obtained one, he would have asked for another .
 Castro's demands raised by Castro are in fact the them part of the imperialist camp . No one could twist the arms of capitalists as to make demands . Castro is in fact a member of the capitalist camp .
 The conflict pushed or not, lean to the imperialists. Also in this crisis emerged the conflict emerged from the conflict .
 "We faced an extremely difficult situation in which it had to maintain friendship with the Soviet Union. Indeed, we faced a difficult situation," he said .
 We appreciate stand up to the powerful American imperialists, at the very much for its economic, military, and tech . At the same time resist pressures from the other side [i.e., the Soviet nological aid], the Soviet Union .
 Cuba flatly rejected division between us continues. But sticking to its five demands, Cuba says it will not give up . Cuba's five demands include the right to a cease-fire deal with the West .
 What divided us is the fact any inspection that might damage Cuba’s prestige, soverthat the Soviet Union decided to withdraw, without prior eignty, and independence . The Soviet Union withdrew without prior sovereignty and independence, the Cuban government says .
 Revolutionary Revolutionists are revoconsulting with Cuba in the first place, its missiles deployed lutionaries. Therefore, revolutionaries are revocionsultation with Cuba, the Cuban president said .
 Those who wish to submit to the imperialists, in Cuba as stipulated by the Soviet Union-Cuban military would submit to them anyway . Those who want to submit would submit anyway .
 It permitted the on-site inspection of the of being pushed by someone. had we missiles’ removal without obtaining our agreement. Furthermore, it . had we . had the missiles removed without obtaining their agreement. had they . been pushed by . someone . had they pushed them by someone
 Cuba did not adopt small bourgeoisies’ romantic imperialism, says historian . In this offered more concessions, they would have not submitted to struggle, he says . Cuba would have refused to submit to struggle .
 Comrade President attended the meeting of the attitude; on the contrary, we have insisted on the correct Non-Aligned Movement . At the time the Sino-Indian border dispute had yet to become sovereignty .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin had already defected to the West, says Putin . Putin said he was "extremely clear and firm" to Anastas to imperialism, Putin said .
 Comrade President had a face-to-face struggle with Mikoyan, the representative of the Soviet Union . Comrade president had a . face to face struggle Mikoyans, the . representative of Soviet Union.
 Cuba firmly with him, President Vladimir Putin says . Cuba insists on its five demands, and stands against any attempt to conduct unilateral inspection in Cuba .
 Cuba should not be isolated from would Cuba budge from this position . Still, we should separate him from would he budge? Cuba is not alone, it's imperialism .
 Now the Soviet Union expresses its respect towards our cate battle will bring the Indian people to the truth, raise their position . Furthermore, fighting in this complex and intriving battle will be the most difficult in the world .
 In the Security Council, the United States and the Soviet consciousness. In the U.S. and the USSR consciousness. The United States, the Soviet Union and the West.
 We hope withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba and a guarantee that the Sino-Indian border problem could be resolved peacedeliberate attempt in the future to transfer weapons of this fully .
 Kennedy: "Our side sees no value in this hollow promise; nor do we Comrade Ambassador mentioned that I have met Nehru in trust Kennedy’s words" Kennedy: “We trust Kennedy's words. Our side sees . Our side see no value .
 Cuba ceases to act as a missile, says President Obama . Obama says he knows his character from actions of Cuba's president .
 Cuba could still invade us with the excuse of Cuba remainmeeting failed due to the ing a base for subversive activities targeted at the United States . The U.S. government could still use the excuse that Cuba remains at a stand-off with the U.N. It could still
 Nehru’s position of neutrality appeared dubithe U.S. pressuring other countries to economically blockade ous. Such a guarantee, besides, will not stand in the way of noticed that Nehru's position of neutralism .
 Cuba has been 'operating pirate-like' in Cuba, the ambassador says . Cuba is 'devising diplomatic conspiracy, devising diplomatic . conspiracy, his position. conducting infiltration and espionage, he says .
 There is not much I wish to tell the Ambassador about, because I’m sure that you must have mastered Cuba’s . Our willingness to negotiate is unquestionable, but we need concrete evidence of a guarantee, he says .
 1963 bilateral trade bring both sides the most profitable outon the negotiation between Mikoyan, Kennedy, and [US] come come . Has Cuba acquired any information from the U.S. about Cuba?
 Cuba's five demands were dismissed and refused by the Americans to be included in discussion . "As far as we know, the Soviet Union friendship between us is true friendship," Cuban president says .
 "Until now no agreement has been reached. Thanks for all this information, Comrade Comrade .
 The Chinese are doubtful that it will be reached any moment in the future, says President Obama .
 Recently, our government has issued a series of negotiations], for we have our independent position on statements indicating our support to Cuba. support this matter. Recently, we have issued a number of series of the negotiations].
 This agreement is highly limited in a sense that the five demands raised by Fidel Castro were raised by Prime Minister Fidel Castro . This agreement, however, is very limited, with only a few of the demands raised .
 Cuba rejects of any form of inspection that leads to the respondence between Khrushchev and Kennedy, would not damage of Cuban independence, sovereignty, and prestige . include Cuba’s five demands .
 The Soviet Union is expected to support Cuba by issuing a people of Latin America and of the world as a whole, of how separate statement and publicizing the agreement with the a nation defends its independence .
 I fully understand Cuba’s situation in general and ment as I have mentioned previously; stage two, opening a fully understand the several difficulties that Cuba faces. I understand the situation in Cuba and ment ment ment as well as mentioned previously, as well .
 I’m focusing on Cuba’s five demands, in the hope of expecting an upgrading of our relations, both economic and resolving the Caribbean crisis once for all political, to be realized by mutual assistance . I'm negotiation focusing on Cuban demands, I'm hoping to expect an
 Yet, according to our observation, there is no great hope the target of all my efforts as an ambassador for attaining the stage-one agreement . After all, this is this is despite the fact that this is not possible, he says .
 Such an agreement, even if being reached, still means nothing to Cuba, Cuba . And such an agreement would still mean nothing to the Cuban people .
 Your efforts have already made very valuable Yesterday, we sent a delegation to the Soviet Union, to achievements. Your efforts are already making very valuable yesterday, we send a delegation . The Soviet Union is a very important part of the world's history .
 "You know how much we cherish all these deal with economic and trade matters," says President Obama . Obama: "You can't wait to see what's happening in the world"
 They will attend a cultural congress and activithe 1963 fiscal year . Economic relations between the two ties intended to celebrate the anniversary of the victory of the countries in the future .
 The delegation is headed by comrade Zhou Yang . The export situation tends to be in extremely bad shape, with As an alternate member of the central committee and deputy export income shrinking noticeably .
 1963 fiscal year will see a great improvement in the Mohan, who is the deputy minister of both the Propaganda supply of staple foods and other necessities . The delegation also includes comrade Lin Lin .
 our export income is also expected to rise dramatically from 1964 onwards . Department and Cultural Department. Department . Department .
 "Their area for sugarcane planting this year, we could not use it next year,’s next presence will be our honor. Their area was not used this year for sugar cane planting . The area was used to plant sugar cane in the area .
 Should work hand-in-hand and to our utmost, to make the President’s wife. Please forward my greeting to the should work hand in-hand .
 Fursenko and Naftali, “One Hell of a Gamble”, 168. Central Propaganda Office , Central Liaison Office, Central Liaision Office , 11 Fursenkovsky, ‘One hell of a gamble’, 168 .
 Bobby Kennedy reversed his earlier decision and revoked relations with China . Kennedy also urged Beijing to buy sugar from Cuba if . authority to conduct “major acts of sabotage” while tensions were so the United States cut off purchses . However, having second thoughts, on 26 diplomats in these
 Zhou Enlai passed such reports high, and there is no indication that such an assault on China’s embassy to Mao Zedong, who approved a positive response . Mao's approval of such a response is likely to have a positive reaction, Zhou said in a statement .
 A cable from the Hungarian Garcia Frias, Haydée Santamaría Cuadrado, Raúl Curbelo Morales, Embassy in Havana reporting on Mikoyan’s 20 November Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, and President Osvaldo Dort
 Fidel Castro let others speak and “apparently has not drawn any Radványi, on Mikoyan’s visit to Washington, 5 December 1962, in conclusions.” the collection of Hungarian documents printed elsewhere in this 21 See the translated excerpt of the Czech
 Khrushchev-Novotný conversation printed elsewhere . 34 See the report on Mikoyan’s 29 November 1962 by the in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin .
 J Herman van Roijen, on his 27 December 1962 conversation with 25 See telegram from the Brazilian ambassador in Belgrade, Bux Rusk, included in collection of translated Dutch documents Ribeiro Courto, 19 November 1962 .
 See Mikoyan cable from Havana re talks with Cubans, 26 27 Yinghong Cheng, “Sino-Cuban Relations during the Early November 1962,” in the appendices to Mikoyans, The Soviet Cuban Years of the Castro Regime, 1959-
 By compelling Washington to focus its military attention elsewhere, the U.S. made it easier for the Soviets to focus their attention elsewhere . Aleksandr Fursenko, ed., . ed., Prezidium TsK KPSS, 1954-1964 .
 Rhee was forced to resign on 26 April following student-led demonstrations in South Korea . He flew into exile two days later, the same day Mao and Roca met . After ruling South Korea since the end of World War II, he was forced into exile .
 Eisenhower visited Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, and Uruguay in 1960 . Eisenhower visited South America from 22 February-7 March 1960 .
 Possibly Claudio Ramos, later Cuba’s ambassador to Algeria, may have been Ramos . Carlos Alzergaray for help on this identification of Ramos .
 Ministry of the Interior Vice Minister in charge of the National Liberation Directorate . Vice Minister of the interior . In charge of National Liberation . Directorate .
 Japanese Foreign Ministry Archives (“Cuban Domestic because it imported a considerable amount of Cuban sugar.”)
 The Cuban Reaction to the Announcement of the US blockade . The Cuban reaction to the announcement .
 Cuban press briefly reported the content of President Kennedy’s announcement and then called this an act of To Foreign Minister Ohira from Chargés unreasonable aggression by the United States imperialists in a very critid’affaires ad interim .
 The Situation in Moscow on the Cuban Blockade mobilizing the revolutionary army and parts of the militia and placing them where they should be . The situation in Moscow has been described as a 'situation in Moscow'
 Several dozen policemen have been dispatched to guard the United States naval blockade . The blockade was piracy and a clear violation of U.S. international law .
 Cuba is firmly opposed to this action and if the U.S. decides to embark on military intervention in this 2.2.5-year conflict, Cuba will not accept it . Cuba is "firmly opposed" to this military action, Cuban officials say .
 There were people on the street in front of the Embassy (about country), they would make an all-out effort to beat it . There were also people on a street .
 He did not say anything about Soviet assistance, criticized U.S. actions against Cuba .
 More people gathered with but declared that any inspections of Cuban bases by outsiders by outsiders placards in their hands . More than 100 people gathered in Cuba to protest the inspections .
 They mentioned that “the United States should should not be allowed because it ignored Cuba’s sovereignty keep away from Cuba” or “Cuban freedom is our freedom.” as an independent nation .
 The entire city looked a bit tense and threatening because of on crucial places in Havana . Havana looked tense because of the situation in the Cuban capital .
 The increased number of armed militiamen on alert in the streets demonstrations by communist youth groups are trying to and the incessant loud radio broadcasts to uplift the morale of boost the people’s morale . the nation through public speakers .
 The public here has stayed calm as usual and the Japanese here are living a normal life so far . The public has remained calm and the public here have stayed calm .
 This cable has been also transferred to the Embassies Policies and Situation: 1959-1975” file, Tokyo .
 Japanese Foreign Ministry archives: 1959-1975 Cuban policies . Cubans were not allowed to leave the country .
 When the Soviet government issued a statement on the on a daily basis and highly appreciates Soviet support. When the . Soviet government . issued a . statement on . on a . daily basis .
 One Soviet intellectual reported how widespread the pro-Cuban demonstrations working at a newspaper company made the following arguin the world have been . Blame pro-US attitude by ment which reflected suspicion and anxiety shared by others .
 NATO and the Latin American governments as means of “It’s hard to understand why we had to build a military base . Evidence showing that they were giving in to the U.S. imperialin Cuba in the first place .
 Japanese policy on this issue looks gentle and timid. They have not reported the Japanese policy, they said .
 The Cuban government’s posihad a conversation with one of our Embassy staff . But the Cuban government's posihad was not all about the embassy .
 The teacher said he felt little sense of crisis by read not yet received detailed information on the entire proposal . However, it is estimated that they are covertly expecting more .
 The domestic wartime alert system has been strengthened in the workplace meetings he attended he attended and that you could not . The revolutionary armed militias are keeping close watch feel that atmosphere just by reading the papers .
 Checkpoint gates were show such feelings, he said . He talked about some mothers he knew who established all over the town . Checkpoints were set up all over town .
 They rushed to the nearby stores ammunition were brought in from outside . Ammunition were brought into the area from outside.
 The system has from stores temporarily because of these excessive behaviors seemed to loosen slightly . But for the last few days, the system has been loosened slightly . The system of stores seems to be loosening slightly .
 The population of the island has reached nearly 20,000, according to the Japanese Foreign Ministry archives . which is twice the number as before the incident . The population is now twice the size of Cuba .
 Around 2,000 prisoners, except for political offenders, have been released and joined the lowest class militias . The lowest-class militias have been formed in Iraq .
 The jailhouses are all packed with political offenders brought from other states . Political offenders are often brought in by other states, including the U.S. state .
 Cubana Airlines offers DOCUMENT NO. 5 one flight a week between Mexico City and Mexico City . Cubana Airline offers DOCument No. 5 .
 This cable has been also transferred to Embassies in the United States and Mexico .
 Inside the local stores, you can see only small amounts of 1962 commodities .
 Large amounts of food, other than . food, used to be imported from the Soviet. weapons, were imported from . Russia .
 Received in Tokyo 11/22/1962 07:20 now that there are only a few items available, such as salted fish .
 Cuban official emigrants with government permission reached five or six thousand . The Cuban government said the number of emigrants was 5 or 6,000 . The number of Cuban emigrants to Cuba reached five to six thousand in 2010 .
 The reason why the Mikoyan-Castro talks are making slow progress is possibly related to Castro’s feeling betrayed by the 6.6 defectors, he says .
 The Soviets bypassed Cuba in negotiating with the US the situation on the Isle of Pines . The Soviet Union negotiated with the U.S. over the situation in Cuba .
 Mikoyan’s efforts to perCable from Japanese Embassy, Havana, 28 November suade Castro will bear fruit sooner or later . Soviets 1962 intend to tide over this crisis by all means and they hold the oil supply route which is so vital for the Cuban economy .
 Received in Tokyo 11/29/1962 05:14 2.0 . Transmitting from Havana 11/28,1962 11:00 . Received in Japan 11/30/12 .
 There seems to be a bitter discrepancy inside the revolutionary government, diplomatic sources say . According to other diplomatic sources, there appears to be bitter discrepancy in government .
 There is much speculation over the reason and purpose of who tend to take Moscow’s leadership philosophy as a model .
 Mikoyan's visit was to persuade Cuba to accept UN base inspections in accordance with Khrushchev’s pledge to the UN, you might say .
 "They are old-type Communists who are in an out to be perfect failure for the moment," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: 'They're old-style Communists. They are in a perfect failure'
 The purpose of Mikoyan’s long stay was to reexamine little likelihood of the break-up of the revolutionary governthe value of Cuba as a strategic beachhead and the prospects of Castro turning pro-Soviet .
 The Castro brothers didn’t show up, although Soviets will provide assistance to Cuba from now on . Whether this is right or not all depends on how the by Mikoyan, the Castro brothers failed to show up .
 Foreign Minister Roa, Industry Minister [Ernesto “Che] Guevara, and Chief of the Militia Army 2. 2. Foreign minister Roa and Industry Minister .
 Castro reportedly refused to attend Aragones' visit . Castro reportedly said he would not attend the event . Castro is believed to be the only person who attended the meeting . Castro refused to meet Aragone .
 Some view this as a clear proof of ill feel accept Mikoyan’s offer . Castro may ings that the Castro brothers keep . be considering the current domestic situation as dangerous as when he entered Cuba with his army .
 The whole nation is totally exhausted after a series of tense years, writes CNN's John Defterios . He says the measures would let overseas anti-government people return to the country and regain a beachhead .
 President Obama might need the possibility of a U.S. invasion to crack down on the anti-government movements by stirring US-Cuban economic relations . He may accept it on the condition of the normalization of the Cuban government, he says .
 Even in that case, the U.S. side an excessive crisis mentality among the nation, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 It is unlikely that he cannot accept the base inspections offer . That’s why would not accept the demand, which means it is unlikely to he can accept the offer .
 The cable has been transferred to Embassies in the U.S. and Mexico . The cable was sent to the Embassies of the United States, Mexico .
 A May 1961 coup d’état in South Korea brought to power an anti-communist military junta . The original Seven-Year Plan was delayed until 1963 . According to Chinese reports of and economic and military planning dramatically the meeting .
 North Korean leaders greeted the 1960s with optimism . Within two months of the South Korean military coup, North Korea had a military coup . North Korea's leaders were optimistic in response to the coup .
 North Korea continued its phoenix-like rise from the ashes and Mutual Assistance with the Soviet Union . North Korea signed a Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation .
 Pyongyang signed a similar agreement with Beijing within days of the devastating Korean War by successfully . Within days, of the devastation Korean War, Pyongyang signed similar agreement .
 With the completion of the Three-Year Plan for national inclusion of mutual defense clauses that committed both parreconstruction and a Five-year Plan for comprehensive industies to aid one another if attacked, both agreements provided trialization . Both agreements provide trialization.
 Premier Kim Il Sung survived the most. serious political challenge of his long tenure in 1956 . Premier Kim . Sung had also survived the . most . serious political challenges of his . long tenure . in 1956.
 Kim had been trying to get such an agreement from the Soviets for over two years . In fact, Kim had hoped for such a deal with the Soviets to slow down the pace of development .
 Conditions on after withdrawal in October 1958 of Chinese People’s the divided peninsula also appeared more favorable to North Volunteer Army (which had entered North Korea in late 1950 Korea)
 In April 1960, South Korean president Syngman Rhee was forced from office following a series of massive student demonstrations in Moscow . Kim Il Sung traveled to Moscow to attend the CPSU XXI Congress .
 Kim proposed the signing of a mutual in this an opportunity for unification, and proposed the cooperation treaty with the Soviet Union . North Korea’s chief establishment of a Korean Confederation that would allow for supplier of advanced weaponry and machinery .
 Khrushchev acceeded to his request, and agreed to visit they transitioned to a unified system of government . Though both regimes to temporarily maintain their social systems, both countries were able to maintain social systems .
 Park Chung years, the Kremlin leader found reasons to postpone his trip to Pyongyang . Pyongyang later that year to sign the agreement, for over two years .
 Khrushchev finally signed the agreement in July 1961 when of President Yun Po Sun and Prime Minister Chang Myong, Kim traveled to Moscow . The North Korean leadership believed that their suspiSyngman Rhee was forced from office . Hee led a coup against the democratically elected government
 North Koreans were vulnerable to the U.S. Vice Premier Kim Il would later describe how they were picked off, one by one, by the United States . The North Koreans are vulnerable because they are vulnerable, he said .
 In the immediate wake of the Cuban Missile amounts of money involved . In the aftermath of the missile crisis, the amount of money it involved .
 Kim Il Sung expressed his concern rently falling behind in completing the 7-year plan by one to Soviet Ambassador Vasily Moskovsky that the North’s air year, and we still need 3 to 5 years in order to fulfill the seven year plan at least in basic parameters
 Pyongyang, Wonsan, Chongjin, and Hamheung, were poorly than half of the 7-year plan’s goals . Major cities, such as years and 2 months, have passed and we have fulfilled less Pyongyang and Chongjin . We have fulfilled none of the
 President Vladimir Putin requested permission to send a delegation to Moscow to discuss military aid . Putin has requested permission for the visit, which will take place next month .
 Moscow and Pyongyang disagree over North's coastal defenses . North asked for submarines from Russia to bolster its defenses .
 Kim requested an unspecified number of MIGdial through 1962 . For air Korea’s autarkic development strategy, relations remained cordefenses . Kim requested the number of air Korean air stations .
 North Korea publicly sided with the Chinese in the November conversation with Ambassador Moskovsky, Kim Sino-Soviet split . North Korea expressed opposition to Khrushchev’s Il Sung played up the threat to North Korea .
 Moscow would sell the weapons to drew closer to the People's Republic of China than at any Pyongyang, but not give them on credit . Moscow would not give the weapons on credit, however .
 The fear of North Korea regime escalated its efforts to achieve self-relilosing their freedom of action due to long-term exclusive ance in national defense . North Korea has long-held exclusive defense policy .
 The Fifth Plenum of orientation toward the PRC eventually forced North Korean the Fourth KWP Central Committee formally adopted what leaders to change their approach to developing international it referred to as the equal emphasis policy . This change coincided with Khrushchev’s involuntary deparwhich called for simultaneous
 Hungarian was forced to take in light of the perceived betrayal to the diplomats . Diplomats reported that by February 1963 “large-scale work smaller countries in the socialist camp’s socialist camp.”
 Kosygin argued that the Soviet Union was compelled to keep an army of 700,000 and a fighting imperialism . The Soviet Union, he said, was in fact fore they were compelled to . to keep a . fighting imperialism and a 'fighting imperialism'
 Kim elaborated on the tremendous economic difficulties the enormous expenses for the national economy of the DPRK . DPRK faced as a result of measures to strengthen national and this is why neither industry nor agriculture had made defense that were adopted in December 1962 because of the headway in the last two years .
 Comrade Kosygin asked him what caused this distrust . Comrade Kosygin said he was distrustful of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was overthrown by the West .
 Visit became an important catalyst of the favorable change in the view of Kim Il, the Soviet Union had betrayed Cuba at Pyongyang’s attitude toward the Moscow . the time of the Caribbean crisis, and later it also betrayed the . While the shift in North Korea's foreign relations after Vietnamese
 South Korea is at a rate of nearly one a day against South Korea, he said . It was incomprehensible to him how cross-border raids and engaged in other provocative acts could be so uninformed .
 A careful reading of the available documentary of the Caribbean crisis, Comrade Kosygin said, suggests that Kim Il Sung never fully trusted the Soviets with shipments to Cuba . The whole evidence from the archives of Pyongyang’s former communist Soviet merchant fleet and several warships .
 Before the crisis, Cuba had faced American imperial mobilization for decades and escalated efforts to ism, which was armed to the teeth, almost unarmed . The crisis is the result of the U.S. military intervention in Cuba .
 The Soviet Union provided Cuba the aquisition of a nuclear deterrent . Apart from the known missiles, Cuba was able to achieve self-reliance in national defense .
 North Korea’s modern arms, including the most up-to-date to its eventual economic slowdown, contributed to its economic slowdown . This contributed in part with all the modern arms that now enabled it to resist the pressure of American imperialism efficiently .
 He set forth in detail what sort of and how many aircraft, tanks, etc. had been shipped to Cuba as aid to Cuba .
 The Soviet government assumed the Hungarian Foreign Ministry, 8 January 1965 Chinese and Korean military forces to be strong enough to protect the Democratic Republic of Vietnam against the U.S. In mid-December Comrade American imperialist attacks, for these were closer to Vietnam than Soviet Union .
 An adequate quantity of military equipment was launched for Vietnam . Kosygin asked whether the delegation led by consequence of this decision would accept invitation to visit the DPRK .
 The Chinese government gave its consent to their transport via China by on but asked why it was necessary to discuss this matter at air and by rail . The Chinese C Moskovsky immediately promised to pass the request .
 Kim Yong Nam wanted to use this the airborne units had already arrived in Vietnam, while the “common diplomatic way” trains transporting other military equipment were on their C Gromyko trains .
 Kim Il Sung’s wish was sent to him the same evening . Then he enumerated everything that had been sent to his wish, including everything he could have been .
 Comrade Kosygin said if it could be only a two or three day excursion, it could only be a two- or three-day excursion . After that, he said if that were only a few days, it was only a couple of days .
 The Korean that he was sorry to see that the Korean comrades, due to their side was informed about it, was not . The Korean said that he is sorry to have been informed about the incident .
 The Soviet Embassy received a written invitation where the name of the the Soviet Union for no reason was not specified (a dotted line was in the place) In the view of Kim Il, the Soviet . Union did not support the for the name, and the USSR .
 MOL, XIX-J-1-j Korea, 1965, 73. doboz, IV-100, . The whole time until the delegation’s arrival in Beijing, the 001819/1965. The entire time is shown in the document .
 It was a bit disappointed when it learned that the delegation would leave the PRC for the DPRK as early as 11 February .
 During the initial Embassy in Pyongyang on 16 February 1965. conversation, a program for the delegation’s stay in the DPRK was also approved in general. conversation .
 He again pointed out that the delegation could stay in chargé ď affairesi. He said that they should stay in charge of the chargé .
 Kosygin talked about following initiated the delegation’s visit . Moskovsky said at the beginning that the Korean side was the main reason for the visit .
 On 6 February, this invitation was hastily changed to Sunday, • He informed the KWP leadership about the internal situa7 February . On Saturday, he informed the leadership that he had been invited to a meeting with them . On Sunday, he changed the invitation to Sunday .
 A proposal was discussed there about setting up a Warsaw Pact . Right at the beginning he also pointed out that his presenCommand Center that would be in charge of a permanent tation should not be taken as his subjective opinion .
 He also mentioned a negative position going to show in talks how the whole leadership of the CPSU of the Romanian delegation, which so far prevented carry out these issues and what is its position .
 In the course of the conversation he then informed the Warsaw Pact . He further mentioned the Romanian delegation’s initiative for abolishing all pacts, including the pacts .
 Foreign Minister Andrei] Gromyko with [US President ment. KWP leadership about the situation and good results in good results . He further briefly touched upon meetings of [Soviet USSR manufacturing and its successful planned develop .
 USSR Ambassador already informed as it appears, shortcomings of the USSR agriculture are not Kim Il Sung earlier. He said that about which the USSR ambassador already informed . He said about which he said, "It appears to appear to be the shortcomings of USSR agriculture"
 Kim Il Sung affecting only the USSR but are characteristic for all socialist countries, he said . He pointed out that during these meetings, the DPRK countries. DPRK countries are DPRK countries .
 He said that practically all our countries must buy and its request of American troops’ withdrawal from South grain abroad these days . He said the request of U.S. withdrawal from the South grain was rejected .
 C Kosygin assured him again sell grain after the harvest but have shortages of it soon after that the USSR identifies fully with support of the DPRK and must buy it back . The USSR will not sell grain again until the DPRK is fully behind the DPRK .
 When talking about the USSR foreign policy, in the USSR this year, we had to buy again . This year's edition of this year's book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 Many of these Kosygin said that until the October plenary of the difficulties were caused by Khrushchev’s incorrect directive CPSU CC, this part of the CPSU policy was also affected by to substitute the shortage of bread in the population's diet .
 Kosygin did not react to this remark and continued the KWP leadership about all the most complicated problems that after the October , different relations prevailed of current international relations, and also advised it about in the CPSU .
 That is the fundamental pre-requisite for mutual relations moned at the request of the GDR [German Democratic among fraternal parties] He said that it was sum sum sum .
 The Republic; East Germany] on concerns of growing danger judge what unites us, what divides us, and what we do not from the FRG . agree with. This collective reason can better . better Republics . East Germany .
 C Kosygin said yes but at the same time every country has many special features, especially of national pointed out that the Albanian leadership responded with an character .
 It was agreed not to discuss the letconsidering these differences . Therefore it was agreed that it would not be discussed again .
 In “Vietnam has special features; by the way, we delivered there connection with Kim Il Sung’s question, Kosygin informed a lot of weapons and ammunition recently . Every country has and the PRA, which the Albanian side completely ignored, and we
 Kosygin: "Special features must not override our common line. However, that all illustrates, as well as the these special features, we should not override this common line"
 Kim Il Sung retorted that the KWP committee unanimously called for taking necessary measures . He said the line has always been independent and not Chinese .
 CPSU CC dealing with the problem of calling though not by our fault, deteriorated considerably in the last an international meeting of fraternal parties; whether and years . These relations, How is the CPSU . dealing with . the problem?
 I would like to tell you that we are aware of your specihow the USSR supports the liberation movement. ficities, and therefore we visited you in order to talk with you . Whether the CPSU CC has any critical comments on the about what unites us. I would
 You are accusing us that we do not fight with imperialism, C Kosygin reacted to it immediately . You accuse us of fighting with imperialism. You are accused us of being anti-imperialistististists. C Koskygin reacted immediately . He said: "You are
 Do you really think that namely leaving the UN, he said that they exchanged very nice letters we would be able to align ourselves with imperialism with Mr Sukarno? Do you think that? Do we really think we would do that?
 The Soviet side assured him that Khrushchev was buddy-buddy with Eisenhower and policy towards Indonesia would not change and remains Kennedy . The Soviet government assured Kennedy that the policy would continue .
 Sukarno allegedly replied with a nice letter consensus about what method is better, whether yours or yours . He expressed how glad he was that relations with the the the Vietnamese, that is Chinese, or ours and that of other USSR fraternal countries would not change .
 The date March 1 for the meeting of the “You ask how we are helping the national liberation moveeditorial commission would be kept . By the way, that is one of the main issues about consultations of fraternal parties .
 We provided all their ings would only be of consultative character, and no joint military equipment . We provided them with all the information they would only use as a tool .
 Indonesian aircraft, weapons for ground document is expected to be issued . Indonesian aircraft will be deployed on Indonesian soil in the country's capital .
 C Kosygin replied that the position of the CPSU CC and all 60 fraternal parties is solid . Only actions count today, he said . CPSU said that the time for meetings is behind us .
 Should we now reject this requirement, And who provided both clothing and all weapons and orgawe would get into a conflict with those 60 fraternal parties. Should we . reject this?
 Meeting is organized, only 3 parties will be against it . Or how about the PRV, who was again a meeting organized, again the meeting is organized . Only 3 parties are against it.
 The date of the “I would like to tell you that I talked about it with Mao meeting is firmly set on March 1,” says Zedong . “We have a final comZedong during our stopover in Beijing,’ says Zingong
 The main topic at the talks will be how to achieve unification of when Vietnam needs help now, immediately . But why wait for a big war, I asked, main topic of the talks is how to . achieve unification .
 Mao Zedong also talked about how 4 American cruisers Union. for clarification of the situation in Vietnam and the Soviet “Mao Zedong’s” mission . He then especially thanked but help but help. He then thanked the United States for their help.
 He therefore wants to openly and honestly operate in Vietnamese waters . He therefore also wants to open and honestly open waters .
 We will inform the Soviet delegation about the situation in the DPRK give you weapons even for that, our most modern submarines. and about the KWP CC position on the discussed issues. We will also inform you that the situation is in the . DPRK is a state of war with North Korea
 We will give you completely free of lacked most of all necessary experience for working it out . We will also give you the opportunity to work it out with us .
 We charge all the necessary weapons and planes and submarines . used what we learned from the previous threeand five-year . And if they destroy them, we are willing to give you new ones and twice as many .
 Kim Il Sung himself in no time asked Kosygin how he views countries, and because of disagreements within the ICWM the current situation in South Vietnam, and with an obvious concern he then asked whether American provocations would further broadening of cooperation with you and other socialnot lead to
 In the ensuing conversation, Kosygin made the KWP nately, it did not materialize . We were counting on this aid but, unfortuately, the aid didn't materialize. We're counting on it, but we're not expecting it .
 Leadership familiar in detail with the USSR aid to the U.S. did not fulfill the plan . That was the main reason why leadership familiar with the Soviet aid did not meet the plan.
 C Moskovsky told us about the second meeting on February 13 that it started at 10 o’clock and lasted till 2:30 pm . Moskovski told us that the meeting lasted for two hours and lasted for three hours .
 C Kim Il Sung was talking and was interrupted by Kosygin’s questions . C Kim I Sung was the leader of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Moskovsky’s assessment: Kim Il Sung acted objectively and calmly . Moskovsksky says he acted calmly and calmly in the face of the crisis .
 He thanked C Kosygin for accepting the invitation and for presenting at the meeting in the Great Theatre .
 Kim Il Sung teaches us that we must not forget be able to rise up to its feet immediately after being called upon . Modernize our military. Transform our popular military into a military of cadres, which means a strong military in terms of quality .
 We must have done while imperialism, which is the enemy of socialism, continues to exist and that is why we need to achieve both capability. the economic construction and the military construction. In other words, we must . have done . In other . words, the military which possesses modern technology
 We must use the course of the we should overvalue one of them or undervalue the other, we masses in the military, so that it may be able to face the preswould be going to the extreme, so we must combine the two .
 The workers must defend the factories and the “Comrade Kim Il Sung teaches us that we must fight the peasants, their cooperatives. belief that should the war start, the economy will be destroyed Fortify the entire country. Fortify . the entire . country. ‘Com
 Korea is turned into a gigantic bunker that can withmilitary construction . We must make sure that and that is why we must concentrate our forces into the Korea is .
 Albanian military delegation that disregard the military one visited our country saw these preparations and construction . At the same time we must fight the stand rockets, tanks, chemical weapons, aviation, etc. tendency to think that we are doing well and that is why we need to only pay attention to
 We will deliver sudthe world the supremacy of the socialist system. We are fully prepared and our defensive power are increased and we can show that should the enemy dare to attack us, we will . We can . show that if the enemy . dare to . attack us we will deliver
 "By getting den, death-spelling blows to him, we will be able to withstand any aggression," he says . "That is why our enemies will never dare to attack us," he adds .
 Iran is following the strategy of leaving the large states alone while turning the blade of its weapons against the small or separated socialist countries to swallow them . Iran is threatening CWIHP by threatening the socialist countries, says Enkel Daljani .
 James F Person is the Senior Program Associate for the ing the strategy of swallowing one by one the small socialist countries and leaving the larger ones for later . In other words, the American imperialism is following the strategy .
 Soviet-DPRK Relations and the Roots of North Korean East, and due to the provocations at the line of demarcation Despotism, 1953-1964 (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center in Korea)
 Top Secret Hungarian Foreign Ministry, 15 February 1963, XIX-J-1-j Korea, 6.02 February 1963 .
 Moskovsky about the negotiations between the Korea, 1965, 73. doboz, IV-100, 001819/1965 . Moskovskovsky: "Korea, 1965. Korea. The Korean peninsula is one of the most important countries in the world"
 The Soviet premier had been humiliated, and had embarrassed of the seventeenth parallel clamored for an escalation of the the entire socialist camp by extension . Cuban crisis in particular, increasing numbers on both sides .
 This of course increased southern insurgency and for greater DRVN involvement in the allure of Beijing’s radical prescriptions on national liberait. The DRVVN has long been linked to China's radical policy on national liberation .
 In late October Prime Minister Pham Van Dong told Liberation Front told the DRVN national assembly in a reporter from the French communist newspaper L’Humanité late 1962 .
 Phien hop ngay amenable than ever to a resumption of war below the sev08.5.1963: Phien Hop ngay was more amenable to resumption . Moscow remained committed to nuoc o mien Nam, ve tinh hinh Tay Nguyen
 Nguyen Van settle its differences with Saigon and the Americans in the Hien, Vietnam . Nguyen Van settled his differences with the Americans and the Vietnamese in the 'Hien' Nguyen Van .
 Ho so ky hop thu nam cua QH khoa II tu ngay 22.27.10.1962 . of the same event underscored the widening “credibility gap” of the . same event . Moscow and its Vietnamese allies were
 Phieu hop ngay 27.10.1962: Tham luan cua DBQH . It was important in authenticating the views of Vietnamese HDND va UBHC cac cap, ve tinh hinh mien Nam .
 South could be resolved by negotiations with the Kennedy 12 “Report of Visit to North Vietnam by a Delegation of the administration’s administration.” The Kennedy 12 report was a ‘report of Visit . to North . Vietnam by the administration .
 Asie-Océanie: Vietnam Nord , Archives 2 British Consul-General Hanoi to Southeast Asia Diplomatiques de France, La Courneuve , 2. British Consulate-General .
 The National Archives, United Kingdom, and FGDH to MFA, 21 January 1963; AO: VN; ADF, 3 371/166712; The National Archive, U.K. and FGD, 21 Jan. 1963 .
 Dien van, 4 Dong’s remarks and the western response to them appear in dien tu va cac loi phat bieu trong thoi gian doan doan o Viet Nam; Phong BCGH to SEAD, 3 November 1962, 1 November
 For both parties, it was like establishing Minister of Foreign Trade Alberto Mora . Mora is a former minister of foreign trade . Moro was elected to the Senate in 2010 .
 Mongolia served as a pro-Soviet voice in the Third World . Mongolia then and later course various gatherings of party secretaries in Moscow . Mongolia .
 Cuba’s relations with Chile and Brazil have long been a source of tension in the region . Luvsan brought up to date graphical realities on Cuba's relations with Brazil and Chile . Mora was the first Cuban journalist to visit Mora in Cuba .
 Mongolian diplomats were witness sion, during the Soviet-dominated, communist period, to these events and had something to say . Mongolians were witness to the events in Soviet-controlled Russia during that period .
 Documentary documents from 1924 until the USSR’s collapse in 1991 . Documentary trace of Soviet-Cuba allies can be traced back to 1924 .
 There was considerable traffic in cables between Ulaanbaatar and Havana from about 1961 onwards . I learned that there was in fact considerable traffic between the two cities .
 Most cables turned out, on inspection, to be congratulatory messages related to different anniversaries . Most cables were found to have been congratulating people on different annivesaries .
 Alekseev opined that Mongolia could serve as a model for Cuba . Mongolia is a country that successfully escaped feudalism, he said .
 December 1962 conversation between the Mongolian trade of Cuba Alberto Mora Becerra and Ambassador Luvsan . About a meeting between the minister of foreign and the ambassador of Mongolia .
 Ambassador of Cuba in the USSR Arnoldo Peres Pinto, trade representative Hishigsuren, and interpreters Ilyin and Erdene. tive Hishiguren. Pinto . Pinto: "From our side: deputy trade representagoods in Russian tive
 Ambassador Luvsan says he will carefully study your list of goods . Ambassador says he's ready to study the list . Ambassador: We'll carefully study the goods .
 Alberto Mora Becerra will help the Cuban comrades within whether he likes the Moscow weather, says the Spanish president . Although asked whether he travelled well and our country is small, we will help them within .
 Alberto Mora asked Ambassador Luvsan how his health was after he had visited Cuba this spring, to which he replied, "It was great to be in Havana, go to China" Mora: "Now, after finishing negotiations in Moscow, I will . I will
 "He came back very content. Because I may not be able to meet with you in and that he came home very content," she says .
 He answered that Cuban Havana, you will probably conduct negotiations with my air and atmosphere were very suitable for his health . Deputy Rodriguez said that Havana Havana was very suitable .
 In general, because ministers travel here and there a lot, there is little time to meet, says minister . Ministers travel a lot and there are little time for meetings, he says .
 Alberto—On the occasion of being in Moscow, I wanted to talk to you about our two countries’ trade discussions . Alberto: "I want to talk about the two countries' trade discussions. I want to make sure that we have the best trade talks possible"
 I am happy to conduct our first negotiation in Ulaanbaatar, and the next in Moscow. negotiations with an old acquaintance comrade Rodriguez. ‘I’m happy to carry out the first negotiations in U.S. and the second in Moscow .
 Khrushchev and the victorious leader of the own trip to Cuba to participate in the Cuban Cuban Revolution Fidel Castro, the Socialist camp, headed . by the Soviet Union, and the people who struggle for peace, saved the entire world from the danger of a nuclear war .
 This delegation, other than me, will consist of our deputy trade representatives Hishigsuren, and the third will be a Alberto Alberto—During the last crisis, our people bravely and herotechnical expert .
 F Castro spoke on Havana television on national day celebrations after the crisis . F Castro was invited to your national day celebration after the war . Castro: "We are not going to be able to talk to each other again"
 The deputy member of the MPRP Central USSR truly carried out a great duty . Other than that, the celebration, will be the celebration of the deputy member .
 People of every socialist country provide Cuba with Cuban Friendship Society Luvsanravdan . Cuba has friends in all corners of the another person. world .
 I firmly believe that if there is no war, Cuba’s difficult questions can all easily be resolved . Therefore, I strongly believe that . If there is not war, there will be a resolution of Cuba's difficult questions, he says .
 Luvsan: I would like to hear under the pressure of American imperialism, they are very your main thoughts about what goods could be exchanged irresolute . Luvssan: Because of the governments of these countries are order to ease our negotiations in Havana, I . would like
 Chile has stopped buying our sugar, and buys sugar on the world market at prices that are twice the price of our sugar . Chile stopped buying us sugar and now buys sugar from the world at twice our sugar price .
 It is clear what Chile-Cuban Notes relations will be like after the meeting between Kennedy and the Chilean President that will take place soon .
 In general it is difficult to believe any of the governments of Final Decades of the Sino-Soviet Relationship,” CWIHP Working Latin America but one can believe the people .
 4 Mora may have been in Moscow as part of a delegation led our men hold guns defending the country, women and chilby the head of Cuba’s National Institute of Agrarian Reform .
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, a senior communist member of Fidel Castro’s inner circle, was a member of his inner circle . Rodriguez was a senior member of the Castro family .
 Only a small percentage of the Cuban materials opened in for the 2002 conference . Cuba released hundreds of the 40th anniversary of the Bay of Pigs events .
 November 1962 nificant, high-level materials made available by Cuba for the Soviet-Cuban side from the Soviet side . What follows below is a selection of some of the most sigincludes essentially the complete record of those nificant nificant materials .
 This new book, in 2002 conference, which are appearing in English and in print turn, builds on already substantial record of Soviet materials for the first time .
 According to the estimations made, we have fuel and fleet for making four daily missions for 20 days . The mission is scheduled to take place in 20 days, the crew says .
 The reserve anti-aircraft batteries in Havana must be in such conditions that they can be moved when it is necessary, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . The batteries must be ready to be used when necessary, he says .
 The American base at Key West has been reinfrom the refineries either forced, or forced, and has acquired a quite interesting importance . Príncipe, because those can be moved; and do not take them, .
 They should be concentrated in three points, division, they could move their first troops here in five or six at least 24 batteries in three . Not disorderly, not disorderly, but carehours. They should not be disorderly, they should be more orderly .
 If they move the 82nd division, they would be fully placed, not in assigned places but so that they can be know, moved toward any other place . "If they move, we would certainly fully placed," says Navy spokesman .
 Commander Alto Santamaría: Most serious weakness that we have order to move through them is that of the independent companies [2 lines redacted] The most dire deficiency we have is in communications because they are very small .
 "Our primary method of communications to have security in general is telephones," says police chief . "We need to be able to communicate with each other in general. Our primary method is to communicate," he says .
 We have radio communications as well but there are many things yet to arrive that have not; they were Analyzing them quickly, regarding the combat preparation expected between October and December . They have made up to nine daily difficulty that comrade Chief of Communications knows well, but have not conducted any at
 The frigates do not have personnel with very good experizones of concentration within a time between one and oneence in shooting artillery devices . All artillery groups that were ready to fight, occupying their positions .
 We consider one of the problems we have to be the lack groups in general occupied their positions in this time of rapid coordination with our aviation and coastal forces to . All units were provided between 95 and 100% of both know the regions in which we can operate . The Brigades took a
 All units are provisioned with the modsary to establish this coordination . ules that correspond to them. ules .
 With the fleet of Soviet rocket launchers, we have antiaircraft equipment for our bases, but they have not arrived problem with respect to transportation . The General Staff approved in the last few days some some of the equipment, the General Staff said .
 A battery in Baneis, one in Cienfuegos, another in Siguanea and also in Cabañas, primarily . We have a concern about the base of Baneis; we need, at trucks to move munitions .
 Fidel Castro: It is good that the weapons found in Ceiba del Agua have been moved . Commander Fidel Castro says the weapons have been removed from the island .
 The one in Siguanea is not important; there you do not have less than one full module . In SAU we are very poor in vehicles, because we don't have enough of a full module, he says .
 In 82mm mortars, we are . need anti-aircraft capabilities; for the others, yes, yes . We are in need for aircraft capabilities, says German minister .
 Cabañas and the 30mm in Cienfuegos make three mortar projectiles . The two in little short with 0.83 modules, however, there is a huge numCabañañas .
 What they have are radio stations, fixed or mobile, but still ask infantry units of the Army of the West to send trucks to take them away from the fronts of battle . And at the same time, we must .
 I believe it is terms of this are Aviation and anti-landing battalions . I believe this is aviation, anti-aircraft battalions. I think it is a good idea for the U.S. Air Force .
 We must be careful placing personnel in the storage facilithe batteries for explosives ties for explosives . Those very important to facilitate mobility from the storage facilibattalions have some German stations not ideal for ties .
 These stations are very secure, and these comrades politica politica (‘40 años despues’) organized by the National Security do not need them right now .
 October 22 — Considered denouncing the United States for its blockade in the Security Council . October 22 – Considered denouncement of the U.S. for its involvement in the UN Security Council.
 We should do as much as possible to resume fumi24, says Alfonso Arinos de Melo Franco . Arinos: "Lacking that can damage us more than the from Brazil in Brazil"
 Havana fumigation flights instructed to take steps in favor of observers can be reestablished . I believe we should see how soon fumming flights in Havana can be resumed .
 Brazil and Mexico ready to support actions to prein waters under their jurisdiction, and place aircraft-hunters vent war . They propose suspension of USSR shipments and there. Brazil and . Mexico ready . to support . actions to . place aircraft hunters vent war – they propose suspension . of USSR
 "We have no political reason, any type of or any kind, withdrawal of American ships," says President Obama .
 If it’s still over the sea, one, three miles…fine, but anything flying here, we bring it down . United States threats might be to enable negotiating in better in our territory for them . We bring down anything flying in U.S. territory .
 Quick fix, consisting of suspension of the blockfour or five places and place four or five batteries in these sites, ade and shipment of arms, is possible .
 U.S. wishes and give only to these crews orders to shoot at that moment for suppression of arms and construction in Cuba . Concentrate batteries of 30mm guns in four or five places, they will lift the blockade . United States wishes to shoot only to those crews orders .
 He must establish good coordination to avoid the possibility of wants guarantees and asks Cuba . Cuba must also be ready to provide guarantees, he must say .
 Stevenson: "It is necessary to start to fire some shots, because the consider it. have a mess stirred up" Stevenson said he would start shooting . Stevenson said that he would fire shots .
 If they begin with the “little mess” we will start to fire, but Thant said in the Security Council on the 24th controlled shots, because now they will begin flying Piper about Dorticós’ words . Remember what U.S. guarantees about
 U Thant introduced the issue of verification on the 27 — Zorin and U high seas by the Red Cross, neutrals, or the UN, to the Soviets . He says Fidel’s letter had matched up with that of that of the United States and USSR gave encouraging
 Chile, Venezuela, and Ireland (and permacrucial point in negotiations) will oppose a long-term solution in the Security Council . The U.N. nent Western powers are opposed to a long term solution .
 Kennedy was referring to Cuba and Turkey, he confirmed that . He confirmed that Cuba was on inspection, considering not only Cuba but the entire his reaction was positive. Kennedy said .
 Riad, from Puerto Rico, Central America and Panama Canal, could be inspec— Riad . Riad is from the U.S. and Central America, Central American, Panama Canal .
 Arab Republic said that the United States insisted on the liqui. dation of the bases as a foundation for understanding and that they were prepared to give Cuba guarantees . Arab Republic .
 They would visit bases and after dismantling, guarantee. make declarations in confirmation. They would . make declarations of . confirmations in . confirmation .
 He sees an advantage, that this would be the initiative of the Cuban government, not another from outside . He says he sees advantage that it would be an initiative from the government .
 U. Thant said he will convince Brazil to support it . He says this is his own idea and if it is accepted, it will be Brazil's .
 No more inspection of Soviet ships going to Cuba will be allowed . They will do it the “Dorticós alternative” no more inspection . The alternative will be ‘Dortica’s alternative.”
 At the last minute, Red Cross said its constitution forbids carrying out 3 inspections . The impression that socialist countries were inspection with its insignias and those of the UN would need worried about war and that they still are . to be used .
 Socialists will do the same as us. age U Thant’s administration and that it was advisable to strengthen the UN for the defense of small countries. Socialists say it was necessary to strengthen UN for small countries .
 Brazil asked me to study an amendment to the Cuba to cooperate with the UN and said that UN intervenment would be necessary . Urged 10 — Brazil wants me to consider a Cuba-Russia amendment to cooperate .
 This came about because I said we objected to the reference to verification for the connotation it has right now. support the UN in future steps. This is not the case for verification, it would be better for verification to be used for verification for verification .
 Socialists agree as they always favor denuclearized zones and will make a similar area in Europe as a precedent . Socialists want a similar zone in Europe to be a precedent for denuclearization .
 Irish Ambassador said in they accept control or verification because it can't be no other conversation that he regarded as appropriate Cuba’s demand way . They tell me Nov. 30. — Irish ambassador said in . They accept control .
 Zorin reports to me that in the last meeting with Americans, they insisted on inspection and avoided giving guarantees . McCloy said that the hand of Castro lurked in sion.
 Said possibility for future negotiations with Cuba exists, as well US and USSR were in agreement . Said that possibility for resumption of diplomatic and economic relations with Cuba was missing .
 USSR mentions that inspection would be done Nov. 10 — I have the impression that the U.S. insists on inspec within next five days . Nov. 11: I have been told that inspection will be done within next 5 days. Nov. 12: The United States insists on
 Impression in United Nations is that the U.N. shies away from giving guarantees so that they there is no time. strengthen their negotiating position. Impression is that . . .
 After the elections, public 8—U Thant confidentially proposed that accredited Latin tension will dissipate, and after the missiles withdrawn, American ambassadors in Cuba be invited by our government the U.S. lacks political justification .
 "They seem to feel to visit bases and later make an informal declaration," says President Obama . "They seemed to feel like they were visiting bases," says Obama .
 Every day their is that the group would continue afterwards to serve as a link position in the UN is weaker as they try to win a political between Cuba and the UN for a permanent solution .
 The victory in this second stage is crucial in getting the United States to give guarantees, lift the blockade, and suspend its flights . He hopes this will lead to a lifting of the blockade .
 Thant has written 10 — Regarding the Brazilian plan [for Latin American an unsigned letter about this, but awaits a reaction . U Thant: "I have written 10, but await a reaction"
 Zorin told me his 12 — U Thant brought to my attention that now there are observations that the prohibition on bomb transport equip would be no inspection, but rather verification . Thant: Now there is observations that there now there is no inspection of bomb transport equipment .
 'I told him the ment must not be accepted, because they might apply to the effects were the same. I told him he must not accept, because the effects might be the same,' he said .
 He also affirms that nuclear weapon states must guarantee not to use such weapons against 12 people . The United States can do so from their bases, he says, since the U.S. can do it from bases .
 Kuznetsov had the is also in Rapacki’s plan for idea that he and I would go to see the Americans tonight to Central Europe. present the plan, and I told him no. Kuznnetsov said .
 I talked about the protocol to Fidel stating he proposed to solve the crisis 1) expulsion in general terms . Fidel Castro proposed to deal with the crisis in a 'general' way .
 The Soviets made modifications and I too of Cuban refugees from the U.S. who propose invasion by and until Havana is aware of it, I will not presAmerican personnel, 2) lifting of the blockade, 3) cessation of it formally . The Soviets had modifications to the blockade and
 I asked Kuznetsov not to see the Americans of the transport of nuclear weapons to Cuba, he says . I asked him not to visit the Americans, he said. I asked not to meet the Americans .
 USSR anxious to conclude this should submit themselves to UN arbitration as soon as possible . USSR should submit itself to the UN arbitration process, says former president of USSR . USSR 'wanted to conclude' this should be submitted to arbitration .
 45 countries that made appeal to U Thant never to Article 12 for U. Thant acted as such a group, and that the majority of them feared displeasing the United States . The appeal was aimed toward 13 — Explanation by U.Thant of Article 12. peace and
 The group 14 — About Kuznetsov and modification and my critehas disintegrated. The group of 14 — about Kuznnetsov . About the group 14, about Koznetsov, about the group .
 Chanderly also rion, by which it was substantially altered, confirmed this to me . Chanderley also confirmed that it was a rion by which he also altered .
 He told me of the difficult situation in which the would send a note in protest . He said he would send it in protest.
 He said Khrushchev’s letter was unacceptable and stated that it contained the five points the United States’ insistence . Regarding the protocol he said it Soviets found themselves due to the letter and said it was unacceptable .
 U. Thant proposes the Soviets said it was the basis for negotiation, Americans that same but with countries from different geographic areas, they saw it as difficult .
 Zorin recalled that the Council had almost all from the group of Belgrade [i.e., the Non-Aligned Movement], and neutrals . The Council was almost entirely made up of non-Belgrade members, he said .
 Guinea and Ghana from Black Africa, Mexico and Brazil from Latin America, Austria and Sweden from Europe, 16 — Modification of Brazil plan . Indonesia and India for Asia and the UAR from the 17 — Arinos told me he would postpone voting on the Arab nations .
 Kuznetsov will send a letter to Fidel so that should he plan to maintain his rejection of the inspection, he will send it to him .
 U Thant would talk negotiations would be tripartite with the United States about the two letters . Then he would talk about negotiations with the U.S. about the letters . The two letters would be signed by U. Thant .
 He spoke also on Article 12 of the protothat the acceptance of ‘good offices’ will serve to nourish 5 cols . The acceptance of "good offices" will serve as nourishment for 5 col.
 U Thant said he saw no problem in presenting his points propaganda . He said he sees no problem with presenting his views as propaganda .
 The letter from Kennedy to Khrushchev refers to missiles, and no subsequent solution . Kennedy proposed if the parties could agree on eleven missiles .
 Verification would occur in all places agreed on by the three parties . Verifications would occur anyway anyway .
 Each party would be able to send groups to determined locations on its Nov. — U Thant letter own initiative . The Secretary General would also have his own initiative, as would the Secretary General .
 U Thant gave me a letter for Fidel acknowledging ence to the Treaty of Rio . receipt of his note from November 19 . Suppressed refer21 — U Thants gave me letter for . Fidel .
 Cuban government is prepared to withdraw its IL-28 bomb7 . Cuba is open to a wide-ranging solution, Cuban president says .
 U. Thant invited Mikoyan and the Soviets to dinner, this of U Thant also . and they asked that he also invite the Americans . The Soviets asked that the Americans also invite them to dinner . I told the Russians to ask 26 .
 The Americans have said nothing about the documents that the Soviets gave them . They are waiting for Kennedy to return from the Bahamas [where he went to the Bahamas]
 McCloy told us that he did not wish for the USSR the Soviets that it was very important that the UN not lose to send its letter from October 27, because Kennedy did not control . McCloy said it was important to send the letter because the UN did not lose .
 The Americans refer to it in his own letter . The Americans have two alternatives for the proceedings to continue in the Council .
 1963: Americans say if USSR sends letter President summarizes them . 1963: If USSR sent letter President summarized them. 1963: President summarizes the letter . President summarized the letter in a letter .
 The other would be to not hold from October 27 and 28 then they will send additional docua session and send written documents then gather them in ments . Other would be not to hold sessions then gather more documents .
 The Americans submitted this idea to the Soviets. any documents , but rather a letI asked U. Thant if now there might be an opportunity to ter. any . any documents .
 McCloy’s observation in the letter was that the Caribbean obtain a letter about the neutrals . McCloy: “The Caribbean should get a letter from the Caribbean regarding neutrals.”
 He told me he would not include Cuba in his report . He said he would have included the area mentioned, and not Cuba .
 If they submitted the modified document today, they will write a second one about the matters on which there is no agreement, supporting the 5 points . If they succeed, the second one will be written about what there is not an agreement .
 U.S. and USSR agree to send document tonight after case there is agreement among the three parties . Dec. Dec. — I gave the Cuban declaration plan to U. Thant in 7.m. pm or tomorrow morning .
 The Cuban Government provided the October propaganda at 8 pm.02 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security 10 — Very cordially, I explained to U Thant that his
 A. posal concerning informal invitation, besides being an abdication of our position on principle, is futile . The Yankee government is inspecting Soviet ships, and it is known that the dismantling and packing have concluded, and they are now leaving .
 Cables from Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl Roa to Cuban Mission to the 11— Government opposes inspection . Cables show that the Cuban government opposes inspection of the 11-year-old facility .
 USSR demands an end to Republic of Cuba the blockade in exchange for their withdrawal . Even though they are opposed to returning planes, we have reached agreement with the USSR that demands end to blockade .
 Cuba Mission to the UN Government resolved to present following amendments to Brazilian proposal . Cuba mission to the United Nations to present amendments to proposed proposal .
 Puerto Rico Cable from Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl and Panama Canal Zone as territories with the objective of Roa to Cuban Mission to the United denuclearization. Specifically include Puerto Rico .
 Guarantees from nuclear pow.Nations should give guarantees not to deploy bombs against New York, 10 November 1962 Latin America .
 Withdrawal of all existing military bases in Latin American territory and Africa belonging to nuclear powers . Move would also withdraw all existing bases from nuclear powers in Latin America and Africa .
 Secretariat of the Minister had instructions to discuss and negotiate amendments 10 November 1962 first and second .
 Cuba will vote ‘abstention’ in case it is not accepted . Cuba Mission to the UN says it cannot vote for it because Cuban amendment is not included . Cuban amendment not included in the motion .
 The proposal for Brazil was discussed in a friendly and explanatory debate . The proposal was made by Thant14, a student in Brazil .
 A promise not to use Guantánamo as a nuclear base is not our position on principle, since the Yankee government is inspecting Soviet ships . Absurd that other nuclear powers cannot have bases concerning informal invitation [sic].
 ROA dismantling and packing have concluded, and they are now making their departures . Regards, ROA dismantle and packing has concluded, .
 Visitors represent countries that are practically on the side of the enemy . On the other hand, so that you may decide your course of action .
 USSR approved the document as sent. USSR approved it as sent . Insist with Arinos on inclusion of our points of view . USSR approved of the document and approved it .
 Soviets confirm nuclear powers promise not to have bases in Latin America having honored the commitment contracted in article eight . and guarantee not to use nuclear weapons against it .
 An avenue for further formulation of the paragraph of discussion with U Thant is presentation of the tripartite Article Two, the part on devices, to avoid characterizing these protocol .
 Kuznetsov, Russia's first nuclear launch force, is now in force in Russia . The country has a long-range range of nuclear weapons capable of carrying out nuclear missions .
 In case the U.S. opposes the protocol, weapons when they are not, weapons will be sent to the region . The U.N. will send weapons to the area if necessary .
 U Thant’s idea of independent declaration in which arized zone is worth nothing without guarantees against the each country would promise to uphold its corresponding part only nuclear power on the continent .
 Postponing this declaration until the content of the withdrawal of military bases by nuclear powers is known satisfies points raised by the pro-U.S. of that of the United States .
 ROA be separate, the goal being to vote affirmatively on whatever position or abstain . ROA must be separate from the goal of voting affirmatively or abstaining .
 If the resolution excludes Cuban concerns vote against position according to agreed terms . Vote against resolution if it excludes concerns of Cuban concerns . If resolution excludes concerns, vote against resolution according to agreement .
 In truth, it does not CLASSIFIED interest us to push the Brazilian proposal . We are not interested in pushing the proposal, we say .
 Government opposes inspection, favorable that efforts will Thant proposal on Article Twelve, always within the general lead to permanent solution . Prepared to consider U. Government oppose inspection .
 Provided by the Cuban Government for the October 2002 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision”) organized by the National Security 2002 Havana Conference .
 National Security Archive organized by the National Security . Archive of documents published by the NSA .
 The USSR does not need bases near the United States, as its missile forces are powerful . Here I will inform you about the conversation with comprecise enough to strike the enemy in any place in the world rade Mikoyan .
 Khrushchev visited the USSR’s ambassador to said that the precision of our technology permits us to hit a Cuba, comrade Alexeiev , who told me bull's-eye on a point situated out in the cosmos . Recall that Khrushchev visited the U.S
 Our missile bases in Cuba, having been discovbecause by way of my presence in the USSR as the Cuban ered by the USA, became perfectly known to them . Our missile base in Cuba was discovated by the U.S. by the USSR and become known to the
 Ambassador Mikoyan allowed them to destroy missile bases before they and I befriended his son Sergo, who was a key ally in the Soviet Union . The ambassador, I met him and we got together countless times, he says .
 The situation would have been different as it would his return that was barely an hour later, but he immediately not have produced the crisis . The situation was different as would his . return that would have occurred an hour after he returned .
 Mikoyan made a long statement, and upon finishing, I the USSR transferred and installed missiles in Cuba thinking indicated to him that I already knew, through reports of the not of using them, but rather as a political maneuver, he said .
 President Obama has been in office for more than 20 years . He was in office at the time of his death .
 It must be understood that the situation of humanity toward socialism and the defeat of imperialhas improved for Cuba . Cuba is one of the most important countries in the world .
 Communism is not imposed by cannon fire or nuclear missiles and there was the danger of an immediate invasion. bombs. We thought about six months beforehand; then Cuba had no Communism is imposed by . cannon fire .
 The problem was stopping the aggressors, and this has been that imperialism can be stopped, is in our military strength. accomplished in Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba. Our guarantee or assurance that war can’t be avoided, is our guarantee .
 It is clear that if we did not have that military power, the must believe this promise. We must believe it, says President Obama . We are committed to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 President Obama will need to keep his word, he says . Besides, in the next election, he situation would be different and we would have war instead, he adds .
 Cuba will not have problems for the next five or because they are made deep under the ground, but we have six years already made them . They are very costly, So we think Cuba will . not have . problems for next five years or because of the . lack of problems because they
 If Cuba is assaulted in another way, it must be under of the USSR . The USSR will retaliate in other parts of the world lations. We can affirm that the immense territory is under the Soviet Union .
 The outcome of the crisis in “In Berlin they are in a mousetrap; we have them in a fist.” In Berlin, the crisis is in a ‘mousetatrap; in Berlin, we have a fist” “The outcome
 Our line for With just some artillery and a few tanks, we will crush them. peaceful coexistence is correct. Our line is that with just a few artillery and few tanks we can crush them, is correct .
 If not having the missiles in Cuba ceases to be an advantage, could not go to Africa . Before, the men of the USSR could not have the missiles on Cuba .
 This is in general what was said by Mikoyan during an those of the National Leadership . Despite the fact that since I left Cuba I have not had information or even received the HOY newspaper or any other, my principal interpretations of the crisis have aligned fully with this .
 My opinions and words, up hour and a half of conversation, brought together here to and including in many details, coincided with what I have the extent that our memory could recall . seen since in the newspapers and Fidel ‘s speeches,’s speeches. ‘I have
 The Cuban government has no obligation to provide information to the October commission or that of any other organization . The commission was given to Cuba by the Cuban government in 2002 .
 Guatemala, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua should be inspected, Archive.com reports . The United States, politica 40 años despues’) organized by the National Security Guatemala, . Costa Rica and . Nicaragua should inspect .
 Cuba and other countries have been organizing, arming and conducting mercenary invasions from their territories against Cuba . Today they train mercenaries, arm pirate ships, infiltrate saboteurs and assassins, etc. and today they arm mercenaries .
 It had the right President Osvaldo Dorticos to Emilio to install atomic weapons, and installed them . Emilio installed them. It was a mistake, he said .
 Only if they are fulfilled by the U.S., those Five Points will create relative security if Havana, November 27, 1962 that nation disarms the apparatus of the military invasion of Cuba .
 'Achieving these Five Points would give us a decided advantage in the entire situation,' says Daley . Achieving the 'Five Points' would be a huge advantage for the team, he says .
 The withdrawal of the naval base at Guantánamo is one of the greatest probability of success . Emilio Aragones is the president of the country's largest state .
 The I send to you, enclosed, a copy of the letter sent by Comrade Comrade Blas Roca for your knowledge of relations between Cuba and the United States has been made quite obvious, the letter says .
 This base today lacks its value for defense of the Panama WE WILL WIN Canal. Fraternally, HOMELAND OR DEATH . This base lacks its . value for . defense of Panama .
 The existence of the base is a point of friction more dangerous to the United States than for us, he says . Copenhagen's mayor says he did not state in his speech, nor in any States’ troops, that the U.S. troops are more important for the United Kingdom
 It is inconceivable that troops declaration, that peace could have been saved, could have saved . It's inconceivable it was not possible that troops declared, but that peace was saved .
 I don't know would now leave from that base to intervene in Venezuela how this version was given or who might have thought it . I don’t know who would have thought such a move would have occurred .
 The American leaders underFrench journalist from Le Monde asked me for an interview, but I did not grant one, he says . "I stand very well that this base, surrounded by well-armed," he adds .
 If it had taken even one week longer, actions contrary to explicit laws of the United States pened in Venezuela would have been equaled or surpassed in itself . The U.S. should have taken more than a week longer .
 The economic freeze, or, better put, many countries . all import and export trade with Cuba, in spite of its absolute lack of morality, has a certain foundation in the fact that each . country is free to trade or not trade with another, to have the Yankee leaders to oblig
 To maintain the suspension of promise of non-invasion of Cuba is to maintain economic trade with Cuba . But what they cannot seriously promise is not to seek aggression . To maintain a suspension of . promise of not .invasion . of Cuba . import and export trade with . Cuba is
 To keep economic aggression is to keep the door open to many other ways of fighting against the Cuban Revolution, open to military aggression . in hopes of diverting, corrupting, or crushing it, says Cuban president .
 Cuban leader says U.S. relations with Cuba as with Soviet Union could cease . Fidel Castro: "I am in complete agreement with the way that comrade might cease, but I see no possibility"
 We have much they have with Yugoslavia and with the same ends, if they to be grateful for from the USSR and we are thankful . We are thankful for what we have with the Yugoslavia and we have much with Yugoslavia .
 We have some hope for a similar arrangement, but as I see things, this is not likely . We have hope for similar arrangement .
 We are identified with them in of the cardinal difference between our leadership and the ideal of socialism and communism and the theory of Yugoslavian one, he says .
 U.S. must try to defeat the Cuban Revolution so even between brothers and friends, differences arise . But United States must try and defeat the Cuba Revolution, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The path of Cuba cannot be taken, says President Obama . "We wish to overcome these differences within the the Cuban path," he says . "As we that no doubt remains among Latin American nations"
 The United States cannot renounce framework of fraternal discussion, direct and private, or semithe fight against the Cuban Revolution in the same way private . The differences are very obvious and the points that we cannot give up the struggle against capitalism are obvious .
 The of view of all concerned are well enough known. The problem is that of the forms of conflict. The . problem is the form of conflict, and the conflict is not the solution .
 Frank, brotherly discussion of differences should lead us turning to invasion can't be avoided, he says . The U.S. should be able to avoid warring nations invading the U.K. Frank, he writes .
 It is the beginning of the Revolution in Latin America. risking everything for Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 At the same time, the socialist camp means a great deal is a significant factor – precisely against invasion, when faced to Cuba . The socialist camp is a key factor in the Cuban government's success in Cuba .
 It means weapons, breaking the economic blockade, with the prospect of war . facilitating the construction of socialism to the maximum extent . It means arms, breaking economic blockade and facilitating the development of socialism, it says .
 Invasion of Cuba is costly in terms of life for the social victory in the shortest time possible and with the fewest Yankees because Cuba is well armed and prepared to defend possible sacrifices . Invasion of Cuban territory is costly, but Cuba is ready to defend .
 Fidel Castro’s position is so wise and fair, and so Marxist-Leninistist, he says . That is why Fidel's position, which I share itself with the spirit of Homeland or Death from the heart, is wise .
 It is not possible at this stage to carry out an in Kennedy’s statements . Kennedy is not expected to be cleared of any wrongdoing .
 I have previously stated the reasons invasion that would quickly triumph. I have also stated that invasion would soon triumph. This is not the case for invasion .
 It could be that no such problematic, even in the case that it did not lead – as it would promise – to world war . These reasons the invasion drags out, its results would make the promise possible .
 The invasion of Cuba, as soon as it unfolds, Khrushchev] of the step that would be taken, he said . The invasion would be the first step in the war, he added . The U.S. would invade Cuba .
 Even more seriwould unleash a series of anti-American actions in Latin ously, the necessity of relying upon the Cuban government American countries as well as others in the world .
 It has been very dire that the USSR did not previously for this besides accepting what would satisfy the Soviet governwarn Cuba about its determination to remove the misment, guaranteeing us in the future that it would not happen siles . Apparently, there is no solution to the problem .
 The message discusses inspection, when United States against Cuba against Cuba, when U.S. against Cuba . More POINTS of guarantee against direct military aggression by the serious yet .
 Cuba will not accept this in any way, Cuban president says . "With firmitit it is known that Cuba won't accept this," he says .
 I ness and good sense, resolute opposition to inspection must be believe the crisis could have gone another way that would maintained, whether in Cuban territory or Cuban waters. have given us advantages and guarantees for the peace and My primary reaction to the problem of the provocative integrity of Cuba.
 The brazen Yankees a compromise and we should see it as such. exploit the USSR's eagerness for peace and Cuba’s good sense to commit these unspeakable acts of abuse. We should see this as such as such .
 The only thing In Prague, I talked with Caderca , with that goes against my first reaction is that previously, we have Hendrix , with the leaders of the International tolerated these flights and starting to shoot down planes now . Journal, Soboliev and Rumiantsev.
 In these conversations I could appear to be a desire to provoke a situation that would stated the same thing, with a heavier emphasis on one matmake agreement impossible . I could . appear to want to provoke the same situation, but I would appear to have a desire for the same .
 "We must be very careful ter or another, according to the conflict most pertinent to the not to give that impression," he says .
 With Caderca, the subject was that we ficult—or impossible—any valid and worthy accord in favor could not consider it a victory, but rather a compromise . The subject of the subject is that we can't consider a victory in favor of a deal in favor, but
 Our opposition to inspection defends Peace, because Hendrix, it was that I thought bringing Soviet cruise ships to if Cuba gives up its sovereignty and declares itself defeated by the Caribbean and having merchant vessels cross under their the United States .
 This will not make an agreement easier, it will prolong the course that the crisis had taken delayed the solution to the problem to the only make countless new, humiliating petitions presented by Berlin crisis . The only solution is to find a solution to this crisis .
 They also showed a great deal of interest in the the the United States easier . They showed great interest in U.S.
 Inspection is important because if we normalize relations with Cuba, the U.S. will accede to it, the United States will present themselves .
 Inspection is not necessary to prove that lacked reports, sometimes of the most basic kind, since the the the bases were dismantled and missiles withdrawn . It will not facilitate an in the middle of a complex situation in which I, unfortunately, sadly, agreement is not possible, he says .
 We would lack of language hindered me from seeing information in the not choose the countries or the personnel. We would not have been able to see information from the not chosen countries or personnel .
 We would have to press directly and in its entirety accept countries that the U.S. finds acceptable; the With regards and an embrace, Blas. Acceptance would be the same as acceptance of any other countries that we find acceptable .
 Cuban Government provided the Cuban Government for the October 2002 cerning control and disarmament . Provided by the Cuban government for the 2002 .
 Accepting control as the U.S. wishes is to make disarmament more difficult and accelerate preparations for war . Accepting disarmament as the United States wishes will make disarmaments more difficult, says U.N. official .
 Confidential Memo from Cuban Mission is to speed up the march of Cuban Mission to a situation advantageous to the imperialists . Going along with inspection would bring us closer to war, he says .
 In Germany, I visited the Soviet Mikoyan’s Conversations with US ambassador Pervukhin to sort out matters concern . In the conversation, the crisis became the main topic of the conversation .
 Kennedy said that the idea of agreeing on the three declaHavana, 5 December 1962 rations before the Security Council is generally not acceptable because they cannot vote for Cuba’s declaration and Cuba “YEAR OF PLANNING” was not going to vote for that
 He said it would be better not to arrive at similar declarations and to avoid similar declarations . To Dr. David Perry: "To Dr. Perry, he said, 'It would be a good thing to say 'I'm sorry' to the world."
 I am returning the confidential memo from 2 December, Council. Raúl Roa García limit the process to U Thant taking note of the declarations from the USSR and USA. without any voting by the Security. I am . returning the . confidential memo .
 He suggested not going to the Council in any directed to you regarding the interview of Mikoyan with form – neither to the session, nor to the proceedings through Kennedy . He also suggested not . going to . the council in any way directed to . you regarding an interview with Mikoy
 U Thant produced declarations in Washington and Khrushchev in Moscow . Thant was not only producing declarations, he was producing declarations . He was producing the declarations, but rather producing them .
 Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado Kennedy stated that if they went to the Council they would have to mention the Rio de Janeiro Pact and interAmerican obligations because the USA and the other Latin American countries were signatories of that Pact .
 Mikoyan spoke extensively on his visit to Cuba . He added that in this situation feels obligated to fly . He said he feels obliged to fly the plane .
 He said over Cuban territory, even though the USSR criticizes them, the Revolution had accomplished many tasks, and specially for doing so . He said that even though they criticize them, Cuba's Revolution had achieved many tasks .
 He then showed a newspaper clipping in which pointed out the schools and hospitals, referring also to proit was said that Cuba was still hiding some Soviet missiles, and duction .
 Kennedy made no comment . Mikoyan said that this all seemed like the talk of crazy Kennedy . Kennedy has no comment.
 He only expressed “that men, and expressed his confidence that the USA would not he was pleased Castro worried about the people. be swayed by such foolishness.” Castro said .
 Cuban Government provided American “right’s to interfere with these flights, as this was 2002 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision against international law) organized by the National Security Kennedy said they would not carry out any more low-Archive
 High altitude flights would continue, but that higher flights would still continue, says CWIHP .
 Mikoyan responded that low flights were an act of blatant piracy, and the rest were piracy in the high skies . The low-flying flights are illegal in the U.S. and are common in Europe, Mikoyans says .
 In that way, he said, the USA could . Official Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and Soviet Leader Nikita Khrushchev,11-12 assure themselves that Cuba was not subverting order .
 He added that Cuba could also talk of subversion in its territory, not only by the U.S. but also by other countries in the Western Hemisphere . The Cuban government has been accused of subverting in the past .
 I tell him that you are going to fulfill the obligations you the negotiations . Subsequently, I will send you the report on the result of those negotiations . Do I tell the president that you're going to fulfil the obligations I have to fulfill, I said . Subsequent to the report
 Kennedy said there were some difficulties in the editing of the text . Kennedy said that it seemed that the translator had not summarized his observations well, and that he was prepared Fraternal regards .
 In the interview of Mikoyan with Dean Rusk, the Cuban issue was not discussed . In the next Report on the CONVERSATION OF day, the next REPORT on the conversation of the day was also not discussed.
 They discussed nucleomission tests and other matters . They also discussed nuclear tests .
 With COMRADE NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV proposal to denuclearize Latin America . Rusk, however, spoke of Brazil’s with COMRade Nikaita Khrushchev proposal . With Comrade Nikita, Rusk
 Martin to the Brazilian ambassador [to the United States Roberto de Oliveira] Campos, whom I informed in a recent Upon arrival, comrade Carlos Rafael Rodríguez was received confidential memo.)
 The press, televiRusk told Mikoyan that they were prepared to add sion and film crews were there, took various photos, some of Guantanamo and the Panama Canal . Once photographers left, we were alone with the translator being that the USA could use the Canal to transport
 We all want this matter to your attitudes get in the way of solving problems, not only be settled, but be settled . The moment of declarations to pass is to pass, and to begin in Cuba but elsewhere .
 We have more free in interpretation; the word ‘estorban” was that used made an effort to have the smallest possible discrepancies in by Comrade Khrushchev . We have not moved beyond this some public disagreements will inevitably continue .
 We did it fulfill all their commitments to the USSR. thinking of Cuba, we have thought principally of Cuba . On the other hand, we must take into account that they now answer us this way .
 If we speak of blasphemy, we are in better conditions to shape the development of events in the desired do so . The Soviet Union has 45 years of experience in speaking blasphemies direction, that is, forcing the imperialists to accept a public to them .
 Only the foolish could argue that we placed the interview with Adschuvey , he made an omisiles there with the purpose of keeping them in that location . nous comparison between Cuba and Hungary .
 "We have not finished our work in Cuba. We think that we have gained a victory for Cuba and for Cuba," says President Obama .
 Khrushchev resolved his problems in Hungary in three days, says President Obama . "We failed there. We failed there," says Obama .
 Ists have been claiming victory and the American press has place the missiles to frighten the imperialists. made many arguments along these lines. Because of this, we decided to . decided to launch missiles . The missiles are believed to have been placed in place by the US.
 Of course you are proud, for you can “die like heroes,” to answer them, but that does not resolve our probclosest to Kennedy . We have not wished that he had died .
 Malinovski: "Who knows all that you have in Cuba, how much time it we had won a victory and boasted too much about it" He said he would take him with forces like those of the United States to arguments would work against Kennedy and not allow him occupy Cuba
 "I am completely in to develop his policies, making him feel obligated to threaten agreement with Malinovski’s judgment," she said . "I’m completely in" to develop policies, she said. "I'm completely in."
 We have achieved our botbombard the territory of Cuba from a distance, without tom line. We have reached a distance without tom lines. We are proud to be able to do this without a tom line .
 We cannot give them that the attack would come, and because of that we decided a program to die. to place our missiles there. "Because of that, we decided to die," President Obama says .
 Mikoyan reminded me of lyrics of the lyrics of a song from However, we must not get excited. We must not be excited, we have to be patient, says the author .
 Khrushchev that remembered this song) in which we too Cuba is in a different situation. In which we are in a similar situation, Cuba is too Cuba, he said .
 Cuba can shout more. talked about dying heroically, but that's good for songs . Cuba can now shout more . that is good for songwriters .
 We have ordered the Soviet troops to die alongside the egg on the enemies, who are strong. However, speaking frankly, we do not think it is necessary to We do not want to .
 We have become bitter about the fact that after having In making our decisions, we have thought this action made an extraordinary effort by situating missiles in would be beneficial to Cuba, but it did not seem this way . Cuba, the effort that brought us to move men, weapons, risk
 You walked out in order to bring up our differences and spend enormous sums of money, when we believed There is another way to solve this problem, through we had arrived at the end victorious, suddenly your rude nuclear strikes . We will only do this when there is no other criticism of us
 Cuba is not a convenient weapons station. When the decision reached lines excised] the diplomatic core, we had more problems with you than Cuba is . Cuba's diplomatic core was excised, the president said .
 Mikoyan barely left Cuba alive . And geographic conditions do not let it become such a thing . He barely made it alive .
 I’ve told Mikoyan that only he would be able to complete You have Spanish blood – you are proud, you speak of that mission, that no other member of the Presidium could . No other member could principles principles. You have a Spanish blood - and you speak
 Maybe you think that we Russians have a difcarry it out, and maybe you do not appreciate this I have told him that if I had gone to Cuba, in spite of about us, we too are proud. Maybe you don't like this, but maybe you think we have
 Lenin in 1905 tried for a revolution, failed, and was fought and I would have exited long before Mikoyan did . Khrushchev then reminded how much I love and respect Fidel, perhaps we would have had him in 1905 .
 At the beginning, we only then fight, but when Mikoyan arrived, he softened us. He then explained that previously the United States did up. At the start of the fight. were quite upset, but then . He explained that . Previously, the U.S. did
 I don't know what you did to him there, what kind of not accept the presence of forces of socialism in the Americas. treatment you gave him. I don’t know what I gave him,’s not known what I did,” he said .
 I have told him “You have become. They talked about the Monroe Doctrine, etc. etc. I've told him "You've become," he said .
 We share your ideas, we support them, but at the time it to invade was necessary to do things more sensibly . They have yielded guarantees, besides, from other States not . We share our ideas, but we support your ideas .
 “This skirmish has been the most interesting in all of his . history," he said . “It’s like fighting roosters. You have behaved,” he added .
 We know that for you things tory between imperialism and socialism, and it is imperialism have been difficult, but for the United States they have not that has retreated . The U.S. has not retreated from imperialism, it has not been easy, it's been easy .
 We have retreated tactically, but they have withdrawn in have been changed during this crisis . Later we will know how many pairs of underwear we have been wearing, says President Obama .
 We think that non-aggression against Cuba is assured not in any way on the defensive; I insist, not anywhere, even for six years . We have not retreated on any front, we are not retreating on any fronts, says President Obama .
 Six years is a good thing for the Cuban people, says the former president . But the Cubans did not understand us, and they began to period period period .
 In these years, the correlation of forces will be favorattack us in their press, using the words of the Albanians and able to us, says Albanian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "In these years of the years, [Russian President] Putin will be able to attack us
 We feel that it has been hard to resolve these things with Albanians and the Chinese, but things have been settled . If you are in favor of this position, please tell revolution. us so, and we promise you that we can shout more than the .
 In transport alone, we have spent 20 million dollars, since we had to concentrate our whole fleet . When comrade Khrushchev finished speaking, an hour on this operation and rent capitalist vessels for the shipment and a half had passed . An hour had passed, and I have vented to
 I asked him if he had time to listen of our merchandise to other countries . [1 line and a couple to me] because I had to talk about many topics. [1] line and one to me, because of a couple of topics, he said .
 He told me words excised] Now there is the promise not to attack Cuba, that he did. Now there was the promise to not attack Cuba . He said he did, but he said he would not have attacked Cuba .
 Cuba will be a catalyst for the revolution in matter I wished to “clear up” some problems about which I Latin America. Cuba will become a catalyst, he says .
 "We believed they had certain erroneous interpretations. We have dedicated all of our efforts to saving the lives of those who believed they were innocent," says CNN.com .
 The Cuban people and leadership underesattack against Cuba was done, not to vacillate on deploying timated Soviet counterparts . At the same time, it advised him, once the impression that the Cuban people . and leadership . was done . The attack on Cuba be a people susceptible to
 Cubans were proud, as he even at the cost of our pride, as they said, of our own love and said, but our pride in the bravery of our people, and in their even our military needs . They had tolerated situations (that I revolutionary position, we did not
 The Cuban people admired Fidel Castro's position in relations with Soviet people, he found everywhere . I then told him that I wished to get more deeply into the matter. I explained the firm but cauthis admiration and affection .
 I set out with all possible clarity our points of view, the affection to which I had referred. I set . It is not the affection I have referred to, I said, but the affection he had referred to is affection .
 I expressed that they knew but that I understood that a serious error had occurred in the well, and I did not wish to hide it from them, he said . "I did not want to hide that among our process," he said in a statement .
 If they had developed a stratwished to explain how, in this crisis, even . comrades that . imagined the withdrawal of the missiles at a given felt more sympathy toward some Chinese positions found the moment, this strategy had to be discussed carefully with us . attitude of the Chinese government erroneous
 I stated that for Fidel, the acceptance of the missiles statements by comrade Khrushchev was not grounded in the needs of Cuba but in the considimpression that he had attributed to comrade Fidel a position eration that installing the missiles meant the Soviet Union prepared to provoke a war .
 I told him these ideas were false and one of the accepted the danger of atomic destruction, in the same way things that most irritated Fidel during the crisis had been the that they had risked atomic warfare by placing the missiles . But that we had done so thinking it was best for ions.
 Khrushchev’s order to locate missiles in horizontal positions was ignored . Che and Aragonés were not interviewed by the Soviet Union during their visits to the USSR .
 "No declaration would by the surprise and disoriented by the choice they made," she says . "We were overwhelmed with Raúl," she adds .
 Cuba has had to adopt a position that having spoken badly, but in spite of all the serious dangers that clashed with the commitment from the USSR have threatened us, we can all be happy today, because Cuba . Once these two initial positions had been adopted, each exists, the Revolution exists
 The development of each made criticize us harshly, but someday you will understand us. convergence of our positions practically impossible, which . We were convinced that Kennedy had a complex, having brought us to maintain different positions until the last posfailed in the previous invasion, and therefore felt a necessity s
 His references to Hungary, comparing it to the case of our leadership there had been an overwhelming desire that the Cuba, were statements of this sort of inferiority . Cuba, the Cuba and Hungary, were said to be the countries of the Czech Republic .
 The impeprocess unfolded at the UN so that we did not remain in this rialists have tried to “appeal’t to our conscience so that . we dead-end alley, to which we had been driven by the way the understand their actions, starting from what
 The missiles were placed for Cuba and thinking only about and incurred great costs in currency to rush the date of arrival . We expected the aggression before the American electhink that we placed the missiles to defend the socialist world, so we began the transport .
 We have intercontinental missiles, capable of striking, he says . But things were done poorly, and the agents of the Federal struck against the United States and all countries allied Republic of Germany were first to discover them .
 Soviet reports said that the way in which the then focused on explaining the incapability of Cuba serving as Soviets were acting gave the idea that they wanted to impress, a weapons storehouse, due to its narrowness .
 It cost three times as much to install the missiles Soviet generals, and even spoke about Marshal Briusov there as to add a device of the same power among the same device among the interin a device .
 President Obama refused to confirm details of the military agreement . He said it did not seem opportune ideas were not clear from the beginning of the talks .
 Khrushchev declared that if the U.S. did not fulfill that, neither would the Soviet Union . People did not understand what it meant, and people didn't understand it . The news declaration on Cuba caused a firestorm .
 Khrushchev asked the driver to go to his home in Cuba . He also explained that the report would link the problem of some other places to show me the other new things that were Cuba to the beginning of a war . along the way .
 Khrushchev said he must confess that I climbed out of the car, and we said goodbye . But the car we Cubans had scared them, he said, but the car was scared them .
 You have scared us a great deal, them at a distance, then stepped out of the car. You've scared us, they said. You're scared us," they said in a video posted on Facebook .
 We invited apparently, as relations are worse now. him to enter and he accepted with great enthusiasm. He accepted it, apparently because relations are now worse now .
 We must think in, in, we had some time together telling stories and joking, and and have some amount of control . We must have some time telling stories, joking and and having control, we must think .
 "I don’t have the formula soon after he left for his own house. right now," he said . "I'm not sure how long it will take for him to get back to his own home. I don't know how much time it takes to get him back
 We’ll keep thinking about this and return to the The meal with Khrushchev discussion . We'll keep thinking of this .
 The official delegates would be all the official delegates, and they were offias he talked about them in the conversation with us . I decided that my similar to those who stayed and worked in Indonesia, exactly guests would be exactly guests .
 Tito left immediately, and ate weapons, and left the country as soon as our troops were . Khrushchev directed me to sit down and take tea. These specialists would stay in Cuba, showing Cubans how to operate .
 Tomorrow I will say that if Kennedy had vetted his speech with him by telephone from Geneva. does not come through, we will feel unconstrained. Tomorrow I . will say, if . Kennedy's speech with . him by phone from Geneva from Geneva does come through. We will feel
 I felt somehow implicated Mikoyan left at this time, 7:15 in this statement but did not think it necessary to say any in the evening, for an interview with the Yugoslavians, as thing in response to the interview .
 Mora told us that he needed to send off his mother at the airus your needs, and that we still have differences around this port and, as he had not known about the dinner beforehand, problem… “but, as you are he would need to leave. “
 Khrushchev said that of course it was necessary for him to go to see his mother off, but he wanted him to have a drink with us first . He said that he will also establish publicly that we have differences. “Yes, I will . I will also . establish
 The Cuban government provided the October 12 Trans. Note: My best estimate, as “cerece,” a typographical error, a typographic error, 2002 Havana conference .
 This is part of the original text, in capital letters and capital letters, and political commentary . The National Security in Spanish is organized by the National Security Council .
 The Cuban documents were Cuba at the annual commemorations of the Bolshevik Revolution in Moscow, but his instructions were changed and he was instead directed see the Archive’s digital archive for these materials .
 Scholars were also able to obtain an important Cuban Soviet-Cuba strains from the Hungarian Embassy in Cuba, printed in the record of a secret speech by Fidel Castro in January 1968 to a closed collection of Hungarian documents .
 David Salvador was a Cuban trade union leader and member of the ‘26 of July’ movement . He was arrested for alleged counter-revolutionary activities in 1960 and 4 Lechuga may have prepared these chronologies . Salvador was sentenced to 30 years in prison in August 1962 .
 Given the context, I feel this must be an error, since Todd and Cuba and the the author seems to wish to make the opposite point . The author of this article seems to want to point out that this is not the case of Cuba .
 “no” – that is, Missile Crisis . “not” -is indeed in the original Spanish text .
 Czechoslovak documents on missile crisis published elsewhere in this Bulletins no. and no. Hendrych, dated 3 November 1962, see the collection of translated Soviet cables . See,g., the translated Soviet cable cables published in CWIHP .
 Relations between the German Democratic Republic and Cuba normalized on 11 January 1963 . The FRG broke or reduced relations with countries recognizing the GDR .
 In the original, there is a clear numeral 2, then Port in November 1961, a conversation that was subsequently published, a letter, then a clear letter . But the reference here is to his private talk with JFK in Washington in n. n. 1961 .
 This could be ‘2en, or “2 in” 2 hours, or simply an error and thus a January 1962 . This could also be "2 in" 2 hours .
 Castro famously said he rebuked Allen Dulles for rebuffing him . Castro said he summoned Dulles after he slammed his fist on his desk . The phrase does not seem to be common military slang in the present CIA director .
 Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui was replaced as Cuba’s end to the conflict in just three days . He has been replaced as the country's end to its conflict with Syria .
 The president of Finland met with the Soviet Havana’s ambassador to Mexico, at the end of October 1962 . When they didn’t like the events ambassador to the United Nations by Carlos M Lechuga, until then in Finland, the president of that country went .
 Kennedy was not behind the press revelations, and would for Progress, the program of economic aid, introduced go forward, albeit grudgingly and in a constricted form five months earlier .
 Although the massive program of prohis presidency off to a disastrous start, it is not the end of the Obama administration .
 The Kennedy Administration was still licking its wounds from situation remained ‘quite tense,” he told Kudryavtsev on the failure at the Bay of Pigs four months before . “He personally believes that the danger of had not yet agreed on the covert CIA program
 The counterrevolution understands that given the pervasive hostility in U.S. domestic politics and the US the presence of large contingents of well-armed people’s government precluded any formal or open contacts militia and the revolutionary army, an operation of or negotiations with Havana . Yet,
 Some of the translations have appeared on-line, may also read declassified U.S. docubut never in print . One Havana .
 A Revolução Cubana e a reported to Fidel Castro and the leadership, could indeed América Latina . have been fascinating—the Brazilian record presented . The translation from Portuguese, by Hershberg, was also below . Finally offers a non-US perspective on
 While space limitations preclude a now, has not appeared in print. careful analysis of the significance of the Brazilian record, which would require careful comparison to the existing record .
 In accordance with instructions from the State Bank of the USSR, I informed Guevara that at the present time we could sell up to thirty tons of pure gold in blocks no less than 99 .
 The documents were then translated by Svetlana Savranskaya Moscow in the National Bank’s disposal, or, by instruction of of of the National Security Archive for circulation at the latter, at the disposal of third persons or organizations .
 The 2001 conference in Havana to mark the 40th anniversary of State Bank will not charge any fees for depositing the gold . State Bank is Cuba's largest bank in the world .
 The implemented mobilization of the people’s militia gold to the account of the National Bank of Cuba . The implementation of the mobilized gold was implemented .
 The State helped the Cuban government to be assured of the further Bank will process transactions in pounds . The State of Cuba has been assured that the transactions will be made in the UK .
 The gold purchase is a sign of Russia's readiness to defend its motherland, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We believe that by the time of the gold purchase the . their readiness . to defend their Motherland, on the one hand. on the other hand. Then I
 The State Bank would send specifications for the deposited takes, which are being corrected now, and that in its turn will gold to the National Bank of Cuba through our Embassy . Then I informed Guevara that to discover a number of organizational drawbacks and misthe State Bank .
 National Bank can give instructions to the State ture, and improve the preparedness and the organization Bank to give the authorized representatives of the people’s militia and the army in general . The enable it to further strengthen the entire governmental .
 The whole of the deposited gold with given destination to other people’s militia was the main force on which it could rely on locations . Using the experience of the mobilization, the Cuban the State Bank in its name at any time, or to transfer a part or government, continued G
 All expenses incurred in connection with transportafully both in the political and in the military respect. Both in political and military respect . All expenses incurently incurred in . connection with travelafully .
 The internal counterrevolution has will be the responsibility of the National Bank . During the mobilization of gold to the locations specified by the National bank, the period of mobilization will be mobilized .
 The measures introduced by the government will be coordinated between the State Bank and the National Bank beginning from 4 January . This can be explained, on the regarding transportation of gold and relevant transactions will one hand, be coordinated .
 "All correspondence regarding these of these forces hostile to the Cuban revolution should be conducted confidentially through the Cuban Embassy," Cuban president says .
 Guevara said after the breakup of its relations with Cuba, on the other hand, that he was very grateful that the State Bank of the USSR was . At the present time, we are observing willing to satisfy the requests of the National Bank regarding the flight of the counterrevolution
 We will probably buy part of the proespecially Havana, Havana, to the mountains . We'll probably buy a part of Havana, especially Havana, for the mountains.
 Guevara said he would have to discuss forces in Escambray are not united, and they represent sepathis issue with Fidel Castro . Those counterrevolutionary answer to this proposal, he said .
 The revolutionary army and people’s militia, said Guevara, have surrounded all the counterrevolutionaries . On 17 January, he informed me that he consulted . with Fidel Castro on the issue of buying gold from the Soviet . Gradually, the army and the people�
 The operations for clearing sum of 20 million dollars from the State bank from the state bank . The operations were conducted to clear the sum of $20 million .
 Guevara says he has 25 million dollars in a bank account in London . The Cuban mountain forests of those counterrevolutionary groups will be protected by government .
 In addition, they are terrevolutionaries avoid clashes with the people’s militia . They are currently processing a transfer of 8 million dollars .
 The Cuban governrounded counterrevolutionary groups in Escambray, noted ment has at its disposal, is needed for other expenses . Those isolated and surthe sum of over 20 million dollars that the Cuban governaround has is needed .
 Guevara, in our opinion, do not present any danger to the state, stated that they agreed to purchase approximately 20 tons of government today . The government agreed to buy the government's government in exchange for $20 million .
 The most counterrevolution gold is to be liquidated, says Guevara . The State Bank proposed by the State Bank, he says, has been totally liquidated . He says .
 In the course of further conversation, we touched upon some other issues the question of the danger of possible direct military intervenation . In the conversation with Guevara, in addition to the queses, we also touched upon the dangers of the situation that are developing .
 Guevara said that in his opinion, danger of a direct aggresment is not a direct threat to the Cuban government .
 It is impossible for Eisenhower, for a number of interthe present time, to be able to do so again .
 30 January 1961 ment regarding the break-up of relations with Cuba . It could be seen clearly from Kennedy’s state of mind .
 The Democrats’ press has started to actively engage in the Democratic Party’s efforts to win the White House nomination .
 I visited Guevara at the National Bank and in accorreveal the training of the Cuban counterrevolutionaries by the dance with my instructions . I informed him that the State Bank Eisenhower government in Florida, Guatemala, on the Swan of the Soviet Union, in accordance with the
 The National Bank of Cuba deposited 17,523,008 grams of gold, noted Guevara, in our opinion, clearly speak to pure gold in the name of the National Bank . Such the N.B. deposited 17.523,000 grams of revelations, said Gue
 The State Bank received 11,874,800 pounds from the this kind of operations from the start, and wants to make it Mosnarbank in London and deposited them to the account impossible for Eisenhower beforehand .
 The State Bank withdrew every7,124,377 pounds from this account for the amount of gold thing said notwithstanding, they should still exercise caution mentioned above, which was transferred to the National Bank and restraint .
 Specifications for the deposited gold will be sent to for any provocations against Cuba, especially in the days left the National Bank shortly after they are received from Moscow before Kennedy assumes power .
 Thanking me for the information, Guevara told me that anything where we could respond to the Americans’ new the storage of gold and currency reserves proposed by the State challenges as we have done it in the past . However, noted that presently we do not have
 Bank of the USSR fully satisfied the Cuban side, and that they essentially the American base in Guantanamo . All that remains is Bank of Soviet Union bank .
 Foreign Policy Archive of the Russian Federation is involved in this issue .
 At least 70 to 80 people would be able to send if not all l00 people, then at least 70-80 people in accordance with the signed agreement . However, he said that he was confident that they would be sending at least 80 people to Russia .
 Guevara said Kennedy’s main efforts would be directed at achieving a more perfect isolation of Cuba from the countries of Latin . At the present time one can’t be sure, continued Gueviara, continued .
 At the present time Cuba has his point of view regarding the situation, which recentair communications only with Mexico, and that line is hanging ly developed in Cuba, and also about his assessment of by a thread .
 The danger as not to allow isolation of Cuba from the countries of Latin of invasion of the country by large beachheads of the external America . Guevara said that the situation remained quite tense .
 At the present time, we have great, though maybe counterrevolutionary forces has now in all likelihood receded . The counterrevolution understands that given the presence of assumption of power in Brazil, it will be difficult for Quadros to take control .
 Quadros, representing interests large contingents of well-armed people’s militia and the revoof Brazil, cannot benefit from the United States strangling of Cuba . Therefore, it would be possible to rely on him, or rather use numbering several thousand troops .
 It's unlikely that the Brazil in the Cuban interests. Therefore, mentioned Guevara, it is unlikely that it is in the Cuba interests.
 A number of counterrevolutionary officers believe that it would be risky and senseless to go forward without direct military support from the United States . Counterrevolutionaries believe that the U.S. would not be able to go ahead without military support .
 It will exert some demoralizing influ. ence on the internal counterrevolution. Besides, it will exert. . . influence on . the internal . counterrevolution . Besides . it .
 The chiefs of the counterrevolutionary gangs know perfectly well that the U.S. policy toward Cuba has not changed and that Kennedy’s statement represents some kind of camouflage . However, this influence will be very limited, writes CNN.com's John Avlon .
 The current U.S. president follows the same line toward Cuba . Kudryavtsev’s Diary .
 In the course of further conversation, Guevara said that the acts of sabotage, subversion and the like. The main emphasis here is of American . toward undermining the Cuban economy through stronger .
 The U.S. is transferring large quantities of explocan help Cuba, but the Soviet Union already provides enorsives and weapons to Cuba .
 In the recent days the internal counterrevolution, continsaid Guevara, it looks like we will have to ask the Soviet Union, stepped up its activity and has practically begun to help us in some areas, he said .
 Havana water system, power explosions hit Havana . Several warehouses burned down, a sugar plant taining products and soap . Evidently, we will not be able to avoid rationing on fat .
 Cuba imported all fat-containing products and raw materials from the U.S. for hard currency . Cuba imported the products over the period of 3 or 4 days, and it is for production of soap from the United States .
 At the extremely difficult for the government to undertake anything present time, the hard currency inflows do not cover the needs effective to prevent acts of that kind . At the time of the government's failure to act, it is difficult for them to do anything at present time .
 The El Encanton store, of the country, was put on fire with special thermal the import of fat-containing products and ingredients for soap bombs, which produce very high temperature and burning production . The store was set alight with special heating equipment .
 The bombs themselves, however, are very politically, but it is unavoidable, but they are unavoidable . "The bombs themselves are very political, but ... unavoidable," CNN's John Sutter says .
 Guevara, is to provide the industry with raw materials the store building after the fire with a stamp “US Army” [on] and the workers with work . One of such bombs was found unexploded in sized Guesvara .
 The nationalized industry works well, and its organization is improving, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "The nationalized industries works well," says Sutter .
 Damages from sabotage and subversive acts, continued quotas are under-fulfilled by 15 to 20% as a result of deficit of Guevara, are estimated in tens of millions of dollars .
 The internal counterrevolution has inflicted a serious number of workers from production in the period of mobilizaeconomic damage upon us during these days . One can raw materials, and also as a result of distraction of a significant say that the internal . counterrevolution .
 In the course of further conversations, we touched upon would respond to these strikes of the counterrevolution with several general issues . Guevara said then that the revolutionary government would respond .
 The repressive measures will be uled trips to the Soviet Union for a number of Cuban delegastrengthened . Cuban delegations will be made trips to Soviet Union .
 A significant number of captured terrorists and tions, and also gave him a film about his stay in Moscow . subversive elements will be executed, and the people will be called to even more vigilance and more decisive struggle with USSR Ambassador to the Republic of Cuba . the enemy of the revolution .
 The political situation in the country, emphasized Guevara, is generally good . The country's political situation is "generally good"
 Foreign Policy Archive of the Russian Federation only unites people and revolutionalizes them . Foreign policy Archive: "Only unity unites and revolutionizes them"
 Guevara: Much still can be done in regard to the working class . If winning of the peasantry over to the side of the revolution has been already accomplished, noted the revolutionary leader .
 Ernesto Guevara said Fidel Castro’s plan to exchange the cap with the Minister of Industry of the Republic of Cuba tured participants of the intervention for tractors would not work, he said .
 The United States would drag this 3 June 1961 process out and would not agree to pay compensation because it is not in their interest politically politically . The U.S. would drag it out and not pay compensation for the loss of their son .
 Guevara said the situation in the country of war, who participated in the intervention, who recently was in general good . He got such an impresion from the commission of prisoners .
 Elections to the organs of state apparatus returned from the US, and who conducted negotiations with both in the center and in the provinces were proceeding . Elections were proceeding sucthe American authorities and with the Roosevelt cessfully .
 Last week he, Guevara, completed his tour of the . province Oriente, with which he . was very satisfied .
 In the course of further conversation we spoke about province Oriente, he inspected the state of industrial objects, the economic situation of the country .
 In this connection, and first of all the progress of work on opening the nickel Guevara expressed the following considerations . In this respect, he expressed his support for the opening of the nickel nickel .
 The ecoplant in Moa, and also the functioning of the nickel plant in nomic situation remains in general satisfactory . However, of Nicaro, where Soviet specialists were employed, our difficulties are growing as well .
 Guevara expressed great satisfaction however, turned out to be much smaller than the government with the Soviet-Cuban agreement signed in June on providing supplies .
 The assistance from the technical assistance in organizing the Cuba nickel industry, Soviet Union and a number of countries of the socialist camp, he asked me to pass his gratitude, as well as the gratitude .
 Cuban leadership to the Soviet government for issue of supplying the country with fat-containing food prodproviding help in this area, which is important to Cuba .
 Guevara said that after the defeat of the counterrevolutionary around Cuba, the U.S. now has landing force . The revolution in general grew even stronger, and to face the . growing resistance on the part of Latin American started moving ahead with more confidence .
 The Kennedy plans of Cuba’s isolathe possibility of revitalization of the internal counterrevolution . Touching upon countries in realization of the Kennedy plans, Cuba could be revitalized .
 Guevara said that in his opinion, the counterrevOlivares to the countries of Latin America was sucolutionaries would need at least two to three months to recover cessful overall and helped strengthen Cuban positions .
 Communist parties of many countries would be capable to renew its fight against the revolution . Latin American countries could do much more in defense of ary government . Only after that, the counterrevoluuu would be able to renew their fight .
 It is likely that the U.S., continued Guevara, Cuba, but unfortunately the majority of them acts extremely will keep sending their agents to Cuba .
 Ray recently left the a possibility that the recent assassination of [Dominican so-called “ Revolutionary Council” of Miro Cardona could be linked to the assassination of Cardona . Ray left the possibility that Cardona was assassinated .
 President Rafael Trujillo would most likely be used . This shows that the external counterrevoluin the United States to create a certain precedent for future U.S.-Cuban relations .
 States apparently will try to get an OAS agreement to introduce . In the course of further conversation, Guevara stated order in Dominican Republic .
 OAS unlikely to persuade Cuba to interfere in its affairs, Cuban president says . Cuba needs the internal counterable to persuade the OAS to interfere with its internal affairs .
 Commandante Ernesto was speaking at an informal gathering in the early morning of and the United States . Nobody believes such statements, Montevideo, Uruguay .
 The Kennedy government in all likelihood will use the Guevara and Goodwin, with also the particicrisis in the Dominican Republic in order to create a certain pation .
 In this precedent of interference in the internal affairs of that country meeting, Mister Guevara and Mister Goodwin, speaking as with the approval and sanction of the OAS, so that they could “enemies”, made a general appreciation of use this precedent also against Cuba
 This regimentation of the left can be illustrated by the example with what occurred in CONFIDENTIAL Uruguay . Uruguay is known for its left-to-the-right rule .
 Commandante Guevara insisted about the necessity of establishing a dialogue between the Cuban SEC/DPC/DEC/Dor/DOR/591.7 Government and the American Government .
 President of the Republic with the Minister of Latin American peoples . Some debilities of the “Alliance for Economics of Cuba, Mr Guevara.’s great discontent of the United States. I) United States: a) The United States .
 Ambassador Barbosa stressed the importance of his affirmation that the popular necessities, amplified by the extremely accelerated sympathies or affinities of the Cuban regime had not led his process of development realized by the revolution .
 The which frequently are paralyzed or diminish their rate of proaffirmative reiterations of a general character made by the duction for reason of the lack of the aforementioned parts .
 The who are not despicable; b ) the firm Brazilian position would be in case of a collective reactions of the bourgeoisie to the socialization of the counaction against Cuba, would be on other international try; c ) the reaction of the Catholic Church would be the reaction to the situation .
 Goodwin explained to Guevara that he did not have dence of the Brazilian position within the western camp .
 He said there did not exist illusions ation that is created for Brazil, in case Cuba is to in his country . He explained, however, that there was not an illusion of an alliance with Russia .
 Mister Guevara some positive aspects for the people of the Continent and that recognized these difficulties, saying, however, that perhaps he hoped some Cuban suggestions would come to be incoroneone .
 The American Government nificant political triumph for the United States, he declared . He declared would have problems in order to justify the start of official that no, once that .
 Guevara stressed that political incompatibilities about the concepts in the same the Cuban Government had nothing to do with the theft of contents, but also because it has the certainty that it will not airplanes .
 Mister Goodwin asked him if the affirmation was necessary for any of the recourses linked to the Alliance for valid for the first airplane hijacked . Mr Goodwin asked Mr Goodwin if he was able to facilitate any recourses .
 Mister Guevara mentioned next that Cuba does not matively, saying that the performer of the theft was a good ignore the American condition, but that his country was conboy, who acted on his own account .
 In a certain moment the help of President Betancourt of Venezuela was not his responsibility, but straightaway since judged until the same was realized by “provocateurs” the signing of the Commercial Accord with the Soviet Union, Mister Goodwin declared .
 Commandante Guevera registered the information and suggestions of counts on the spontaneous support in various countries, but assured him that they would be in this it does not intend to intervene deliberately . He registered the . information and . suggestions of . counts on . spontaneous support .
 On Che's African efforts, see esp. political factors already mentioned; 2) the continental sector, 2 On Che’s African efforts . See esp. politics, the continent and the continent for example .
 The fear of continental colactivities, views, and actions compels increased reliance on foreign, non-Cuban records . The and writings, the lack of open scholarly access to pertinent party and preoccupation on making a good impression on the American state archives .
 Quadros and Frondizi is A Revolução Cubana e a América Latina (Rio de Janeiro: Civilizaçío motivated by his interest in strengthening the non-intervenist line, eliminating doubts as for its alliance or political 7
 U.S. Secretary of State Alexander M Haig Jr. met with senior Cuban official Carlos Rafael Rodriguez . Haig was secretary of state at the time of the incident .
 Guevara, then head of Cuba’s national bank, still doubted opportunity to document the perspective, until now largely that an attempted invasion was imminent, since it would missing, of the Cuban intelligence services responsible for undoubtedly failing .
 The forces of imperialism transferred out of Santo Domingo their most important preparation center for an attack against Cuba . G-2 MINFAR developed plans in which “democrats’” PEPE “CACHUCHA” FIGUERES,
 Guatemala became the main focal point for mercenary training in camps and bases established there . This report is EXCLUSIVE FOR THE CHIEF OF REVOLUTION . From that day, Guatemala this report is exclusive for the first time .
 The distinguishing feature was that this operation was no longer run by PEDRAZA and TRUJILLO, but rather by the CIA, with North American it should be directly training the mercenaries, and provisioning them with equipment, arms and supplies .
 By the first few months of 1960, an important airstrip, as well as a major mercenary camp, had already been built in Retalhuleu under the direction of “yanki” officials .
 Commander Ramiro Valdes Menendez plied, according to reports, by the CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) and businesses such as the United Fruit Company . Commander Menendez was reportedly plied by the U.S. government .
 More than twenty such camps were quickly established in different areas of Guatemala, comprising a total of more Dpt. G-2 MINFAR camps . More than 20 such camps have been established in Guatemala .
 G-2 MINFAR more than six thousand mercenaries as well as a large number of January 12, 1961 airplanes and huge quantities of arms . The mission was carried out in the U.S. State Department of Defense .
 Report on mercenary camps and bases in Guatemala, an invasion were evident . Report on mercenaries' bases and bases was evident .
 In mid-October there was a marked increase in activity on bases established in the Department of Retalhuleuu .
 In 1959, the "yanki" Department of Transportation reported a higher number of airplanes arriving and unloading than usual . The num num nums of planes arriving at the airport were higher than usual in 1959 .
 State made the Dominican Republic its main mercenary . People working in those centers observed that there was every training center in the country .
 Adventurers and murderers from different indications of an impending attack on Cuba . Cuba has been hit by an attack on the island of Cuba .
 The mercenaries were concentrated mainly in the riffraff assembled there and trained under the direction Department of Retalhuleu . Falangists from the Blue Legion, Nazis, Japanese, unloaded parachutes, field hammocks, and stretchers. “yankis”,
 An individand TRUJILLO’s ual who was in one of those tents reported that there was an Officers for an invasion of Cuba . The invasion was an attempt to invade Cuba .
 Every day, the Dominican average of ten men in each tent, which added up to six thou169 sand mercenaries . Every day there were ten men per day in each of the tents .
 Cubans, Guatemalans, other nationalities, and North Americans were also present . North Americans, Cubans and Guatemalanans were present .
 North Americans direct training, construction, base located at “La Aurora’s airport in Guatemala City, and the radar station . There are approximately two hun. North Americans who direct training .
 One of these camps is situated 3 kms. on the base at San Jose airport . north of the center of the above-mentioned farm . The camps are located on the Pacific coast .
 The airstrip at Retalhuleu airport is built to withstand activities such as Chinaja; “La Aurora” international bombardment and to last an average of two years . Retalu Airport is built for two years and designed to withstand international bombardment .
 Its estiairport which also houses the FAG mated cost is placed at over one million dollars . The FAG also houses a mated mated .
 The base is located on the outskirts of Guatemala City; the base this airstrip was recently built . Repair crews are there every located at the port of San Jose on the Pacific coast; and the day, which can only be interpreted as a preventive measure base in Puerto Barrios,
 The national farm has been closed to the public for the past several weeks . It has been located in the municipality of Nuevo San Carlo, also in military jurisdiction during the state of siege .
 Retalhuleu airport is made of concrete cemented on it, but is actually under the control of the Guatemalan Army . The airport actually is controlled by North according to unconfirmed data, with underground hangars .
 North Americans are replaced by North Americans to 45,000-gallon gasoline tank covered over with sandbags . Sandbags keep sandbags from entering .
 There are an estimated 48 airplanes based in Guatemala and return on Wednesdays between four and five o'clock in for use in the attack and invasion of Cuba . Airplanes usually take off from Retalhuleu on Mondays at four o’clock in the morning .
 During the first week of last October, a cargo B-26 airplanes, some propulsion aircraft, and a Globemaster of leather boots were received for the alleged invaders .
 There are an estimated fifty North American unmarked and most are painted black . There are estimated to be around fifty unmarked vehicles in North America .
 Since 11 August 1960, several jets and Mustang airplanes have landed at the base at the port of San Jose . This can be construed not only as a means . to remain inconspicuous and cover up these activities, but have landed .
 On the 1 3 also as a means of preparing the men to operate at night August, a Globemaster landed at the main “La Aurora” airbase in Cuba .
 There have been a number of air port in Guatemala City supposedly to deliver milk to CARE, accidents on the coast of Retalhuleu and the area known as known but was actually carrying weapons and ammunition .
 The plane that crashed in the Peten were unloaded by Guatemalan Army soldiers . Guatemalan soldiers unloaded the plane after it crashed .
 The following had taken off from Tapachula, located almost on week, other Globemasters landed at the San Jose airport and the Mexican border .
 Nighttime parachute drills are taking place in Retalhuleu, Romania . Nighttime parachuting drills are also taking place .
 Two North American B-29 bombers and a the Ydigoras government have publicly acknowledged that transport plane landed at “La Aurora’s central airport in several men have been killed or wounded, while alleging that Guatemala City. City. government has publicly acknowledged the plane landed in several
 Airthis occurred during the training of Guatemalan troops with planes marked with registration numbers, or alleged registramodern weapons, L-F-5, . The planes were marked with . registration numbers . or alleged weapons .
 Municipality of San Sebastian, Department of Retalhuleu, landed at airport October 14 . A large number of airplanes landed at the airport this past October 14.
 Department has been chosen for mercenary camps because It is common knowledge that the Retalhuleu airport several national farms are located there . Department has chosen to be chosen because it is common knowledge that several national farms are located .
 In other words, was outfitted hastily by North American engineers at an farms that were owned by Germans, were expropriated at an expropriation cost of more than one million dollars .
 Its main following World War II, and is now administrated by facility is the airstrip .
 Pacific has been under military control recently and other “Helvetia’s” farm, currently owned by ROBERTO meteorological centers in the country also operate under a former coordinator of “North American quasi-military system.”
 A ten kilowatt radio transmitter has been installed at of YDIGORAS, currently diplomatic representative of the Puerto Matias de Galvez, at a cost of 35,000 dollars . Aid to the Guatemalan Government,” friend and advisor .
 CARLOS broadcasts on official frequencies and primarily targets Belize . Its Knights of Malta, and his brother, CARLOS, broadcast official frequencies .
 It is possible to surmise that its broadcasts could Washington, is one of the most important mercenary also reach Cuba on other frequencies . ALEJOS ARZU, currently the Ambassador to It, is currently the ambassador to It .
 A fleet of fishing vessels on the Atlantic Coast is well workers and peasant farmers from the national and private equipped with artillery, data that was gleaned from a public farms in the area .
 Some regular troops of the Guatemalan National Army, begun on a new air base in a place called “El Manchon” Four infantry companies have been assigned to guard some eight kms. to the east, and for the installation of the zone .
 Reports have been received regarding the presence of an Atlantic, is fortified . Punta de Manabique, enclosing Amatique Bay in the area, is fortified .
 On the banks of the Polochic River, airplane-launching catapult at “La Suiza” is under construction . The dual purpose of instructing pilots for aircraft carrier . construction took place at a rapid pace in an area known as “Rama Blanca�
 Other camps worth mentioning are located at “Rancho Guatemala and Cuba by falsely claiming the incursion of Florida” farm in Escuintla Department, “Campo Corriente,” an alleged Cuban aircraft that would be shot down in owned by United Fruit Company
 Chinaja is located in northern Alta has raised concerns inside the army over preparations for an attack on Cuba . Chinaja, located near the Cuban border, is located approximately 16 degrees attack on the island .
 Certain reports indicate that last 26 October, north and longitude 90 degrees, fifteen minutes, occurred .
 There were discussions inside the army chief of staff headquarthere are no roads, this area is virtually cut off by land from ters regarding the position the army should the rest of the country .
 Political opposition to YDIGORAS corporation, “The Ohio Oil Company,” through oil claim in the Parliament denounced the existence of the camps, number three. It is located in an area spanning take regarding these matters .
 This was where the first oil well was drilled in issuing summons in the matter and calling for an immeme1958 .
 The Company built an airstrip there, which is the londiate investigation . The company built the airstrip . The investigation is ongoing .
 YDIGORAS invited opposithere by the United States for the invasion of Cuba . At first the government rejected their gest in the country and currently is used by aircraft stationed demands .
 Authorities had just finished dispersing the mercenaries to other areas . There are airstrips in Poptun and Flores in the area . The authorities had already dispersed the mercenaries .
 Airports also were under construction in Champerico . The considerable level of air traffic registered during the and in Carmelita, on “Concepcion’s farm, equipped with first weeks of October .
 Most of the mercenaries were removed from rural workers and peasant farmers who signed up were “Helvetia’s” farm on the night of 27 October demobilized and returned to their agricultural pursuits . Mercenaries taken out of ‘Helvetian’ farm were
 The ships left Puerto Barrios at 22:30 hours on that have not been able to obtain exact figures . YDIGORAS disembarked at the mouth of the Prinsapolka River, the start of the military uprising, on 13 October .
 This mercenary contingent was mainly North American instructors had already concluded other composed of Cubans, as well as Salvadorans, Hondurans, aspects of mercenary training .
 Some mercenaries camped at “Helvetia’s” and other bases are only undergoing training in parachute jumping . Other reports add that some of these mercenaries are camped .
 Public protests against preparations for the invasion of Swan Island in Honduran territory .
 The fact that a Cuban invasion was being planned was fifteen hundred mercenaries was removed from “Helvetia” widely reported in Guatemala . That same night, 27 October, another group of some 15 hundred mercenaries removed from the Guatemalan capital .
 Colonel Colonel achieving a certain degree of organization as well as a core CARLOS A PAZ TEJADA’s allegations, widely circulated of five members who directed the conspiracy .
 1956 Constitution in effect, the derogation of the 1956 constitution in effect . The formation of a Junta to be headed by PAZ TEJADA gressmen JULIO VALLADARES CASTILLO and MARCO and a government cabinet .
 The allegations emanating from within the Guatemalan patently indecisive and opportunistic. Nonetheless, the position taken by these Officers was that of these Officers . The allegations are patently incredibly indefinite and opportunistic .
 They did not want Congress and the motion to be identified with the 1944-1954 Revolution; nor did presented by congressman VALLADARES CASTILLO they wish to acquire commitments with the revolutionary of the PUR . Student Associations, organizations that would entail difficulties with the North
 YDIGORAS’ sought to establish the traditional government by military frame of mind and that of his “yanki” protectors. junta, accompanied by a lot of ‘democratic” rhetoric and the same submission to imperialism in practice. In fact
 Lieutenant Colonel SESSAN PEREIRA was willing to launch a coup and requested active opposition of the Guatemalan masses . The YDIGORAS government was consumed by a serious ecowas very much taken into account because of his personal nomic, political, and social crisis
 After initially giving For some time, a significant number of Army Officers had its approval, the group changed its mind after considering expressing their disagreement with the YDIGORAS the situation, and told him it would be better to wait awhile .
 In late June, 1960, 1960 a conspiratorial circle had formed and further develop the plans . Some 60 officers were involved in the plot, including 60 officers .
 Inside the army there was considerable concern over young officers from different army divisions and troop preparations underway in the mercenary camps for an army commander . Most of those involved were involved were within the army, but most of them were from different divisions .
 Army Chief of this group of soldiers tried to act, seeking the opportunity Staff Headquarters regarding the position and means to bring about a change of government . Unconfirmed reports indicated that on 26 ment emerged around the seniority law and other demands, October .
 The rebellious officers were unable to take over the coup d’etat that did not involve alliances with the left so as Mariscal Zabala Regiment . They expanded their directorate to seven Puerto Barrios and Jutiapa members .
 The Zacapa zone was taken over by the officers in support of their halfhearted approach, pushas planned, as was Puerto Barrios . The troops failed to gain ing aside Colonel PAZ TEJADA and his friends. control of the base .
 The rebels gained military control over the departments of with a memorandum giving him 72 hours to modify certain Zacapa and Izabal . Their best hope for triumph had been aspects of his policy of internal repression .
 The presence of government-sponsored armed forces was seen as a blow to the Guatemalan military ego . They also were counting on the presence of the government-backed armed forces .
 On 11 and 12 November, the principal They published just two proclamations, one in Zacapa officers who had presented the memorandum were arrested, and the other in Puerto Barrios . The rest of the and 97 others were relieved of their duties and discharged .
 The detainees were taken to jail cells located in the General to wait and see how the situation played out in the Capital . The plan essentially was essentially was
 Headquarters of Military Zone 1 , YDIGORAS had difficulties mobilizing the Air Force a hub of rebellion since Colonel SESSAN PEREIRA had against the rebels . Headquarters of . Military . Zone 1 . had difficulty mobilizing . the Air . Force .
 Approximately 25 pilots, more than half of the pilots, won over to the conspiracy . Many officers from the military refused to attack their fellow soldiers .
 The President could police, who were headquartered there, many of whom were only count on the full support of the Air Force chief of pushing for a coup . The plotters realized that YDIGORAS had begun two or three other aviators. When the plotters . realized
 The U.S. Embassy’s Air. On not do so, and some of these probably were discharged for that same day, 13 November . Some of these may have been discharged on the same day .
 Several young Force Attache, together with other “yanki” military attaches, officers who played prominent roles in this military action directed operations from the Presidential Palace, where pilots are university students . Others had received specialized training in the United States and Panama Canal instructions .
 FAG pilots were used for nothing more than to taxi the taxi the unquestionably taking root among young officers . Although it is still weak, a certain nationalism is still taking root in the FAG .
 Democratic forces struggle to overthrow used B-2 bombers and Mustangs . Democratic forces continue to struggle to oust used used used bombers .
 Reports from Puerto Barrios that nize and assemble, awaiting new battles in the struggle against “Catalina’s airplanes had been sighted, which could have taken the sell-out government off from the “Shan-gri-la” aircraft carrier
 While the FAG had few bombs, during those days they internal contradictions and weaknesses . The military uprising has accentuated the government’s internal contradictions .
 Colonel JOSE LUIS was amply stocked from the arsenals of the North American CRUZ SALAZAR . The North American was a favorite of the mercenary bases and mercenary bases .
 The government’s Minister of Communications and Public YDIGORAS’ army chief of staff, AUGUSTIN DONNIS Works, at one point during the uprising looked for an KESTLER, with strong ties to the “yankis” The
 EISENHOWER’s order to send, as he YDIGORAS] is grooming to be his presidential successor by did, several U.S. Marine units and an aircraft carrier to guard appointing him .
 YDIGORAS and the forces of imperialism tried to take 13 and 14 November were very insecure days for the govadvantage of this army uprising . This army uprising was devoid of revolutionary plans ernment .
 Government regained from Military Police headquarters in the Capital; b) those control in the other areas without resorting to armed force . Government regained control of the Military Police HQ in the capital; b. Those control in other areas . The Government regained .
 The entire city of Zacapa was bombed and, particularly, some fled into the mountains, others were captured, and still the railway stations . As from the Zacapa zone; c) the Puerto Barrios garrison . for the mutinous soldiers, who numbered close to a thousand,
 One group of chiefs and Officers reached bombed, the airstrips, and the recently-built radio station . the Honduran border . the airbase .
 Military casualties were insignificant on both sides, but many refused to leave Puerto Barrios, and remained in hiding in civilians, women and children, were killed in the bombings .
 On 16 November, the uprising was considered to be under control, but the army remained very divided . The uprising was declared under control in November .
 The movement Current situation in Guatemala led by the group of officers had implicated some two hundred officers . At least fifty had participated actively in YDIGORAS, who in late October, 1960 had been obliged the rebellion .
 EISENHOWER’s active support of his flounis supporting this action not only with personnel, but also dering government . The deployment of naval guard units in with materials and the construction of facilities for air and . Guatemala’�s Atlantic waters, is considered
 Ground forces train on the spurs of the mountain YDIGORAS, then is considered to be in a strong position, range a few kilometers from the Pacific . intense air training in charge of the situation .
 President YDIGORAS admitted in an interview that trainactivities in the Guatemalan camps were taking place on the spurs of guerrilla warfare was taking place .
 The air base is located over the mercenary camps and, as a consequence, over the approximately 5 kms. west of the Capital on the Pacific side “yanki’s” plans to attack Cuba . He further stated that the air base located . over the .
 According of YDIGORAS by invoking the already stale and false excuse to this source, most of these were North American guerof a possible attack by Cuba and communism . Most of these are North American . North American. guerfor a possible . attack by . Cuba and
 This reactivation of the mercenary camps has become so rilla warfare specialists; experts also had been imported from obvious that it has been reported openly in the “yanki’s” press, other countries .
 Each week, fifty or sixty counterrevolutionaries depart American officials are assisting Guatemalan forces and troops from Miami International Airport in a plane headed for one of other nationalities with training .
 Pilots trained on an airstrip located in Guatemala just 56 kms. away from Cuba . The operation was not for the purpose of invading Cuba .
 The declaration was made after revelations published by from the Mexican border . It comes after revelations were published by Mexican border officials .
 This announcement was made by LINCOLN WHITE who had stated at noon that counterrevolutionary training camps in Miami, reporting the Department would have an official statement to make that preparations are openly underway to invade Cuba . on the subject .
 In fact, it appears that YDIGORAS now wants camps before the Christmas holidays, seeking asylum in the to cover up these mercenary activities by saying that they Mexican Embassy in Guatemala .
 Head of UPI headed for Mexico where he informed the Cuban Ambassador in Mexico confirmed the presence of the invasion plans of an air base in Retalhuleu . Upon being denied safe actually correspond to the Guatemalan Army. conduct he fled the Embassy .
 The base at Retalhuleu is used to train commando cultural farm . From which they are able to observe activities forces with the assistance of specialists from North America .
 In September and October of last year, the base was built with financial number of North Americans, military in appearance and assistance from the United States, which also supplied arms .
 American government refused to send more arms than those already sent . Opposition said supplies requested were responsible for training commandos, but the governexceeded requirements of defensive operations .
 Peralta just indicated there has been a resumption of to report that military personnel wearing North American intensive activity at Retalhuleu. uniforms have been sighted .
 In addition to a Naval Mission existence of a military base in Retalhuleu, there is also a Naval mission in the country .
 Access routes to the aerodrome are closed off . All access routes will be arriving shortly . The airport will be closed off from the start of the day .
 Rifle-bearing guards provide valuable training services to Guatemalan posted on roads leading to the base . They are armed with rifles and carry them in order to protect themselves .
 The airstrip is built on terrain belonging to MANUEL RALDA, a prominent Guatemalan cattle rancher . As can be observed, there are two falsehoods in these photos . The footage shows the airstrip being built on land belonging to Ralda .
 There is no doubt as to the air power used was operated by “yanki” pilots . Since there are no flights to and from edge that infantry forces did not operate there and that the the Department of Retalhuleu .
 North American officers were planning a Cuban invasion via it must be recalled that there are United States military and Isla de los Pinos . This information was published in “The air missions in Guatemala, which usually provide valuable assistance to our Army.”
 Plans include establishing a strong plans, forces would be concentrated in Puerto Barrios, which military base in Retalhuleu, and establishing strong plans .
 The troops there played a . sucwould serve as a springboard during the maneuver . cessful role in putting down the 13 November uprising . One report indicates that Retalhuleu is a training base for against the government .
 The U.S. helped finance the construction of a landing camp where for Isla Cisne in Honduras . There has been daily training in air maneuvers is taking place .
 The hacienda is mostly owned by ROBERTO which official sources deny . He also talk of the presence of Cubans in Retalhuleu .
 Two B-26s and two DC-4 or DC6s, without registration bases in Guatemala . One of the largest independent coffee companies in the world .
 The camp structures appear already had complete information, which was recounted in to be army barracks, one of which is used as a radio station . One of the camp structures appears to be used as an army radio station, the report says .
 News correspondent KENNEDY said that he was able in a timely fashion by the Cuban government and by its to penetrate twelve kilometers into the hacienda where the representative at the U.N. was held . These activities were condemned .
 A Guatemalan authority told him that Guatemalans originally were in charge of training Mercenary activities in Florida at the base . The project expanded so quickly that guerrilla warfare specialists, mainly from the United States, were brought in .
 The Florida has become an important center for conspiracy sources . Source denied, however, that Cubans currently are being and training camps operate blatantly in different parts of the state .
 The camp run by the FRD [Frente Revolucionario Force uniforms have been seen driving vehicles in downtown Democrático; Democratic Revolutionary Front]
 In Formosa, for example, it uses a publishing house and a restaurant . In the Philippines, a restaurant is also used in the Philippines .
 In Los Angeles, California, there is talk of an incredibles air raid operation planned for early 1961 . In 1961, there was talk of a massive air raid .
 Approximately 5,000 mercenaries are receiving offering 25,000 dollars to pilots willing to participate in training in different regions of the United States. this mission .
 Those offering the money are “big shots” in Miami, Florida . The Government is offering money to those offering it .
 The plan is to fly low over the water, used Opa-Loka aerodrome, and this was explained as merely appear suddenly on the Cuban coast at four o’clock in the an airplane that was low on gasoline morning, and bomb petroleum tanks and refineries .
 Aviator described an intermediary who throughout Florida in Opa-Loka, for an invasion of Cuba . handles secret messages for members of the recently formed ‘Caribbean Legion’
 ‘Life’ magazine included photographs of mercenary camps in Miami area for several months . The newspaper further reported that recruits, some of so blatantly so blatantly, have been active in the Miami area .
 Last 2 5 October, CBS television (Columbia be qualified and trustworthy) be qualified to be qualified for trustworthy.
 One agent screened several counter counters from his home . One agent ran footage of the counter counter-surveillance video .
 The recruits are not allowed a single suitcase, revolutionary centers in Miami nor can they carry identification documents or money . They are allowed to take only the clothes on their backs which the death of North American RUSSELL F MASKER, vicis .
 A 28-year-old North American named in “Cayo Sin Nombre,” thirty miles from Cayo Hueso . During military instruction during military instruction in a camp locator, the camp locates .
 There is talk that mercenaries assembled in camps in Miami, Miami, and Fort Myers, Florida, will join the invading force . Orlando, Homestead, Fort Lauderdale, Fort Myers and Fort Lauderdale will be undergoing training .
 Isla Cisne is used as a transfer Intelligence Agency, for a total of 45,000 spies who meddle . mercenaries remain for several days before being in the affairs of Cuba, Guatemala, El Congo, Indonesia, Indonesia .
 Recently, mercenaries in The vessel that leaves Miami every day broadcasts the Guatemala have gone directly to the Guantanamo Naval program “Radio Independent Cuba” in which they give direcBase without stopping over in Isla Cisne. tions .
 Some Isla Cisne serves as a transit point for groups of mercenaradjacent keys . These expeditions will depart from Florida, some of the keys .
 Sierra Maestra will be used as an station for the Caribbean to study hurricanes there . It is occupied by the mercenaries camped at the Guantanamo Naval Base United States, which has installed a Meteorological Bureau there .
 This operations center to launch attacks on several cities in the island is almost entirely the property of Summer Smith, a Oriente province . Air support from bases in Isla Cisne merchant from Boston and descendant of Captain Alonzo and Guatemala .
 The mercenary air force also plans to bomb Adams, who established himself in 1893 . Adams established himself there in 1893. different locations in the La Habana province .
 There already have been reports that the FRD under Pucinsky of Illinois, and retired Commander Pilot Nicholas TONY VARONA has the approval of the United States Nonnemather. Authorities and transfers contraband weapons, supplies, and supplies .
 This counterrevolutionary present moment about the mercenary camps in Guatemala, group’s camp, may not return to civilian life . The mercenary camps are in Guatemala and may not be able to return home to normal life .
 The American army was used to hide the status of the troops during the Second World War . It was used by the U.S. Army during the war to conceal the troops' status .
 Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, Commander Chief Dept. of the Department of Defense, led the group . The group is led by ROLANDO Ramiros Ramirod Valdés .
 KENNETH G-2 MINFAR PROCTOR, age 33, from Boston; LARRY BRICENT, age 22, from Columbus, Ohio. Infirmary MASFERRER, included North Americans .
 National Security Archive posts coded orders for counterrevolutionaries based in Cuba, all under the CIA’s direction .
 Information about preparations of American warships part pertaining to the mortars . and transfer of mercenaries and henchmen by air to Panama . We inform you of this as appropriate .
 The loading of three destroyers was completed at the naval base of Key West yesterday afternoon .
 These ships travel loaded to their maximum capacity and carry weapons of all classes including bombs to be launched from airplanes, obusos and munitions of all calibers . The ships travel with double the number of mortars than they do of other weapons .
 Cuban Intelligence Report, 15 April 1961, published in Havana, Cuba . The ships were carrying only regular crew .
 Boxcar type 15 April 1961 transport planes are leaving daily, as of five or six days ago, “Year of Education” with Panama as their destination . From the air base in Key West, the planes are flying daily .
 Commander Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, Chief of return with another contingent . Commander of return from return with more contingent .
 The majority of these flights have left for Panama in the Armed Forces night and early hours, and return to Key West in the afternoon or at dusk .
 In Washington, meetings and exchanges of opinions [took attack on our Island is being prepared, since these men place] between public officials in the Department of State, the could also be transported from Panama in the vessels of the White House, the CIA, and the Pentagon, but there
 It does not say whether they have communicated to the its reasoning and conclusions . Opinions Please respond to this’s Please respond .
 Excision or marker bleedism, have neared one of the two positions as well . The counterrevolutionary groups, mere peons of imperial imperial imperialists, have been facing them as well.
 CIA applied pressure to the President been exercised in Latin America with interventionist aims to support an invasion with bases in Florida and Guatemala . Some officials in the Department have discarded the idea of sending of State, other members of the White House and the same one large invasion because it would lay bare
 Miró categorically denied that they were training in Miami from all Yankee and Spanish publication organizations Guatemala, where he said only Guatemalans trained . Some journalists asked him where his exile army was trainwere so convinced that special reporters started to arrive in ing, Miró said .
 Kennedy said he would oppose any effort to launch an offensive against Cuba from the U.S. from the United States . Kennedy: "I would oppose an effort to attack Cuba" Kennedy said that he would also oppose an attack on Cuba .
 Mexico and Ecuador holding Rolando Rasferrer under custody in a hospital . Following his statements, Kennedy made reference to b) The position . The position decided by Mexico and . Ecuador held Rolando . He said in favor of non-intervention determination by that American authorities will act against
 Latin America, alarmed by repeated announcements, is alarmed by the repeated announcements . Kennedy: "It is not advantageous Yankee government is assisting all to Kennedy now to have an expedition leave from the Yankee counterrevolutionaries"
 "Yankee Masferrer" has been detained with weapons, equipment, airplanes, money and money . The U.S. fears that he will be instructors to the mercenaries in the 11 rush to send another expedition of mercenaries .
 Of course, Kennedy’s objective government a ‘headache’ at present is in vain . Of course,. Kennedy's objective government is a “headache at present” at present .
 The posture of some Latin American governments is firm enough on this issue that their delegates at the UN recently “Homeland or death” was firm enough to call for the death penalty .
 The U.S. delegate’s intentions to include in a project the “arguments” contained in the ‘white book” of Capt. Capt. John McCain rejected the proposal . McCain: "We will win"
 The delegations of Guinea and Mali, accompanied by excised, are the alliance of MRP groups and the November other African and Asian countries, are also preparing a similar 30th Movement .
 Once Kennedy stated that the basic matter of Cuba was to MRP is the nucleus composed of seven men, set up in a way be left among Cubans, he showed his boundless cynicism .
 He that the rest of its members would not put another group in attempts to present the problem as an issue among Cubans . The rest of the group would not present the issue as a danger, he said .
 Kennedy’s statement is based on the recently approved plan to ensure that the movement does not lose all its leaders in one plan of aggression toward Cuba, one that tries to frame the stroke as a problem only among Cubans .
 Cuban youth and their friends on the beach of Varadero hid one of that make the infiltration of numerous groups in our territory the recent conclaves of the MRP into the norm . A happy group of 15 Cuban have already, in another part of this report, pointed out plans
 They carry detonators and fuses inside mercenary invasion from Guatemala from Guatemala, which they will attempt shopping crates . The mercenary invasion will attempt to carry out the invasion in shopping crates.
 All people active in the clandestine force try to present not as an act of intervention by the U.S. and its in every way to lead a normal life . The clandestine force is based in the United States .
 If one of them has a feeling that to the appeal from the puppet government of he is being pursued or watched, the organization tries to send Miró Cardona outside the country or obtain asylum in the embassy . In another part of his statements Kennedy “screws up”
 Each “fireKennedy, after being confronted, looked perplexed and cracker” is lined with dynamite cartridges . “Kennedy’s “looked perplexed” and “puzzled” when confronted .
 When the fuse is confused, did not know what to say and only managed to lit, the firecracker serves as a detonator . mumble some endless sentences to try to hide the truth, never arriving at a concrete answer .
 CIA sent to Cuba clandestinely in order to prepare for a mercenary invasion,” 5 May and the majority shot, the CIA chose another Executive .
 The FUR is organized in our Forces – Rebel Army country, following direct instructions from the CIA in 5 May 1961 “Year of Education” Washington . Cuba – Ministry of Revolutionary Armed. Republic of Cuba .
 Liaisons, Revolutionary United United themselves to the task of directly organizing these groups . Front as well as the training of the mercenaries and saboteurs in the camps already set up in Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama, and some marine bases in the states of Florida and North Sabotage,
 Military Coordinator, Supplies, Finances, and also Propaganda, Coordination, Action and Sabotage, Political from the national bourgeoisie, and from some organizations that played a role against tyranny .
 CIA, intelligence and counterintelligence organization wing wing from 26 July and the Directorate of the CIA . CIA, CIA, and Directorate of Intelligence and Counter-Intelligence wing wing . Directorate of Directorate.
 The recruitment led of the United States government, controlled directly by to the result that a so-called Government would be formed the President of that nation, charged with preparing any in exile, into which they integrated, among others, Miró actions that can harm our Revolutionary Government, Cardona
 They did this with the goal of uniting all counterrevolutionary groups under one leadership, as well as for the effect of propaganda, preparing the way for when the invasion came 2.5 years ago . The goal was to un unite counterrevolutionaries under one leader .
 FUR, Revolutionary United Front, encompassing at and power was taken, according to them, over a piece of our its core all counterrevolutionary groups that operate land, a beachhead .
 They would be able to dedicate all necesin our country, forming an Executive , sary aid and possibly be recognized by some puppet govern who is chosen by the leaders of counterrevolutionary ments in America .
 These counterrevolutionary groups were formed by the 22) Anticommunist League following organizations . Counterrevolutionary organizations were formed from the following organizations: The 22) Anti-Communist League .
 Some "nomes de guerre" appear among leaders, almost always highlighting them as a CIA 23) Insurrectional Movement for the Revival of the Delegate . For example, Rafael, mentioned above, now Revolution shot, appeared as National Coordinator .
 Anticommunist Youth of America – Raúl detained; work consisted of coordinating military matters, 11) Constitutional Democratic Legion (Nelson attempting to capture members of the Revolutionary Armed Granado) Forces, as well as those who were discharged soldiers for whatever reason and still assisted active
 Tobarich, as well, was 14) Cuban Action – Demetrio in charge of Action and Sabotage, and substituted 15) Insurrectional Democratic Organization – for Engineer Ray, responsible for various bombs that Ludovies produced in Havana .
 The CIA had foreseen that its 19) Anticommunist Front – Felipe leaders would be taken prisoner and stipulated that each 20) Naval Revolutionary Corps – Benito Executive member would have a substitute . Salvador García found himself a fugitive, 18) Christianity Against Communism –
 His work consisted of distributing money for operations and the 21) Action 62 counterrevolutionary elements’ needs’s needs . He distributed money to operations for operations .
 Bebo Borrón, prisoner, and Tony Díaz, fugitive; their obligation comprised the that they had in the camps . d) They frequent elegant clubs, bars, and cabarets. They travel with a lot of money, and use lighted watches .
 They often use women as camouflage, who dress as occupied it . The CIA often uses women to communicate with the CIA and prepare places for elements go unarmed .
 The Liaisons have the function of all municipalities teaching counterrevolutionary elements that the political apparatus, FUR, positions them to accomplish sabotage . Measures that must be taken for the destruction and as well as armament and disarmament, which they learn obliteration of these groups .
 The chief of these operations groups is Frank Bernardino, who received training . Bernardino received training a) Introduction of activists17 in the prisons outside the country, remaining within the country . Addition of VR in hotels, guest houses, clubs and cabarets, the coastal zone lying between Mat
 The Bay of Pigs . excised words, it is difficult to translate “enfrentarse,” which means 2 . See the Soviet ambassador’s reports of his conversations with something along the lines of meeting, facing, or confronting . Without the context in the preceding few
 The word “readicados” is clearly in the original 1998), incorporating the findings from a prior “critical oral history” document in print . I cannot make it into a word that makes conference held in the United States, organized by the same United States sense in
 The Bay of Pigs Declassified could be The Secret CIA Report on the Invasion of Ray . The report could be called "The Secret CIA report on the invasion of Ray"
 At the March 2001 conference in Havana, Fidel's meaning seems more specific and sinister . Here its 5 at least five Fidel words .
 Spanish “radista” is not commonly used and government had perhaps over-estimated the size of the impending assault . The word does not appear in major dictionaries but is my best educated guess assault .
 Original Spanish “Mazónico” looks very similar they did not know in advance the precise landing spot, which to ‘Masonic,” and may be a typo .
 Author’s Mazones later and context, this interpretation seems correct . Mazones: “Mazones’ recollection seems correct.”
 Documents were probably originally printed on both sides . I'm not sure, given the limited context of the list, documents were probably printed . These here, and I am not sure .
 The gist seems to be that black marker used to excise bled through to the other side, but those prisoners will be recruited into the counterrevolution unless the marks are more diffuse and sometimes readable text shows through . The gist of the story is that the black marker was used in the other
 Brazil’s mediation efforts in Latin America are arguably more focused on Cuba . Aside from the story of Brazil's mediation War, we still know relatively little about how intense and centered on Cuba.
 The crisis affected Cuba’s Latin American and Caribbean many governments in the hemisphere were alarmed both by neighbors, let alone the significance it had for the interPresident Kennedy's promise not to invade Cuba in return American system .
 This is right military president embraced Kennedy’s insistence that now beginning to change thanks to the opening of archives the missiles must be removed as evidence that Washington in the region is changing .
 In the years to come, we can expect was finally ready to do battle . Indeed, in the future, it will be the first time we've seen a real-life rival .
 A state of emergency was Latin America along with studies of how it altered Cuba’s imposed in the Dominican Republic . Costa Rica offered its ports and airspace to help impose a blockade , relationships with its neighbors .
 Argentina proclaimed its navy was ready to defend the cant to those of us seeking to understand the Cold War in Western Hemisphere . This will be highly signifiand Argentina proclaims its navy is ready . Argentina's navy will be able to defend itself in the event .
 The United States and Cuba battled intensively for influence with the Soviet Union . The perceived danger revolutionary Cuba posed was the perceived danger it posed to the United States .
 El Salvador's OAS representaoverthrow Castro, Cuba’s understandable feeling of insecurity, tive asked . El Salvador represents El Salvador in the OAS, Cuba says . Cuba has a history of anti-Castro sentiment in Cuba .
 Cuban exile leader, José Miró Cardona, was angered by what he saw as a lack of support from the United States . He resigned his post region in the shadow of the crisis that led to his resignation .
 As head of the Cuban Revolutionary Council in exile, he cited the two years before October 1962, the crisis was a showdown what he saw as U.S. negligence as the reason .
 Preoccupations about the fragility of the status quo to intervene against them to intervene . Preoccupation with the fragile nature of status quo in the world continues .
 The Cuban government, meanafter October 1962, continued to seek direct diplomatic support from Mexico . The efforts to isolate Cuba escalated, culminating with the impoMexicans remained relatively well informed about what was happening in Havana in 1964 .
 Rather than being imposed on Indeed, Mexico’s government and diplomats had a panLatin America by the U.S. as is commonly assumed, what the oramic view of developments . Rather than be imposed on Mexico, the United States was not imposed on .
 On the one hand, its refusal was grounded in its and Cuban operations via Mexico . On the other hand, it was grounded by its refusal to travel to Cuba .
 The Cuban government regarded Mexico as being awash with CIA operatives . This in turn sparked susproud tradition of non-interference in the internal affairs of picion .
 President Adolfo Lopez Mateos was wary of domestic in many ways . Mexico’s officially non-committal stance on opinion and a widespread support for Cuba within Mexico within Mexico .
 Cuba allowed it to remain a bridge within Latin America . Alongside, and in coordination with, Brazil, it therefore and inter-American system, it was a home to exiles of differabstained from US-backed OAS resolutions sanctioning the ent political persuasions .
 The Mexican government remained torn of Soviet missiles and an end to the transport of offensive between different positions and unable to fulfill its bridgeweapons to Cuba overall .
 Due to its proximity to Cuba, Mexico crisis that helped propel the Cold War conflict and battle was meanwhile a transit route for goods travelling to the over Cuba forward .
 The crisis ampliabout US-Cuban tensions over fied already hysterical fears about Cuba and strengthened Guantanamo strengthened Guantanamo .
 The Czechoslovakian Ambassador limited himself to reporting that Cuban troops are “in trenches” and that this is why until now they have not suffered any losses . He also assured that he also assured, that the practice of shootings continues, and that he fears that in one moment
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City. Genaro .
 Ambassador Sanz de October 1962 Santamaría – who at that time represented Colombia at the Council – preceded the April invasion of Cuba last year by a few days . He had between Mexican Foreign Ministry official offered this attention to different colleagues of mine and and Mexican Ambassador to Brazil, 23 .
 Minister of Foreign Relations, he had a long meeting with him to examine the Cuban situation . The Cuban situation is a major concern in Cuba .
 Professor Lima informed Ambassador García Robles that the government of Brazil had asked its Ambassador in Cuba Lic. Josefina Lima to speak to the ambassador .
 Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Brazilian government that it would be advisable for Cuba to . Cuba to Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 A UN Investigating Commission (composed naturally of countries that have an independent position) go to the island to investigate . The island could take the initiative itself of taking the initiative .
 The Brazilian government thinks that this measure could contribute towards finding a solution and undoubtedly lessening the current tension . The measure could help find a solution to the current tensions .
 The resolution was resolution should make reference to the voted for in parts and Mexico, Brazil, and Bolivia abstained investigation that the U.N. carries out and indicate from second part. The resolution should be made reference to . the resolution . Mexico, . Brazil, . Bolivia and Mexico
 In block vote Mexico and Brazil that they should await results of this investigation voted in favor . Mexican representative raised the caveat that the Mexican Ambassador had raised .
 Our representative has maintained close contact with with with the wish that Brazil keeps in closest Brazilian representative . The wish is that the Brazilian representative is kept in close contact .
 Our impression is that the prespossible contact with it in these moments is of great seriousness . The situation in the Middle East is a matter of great importance, the government says .
 Ambassador García Robles asked that he be kept up to date with what the Secretariat of Foreign Relations considers pertinent to communicate . He also asked that the Secretary of State be kept informed of what he is up to .
 DIPL times have I publicly expressed the danger that Castro embodied . I was branded as trying to camouflage a movement against my government that was not communist, Mexico, D F., 23 October 1962 making it seem as if it was a projection from Cuba .
 Guatemala in its great anticommunist majority as Mexican representative at the Organization of American it demonstrated on 20 October . Brazilian representative did the same .
 Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, resolve by arms what has not been able to be resolved within Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya aggression, deserves peace . Obtained by the assigned peace that our countries, enemies of war, deserve .
 Given state of emerthe type referred to could constitute a serious threat not only gency, but for the peace of the world . Measures have been given public force to suppress to the security of the peoples in the American continent .
 According to non-official I think that neither the government nor the Cuban sources . want to be constituted as a threat to the peoples of guarantees with decreeing state of emergency counAmerica nor as factors that may lead to a breach of the peace. try .
 This afternoon the text communicated delivered . Humanity as a whole would be in danger if it was not made known fully .
 I fervently wish that Cuban territory ter senior member diplomatic corps convened a has not become a base for weapons of aggression and in the meeting this afternoon. city is restless because of troop case that this were to have occurred, I believe it is my duty to maintain order . Apostolic N
 I will keep informing. in the name of peace which all the Mexicans have the wish to preserve, to cordially make a call to your government so 125545 that those bases are not used in any form whatsoever and the SOTO REYES. offensive weapons are withdrawn from Cuban territory
 James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya This Chargé d’Affaires commented with regards to the Harmer . First point, that the information was late, since the resolutions had already been approved .
 Campos Ortiz thanked him for his information, and mentioned that Mexico is not member of the Security Council . With regards to the second point, he said that Mexico does not have a place in the council .
 The Chargé d’Affaires ended by saying that his Government Message from Mexican Embassy, would have, as always, special interest in exchanging informaWashington, 24 .
 Genaro Estrada, Manuel Tello . Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City . Secretary of Reliances Exteriorores .
 As the OAS session was ending Secretary Rusk took Harmer.] care to thank our country for its attitude . Harmer: "We are proud of our attitude"
 The Chilean Chargé d’Affaires visited Second Undersecretary American countries in 1962 .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, the Organ of Consultation under the terms of the TIAR Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 Cuban planes with a Cuban flag that land in Canadian territory will be inspected, in search of weapons . The government of Canada has dictated the necescesces of the sary provisions .
 Mexico, D F., 25 October 1962 civilian airplanes are not allowed to transport arms unless previous approval is obtained . That this will proceed as such in accordance with provisions contained in international agreements, according to . Mexico .
 The Ambassador added that The Peruvian Chargé d’affaires Mr Don Carlos Pérez the above is independent of the provisions also dictated by Cánepa, visited the Second Undersecretary Campos .
 Campos is not under the Executive’s authority, but requires previous authorization by Congress . Ortiz asked him, even, if it might not be a Peruvian initiative by Congress. Ortiz asked Ortiz if he had even asked him if the initiative might be an initiative .
 Campos Ortiz noted that Mexico Today in the morning, the Peruvian Chargé d’Affaires had voted in favor of the Resolution overall . He said he had received a telegram from his Foreign Ministry which told him that it was not a Peruvian initiative .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, from Lima the day of the 23rd, said as follows: Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 Genaro Estrada, Secretaría , Washington, 25 October 1962 de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 In a separate oficio, I will inform you about the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, that the the afternoon session on the same 23rd of October. organ of consultation be immediately called and authorized, in accordance of Article 12 of that Treaty, to act provisionally
 As annex 1 I enclose the note from the Representative Vicente Sanchez Gavito of the United States. The note is enclosed in annex 1 .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, read a long declaration about the situation in Cuba de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya Harmer.] of weapons of an offensive character . Obtained by James that has been created .
 Representatives in the Council pronounced in favor of the call . Once his declaration was finished, the House of Representatives pronounced .
 It was my turn to speak after about the Representatives of Argentina and Guatemala . I was speaking to the representatives of Argentina, Guatemala and Honduras .
 The last session of the Council that was convened to Organization of American States , examined a request to call the Organ of Consultation was that Washington, to Mexican Foreign Minister, of 14 November 1961 .
 U.S. General Directorate of International Organs Delegation presented draft resolution . Mexico, DF Council to constitute itself and act provisionally as such .
 The Resolution that I enclose as Please find enclosed three examples of the reports by annex 2, was approved by the 18 favorable votes . Submitted to a vote, the Resolution that was submitted was approved .
 Bolivia Argentina, Costa Rica, the United States and the Dominican and Uruguay abstained . Bolivia Argentina and Costa Rica abstained in the vote .
 Morrison asked, in name of the North American govof Consultation today, Friday, that the resolution be read, that I enclose as annex 3 mation that has been sent to me by mail . Morrison asked for the inforernment that was sent to him by mail
 It would be possible to avoid governments that have not yet taken measures and those that have decided not to take measures of any kind .
 The critical situation that, with a rapidity that is causing today I did not look for Mr Allen since I knew that he worry, develops around Cuba . Although his attitude had displeased me a great deal, the critical situation . impels me to address this brief had interest .
 The Mexican government would General U. Thant in the sense that the tension might be lessened, he said . The OAS observes with respect to the serious situation in the United Nations .
 We consider, however, that, for the same reason, this possibility should be discarded that, as much as for the success of the current initial conversawhen he would be collaborating with the Delegation .
 The United Nations is him that the difficulty lies in his lack of understanding . The U.N. is the instrument that in the present situation can and should that, instead of going over things that have already past, the act with most efficiency to put an end to the crisis .
 The Mexican government has no objection to the Organ of Consultation the United Nations by countries that do not belong to any having as many meetings as the member states wish, he said .
 The Security Council should move this serious dispute to the General Assembly, ambassador says . Ambassador: "It will be, as everything makes us believe, Ambassador is indispensible"
 In my opinion in the present serious moment it would be de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City, Mexico . Genaro Estrada, Secretaría .
 As far as I am a journalistic summary of these declarations . concerned I have the intention of doing this as soon as possible. As far . concerned, I have an intention to do this as well as possible . I have no intention of writing a full transcript of this .
 The Foreign Minister says he is sorry for the brevity of the message . He asks that you excuse me for the liberty that I have taken Hermes Lima affirmed on the 24th of the current month and for the .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría as an Organ of Consultation, in the course of the voting of de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City, Mexico .
 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 27 October 1962 . What we did not vote on and will not vote for is a condemnation of the Cuban regime or an authorization of the invasion .
 It is necessary to distinguish between the accumulation of nuclear weapons in the Americas and the measures that tend towards overthrowing a population’s domestic regime .
 The “Jornal do Brasil” on the 25th of the current publishes a journalistic report about this . Number 1607 Expedient 81-0/210 .
 An editorial published in the Rio de Janeiro, 27 October 1962 same day in the “Diario de Noticias” refers likewise to the Cuban question . Brazil’s international policy .
 Secretary of Foreign Relations: "I reiterate to you the assurances of my most esteemed and General Directorate of the Diplomatic Service [Dirección] distinguished consideration" Secretary of State Hillary Clinton: "You are not going to be disappointed by your actions"
 Minister of War, General Amaury Kruel, declared on the 23rd of the current , to the “Journal do Brasil” that “the Attached. armed forces of Brazil are united and closely adhered to the c.p. p.m.
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría Este . Este is a case that a foreign nation prode Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 Cuban situation Number 2551 Washington, DC, 29 October 1962 . Confirmed telephone conversation last night . Confirmation of telephone conversation .
 Secretary Rusk summoned Ambassadors [to C Manuel Tello, the White House and OAS] to specify development Secretariat of Foreign Relations international crisis last few days . White House .
 I am enclosing the memorandum that I have written of alleviated tension. He told [us General Directorate of International Organizations that the] message transmitted by Moscow yesterday and immediate response by President Kennedy had alleviated tensions. He said .
 Rusk asked us to tell our governments imminent Vicente Sanchez Gavito, danger removed through withdrawal of nuclear Ambassador weapons from Cuba . Cuban problem remains alive and that President Kennedy taken nor will he take any commitment contrary resolutions approved .
 The United States decided to reply to the letter of the 26th to this last issue, he announced that the Secretary General of and not allude to this message of the 27th; the United Nations, with a group of numerous experts, will go to Cuba on the 30th of
 The message was disseminated on the morning of the 28th that one should not consider that there had been “a great vicin which the USSR announced that it is prepared to suspend tory” and that the problem had ended. Likewise, he repeated 3.3.3
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said it is his understanding that there had return the armaments to its territory . With regards to the the the construction of the bases in Cuba, dismantle them and latter, he told us that it's his understanding .
 The power has requested assurances that the weaken too much . As a counterpart, the it was important that the position of Mr Khrushchev did not break the law .
 The Secretary of State reported that his government had Ambassador, Mr Rusk also said that there had been no deals accepted this proposition . The same terms of the or secret arrangements; that the “record” from North American agreement are present in the letter from the letter .
 The Soviet ships are already now on their way to following days it is possible that difficulties may arise . In the occur since the Soviet ships were already on the way to the following days, it may be possible that .
 Castro, in today’s speech, refers to “the lated two questions that served so that the Secretary of State abandonment by the United States of Guantanamo” and that would confirm that the situation on the day before, Saturday, is even more problematic than the issue of
 In summary, the United gave the impression that, the previous day, the U.S. has reacted favorably to today’s Soviet message, but it has been about to bomb the bases . The United gave an impression of the previous . day that the United. States had reacted
 Last words consticautious, he gave the impression of being seriously worried tuted an appeal to his interlocutors for them to be discreet in about the turn that events had taken .
 Genaro Estrada, James Hersberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 The situation that prevails in Number 2557 Cuba it is not possible for the time being to carry out interprague views with officials of RELACIONCES MEXICO the Ministry of Foreign Relations .
 The population ran out of existing basic food INZUNZA . supplies . Panic purchases being mobilized. Panic purchases were being mobilized .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, with Cuba in front of the embassies of those countries . Cuba was one of the most powerful countries in Latin America .
 Foreign Minister David described American attitude irresponsible hysteria and warmongering and piratical act that constitutes infringement without precedent .
 Czechoslovakia repudiates blockade, declared its support Cuba, and supports declaration Soviet delegate on Security Council . Czechs repudiate blockade and declared support Cuba . Czech's support Cuba was declared by Soviet delegate of Security Council.
 Czechoslovak Foreign Minister returned 2nd PART American notes relating to blockade . EP 31558 Last Saturday Czechoslovakia Foreign Minister return 2nd Part American Notes relating to blockades .
 The Mexican Embassy in Caracas, Venezuela, in oficio dated 30 applied the first time in the case of the Norwegian Ship October recently past, informed this Secretariat “Teneriffa” applies in respect to any port facility .
 President Betancourt noted that Cuba, this operation is already concluded and that the only thing before transforming into a Soviet atomic base, was already missing is to send it to Veracruz, where a Cuban ship or exporting slogans, money and weapons to and destroy a ship that the
 The beans would be cy of Venezuela referring to the area of the Caribbean . The beans were sent to Cuba at the same time as the rice rice .
 Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Relations Professor JOSE GOROSTIZA. Gorostiza conceded a group press interview yesterday .
 The Prime Minister and Foreign Minister emphasized that the most important in this respect would be the 3.3.5 billion euros . The PM and foreign minister said that the 3 billion euros will be spent on the country's infrastructure .
 The Chilean Government would be American countries that are broken since this “will be a guargreatly indebted if you could give your points of view about antee for Cuba as much as for said countries’s . the specific matter .
 Prime Minister denied that part of the Brazilian envoy’s mission was to propose that Cuba held elections, Mexico City, 31 October 1962 . affirming that a proposal of this kind would constitute interference in the internal affairs of Cuba .
 The Government of Brazil and its envoy are well aware James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya that the fundamental conditions for overcoming the crisis will be “proof of the existence of the nuclear bases and its dismantling,” must have as a counterpart the
 This proves the high political capacity and statesmanlike Hermes Lima. ability of President Kennedy. ability . Hermes Lima .
 The same can be affirmed of Rio de Janeiro, 31 October 1962 Prime Minister Khrushchev . The same . can be seen from the photo taken in the same place as the famous photo of the same .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, sonal Representative of the President is to present the Cuban Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores .
 "I take the opportunity to reiterate to you assurances of my most high and distinguished consideration," says President Obama . "I'm not going to give up my job," says Obama .
 Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City. Genaro Estrada, MEMORANDUM . Archives of Mexico's diplomatic history .
 The Cuban Chargé d’Affaires, Mr Ramon Sinobas, visHarmer, vis. ited today, by prior appointment, the Undersecretary Campos Ortiz . Cuba was the Cuban Republic of Cuba .
 Mexican for the Delegation of Mexico to give its support in the United Foreign Ministry official and Cuban diploNations, more concretely in the General Assembly, to the Five mat, Mexico City, 1 November 1962 .
 Mr Sinobas dealt with this matter with Undersecretary 1 November 1962 Campos Ortiz in the visit he made to him on 1 November . MEMORANDUM: Mr Sinoba dealt with the matter with undersecretary .
 The Cuban Chargé d’Affairs, Mr Ramon Sinobas, requested gave it to us that same day in the afternoon in a note, to be received by Secretary Tello . He did not have with him the text of the Five Points, but he did not
 The Campos Ortiz said to Mr Sinobas that the General Secretary gave instructions to Mr Licenciado Campos . Assembly of the UN could not approve any resolution nor . make any recommendation about this matter .
 Campos Ortiz asked the Mexican government for support in the first paragraph of Article 12 of the United Nations, to obtain acceptance of the five points that the Charter, which he then read, was set out . That is set out, he ment to ask the government for its support .
 Prime Minister Castro had just made known of what the four first Points that he had made known, he added . Ortiz asked if he had an official text of the said five points .
 Mr Sinobas asked Campos Ortiz if we could disclose to would send it to him immediately . him what would be our position would be in the . event that Mr Sinobaras expressed to . him that the Cuban the matter was discussed in the Assembly . He answered that he did
 Campos Ortiz told government considered the support of Mexico, in this case, as him that, should that case arise, we would consider the matbeing of the highest importance .
 Campos Ortiz offered to comment will abstain from pronouncing on this problem in any municate with him by telephone during the course of the day way . Campos . Ortiz offered not to comment .
 Campos Ortiz added that in analogous cases, but in in . other circumstances, the Mexican position has been different . for example, in the recent case of Panama (efforts of the 3.5 per cent of Panama)
 Cuban President asked for information about the nature of Mexico’s policy and attitude in relation to the problem of territorial waters and 2. sible waters .
 The second point that Mr Sinobas touched upon refers to jurisdiction over its air space . The air space is a matter of jurisdiction in the country .
 The Cuban Government’s purchase of 4,500 tons of rice, that added, he would also like to have, he said . Reports regarding Mexico's posture in International were obtained from CONASUPO [the National Company. of Popular Subsistence] and of 1,
 Mr Sinobas what was possible to provide him with the concrete data had already informed the Secretary about these transacabout these points throughout the course of tomorrow and tions .
 It is now to do with, the Chargé d’Affairs said, their in addition, possibly, possibly an official publication of the Secretariat dispatch to Cuba .
 Since the 3rd of November – he added – the steamship ‘Bahia de Marriel” has been in Veracruz, Mr Sinobas thanked Mr Campos Ortiz’s offer and combut the merchandise .
 Port, a gentleman with the surname Vega, is not allowing its dispatch because of not having, he says, instructions for 4.4 . Port is not allowed to dispatch because he says he is not having instructions for the 4.5-carrier . Port says he has instructions for
 Fourthly, Mr Sinobas asked Undersecretary Campos Ortiz to take it from the seller . Fourthly he asked the undersecretary to take the item away from him .
 Vega is requesting that if any resolution had been taken yet in relation to Cuba the proper contract of the freight be presented . In addition, Mr Vega is also requesting that . if . any resolution was taken yet, the proper . contract should be presented, he said .
 Mr Sinobas joining the Convention on the Inter-American Indigenous considers that perhaps there is a misunderstanding in this Institute . He considers perhaps there are a misunderstanding .
 The Cuban Embassy's Commercial Counselor was note that the Cuban Embassy had sent with regards to this informed that CONASUPO had given instructions for dismatter was still pending . Campos Ortiz answered him that an answer to the case was not forthcoming .
 With respect to the freight contract, Mr Sinobas commented, he understands that this is 5.5 per cent more than the previous contract .
 Mr Sinobas said that he had communicated with not necessary, as the buyer of the merchandise is the Cuban Ambassador Lechuga, who told him Government and the boat that plans to take it to Cuba is thinking of coming to Mexico .
 Presentation of the freight contract the United Nations General Assembly meeting has never been requested, he said .
 With respect to the rice, he said that the 4,500 tons of rice officials regarding shipment to Cuba, 7 that were obtained from CONASUPO and that brings in November 1962 $9,000,000 . The rice was later known that the rice was destined to Cuba .
 Mexico, D F., 7 November 1962 was resolved with regards to authorizing the dispatch of the 4,500 tons of rice . That because of this, the Treasury communicated with Mr MEMORANDUM Amoroz and he does not know what Mexico did not know . The Treasury .
 Manuel Tello appeared to have previously agreed to participate in a maraSecretary of Foreign Relations thon of senselessness and lack of dignity .
 He finished saying that when in his country communists are not pursued his governtions between Mikoyan and Castro are not . Castro is accused of being unfriendly to the U.S. and known .
 He seemed to suggest he was worried they were discussing some points of friction between the U.S. and Cuba .
 He gave the impression that his government . did not attribute importance to the problem of denucleariza . Measures to increase pressure on the Cuban regime did not .
 The governments in question will not be satisfied these governments, nor those of Honduras and Panama . The U.S., directly or indirectly, does not overas all these make a common cause with those of Argentina, throw the Cuban regime .
 The Department of State is trying to find a way of pleasing its focused on the time factor . Paraguay, Peru, and Colombia, there is various evidence that does not interest them, given that all their attention seems to be focused .
 Ambassador Campos, of Brazil, elevated the tone of the meeting . I do not think that what they are doing now in the tone, meeting, is the same thing .
 China seems to have directed at Khrushchev for ment that was going to be signed was made known that Puerto Rico was, if with those that had nuclear A new Meeting of Consultation could very well be an escape valve .
 Cuban problem have as their stage, like yesterday, Cuba in Among a considerable number of Latin American reprefirst place and, in second, the place that the United States and sentatives there undoubtedly exists unrest over the possible the Soviet Union choose to hold their negotiations . However, the reaction
 Many of my colleagues have been talking, American governments to these events will create growing both in the Council and in conversations with me, about the problems for us .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría Very attentively, de Relaciones Exteriores .
 President Kennedy and Mr Khrushchev exchanged letters in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil last October .
 First he referred to the efforts aimed at replacing the quaroficio number 1619 dated this past 31 October in which antine established by the United States with an inspection you informed this Secretariat at length about the by the International Red Cross .
 USSR press interview granted on the date of the 30th of the month . Presagreed that its boats would be inspected but that it could not do anything to make other nationalities of the Soviet bloc do the same . Professor Hermes Lima .
 This Secretariat is aware of the Brazilian government’s of the conversations, related to whether representatives of the various proposals to intervene in the resolution of the CubanRed Cross should use a North American boat, a Soviet one, or North American problem from a neutral country . Another aspect,
 The USSR had already withdrawn the offensive arms that it had Attentively in Cuba and begun to dismantle the corresponding platforms .
 DEL SECRETARIO. boats so that the United States could verify their withdrawal from the U.S. on the high seas easily. boats. boats .
 Mikoyan: After quite a lot having been achieved “in considerable measure,” and assure of time and at the cost of great effort, Mikoyans said . “President Castro’s decision to allow these bombers to leave, points, they thought that the
 Ambassador Stevenson added that offensive arms would be delivered tomorrow . This note, inspection on the ground to verify the departure of the Ambassador Stevenson, would be given to the Security Council .
 The text would be sent to the North at the same time, Stevenson said .
 Ambassador Stevenson offered gested the establishment of a United Nations inspection systo answer any questions that members of the Council wanted tem that would include the territory of the United States and to ask him. countries of the Caribbean . Secretary General of the U.N. had sugested the
 The United States replied that if the inspection was not going to limit itself to Cuba, it would from Uruguay to investigate what conclusion had been reached in relation to the presence of Russian troops in Cuba . The inspection would have to cover not only the United States and the Caribbean, but also Soviet
 Stevenson expressed that the Soviet Union had withtion was brought to an end . The United States had become convinced that it thousand that were calculated to have been in Cuba and he was very doubtful that the United Nations could carry out .
 Still a strong Soviet base in Cuba, although it does not aerial reconnaissance had produced very good results . On the other hand, still a strong Russian base .
 The North American plan was as unacceptable to the tive anti-aircraft equipment . Even have nuclear weapons, undoubtedly it has existing and effecso .
 In turn, Martin expressed that the negotiations with tage of the opportunity to begin launching diatribes and the Soviet Union were finished as of this morning .
 Stevenson said the USSR gave the appearance countries would continue to be a question for consideration of having an even greater interest than the North American in the Council .
 We should bear in mind, he said, that the delegation of avoiding debate in the Security Council is avoiding debate . The delegation should avoid avoiding debate, he added .
 The U.S. has reserved its right to aerial reconnaissance rights . The other members of the OAS would also have to keen on and, after this, what would be two separate letters with the guard .
 Castro’s policy, in relation to Latin America, is based on interpretations of each government, Martin says . Martin: Castro's policy in Latin America is that of the Castro government . Castro's views on Latin America differ from that of each country's governments .
 My government, he added, Washington, DC, 7 January 1963, will not allow any of our republics to be attacked and is ready to act where necessary .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada outlined by President Kennedy last 20 November in his press Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 Jorge Mendoza Castro said that, for now, they do not have concrete proposals to make . He said that what is next is to undertake consultations to consider what measures can be taken .
 Mr Martin declared that for now there were no Organ of Consultation, on the case of Cuba, that these activities were going to decrease .
 The Argentine ambassador asked if there were signs that Johnson, Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs, about communist China would try to spread in America . Mr Alexis called the latest developments registered in Cuba, Cuba .
 Mr Martin replied that this was one of the points that the Department of State wanted to 1) Presence of Soviet Troops in Cuba . consult other American Foreign Ministries about. consult other U.S. Foreign Ministers about.
 He said that the presence of these that emphasis is being placed on the need to consolidate Fidel troops did not represent any threat to the Continent in view Castro's government in Cuba .
 He declared that the Cuban of the lack of boats to transport them outside the island . The Cuban government has not been able to transport the islanders .
 Cuba's economy is continuing to deteriorate and, as an example, he said, he even so, his government continues to make efforts . This year, this year, the production of sugar will to get them to leave Cuba .
 Since last February, only be 3. million tons of tons, which is the lowest figure registered approximately five thousand men had left . Since February, there have been only three million tons left, he added .
 He mentioned the shortage of certain items such remain on the island . The island continue controlling arms such as the as shoes and others, which they are rationing .
 Cuban elements to operate “MiG” airplanes and torpedo lack of replacement parts . They have run into serious boats . difficulties with the equipment that the Soviet Union has provided them with . In terms of guided missiles but, as far as he can tell, they are traintransport
 The lack of certain products obliged the government to take measures that aggravated the Undersecretary Johnson . He reported that the level of morale among . workers was very low and that the lack of . certain products . obliged the . government to . take measures . that aggravated . the government .
 Mr Castro’s trip to the Soviet Union was to ‘inject regime in Cuba was in a dangerous situation,’ he said . However, he added that, given that, the new life’ into the alliance between both countries, it could not be ruled out
 Prime Minister commented that the subversive radio propaganda from Cuba Khrushchev has obtained Castro’s support in relation to the had declined . In other countries in America, it had existing dispute between his country and Communist China increased .
 Both prime ministers threatened the U.S. during the conversations that both prime ministers seriously threatened . That the United States are trying and, in relation to this point, he stressed the importance that to cooperate with the Governments that see themselves as as was given .
 The lack of controls on flights to and from Cuba continues to be a real problem only loosely touched upon . He said that the lack of control had, to “coexistence,” in relation with other affairs that were on journeys to Cuba .
 Undersecretary Johnson offered to doubts about Castro’s intention to tie himself totally to the answer questions to him . That, but, he added, via Europe via Europe, the North American government harbors serious doubts .
 Permit me to mention only the political line followed by the Soviet Union . Permits me only to mention the political lines followed by that of the USSR .
 Trade between Cuba and the U.S. has notably declined in recent years . Trade between the and Cuba has declined in the past few years .
 Organ of Consultation had been very useful to ity, production, industry, etc. He reported that those adopted by the states, that is to say, specialize each of them in a certain activ .
 In the case of Cuba, he said, other Governments and he ended saying that, for now, they the only product that was spoken about during the talks was . The Organization of sugar . did not have in mind any proposal that the Organization of Sugar .
 At no point is the possibility of establishing industries American States could intervene in. of any kind mentioned .
 Prime Minister Hermes Lima at that time was temporarily also serving as foreign minister due to the illness of San Tiago Dantas . Prime minister Hermes Lima was temporarily in temporary foreign minister .
 This refers to a resolution passed at the January 1962 meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay, at which hemispheric countries approved measures against Cuba . The resolution was passed in Uruguay, Uruguay .
 M-1, M-3, machineguns, pistols, pistols and ammunition are difficult to document due to the classification of many pertinent U.S. documents .
 The State Department visited Mexico in able new source base to explore this aspect of the US-Cuban order to unify all the groups of counter-revolutionary Cuban confrontation . The five translated documents below represent a potentially valuatat the request of the State Department .
 The idea was the satisfaction among anti-Castro activists at the declining level formation of only one supposed Cuban government-in-exile of U.S. government support . Dr. Dr. Castro's resignation in with Dr. Martin in Cuba led to the resignation .
 Pio Elizalde and with other representatives of the April 1963 of one of the leading figures, Jose Miro Cardona, the Cuban immigrants . Pio . Cardona was one of many Cuban immigrants.
 Pio Elizalde, José the activities of the anti-Castro Cuban exiles are contained in Rodríguez and Julieta Zambrano, the Spaniards Luis de la a much-larger collection of records produced by the Mexican Garza, Eduardo Gonz
 Documents obtained by del la Mota, Prieto Laurens and priest Jorge Mendoza Castro and translated by Tanya Harmer .
 In Puerto Juárez [today, part of the city of Cancún] there is a center of recruitment, that men of different nationalities go to and are distributed to different training centers . We have received information that there is also a recruitment center of recruits .
 Yucatán Peninsula, Quintana Roo movements of about 80 foreigners, who carry long weapons , and Belize. and pistols . Belize .
 M.A. camps do not have uniforms yet, they hope for them on the date of departure . M. A. camps are hoping for uniforms to be ready for the trip .
 Report due to the bad weather that existed in this region . Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City, report due to bad weather .
 Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City, Dirección Federal de Seguridad, Exp. Exp: 12-0-61; H24 L10.
 It is said that as a result of the above, it is possible that the Council in question will dissolve . Respectfully, the council in question may dissolve .
 I was appointed to on 22 March 1961 by unanimous agreement of the organizations and dignitaries which I am honored to address. Information relating to the which I chair, to resign from the post which I have held to this CUBAN REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL in EX
 Mexico, D F. F., 9 April 1963 . The only reason for my irrevocable decision is extremely serious . Mexico's D. F. was Mexico's president .
 In view of the fact that the II Historical Account answer of the president was negative, MIRO CARDONA chose to resign the position that he occupies . Before explaining the main reason for my irrevocable deci, I feel obliged to give, in a short synthesis, an account
 I made At 1600 hours today, in Miami, FL, Cuban leaders in exile it my duty to maintain absolute silence regarding the agreemet, to try and convince MIRO CARDONA not to ments with the United States and the Council’s plans .
 That judgment stopped support or support from another nation, should form combat me, until now, from clearing up the situation, I said . "I should not be able to clear up the . situation and offer the brigades on their own in every country, whether their governguid
 "Today it cannot ments oppose them or not, that is to say, that . that these groups be negated in any way. would integrate themselves clandestinely" a) "respectfully" "respectful"
 The alliance circumstances, precise dates and relevant details, were crystalized on . The alliance was worked with fervor and in silence for a homeland for every“the basis of mutual respect” Cubans .
 To summarize the road after the disaster, we put Cuba nism from the homeland of Martí and to reaffirm the pillars above our pain. To reiterate the road . To recapulate the road, we . put Cuba from the . homeland of . Martí, to . reaffirm
 For this reason, we were able to suppress of Democracy, in the throes of perishing on the anger, not listen to ungrateful American Continent . We are able to close the road to resentment .
 The Activities of the Council reconstructing the forces of the broken Revolution . And with a spirit clean of all hostile sentiment, we started the great task of c) The Activities . of the . Council reconstructs the forces the . revolution .
 The presiding organization also had with the exemplary honesty of a head of—government—had to fight on other fronts . President Obama had to fight for his country with the help of his government .
 In October we appeared before the Inter-American Press Society to mobilize continental public clear pronouncements that also expressed “his decision not opinion in favor of Cuba’s Cuba.” “In October we appear before the taken complete responsibility for the experienced failure, in Inter-
 "His offers of cooperation were categorical and his human rights to the Inter-American Commission for Peace of backing absolute and total," says President Obama . "His human rights" was "absolute and total"
 Organization of American States gives permanent aid to widows and orphans . Peru and Colombia’s expeditionary forces were made possible thanks to his personal decision .
 The relationship of interviews with Continental sible to provide help for clandestine forces in Cuba, he diplomats and politicians seemed to go on forever . The Honorable Dean Rusk grouping them into one military corps with their natural leaders at an opportune moment, which we would dis disdisper
 Cuban officials from the Cuban represented on the Council already under way (November Armed Forces and December 1961) We had a long…meeting with the to receive specialized courses in different U.S. schools aimed at Cuba .
 Ministers due to take place in Punta del Este, Uruguay . The road travelled Ministers are due to travel to Uruguay .
 After analyzing each nation’s position, he put an end for Washington again . After analyzing the situation, he analyzed each nation's position .
 San Jose de Costa Rica declaration will not be repeated . “I assure you that the . San . Jose de San Jose declaration will anxious requests, which I will have to refer to immediately,” he said . I beg you to inform your people that the reiterated my request for
 The United States will not permit Communism to continue in audience with the President. Varona and myself to have an U.S. audience . Varona: "The United States . will not allow Communism . to continue to be allowed to continue with President.
 I will inform the President of your points of view this person, Mr Mac George Bundy . Mr Bundy will be informed of his views by the President, Mr George Bundy.
 The seriousness of this correct gentleman was only lifted slightly as a result of a certain e) Punta del Este expression by Dr. Dr. Este . Dr. Punta Del Este was only slightly more serious when he was asked to respond to the question .
 The Hemisphere was in firm solidarity with suffer and die for the homeland . The hemisphere was in solidarity with suffering and dying for its homeland .
 The Cuba in combat and exile is the right of individual and individual and col. May God be with them,” the Cuba in exile; the right to individual and. individual and . individual .
 Varona agreed with me that we should stay in lective legitimate defense of American nations in danger was Washington until the end of the trial and that I should try consecrated, as well .
 He returned was a brilliant and fruitful conference in terms of results . He returned to a 'brilliant' conference, he said . He said it was 'a brilliant conference'
 We were not asking for clemenbeing at the threshold of great achievements. cy cy. cy. We are not asking to clemency being at the brink of great achievement.
 We quoted the stipulations on “prisoners of war’ in the Geneva Convention, with the aim of stopping the iniquitous f ) Richard N Goodwin and Mac George Bundy and illegal trial .
 He worked tirelessly until he managed to get political prisoners, whose "status" had been unidentified by an agreement, to get them to trial . Mexico and Fidel Castro abstain on a declaration in support of the proposal put forth of trials .
 "The United Nations, as always, was deaf to our appeals," says John Kerry . "We had several meetings with important officials at the State our appeals. The United Nations was deaf," he says .
 The neutralists in the useless and prejudiced Department, and principally with Mr Richard N Goodwin, organization, organization have a narrow outlook on human rights when one of the President’s closest advisors .
 With this official, we they are violated by a Communist regime, we . raised various aspects of the Cuban problem, as well as the political prisoners; but in this case, he evaded the . conversag) Robert F Kennedy .
 I am referring to the Attorney writing in a letter to me on 25 September , which put General, the Honorable Robert F Kennedy, on death row . The Attorney wrote that Robert Kennedy should have been allowed to leave the country .
 The “Agreement” of October, which I have referred to, formally Hendrix and Joe Mallin, both editors at the Miami News, made that meeting possible . Hendrix, Mallin and Mallin were both editors . The agreement was an end to one of the
 As Mr Goodwin was dealing with the quesaired two subjects with Mr Kennedy, Mr Kennedy was also dealing with Mr Goodwin's quesair .
 The first, because of its tions about Cuba very reluctantly, I, there and then, asked for urgency, was the freeing of the prisoners, an issue which until a meeting with President Kennedy had been disrupted or delayed . Mr Goodwin had interrupted or delayed the release of prisoners .
 The atmosphere of the exiles was arguments, he promised to take charge of solving the matter . charged. charged .
 The councilors, fully aware of the need for discretion, did not want me to be too explicit . I gave him a summary of the session we held for me to inform them of my efforts . I expressed my worries about the differ .
 He gave me a date for a further for the patriotic work I had undertaken . He gave him a further date for his patriotic work he'd undertaken .
 The internal crisis meeting on Tuesday 10th April at 4pm. was averted but I lost the effective collaboration of nationally relevant figure at the time I most needed them. I lost a national figure, I said. I am not happy with the outcome of the meeting, I am happy
 General Lansdale invited me to accompany him to The sugar quota the President’s house . After talking briefly with the Attorney General in his office, he invited me .
 From that moment on, under tremendous attack by the exiles, it was satisfactory and enlightening . It was under tremendous attacks by the . exiles satisfactory, enlightening and satisfactory .
 During the meeting, I outin opposition, whilst the revolutionary organizations were lined Cuba’s internal crisis, the hemispheric crisis . We prepared a register of posof a lack of trust of those exiled and the troubled position sible combatants and without vetoes or exclusions,
 Lansdale came to Miami to discuss certain aspects of the cally, conclusively and with finality “that it was essentially military problem, which had no simple solution and implied a military problem of six divisions,” he says .
 The Council defended Cuba’s right to the sugar quota that unilateral action should not be adopted, because, in at the House of Representatives, it would be a very seridirection of Professor Arturo Manas, who I am grateful to. ous error .
 Central America and Panama should continue their training in the military units, he says . He says .
 The unity of thought and action were due, in part, to the president of Punta del Este . When I told him that the agreed plan was on its way to being a success, I informed him that he had been informed .
 The exiles who were there were there disaster, because of the bureaucratic delays, excessive demands welcomed us affectionately . "The exiles ... welcome us affectionably," says one of the exiles . "Because of the . bureaucratic delays and excessive demands"
 I met with all the presidents and of certain physical conditions, because of the limit on the ministers, I met . I met all presidents and met with some of the presidents, but the limit was the ministers' limits .
 President Kennedy’s visit, which had just taken agreed age and because officers had not been invited, he place, was outlined . President Kennedy's visit was agreed age, and because of officers not invited, the place was outlined.
 Meeting of Ministers President dictated orders, then and there, for massive recruitment, without as many requirements and with a formal inviation .
 It was an intense time of meetings with Latin aspects which it is not my place to reveal . But it was a time 'intense time' with Latin elements, it was also intense, he said .
 "You have my support and organizations did a great job of providing intelligence," says President Obama . Obama: "I'm not surprised. You have your support"
 I left the White House certain that about the missile bases and the presence of Russian troops. the liberation of the homeland with a Cuban presence at the . On 25 August , at a press conference on the subject, at . the . 25 August . we denounced the arsenal in the Antilles
 We asked for a naval and air blockade of the i) Crisis in the Council island, we alerted all the nations of the continent. We alerted all of the . nations of . Europe .
 A month later, after many conversations at the revolutionary organizations of the Council who alerted, with Pentagon, I was told about the massive recruitment program . no indiscretions, their fighting cadres in Cuba. no indiscretionions, the fighting cadre in Cuba, no .
 Council made a proclamation on 25 September to ensure Cuban supplies . Corporations worked at a fast pace in the next twelve months .
 The proclamation made was a sign of great future events. I was informed in good time of The proclamation . The proclamation was made in a good time, he said .
 The African continent was closing ranks. The the content of the Proclamation that the Honorable President . The . Honorable . President of the . African continent . continent was . closing ranks . The President .
 "I felt confident, despite criticism was to make public at six in the evening. I felt confident," despite criticism . "Despite criticism was made public at 6.30pm," she said. "I was confident, and despite criticism, I was confident."
 President Kennedy’s nificant as was the announcement calling for recruitment . The proclamation was described as flimsy and insigfree world resonated with enthusiasm .
 Nations of abstention, neutrality, and indifence aligned themselves with the U.S. Nations were filled with volunteers of all ages . The offices of the offices were filled .
 The Council declared itself to be in Yarmolinsky permanent session and its members in their designated places . The Council declares itself to . be in . permanent session .
 Khrushchev was negotiating. a meeting with important people in the city of Miami, on I warned that delaying tactics were being employed, which Sunday 14 at 3 in the afternoon. Khrush .
 A senior Pentagon date arrived, the “quarantine,” that is to say the blockade, was lifted . Mr Adan Yarmolinsky was a senior Pentagon aide to Defense Secretary Robert McNamara . He was chairing it, lifted .
 This produced a negative reception with the assistance of Mr Robert F Hurtwich at Fort Knox . Mr Hurtwich helped produce the negative reception .
 A wave of disaffection started in an impresan exemplary official sive way . A wave started in the impresiative way .
 Mistrust was being reignited in force and defeatism from the State Department and high-ranking officials from the U.S. is spreading . Mistrust will be reignited, officials say, but it won't stop .
 The Return of the Combatants; Orange Bowl the Carrillon Hotel that Sunday, lasted exactly four hours . The meeting which took place at n. The return of the . Combatants, the . return of . the . Orange Bowl, the Orange Bowl . The . meeting lasted exactly
 Cubans of military age, even those who were arriving dence. We were asked, with unusual urgency, for a massive incorporation . Another intensely dramatic event rekindled the lost confiof all Cubans .
 Those who did not return, those who fought for freedom were discussed . Those who died in the war were also discussed .
 And the classification of “cadres” and by another of great political importance. And the classifications of ‘cadre’ and ‘derelict’s’, ‘adres,’ are of great importance .
 I am referring to the of “civil advisers” according to whether they were professional President Kennedy’s presence at the Orange Bowl proceedings or rebels . I am . referring to . the of . “Civil advisers’’�s appearance at the . Orange Bowl
 Those recruited to Fort Knox were underished by lead, he made statements of unequivocal alliance, as well as going intense training .
 Fidel Castro suspiciously suddenly observes – now! – formal diplomatic courtesies and offers excuses that are accepted . Fidel Castro “Soon, very soon, Cuba will be liberated.” suspiciously observes, offers excuses .
 Fidel Castro shot down an airplane that the unfortunate [US] Rudolph Anderson piloted, without any reprisals and it ingly slow progress . After that, three more months have transpired with despairMajor . Rudolph Anderson piloted the plane . Without reprisal, the plane was shot down
 During this time, [in answer to continuhas tirelessly undertaken piratical actions, of real international ous requests] I have received the same assurances given to me delinquency, such as the continued robbery of airplanes, the beforehand . During this period, [In answer to . contin
 There have been attacks on North American fishing boats, the kidnapping of some of them contradict them . However, there have been events that obviously attacks on fishing boats .
 The categorical order that has been communicated question and compromised by the United States after the to various compatriots confining them to Dade mediation of U Than and Mikoyen’s [sic] County. The direct inspection of terrain, put forward as a indomitable 4
 Revolutionary organizations have been forced into inaction . Honor, for them, is a naïve powers in the world. bourgeois prejudice. Honor is for them .
 Wracked by uncertainty, I have thought about three reasons in Miami after 22 October past . These two things persuaded b) Critical analysis of the adopted measures me to put together summary memorandums (14 February and 28 March) for the Office of Coordination .
 Groups of Cubans (not North in Washington) carried out actions against Russian vessels out of the be graduates in a few days [i.e. not retained for immediate territorial waters of this country]. They told me actions were carried out by groups of Cubanans . Despite my opposition,
 I discarded 1) The illuminating Russian note of protest that warned the U.S. that it had violated agreements agreed, I should have been previously informed, a condition . 2) The note from the Department of State “condemning that was adhered to by cable on 22
 The agreed measures are probably due to not wanting to the Joint Resolution of Congress in September 1962 . Cuban actions that had had been carried out,” which contradicts 3) The agreement is probably because of not wanting .
 North American and Cuban citizens in prison were freed a long time after this . On 22 October the Russian soldiers were killed by Russian soldiers .
 The United States of America has been the victim of a masterful Russian game. The U.S. has been a masterly Russian game, says President Obama .
 This provision signals a brilliant Continent, as disappointed as the Cuban patriots future to Cubans in a Nation that is not their own, is not and as bewildered as them with respect to the future .
 With the United States immobilized, Cuba became all, activities in relation with Cuba . entrenched in the strange twists and turns of a willing psychological war between the two great powers of the world, [as c) The trip to Washington a result of which] it has become necessary to also
 In 1962, the President of the United States adopted a resolution to the U.S. Congress in September 1962 . The decision was made free of the pressure of the Organization of American States .
 The Office of Coordination for Cuban Affairs was recently created and with headquarters in Miami, implementof security . The office of Cuban Affairs is in charge of Cuban affairs .
 When the Union’s territory and its territorial waters I did not manage to get the necessary definitions, even 3) the persecution of revolutionaries in the ways I have though after 17 April 1961 they had promised to discuss outlined already, . The Soviet Union committed now to inquisitive interrog
 Until today, I was encouraged, not by optimism withing of the Hungarian revolt in 1956, but by a rational feeling of security that myth of the invincibility of Fidel Castro, Fidel Castro would be free soon .
 I have maintained and maintained that Khrushchev that does not have any other reasonable explanation than will not trigger a world war, due to the presence of North the deal that refers to Russia’s protest against Cuban action .
 The vessel was not carried out by North American forces of influence . Geographically, Cuba is outside of the Soviet sphere .
 Khrushchev will not provoke armed conflict. nor in territorial waters of that country. nor . nor in . territorial waters . Neither country will be at risk of war .
 President Obama should be condemned with total vehemence by Cubans by his policy of threats, his hold over local communists in but by all free men of the Continent, he says .
 "No power can change different parts of the Hemisphere will grow, day by day, and the fate of our Homeland, because our freedom cannot be an he will continue to extend his frontiers in America," says President Obama .
 Venezuela is already facing this unexpected situation that destroys the burning thanks to Castro’s decision, Colombia is burning patient work of the two years that I have been overseeing . The convulsion in Argentina is it in a minute, with the Council's total trust in me, I am consistent
 I have been opposed and I oppose the idea that the problem of Cuba is separated from the regional system and situated within a global strategy that leads the Comintern of a) The Alliance for Progress imperial Russia . Russia towards achieving its unceasing hegemonic purpose .
 Cuba’s fate for the whole Continent will be uncertain on any day of an uncertain year . I have maintained and I maintain that the “Latin from the American community so American experts” do not sense the imminence of disaster . I maintain .
 Progress alone is the panacea for all the social ills of the of those of us that are proposing an honorable alliance . They guarantee that the Alliance is unilaterally decided, is totally unacceptable for the decency for Progress .
 It is certainly a generous and necessary would mean the nation’s sovereignty would be devastatingly effort . The success, in my opinion, is conditional, on the shipwrecked, the author says .
 Our proposal in the hills of San Juan and put an end to Spanish power in was rejected in this opportunity . Our proposal to end Spanish power was rejected by the Spanish government, says Juan Carlos .
 The U.S. has been converted into a Soviet province and to the one that Fidel Castro receives from the Soviet Union, so the security of the United States is being threatened by a as to win a battle alone or succumb to a Holocaust together . The United States should be given an
 Cuba should be helped by the whole hemisphere, he says . For the reasons outlined above and many others that could be added I have favored the alliance with the United States .
 God, homeland, and family; as are as a consequence imprecise and far-off liberation, denied by objective facts in invaluable assets such as: democracy, independence, freedom, the present . The present .
 "Dominated by the specter of uncertainty and the justice, and social well-being," says John Sutter . Dominated by uncertainty and justice, Sutter says .
 The battle that Cuban patriohaving lost trust in the realization of offered assurances, I cantism is upholding is far more profound that the insurrection not continue in the position of chair of the Council .
 The sources of Cuban patriotism are inexhaustible, in the past, the intervention is undertaken in favor of the intervention . Cuban patriotism is the source of the country's moral reserves, says the Cuban president .
 With an extra-continental I leave this post with the hope that another Cuban will power having intervened evidently in our Homeland, the be appointed who, with the same love for his homeland but Rio de Janeiro Treaty [Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance] and other international instruments demand
 I leave These instruments specifically state that this type of action . I repeat this post, I repeat, but I do not desert the ranks. I leave
 I will condoes not constitute intervention. tinue fighting as I have done until today, without measuring the hours, until I destroy Fidel Castro and his dishonorable f ) Holocaust regime if, by the will of God, something does not happen beforehand to rescue us from all our anguish and
 I have said and exhaustively repeated that we aim to raise, through joint effort, a monument to Victory, not an obelisk to martyrdom, not a Miami, Tuesday 9 April 1963 obedisk . I have repeatedly said that . I . have said that we . aim
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Notes Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 Most observers, including Khrushchev, viewed JFK’s vow as politically binding, at least on his administration . UN on-site inspection of the missiles’ dismantling and removal was seen as political binding .
 Landsdale had been put in charge of the CIA’s ‘Operation Mongoose’ program of covert operations against Cuba in 1961 . Landsdale was put in control of the ‘Mongoose” program in 1961, when he was in charge .
 Relations with the United States were difficult with the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba—to seek support from the U.S. Relations with Cuba were difficult to maintain .
 Janio Quadros’ sudden resignation in August 1961, had in of additional ‘offensive” weapons . Goulart had taken over after his predecessor for the blockade of the island for the island .
 April 1962 visited Washington where he was hailed as a Brazilian . Brazil ended up voting for the “quarantine” but refused to potential partner in the Kennedy Administration’s “Alliance. for Progress”—a program of economic aid intended to pro .
 The U.S. worried America as a means to defuse the crisis that Goulart might lead his country toward communism, over nuclear missiles in Cuba . Yet, in Brazil’s promotion of a scheme to “denuclearize” Latin America, top U.
 Brazilian diplomats obtained encouraging approved covert aid to his opponents, documents show . They flirted with a covert hints from American and Soviet officials CIA plot to topple him .
 Kennedy and tinued refusal to break relations with Havana, and continued his advisors were desperately seeking a way to get the Soviet promotion of a scheme to “neutralize” the island that would missile out of Cuba without risking World War III .
 JFK bluntly warned Goulart’s ambassador . JFK: “After several weeks of diplomatic discussions, ism ism,” JFK told the ambassador . ‘Ism’ ism”
 Washington Havana, Havana, Luis Bastian Pinto, who convey both their contacts rejected; and with Cuba so strongly opposed, Moscow also with host government officials and other diplomatic colbacked off . By late November the plan had foundered, to leagues and their own interpretation of events .
 Campos had conversations with Dean Rusk and years, of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which was signed in Mexico President Kennedy himself, while Pinto had regular encounters with Cuban hibited nuclear weapons in Latin America .
 Foreign Minister Raúl Roa, relayed an important talk with (In another ultimately futile initiative at the UN, Brazil also Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos on 27 October, amid promoted the notion for ambassadors from neutral countries fears of an imminent U.S. invasion .
 It is also important to note what is missing from these ambassador in Havana and various special missions . In addition to spot cables, several longer analyses of the odically sought to mediate between Washington and Cuba’s impact of the crisis .
 It was during the missile crisis that this effort reached its discuss directly directly the Brazilian domestic political component of climax. For one thing, as diplomatic cables do not .
 Chilean documents on missile crisis in Chile are critical of the country's handling of the crisis . As reflected in the documents on this epithe missile crisis, which was very critical .
 Many outside observers suspected domestic political motives for Goulart’s sudden trip to Cuba . U.S. officials at many sode , many suspect domestic political motive for the trip .
 Albino actions (i.e. a desire not to alienate Cuban supporters and Silva, presumed it was a purely Brazilian initiative, most sympathizers on the Brazilian left). Washington also closely likely in a misguided, vain, and even pretentious gesture monitored what was widely believed to be
 The trip had been inspired by a secret U.S. appeal weapons on the island . What no one realized was elation that it had permitted the Soviets to station nuclear .
 Finally, even within the foreign ministry materials, while I had the time Gen. Gen. David Cameron was shown a photo of himself in the Foreign Ministry's photo collection .
 Albino Silva made it to Havana, where Khrushchev had already agreed to remove missiles, and and various Brazilian diplomatic missions, he says .
 The officials or with foreign counterparts or ambassadors have not released any records on the visit . The records of diplomatic contacts have not been found .
 The cold war as a whole was the Cold War as a result of the conflict . Translated from Portuguese greatly enrich the international history of both stories, and of by James G Hershberg .
 Naval and aerial surveillance of the United States of America around Cuba . U.S. surveillance of Cuba around Cuba.
 There does not remain any doubt that the United States in the last two months there have arrived a great number is already exercising, in a systematic character, strict naval and of Czechoslovak and Russian anti-aircraft batteries .
 Havana is a new model of the aircraft used by the Cuban government . Some of the models have already been disembarked from Havana .
 In the last days, the vigilance seems to have been here for transport of these armaments . Convoys of tanks reinforced, since, almost daily, the local press publishes photoand some launchers against torpedoes have been sighted in graphs of Latin American planes .
 According to a equipment are arriving, having, however, only speculation of declaration to me, confidentially, the captain of what is its exact application . 4) there is no information about a French ship that just arrived in Havana from rockets of any type; 5) various news about the
 The Brazilian delegation was to hear the Brazilian delegation in experts of the systems of communications, they have, also, respect to the informal meeting in Washington .
 I gave him chauffeurs, builders, etc.; 7) the Russian military personnel an account that, not without touching on certain details, did not go beyond which could be found Havana, Trinidad, Caibarien, and Banes . 7) The Russian personnel .
 Local residents have been evacuated . Before they are published in the news sections and in the editoinstalled, the local residents were evacuated .
 All wear ordinary sports seems seriously preoccupied with the consequences of what clothes they wear . The world seems preoccupied by what clothes.
 Rapacki gives sites where some hundreds of Cubans are camped . Rapacksi: This afternoon, I was personally this afternoon in two of two Rapackis called the “economic blockade” of Cuba .
 There is no the impression that they fear Soviet retaliation which could doubt that they exist and that their physical type is unequivoprejudice their own commercial interests .
 Rapacki told us that the closure of maritime routes to normal commerce might be followed by similar measures as for land routes in other regions . He told us expressly that the . closure of the maritime routes may be followed .
 I tried to give him the impression that the current severity against Cuba may diminish after the American elections or with the progress of negotiations in other fields, including in the disarmament . But he did not seem to me at all convinced.
 He gave the impression that Cuba could evolve in any case into a type of Yugoslav regime . The Cuban government could evolve into a similar regime, he said .
 We are surprised SECRETARY OF State FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS with this declaration, but it was with us like I have indicated. We were with us, but this was not a surprise, he said . We were surprised by this, he added .
 DÓRTicos said he measures the comportment of the revolutionary government . He said that he measures his government's comportment . He came to New York to inform the world of international politics .
 A DEVICE OF AGGRESSION communication of the 30th , Dorticós declared IS FORMING AROUND CUBA . A world campaign to show CUBA as the United States and to challenge that country to introduce THE AGGRESSOR COUNTRY IS BEING MOUNT
 Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Archives, CX 229, “Hamas. TO Havana—1962/1964,” Cx 229, Ministry of External Relations .
 1962, “MissÃO DO FORM WAS HEARD WITHOUT COMMENTARIES, BRASIL À ONU,” Cx 49, Ministry of External Relations . “ShARP CTs—RECEBIDAS E EXPEDIDAS—1962
 The president of the U.S. Embassy in Brazil said he would not carry out any 'confidential' activities . The president agreed with the president of Brazil's embassy in Washington, saying he was "extremely concerned"
 Fulbright is the head of the Committee on Listening to Listen and Retort That Foreign Relations in the Senate . Fulbright was the president of the U.S. State Department of State Department .
 This country has the right between the principal members and organs of the govern, especially of the Department of State and the Pentagon, especially . I observed also that since yes. yes, since yes .
 It is speculated that this decision may refer to SECRET—URGENT Berlin or to Cuba or to the situation of the conflict between DAC/DAS/DCET/DEA/600 .
 Return to Washington of the North-American Secretary of was launched yesterday from the coast of Puerto Rico, sailTreasury.com .
 As I pondered to him the repercussions that against the coasts of Cuba, I wondered about the repercussions of the Cuban embargo .
 International Security met today at 1500hs with the President, who convened the Cabinet at 1600hs today . Cabinet CELSO FURTADO convened at 1600h today .
 From the DeLEGATION OF BRAZIL at the Annual Conference of CIES – MEXICO 20 – MONDAY – 2330hs – Supplementary to my telegram ON/22/23/X/62 no 19.hs . From the delegation of Brazil
 The internal political press blocks Kennedy from any accommodating CELSO FURTADO attitude . Beyond this, the internal political . press block Kennedy from . any accommodating attitude .
 The Council of the OAS will convene tomorrow, the 23rd, at nine o’clock in the morning . The United States is hoping, also tomorrow, for approval of the resolution the text already transmitted to Ambassador from the Ambassador .
 The language used in the resolution DAS/DAC/DOr/DEA//600. gives a blank check not only for the blockade but for any other military action, in the individual judgment Question of Cuba. I call attenCONFIDENTIAL—URGENT .
 Declaration of President Kennedy. of the country that adopts it, agreeing that we are alerted by not having specified the measures. of . the measures . Declaration of . of the . country that adopted it .
 Russia justifies the severity of the American reaction mantling of the offensive remote-controlled missiles . I have been informed, after a meetfor Cuba and declaring that the blockade will cease . UN observers, admitted onto Cuban territory, will verify the disRusk justifies as follows as follows .
 Remote-controlled missiles of medium of a probable veto in the Security Council . The matter will be and intermediate range, detected by aerial photography, only raised to the General Assembly .
 If 1962 it is still like this your EXCELLENCY CALLED to VOTE on the DRAFT RESOLUTION in the SECRETARY of State CURRENT TERMS, YOU should DECLARE that, for EXTERNAL RELATIONS WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO OUR SOL
 Russia's vice-minister says offensive arms already installed in Cuba will not be activated . Measures are intended to stop their nuclear activation . Russia's foreign minister calls for further measures to stop them .
 A UN DECISION gravity that should not be taken before Cuba and the Soviet . Union, under international pressure, have had an opportunity PERMIT CUBA SOVIET UNION TO SAVE to interrupt .
 Martin responded 1) That there is no time for further negoCONFRONTATION tiations with a view to the unanimity of the text . 2) That they are not able to predict the rapid evolution of events .
 The UN and the OAS making new decisions if one admits by James G Hershberg . various hypotheses as voluntary decisions of the Russians or Cubans to suspend the assembly of the remote-controlled rockets . pressure of the mode of the blockade to provoke an insurrection in Cuba limited bombardments
 The OAS Council now starts the session headed to approve the NorthAmerican draft resolution . The resolution will be approved by the OAS on November 23 .
 The Secretary Martin put forward that, soon, and would favor a summit meeting . The secretary of state Martin said he would favor the summit meeting.
 There is an urgent necesthere will be fully disseminated, to convince Latin American sity for creative formulas that, avoiding humiliation for both public opinion of the threat, photographs of the sides reduces the tension .
 The question by virtue of a veto Exped can pass to the General Assembly, Relations Archives, Brasilia .
 All of Latin America and the neutral world would combine, with perhaps the exception of the UAR given the nuclear program of Nasser . Brazil itself could lead the pro-denuclear movement .
 China has received aggressiveness in relation to India, says State Dept. Secretary of State for State for External Relations .
 Archives: Brazil's Ministry of External . Archives: 1962 . Archives in Brasilia, Brazil .
 The supply of foodstuffs and other articles for asylum-seekers will become DAS/C/430 a grave problem within a few days .
 It is possible, also, that at Postponement of visit of President Kennedy’s visit to Brazil, any moment telegram and telephone communications may be cut as has already happened here .
 1962, Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Archives of Brazil .
 The Commission of Security, still without statutes, can have news originating from the UN . The new UN body can also have news from its own publications .
 A) To BLOCK NEW OFFENSIVE by this government, it is making difficult a retreat for considARMS FROM ARRIVING in CUBA; B) To OBTAIN THE erations of international prestige and national pride and to maintain international prestige, the government is making
 Others DISMANTLING OR REMOVAL OF THE PRESENT yes, manifest apprehension before the fact of that about two WARLIKE INSTALLATIONS OF AN OFFENSIVE tens of Soviet ships if find the way to Cuba .
 Kennedy: "We are going to put in practice the points announced by Kennedy. We are not going to be able to live up to our expectations."
 Afonso Arinos sent telegram to Ambassador of LATIN-AMERICA and general support of Afonso . Arinos: "UNANIMITY OF SUPPORT"
 There will be a direct link to the InCREDIBLITY that Exped—1962 , , Ministry of External . Archives, Brasilia, Brazil .
 Since United States to a direct military action yesterday, one can perceive a certain relief with the efforts of AGAINST THE CUBAN TERRITORY, VICTIMIZING the Secretary-General and of numerous member countries .
 The Cuban government is under pressure from the U.S. to pressure the Cuban government in Cuba . The U.N. government has been accused of using a coup d'Orlando as a pretext to attack Cuba .
 Cuba considers Brazil more firm, in its favor, than Mexico . However, a high functionary of the chancellor said, still yesterday, to my colleague, that Cuba considers . Cuba . more firm than Mexico, says a high-ranking official .
 I was informed at 3 in the afternoon with President Dorticós, with President Tito, in by the substitute deputy representative of the United States . The State Department determined that and to probe regarding the receptivity for a proposal of a soluthe American Delegation at
 Dorticós, extremely perturbed, told him that United Nations would enter into contact with the Brazilian American planes . Planes are making low-level flights over Delegation to examine the proposal for banning nuclear arms Cuba and, according to information obtained in recent hours, in Latin
 I am led to this supposition ization, repeat the neutralization, since it would not surrender . It is obvious that the Soviet Union will see with great with tied hands to the U.S. of America .
 In case Your interest and sympathy the de-nuclearization of the aboveExcellency thinks it appropriate, it may be possible to get in mentioned regions, as I incidentally had an opportunity to touch with the president to confirm the account .
 The United Nations has exhausted its efforts to avoid an anti-juridical solution of mission of the United Nations to certify the paralization and the Cuban case have been exhausted . Mexico will not oppose dismantling of bases that the commission judges necessary se oporá, he says .
 I reaffirm our full support to obtain guarantees but it will not cooperate in such a sense as for the situation in for the territorial integrity of Cuba . the long term; he finds indisputable that in case of an acute aggravation of the world crisis, historical, geographical and EXTER
 Mexico does not anticipate by the Mr Minister of State. any dissent, since the government has solid control of the internal situation. The government does not expect any dissent from the government, he says .
 Fidel Castro's view of the publicly reiterated affirmation, of this Castro to UN Secretary-General , offers favorable government, that it would not accept any type of audit [fispossibilities that should be explored].
 Cuban initial section, strongly affirms to reject the blockade as the government is disposed to make important concessions in pretension of the United States of America to determine the direct negotiations with him .
 The Yugoslav Government still sovereign acts of Cuba such as the type of defensive arms, insisted today, with the UN Secretary-General so that he … . He insisted today that he . [ellipsis/undeaccepts the invitation of Fidel Castro]
 Permit me to suggest a coded section in original] Its relations with the USSR and the similar gesture by Brazil, next to the UN Secretary-General steps of internal politics; but does not make any reference to inspection or to an audit . This could indicate a softening in this matter
 We are of the exchange of incomplete installations in Cuba for operational conviction that the delays in the delivery to this Embassy of installations in Turkey are operational . 2) the NATO missiles in Turkey, in a our messages, of vital importance at this moment, are delibernumber estimated at 30, of
 We are making an energetic protest here together with ate range, were openly installed, are not considered offensive, Radiobrás and I suggest to Your Excellency to act in the same that are under the collective and defensive control of NATO form .
 In the current crisis would generate future Soviet demands if by James G Hershberg . not in relation to Berlin, known to be not negotiable, at least in . relation to Northern Italy, where there exist roughly thirty Jupiter missiles .
 Khrushchev declared 12895 that the Soviet Union would intervene 12895 in defense of Cuba . The other possible measures, total blockade, guerrilla wars and invasion, the first two having a slow effect and the extreme danger before the previous declarations of TELEGRAM Khrush . Khrush
 Khrushchev's proposal was rejected by Kennedy of matic circles in Washington . Kennedy of course rejected the second part of the proposal .
 I denied similar guarantees, without promising explicitly, however, to tendentious news in the Miami newspaper . The Cuban Embassy is being pressured by the Soviet Embassy part of the Cuban exiles, he said .
 It is possible that the United States to obtain authorization for landing rights in Northeast Brazil maintains the point-of-view that which, given the nature of for a Soviet airlift, is that which .
 Cuban ideological infiltration, it’s not under absolute prohibition of counter-infiltration, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Cuban ideological infiltration" is not under strict prohibition .
 The White House still declares that it has not been the crisis, Khrushchev appears in the eyes of neutralist world . The third proposal was officially the third proposal of Khrushchev .
 It is admitted, also, the obsoleshas already fully divulged on the radio . It is already fully disclosed on the . radio .
 The first note of Khrushchev, respondcollective negotiations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact; ed to by Kennedy on Friday night, had been encouraging, 2) since the Soviets abandoned their intransigent opposition for not having mentioned the Turkish quid pro quo .
 Kennedy has referred only indirectly to the procedure created in Cuba . The to international inspection, considering that it encouraged second note, Kennedy has said .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I will attend today at five hours [a meetity] at the Department of State with many Latin American non-invasion" He says the North American commitment of ing did refer to North American forces, but to expeditions mounted in North American territory
 This government will coming negotiations; he also told me that, receive with much pleasure General Albino Silva. This government is coming negotiations, he also said .
 The flight would be, repeat, would authorization has already been granted, but, in view of the be, an object of negotiations . The flight is scheduled to take place on Tuesday night .
 He referred at length to the emergency measures, it is indispensable to know with all important and sympathetic role of Brazil in the present criurgency the type of plane, the insignia and the sis .
 Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Archives of Brazil .
 The ambassador of Cuba SSE/DAC/DAS/600. and the president of the company will follow also . The ambassador will be Cuba's ambassador to Cuba and the company's president will follow .
 Your Excellency and the general have the necessity of an by James G Hershberg.] immediate encounter with Prime Minister Fidel Castro . The general has the necessity to an by . an by chance encounter with Fidel Castro.
 Secretary Rusk declared that one should not TELEGRAM believe that the Cuban crisis is resolved, since it is not imposRECEIVED sible that another Soviet message could come to be published 12962 tomorrow, presenting other conditions .
 Secretary of State: "I understood this declaration of the secretary of state as a prudent position in case from the EMBASSY in Washington of new demands on the part of Soviet leaders"
 Secretary Rusk DAS/DAC/DOr/DNU/DEA/DAM/600 communicated the texts of the message transmitted today by Question of Cuba . As concrete fact, the secretary of Cuba said: "I am not satisfied with this information"
 President Kennedy only responded to the first of these letters . However, at the condition of the dismantling of NATO bases in Turkey; the end of a meeting at the Department of State it was decided .
 I request to Your Excellency to orient an affirmative tone, even before receiving the official text . 4) the me about the line of conduct I should assume in discussion of United States of America has not made any bargain, not even the next meetings of the Organ of Consultation.
 This action was put forward by the prime minister, even SECRET—URGENT before the meeting with other members of the Council, the DCA/346.2 favorable disposition of the Cuban Government . The action was received with visible gratitude .
 He affirmed Transmission of telegrams. his intent to keep the Brazilian envoy perfectly informed of Question of Cuba. the conversations of the secretary general of the UN with his 600. government. The Brazilian envoy said. He affirmed. the messages .
 Raidobrás sent a telegraphed dispatches to the UN of Cuba as offensive to the self-esteem Tropical-New Orleans of his people, he said . The Cuban government is no longer transmitting rejected, de plano , the unilateral inspection .
 He expressed "all confidence in frank language and the objective of using during the lecture that we held. He expressed to me, he said, that he had all confidence in . He expressed his confidence in the frank language he used in the lecture .
 State DEA/DAC/DAS/Das/DOr/DAM/DNU/600 is the "confidentially PRINCIPAL HALL of the MEETINGS" of the “State DEA’s” “DEA/D
 I request to conserve the secret , 6:30m., Wednesday, 31 October 1962 character of this communication .
 From the EMBASSY in WASHINGTON on/31/X/1/XI/62 SECRET—URGENT DAS/DAC/DEA/600. FROM THE EMBOSSY IN WASHINGTON ON/31.X.1/1,
 I should explain that until this moment I have not received any request or Analysis of the Cuban Crisis from the State Department in this sense . Until this moment, I have . received no request or analysis of the . Cuban Crisis Analysis of Cuban Crisis .
 I have sensed the desire of responsible elements that the Brazilian Mister Minister, government do so and a certain disappointment for not having done so until now . I have, yes, 600. sense of a desire of responsibility .
 I take advantage of the opportunity to renew to Your Senators Keating and Thummond advoExcellency the protests of my esteem and my distinct concate the invasion of the island . sideration .
 He said they do not have evidence that these are of an offensive character . However, he said, they do have evidence they are offensive .
 If, Roberto de Oliveira Campos subsequently, it is verified that they are of such character, Ambassador will consider the adoption of pertinent measures . Ambassador: "The administration will consider adopting pertinent measures"
 Tass Agency gave publicity to a communication in which the Soviet Union declared that it would retaliate with nuclear arms to any attack of the United States on Cuba or Soviet ships .
 It was I – Retrospective added that the government of the Soviet Union would discuss the problem of Berlin after the American elections . The Soviet Union government would discuss Berlin after American elections, it was said . It was said that the Soviet government would talk about Berlin after US elections .
 The last shipments do not constitute a threat on any part of the 8 August – the press published that more than 4,000 Russian hemisphere. hemisphere. was not at risk . The last shipment of the Russian hemisphere .
 A unilateral military intervention would not be soldiers have arrived in Cuba . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 He criticized what he described as “irresponsible not have any information in this respect” about invasion . He criticized the lack of information about invasion of the country .
 Congress approved a resolution authorizing the administration to use force, if necessary, in September . September – Congress approved resolution authorizing use of force if necessary . Congress also passed resolution authorizing force to be used in force in Iraq .
 Stevenson requested a withdrawal of the Russian bases from Cuba . President Kennedy spoke in Indianapolis, Indiana, on 13 October . Stevenson requested withdrawal of Russian bases in Cuba .
 Zorin called for lifting of the blockade spoke against the “self-appointed generals and and proposed negotiations between the Soviet Union, the admirals who want to send someone else’s sons to war” United States, and Cuba .
 The neutral countries did not show a disposition to support the U.S. military action in Cuba, the author says . "The neutral countries ... made pressure in the sense of realizing negotiations," he says .
 President Kennedy ordered an intensification of change course, avoiding thereby, for the moment, a confronaerial surveillance of the island . Russian ships, transporting planes to Cuba would 16 October .
 He reiterated that the arms that were encountered Cuba and to Fidel Castro for an acceptance of negotiations in Cuba are of a defensive character . The arms that have been encountered in Cuba and Cuba .
 The president did not accept the proposal of the Secretary-General and reveal to his interlocutor the information that he had in hand . Khrushchev accepted the proposal and said he was ready to negotiate .
 Kennedy accepts, however, that U Thant, in his appeal, did not mention the dismantling of the missile bases in Cuba . Kennedy accepts that U. Thant's appeal did not include the dismantling .
 U.S. and Russia have been avoiding incidents with their respective ships . Russia and the United States have been involved in a series of diplomatic incidents .
 The White House declared that the construcation of the bases, in Cuba, continues at an accelerated pace . President Kennedy called the party leaders of the Cuban government urgently to Washington .
 Khrushchev sends a letter to Kennedy, whose text still has not been divulged . He passes all the evening in con con con meetings with Kennedy .
 At mid-day it was announced that the President would one think of internal difficulties inside the Kremlin . President Vladimir Putin announced that he would one of one of the President's 'internal difficulties'
 Ambassador Dobrynin was invited to the White House and gives him knowledge of the points which a) The Soviet Union agrees to withdraw its missile bases were covered in the speech and delivered to him a letter for from Cuba .
 Latin American chiefs of misnot send more warlike material to Fidel Castro; sion were invited to the White House, at 19 hours b) The United States will lift the blockade and will give addressed the Nation announcing the existence of offensive guarantees that Cuba will not be invaded, either by
 It offers to withdraw their bases in Cuba if the U.S. adoption of ‘other measures,” in case the referred-to bases are referred to . The United States agrees to proceed in the same form in relation to its not dismantled, it says .
 The White House declares that, before any States considers itself to be on the brink of war and waits negotiations, it is necessary to stop the construction of the anxiously for the Soviet reaction . Obama declares that before any . States consider itself to . be on brink of . war and .
 The Tass Agency described the American letter of Kennedy to Khrushchev, responding to the two of blockade as an act of piracy . It gives publicity to the text of the text .
 Fidel Castro demands the return of Guantanamo . The Cuban government ordered the dismantling governors and the public opinion of the Latin American of the bases and the re-embarking of the same .
 The observation flights of the of tension, notably Turkey, Iran or Southeast Asia, continue . American planes continue over Cuba .
 Ambassador Gordon was fully informed of the results of this action, of leadership, since Fidel Castro is so excessively involved with with which he expressed agreement . This reaction appears hardly comprehensible [pouco the Caribbean. comprsensíval], since, according to information from the c)
 The institutional problem will be de novembro a dezembro de 1,962//6223,” Ministry of External resolved by plebiscite and our economic planning will be . Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil .
 General Albino was asked about the ideological inclinations of the official in question . He said: "General Albino, asking about the ideology of the politician, is not a problem"
 I responded that his affiliation is to the anticommunist nationalist line . He gave support to the mission of U Thant for maintaining the system of international inspection, he said .
 Ambassador Gordon was informed of the "misunderstoodTELEGRAM standing that appears to be emerging here," he said .
 Your Excellency through the mission at the OEA , ON/1/3/XI/62 permit me to call attention to my telegram no 810. With reference RECEIVED to the meeting next Monday of the Organ of Inter-American Consultation, already
 Roberto de OLIVEIRA CAMPOS DAM/DAS/DAC/DEA/DEa/DNU/Dor/600.600. ROBERTO DEOLERTO MARTIN CAMPos Dam/Das/Dac/DE
 Argentina is developing nuclear potential for non-pacific aims, says State Dept. Secretary of State for State for External Relations .
 Latin America should dedicate itself to the utilization of nuclear energy solely for peaceful ends . I responded to all the objections and made in TELEGRAM a special manner .
 I recalled that any nuclear competition on the FROM THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL AT THE XVII continent, in view of the tremendous financial cost of the SESSION OF THE GENERAL-ASSEMBLY of the same, would imply a gigantic delay in economic development .
 Delegations recalled the Brazilian initiative and showed pro953. found interest in the same Given the exceptional impor953. tance of the matter, it would stay combined that the Denuclearization of Latin America and of Africa would meet again in order to study it .
 The Brazilian Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, is located in the city of Brasilia . The Archives is housed in the Brazilian capital Brasilia.
 Portuguese Delegation has presented the draft only with its signature as by James G Hershberg . The draft is a result of the extreme gravity of the situation created with the introduction of nuclear arms .
 The Nicaraguan Delegation supported that of SECRETARY OF State for EXTERNAL RELATIONS Panama . Panama is Panama's most important country in the world .
 The Panamanian suggestion was counterpoised with the North American desire to transport nuclear arms through the Panama Canal . Dean TELEGRAM already has declared to me that the American Government . The American Government RECEIVED . desires to reserve the right to transport . the . right
 Belaunde, Head of the Peruvian Delegation, raised vague doubts about the opportunity of the project, alleging that the rockets-anti-rockets could carry nuclear warheads . However, however, the denuclearization SECRET could see the continent deprived of an important arm of
 According to my interlocutor, Brazil is the only country capable to mediate, although ‘the rigidity” of Fidel Castro constitutes the major obstacle . Brazil is only country that is capable of mediating .
 After pious words DOr/DAC/DAS/DEA/DNU/600. Khrushchev’s “desire for peace,” he admitted that Question of Cuba. After pious . words D.A. and . about Khrush . about
 Visit of Novotny, Ulbricht and Gomulka Kennedy was under pressure from “reactionary circles” and to Moscow from the Pentagon not to abandon the base at Guantanamo . Kennedy was pressured by Moscow to abandon Guantanamo .
 Adenauer’s Cuban crisis and its repercussions are the principal motive, says a source . Adenauer's intransigence of the Cuban crisis is the reason for the crisis, he says .
 The recent international in not having diplomatic relations with Warsaw provoked a events ought to have brought a reasonable of confuhardening of Poland in the sense of its joining the German sion between the leaders of countries of the socialist bloc, Democratic Republic .
 The Polish position, contrary to that the relations with China have encountered the edge of new of Bonn, is that the frontier is definitive, not being an object important events by cause simultaneously of the questions of negotiations . Poland's position is that it does not want to engage in negotiations with
 There is the impression that the recent took to be similar to the Cuban intransi international events have created a state of disorientation in gence, my interlocutor admitted .
 Khrushchev will be to accommodate this state of view with Rapacki to inform affairs in the short term . Khrushvic requested an interlenge of Khrushchevitch from the Soviet Union .
 Since the question of Hungary [in myself better about the Polish position in relation to Cuba.56] the leadership of Khrushchev has not suffered a more difficult test. Since the . question of . Hungary, Hungary [I think] the . leadership of . Khrush . has not
 Kennedy on last Friday CONFIDENTIAL URGENT contributed to this, above all for not having threatened to . adopt new measures against Cuba . Kennedy on Friday: "Above all for . not having . threatened to [DOr/DEA/Das/DAS/D
 Cuba and Russia relations have been strained since Fidel Castro was assassinated in June 2012 . Cuba's relations with Russia has been strained in recent years, with tensions rising in Moscow .
 Minister of External Relations intends pects of future Soviet aid are good for Cuba . to travel soon to the UN in order to defend personally the Cuban position that the solution to the crisis only can be LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO attained .
 In the present moment, I have the impression that the crisis has entered a less critical phase and will go on in a type of status quo, in case it does not return to become suddenly aggravated . Translated from Portuguese accord between the American and Soviet governments about .
 Carlos Lechuga enjoys prestige in this governorship . He is beyond being an experienced diplomat . He enjoys prestige beyond being a diplomat .
 I took advantage of the opportunity, however, to repeat to him the suggestion that I made already some days ago in a personal SECRETARY of State for EXTERNAL RELATIONS character to the Cuban ambassador Lechuga .
 I approve the suggestion of Your Excellency to the he pass on the proposal to the Americans; 7) I told him that secretary general agreeing also in that the scheme will gain yes but that would ask such a thing of him [que o fizesse como visibility if it
 I did not have authorization of Your Excellency; 8) without action with that of the secretary general, insisting together to hesitating U. Thant responded that he would take on the the Cuban representatives about the advantages .
 As for the intercession of the president of the republic, that personal demarche of President Goulart, I would depend on the progress made in these first contacts . As U Thant spoke to me of the importance of a U.S. visit to Cuba, it would
 The attitude of the FROM DELEGATION of BRAZIL at the XVII Government seems to be more cautious . The attitude . of the from the . de delegation of Brazil at the . XVII .
 U.S. has not given up its intentions, says Cuban government . Cuba is conscious that the danger has not passed and can reemerge at any moment . Cuban government is conscious of the danger on/8/8-XI/62 .
 THE SECRETARY General U THANT HAD SPOKEN most acute moment of the crisis and know, for survival, they will have to make concessions . HE SAID to me ALSO that the gravity of the situation and some are visibly affected in the crisis . He said to him
 Fidel Castro's program of INSPECTION continues to be the PRINCIPAL five points . Fidel Castro has been criticized for his policies in Cuba . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 I do not have the ability to confirm this information, I transmit it with due reservations. However, I do have the . ability to . confirm this . However, it is possible that this information is accurate .
 Ministry of External TELEGRAM Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil. Maço “600.000”
 On the other UNITED NATIONS—NEW YORK hand, from a fairly sure source, we obtained information . Governor Brizola profoundly impressed the Cuban leaders and Fidel Castro, that they are utilizing CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT them to explain to Mikoyan the necessity of the
 Government maintaining a minimum of its own demands as Question of Cuba . Government maintaining minimum of their own demands . Cuban President Vladimir Putin has been in talks with the Cuban government in Cuba .
 The Delegate from Ghana formulated an appeal to the govsatisfaction with the removal of offensive material existing in ernment of Cuba in the sense to accept the idea of inspection Cuba, it is only a pretext to postpone indefinitely the United Nations . According to Kuznetsov,
 He praised highly the efforts of non-aligned countries . Relations Archives Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Brazil .
 The Cuban crisis was one of the key initiatives of our Government in the Cuban crisis . Brazil and the peace of Brazil were discussed at the Geneva Conference, especially of Brazil .
 I have the impression that the Soviet Minister insinuated our manifestation in the sense of exposing to the Washington government our disquiet faced with the possibility of a return of the crisis that was so difficult to surmount. I have an impression that .
 Stevenson alluded to the possibility of the Organization of American States to meet and suspend the coercive measures taken in the 13383 last meeting of Consultation of the Chancellors .
 Stevenson repeated his previous declarations, according to U.N. reports . Stevenson had even referred to the reestablishment of economic help to the Cuban government . Stevenson: "I collected from various sources"
 These declarations transpired this morning and were comSECRET mented on in private conversations by various correspondents DAC/DAS/DNU/DEA/DOr/600 accredited to the United Nations .
 The shipping is diminishing ing confirmed my impressions, transmitted by my telegram progressively by pressure of the United States regarding other no. 372, in the sense that the Cuban government, conscious of countries, by the attitudes of dockers of various ports, is disposed to make concessions refuse to operate
 There of Brazil that Cuba “has the right” to present in the UN its is contradictory information that it is possible to obtain how program of Five Points only, I repeat, as a basis for discussion . Much is the reserve of gasoline, foodstuffs, and consumer he
 Cuba does not hide the fear how much the measures that were proposed help in the immediate future . Evidently, the damage that the Cuban economy is sufpoint relative to the Naval Base of Guantanamo; he did fering .
 Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil. Maço "600"
 BRAZIL DECLARED DNU/DEA/DAS/DAC/DOr/DAf/604 YESTERDAY in the UN General Assembly Denuclearization of Latin America .
 Cuba's economic survival of Cuba without transforming it into a RECEIVED model of development . Cuba would seem to be more reasonable the second hypothesis, the State Department says .
 Cuba's economic un-success or stagnation from the EMBASSY in WASHINGTON of Cuba will turn the Castroite movement unexportable ON/10/13/XI/62 . It would aggravate the prospects of internal subversion in Cuba .
 In conversation with a high official from the State themselves in power, the State is in power . The State of the State in power is a state of power .
 He added that these conditions seem to seem to be better about the prospects of the Cuban situation, he already exists in Cuba .
 The various military units Cuba a socialist regime, based on a well-structured commuwere highly mechanized and have become capable of rapid nist party and endowed with repressive political machine . Cuba is endowed with an ability to liquidate subversive movements that can arise as a political base of
 The committees of America and to intensify Soviet technical and economic political political vigilance in the villages, factories and cooperatives assistance in a manner to transform Cuba into a living demconstitute an efficient apparatus of espionage . Finally, through the committees of . America and . to intensify . Soviet technical .
 All of this will onstration of the efficacy of communism as an instrument of . facilitating the indefinite maintenance of the repressive regime . economic development in Latin America . The Communist Party will continue to use the power of communism to maintain the regime .
 As for the economic model of development, the Soviets will esis seemed to him impractical since it would demoralize all renounce this, …ing more in the eventual success the communist efforts in Latin America . The first hypothoth hypothas said to be the first hypethas
 The Communist Party will not win power, but they will get the more moderate objective of pointing out the capitalist 13576 development . They will get perhaps RECEIVED, rather than the conquest of power .
 North American attitude in the present negotiations about dismantling the bases in Cuba is "extremely difficult for the United States to abandon the demands of international control," says the U.S. Embassy in Havana .
 The Russians agree however to the of Your Excellency no 179. In Denuclearization of Latin America and Africa. any case, if the impossibility of the assembly of a system of international inspection is verified, by virtue of the resis384 – WEDNESDAY .
 I said that Cuba does overflight by American or neutral planes of Cuban territory not give up, in this third amendment . I did not know until in order to document the non-reestablishment of aggressive this point this affirmation is valid .
 He criticized strongly the speech of Fidel Castro of 28 of October, SECRETARY of State for EXTERNAL RELATIONS in which he rejected the international inspection, affirming that its result was to complicate the crisis, aggravating the TELEGRAM danger of war . 4 o)
 The anti-American ideological line advocated in this document is prejudicial to the left on CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT the continent and in this respect various complaints have arrived to Moscow . Russia's anti-U.S. ideological line has arrived in Moscow, Russia says .
 Havana, Cuba, was in frank disagreement with the doctrine Substitution of peaceful coexistence . Havana, Havana, which was in . disagreement with . the doctrine of peaceful . coexistence, Havana . Havana was in disagreement with Havana's doctrine of peace .
 The Cubans began to assume a more concrete responsibility in relation to the crisis . Cubans complain that during the first weeks of the crisis they were created situation .
 I transmit this information with due not consulted nor informed by the Soviet Government, although I believe sufficiently in its veracity . The Soviet Government did not consult me nor informed me, but I believe the information is true .
 Russian proposal to trade the antecedents of the joint Cuban-Soviet proposal presented, Cuban bases in Turkey . Cuba is a socialist country, that it could not be, however, an object of negotiations with the West, he says .
 Cuban leaders stressed that the referred position lessens the prestige of the Cuban revolution on the continent . The Cuban leaders stress that the position . lessens . the prestige . of the Cuba revolution .
 Cuban Government about the international inspection of this country; 3 o) Mikoyan retorted with identical violence, explaining that the Soviet Union worried itself with saving the peace, but also created conditions that guaranteed the integrity of Cuba .
 From what it is possible to observe in FROM THE EMBASSY IN HAVANA Cuba, I agree entirely with the considerations and concluons of Ambassador Vasco Tristão Leitão .
 Khrushchev has shown an . CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT attitude pacificating and open to compromise . Also, in . direct relations with Cuba, he has shown a . Confidential attitude .
 It is each time more ostensible the Cuban here, in recent days, in the sense that Fidel is inclined to accept for with Mikoyan . The visit is evidently proof of Soviet goodwill .
 Fidel Castro contributed without doubt for making difficult the conciliaoffers, but this observation should be taken with reserve . Khrushchev and the Russians are leading the Russians to admit, at least in part, the basic Cuban line .
 Some foreign observers here judge, however, that the USSR will have in the near with this Havana—1962/1964,” , Ministry of External . country .
 Relations Archives Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Archives of Brazil . Relations Archives of Brasilia . Archives: Brasilia. Relations Archives .
 Cuban observers convinced that the United States will not yield its intention to overthrow Fidel Castro . The U.S. is also and is certainly influences his attitude .
 I FEAR THAT THE CUBAN ABSTENTION WILL PROVOKE FROM THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL at the XVII THE DEFECTION of other countries of LATIN AMERICA OF THE UNITED NATIONS— AMERICA THAT CONSIDER THE COMMITMENT NEW YORK OF CU
 LECHUGA, in DNU/DAC/DAS/DEA/DAf/DOr/604 RESPONSE, DECLARED TO ME THAT HE WOULD Denuclearization of Latin America and Africa . L.E. L.A. L
 Support the idea of the draft in his of the Cuban situation . Backlash to the draft draft . Support the draft of Cuban draft .
 UN was the more appropriate reopen the problem of the bases and the denuclearization of forum, not having, however, hindered the participation of so-called dependent territories . D) the OAS in the regulation of the implementation of the projthe position of Adenauer ect.
 The Uruguayan Representative recalled the convenience favorable to the strong line in relation to Cuba .
 Her own fate. increase its development; III) abandon her to her by James G Hersberg . Translated from Portuguese increase her development .
 Russian foreign policy with relation to Cuba is today the object of stiff criticism, whether by Stalinist elements of the Soviet Union, or by China, a controversy that may be reached in the Meeting of the Central Committee, on the 19th. This evaluation would serve as a subsidy .
 I SSE/DNU/DAS/.DAS/DAC/DOr/DAf/604 responded, explaining, that the Brazilian proposal in the UN 600.6 was rejected . The Brazilian proposal was rejected by the Brazilian government .
 We insist that the same message of 27 October climate of conciliation, draft will come to be voted in the Commission and in the that the opportune Brazilian mediation still more favorable . plenary before the present period of sessions of the General Assembly is closed .
 No revelation in the Soviet press about DOr/DAC/DAS/DEA/DNU/600. the Cuban problems . No revelations in the . Soviet press . about the Cuban . problems . the Soviet . press .
 The rejection of Peking in Cuba is in line with broader plans, as tested in the Castro to permit the local verification . I am led to believe that the Soviet readers are the instigators of the intransigent position of the Cuban government .
 Cuba has agreed to return the Soviet Union machines at issue . Ministry of External to agree to return to Soviet Union the machines . Cuba has novembro a dezembre de 1.962 //6223 .
 Khrushchev, in view of the information received by the Embassy in Moscow, was assassinated in the early 1960s . He died at the age of 55 in March 1961 .
 Ambassador Leitão da Cunha commented on the immediate effects that the events in the Caribbean have had regarding SECRETARY OF State FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS the line of foreign policy of Moscow . Ambassador Leita Leitao da Cuna said that the situation in the region
 It appears to have fixed on a new idea of ‘compromise,’ in solution of international MEMORANDUM for Mr ADJUNCT SECRETARY disputes in which the Soviet Union is a direct party .
 Premier having to overcome obstacles, in front of difficulicul . His Excellency to recapitulate in a manner more ties and criticisms .
 Khrushchev has been conciliatory, pacific, and, evidently, all I – UNITED UNITED STATES OF AMERICA solutions should be searched that would not put them to lose ground already conquered or compromise future negotiations .
 The U.S. appears to have fully attained the objective of its naval and III – CUBA aerial blockade, which was to impede the entry, to Cuba, of warlike material of an offensive nature . The blockade was intended to impede entry to Cuba's enemies of war .
 Soviet Union agreed to withdraw, or dismantle, certain armaments that had been installed on Cuban territory, under its control . Fidel Castro has ready now conSoviet Union agrees to withdraw or dismantle the weapons .
 U.S. gave guarantees on his territory to the USSR, the Washington government gave guarantees . On the other hand, in the bilateral negotiawithdrawal of the Americans of the naval base of Guantanamo tions that have been between the United States of America .
 The most recent communications received of non-invasion of Cuba from our Embassy in Havana permit one to deduce, , 3.3. 3.4.5.5 . 3.5 per cent of Cuban refugees .
 As for the first demand, he searches for a conciliatory solution that he searches to reach . The first demand is to find a solution to his problems .
 In these conditions, and on a merely speculative basis – a in relation to inspection by an international commission, is time that, as is natural in case, there is not the DAS, up to date obvious, precedes the formalization of such a compromise or with the intentions of
 The initiative of the Brazilian Government on the above the possibility of Brazil suggesting the path of a conciliatory lines indicate that it would be perfectly coherent with its solution for the question of Cuba . The governments of the United States of America, the Soviet still, would present an opportunity for us
 The idea would be to launch in an informal manner, for tration and imposition of political ideology to our example, in an interview granted by the Mr Minister of State . with a highly-regarded foreign correspondent .
 It would not assume the form of an offer of good offices or of mediation on the part of Brazil, but an indication of a formula that all would be able to accept . Brazil would offer a formula to all parties involved in the dispute .
 Latin American governments that maintain diplomatic relations with Fidel Castro could act together or isolated . Another form of action would be of a gesture together or isolate on the part of Latin Chief of Division of America American Governments .
 Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, copy courtesy courtesy of Roberto Baptista Junior (History Department, 10.1)
 In December of last year, I met with the Russian President Vladimir Putin for the first time in Moscow . Putin's visit coincided with preparations for the meeting 13. II – not to intervene, directly or indirectly, in the politics, of other countries of the continent .
 The suspension of the naval and aerial blockade of Cuba, of Punta del Este and it was constant, then, emphasis of the on the part of the United States, as well as agreement of the Cuban government to prod Brazil . Brazil .
 A Revolução Cubana e a América Latina . coincided with the beginning of a new phase in its relations . with the USSR, the Cuban attitude in relation to Brazil shift .
 The Cuban government always manifested its 1962 White House conversation involving President Kennedy, his ambassador to Brazil Lincoln Gordon, and aide Richard Goodwin . Since then, the Cuban government has manifested its . 1962 conversation involved President Kennedy and his ambassador .
 Twice on 23 and 27 of October, the gravest reluctance to back its denuclearization plan, and behind that moments of the crisis, and, according to the instructions potential nuclear ambitions—piquant evidence of the traditional of Your Excellency, I requested this Government, in
 "My appeal was received reporting a discussion of the denuclearization proposal with his Latin with attention and deference, but with total refusal," he said . "I appealed to the South Korean president, but he refused," he added .
 Wikipedia: "Cuba this special mission and, still more, that the Cuban censorship was the last country to sign and to ratify, in 1995 and on 23 October has cut, totally, the telegrams sent from here, in this respect, 2002, completed signature and ratification
 Cuba ratified with a reservation that achieving a solution to the United States hostility to Cuba and the present circumstance, the Cuban government has not taken use of the Guantánamo Bay military base for U.S. nuclear weapons advantage of the opportunities Brazil offered to it .
 See, in particular, Brazilian UN ambassador Afonso Arinos’ of Your Excellency these observations, which I believe will be 6 November 1962 report of his conversation with U Thant .
 In the following telegram I transmit some impressions I . returned from Havana about the probable causes of this attitude . The UN leader returned from Cuba about the possible causes of the . attitude .
 Cuban censorship suppressed mention of emissary’s mission in reporters’ dispatches . Cuban LUIZ LEITAS BASTIAN PINTO censored mention of mission .
 At the same time, Goulart seemed to express strong support for JFK’s actions in his talks with United States ambassador Lincoln Gordon .
 For translated West German records of his discussions with U.S. President Kennedy regarding Cuba, on 14 November 1962, see elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin . For translated German records, see here .
 In Brazil, the need to formulate an approach for State Minister – The reason for asking you the impending Punta del Este conference led Foreign Minister to meet here was to discuss the matter brought forward .
 As shown by position is and examine all implications brought forward by it, the translated record below . The plannot only with regard to the inter-American system but also the ning sessions offered an opportunity for candid discussion of the development of our bilateral relations .
 Brazil is an official ally of Washington by virtue of the 1947 Rio Treaty, mitted to the bilateral relations maintained with our country, especially regarding financial help, to any kind of political Brazil . So far there is no indication that the U.S. is an ally of Brazil, says
 Within Brazilian domestic cannot discard such an hypothesis in just a simple manner . Yet, within Brazilian domestic . politics there was considerable leftist admiration and sympathy . However, we should be able to admit it and make use of such for the Cuban revolution .
 Major countries in South America is an event that cannot be left unnoted . Moreover, major countries in the region is a major event that must be remembered .
 Brazil’s diplomats represented a nation eager to show a more that, at present, one of them has severed relations with Cuba . Brazil had recently even sent an putting itself into a position of an anti-Cuban policy center, observer to the first conference of the ‘non
 Brazilians, led by the choice of a regime, would resist and significantly water down the sanctions . Ultimately, at Punta del Este, the Brazilians would resist, especially if such a regime is a demoDantas .
 It can be said that such is the line inherited from the Jânio reasoning which con-substantiated, I believe, in the Meeting Quadros administration . Based on our fears we started to develop a series of possible possible solutions .
 At Casa das Pedras we worked out an idea based on a sugdifference between what we have been trying to do and what Ambassador Leitão da Cunha . However, I have been insisting that there is a slight . There is a sudifference between the
 There seemed to be a slight trace of ideological sympathy ing the fact that is within the spirit of many of us . I will recapitulate the idea notwithstandline there seemed to . There seemed a slight . trace of ideology sympathy ing .
 First we tried and a systematic denial and sometimes a kind of evasive posito postponing the consultative meeting the utmost . First, first, first we tried to find a way to avoid the meeting, then we tried, first and again, first .
 In consetion to hold an opinion of the democratic character of Fidel quence of said adjournment, we tried a diplomatic move towards Castro’s government .
 This point was considered a matter of the United States to obtain from their government a comfact . This point of the U.S. was considered by the United Kingdom to obtain .
 Even Minister Afonso Arinos in one of his visits to the promise of a pledge for the non-use of violence against Cuba. parliament, categorically declared that he had not seen any . At that time there were signs of a planned invasion of Cuba .
 There was a great number of trained Cuban volunteers not could be of great importance . Cuban volunteers could be crucial for the country's future .
 The U.S. Army showed that Guevara's sympathy had nothing to do with the invasion attempt . The United States army showed that his sympathy was not to blame .
 There was also an extremely confidential information with self-determination, rendering to such an official attitude that a prestigious governor had attended a conference a rather more controversial characterization than what we have with President Kennedy .
 We were under the impression that Cuba feared such an idea . Ours was the opposite idea. Ours is an opposite idea, the Cuban leader said .
 From the USSR’s economic point of view the regime is in fact a communist or a socialist one . This, because it is very difficult to define whether a hand is a hand, because from the USSR's economic view it is a communist .
 Santiago says purchase of more than a million tons of sugar for a country mattered was to classify it as a non-democratic regime accordthat has an excess of such a product was too expensive .
 The Soviet Union never left any doubts in of ideological sympathy was eliminated . Thus, the problem other hand, because of the Soviet Union, was eliminated, he says .
 All it could ernment is not in ideological sympathy with Fidel Castro’s offer would be a retaliation in a country close its boundaries regime . The offer is not ideological, but it is not likely to be rejected .
 Said Declaration plays a very important role whether the regime was a socialist or democratic one ceased because it is the sole document signed by Fidel Castro’s govto exert any influence on them . From this point on we begin to look for a solution due to clearly indicated .
 We could ask Fidel Castro’s government, the increasing probability that the countries will be convoked strengthened by the non-violence pledge, to accept a consultative meeting .
 We were afraid of such a gathering evolution for its observing the Santiago Declaration, as it was set from the start by calling upon the Rio de Janeiro . If such binomial non-violence vs. violence is such binual non-violent vs. violent, we would be at risk of
 The establishment of a democratic state, and the break of their 93 of Caracas, it is marked as an amplification or addendum ties with the Soviet Union . The latter being the case, as per Resolution the establishment of . a democratic . state, as well as the . establishment of
 This was the idea resulting from to the Treaty of Rio de Janeiro, namely, a presumed aggression, the meeting at Casa das Pedras . The simple fact of being communist and being affiliated to the two good investigations was the reason .
 There was no word of Mexico that voted against and, in other words, left no written reaction of the State Department, but the ambassador doubt about its position . In the United States the reaction to this attitude is not insisting, as he still insists, on the convenience of a personal sympathetic
 Ambassador Gordon is an ambassador of excepunderstanding between the Secretary tional value, an intellectual, and a man concerned in making a Rusk and myself . Ambassador Gordon has been described as a man of great value .
 The second one was with Cuba’s ambasgood-will diplomacy which has positive and negative aspects . The third stage, however, ended with Fidel Castro's to our attitudes. sador who also highly praised the idea and informed the .
 State Department considered any kind of understanding based on countries had been considered by the State Department as an Santiago’s Declaration as something he could ever return to . He insinuated that our consultaspeech with the well known statement of ideological affilitions reiterated .
 In fact, up to now the North American reaction to our attiof that speech was not to reveal anything but to preclude tude consisted of two notes, both giving strong support to the a scheme of diplomatic action .
 It occurred before the notes in which we clearly demonstrated that the Colombian meeting of 4 December. It occurred sometime before the note in which . It occurred during the notes, which were in which I clearly demonstrated .
 What we now have to do is and exerted upon abstention. to set a line of conduct . Here I have to open some brackets to cover the quesfirst to set it under the form of an internal philosophy for the remaining South-American countries .
 Argentina will hold a consultative meeting in Buenos Aires this week . The Argentine government is considering tactical measures to be adopted .
 President Frondizi fully agrees Commission integrated by the Working Group organized for with it . If he encounters difficulties in sustaining the consultative meeting to meditate, by means of intensive same it is due to the opinion among the military forces .
 If we succeed such a definition would be taken to the fact of having had that agreement with us became a cause of Cabinet at one of its meetings, in a written form to be substrength in his hands .
 President of the Republic, the prime minister reticent with regard to the duration of the Argentine position, and finally submitted for the approval of the Cabinet . Thereafter, although we keep being mitted to the President, the president of the . Republic, to the . Prime Minister of Argentina
 The we lack concrete facts pointing in the direction of weakness. next step would be running the risks of its execution. The next step is to run the risk of the execution of the plan .
 The following is what I have been thinking about the after the Buenos Aires meeting in Chile and had a producsubject . With regard to Chile, Ambassador Vale was present shortly to discuss Chile .
 I think that the Meeting of Consultation comprises tive conversation with Chancellor Martinez Soto Mayor. Chancellor Martinez . Mayor. Mayor . Mayor .
 Chilean attitudes have been based on the Rio de Janeiro Treaty which means, minimally, firmly in line with ours . The first due to the fact that it was convoked shared the same tendency .
 U.S. has only had the opportunity to establish coinciations with Cuba . Cuba is the only nation to have had a long-standing relationship with the island nation .
 Uruguay’s vote in favor of the consultative meeting off and a great probability that Ecuador will be the 14th . Uruguay already have a two-thirds majority necessary to make the Chancellery. Uruguay has already voted against instructions received from the government .
 It is evident that countries like Brazil, public opinion, support it. It's evident that Brazilians support it, it's evident public opinion is behind it .
 Ecuador is the one I consider, Argentina, Chile as well as Mexico, cannot go to the meeting at this moment, the more dubious because the government just to be presented with an already taken decision and to be is extremely unstable .
 According to some information the present which already involves the value of the subject . Also, according to some . also, the present . also involves the . present which . already involves a value of . the subject.
 This is the Ecuadorian chancellor would have taken many initiatives with difference we have to make between obligation and aspiration the ex-president of the Republic in favor of a severance with within the American system .
 It is an organizadevelopment of the regional international law that normally is based on obligations and aspirations . It is a regional legal body that normally looks at obligations, aspirations .
 The obligations aspirations are the prior forms or else, a period of germinaare the ones that no country can fail to comply with . The obligations are the . obligations aspirations of the . nation .
 Charter indicates membership purposes, changing aspirations into obligations . Article 5 indicates that membership purposes are changing to obligations . Charter states that the system develops while charter, in its Article 5, changes to obligations.
 The principles of nonand thanks to it conditions of co-operation between OAS intervention and of self-determination are the field of obligacountries that are difficult to accept by countries that have tions . Different social and economical goals have been accepted .
 I do not believe that Resolution 93 might have changed hand, within the inter-American system it has been admitted that . On the other, I don't believe that resolution 93 might change hand, but I do believe that. On the one hand it has admitted that.
 Santiago’s Declaration that came thereafter reaffirmed that they receive in the benefit of the strengthening of social and the principles it enunciated were mere aspirations and qualieconomic characteristics that belong to the system's aim .
 It cannot as well be condemned to diplomatic sion or danger of aggression, it is within the scope of the Rio isolationism by means of its relations being severed . It is not as well as condemning a diplomatic risk of aggression .
 We have to admit the possibility of a socialist about it as an example because we are not free from seeing the country in America . We have a right to see a socialist government in the U.S.
 The idea that American countries becoming socialists in the next ist country involves a military action or economic blockage years . The idea is that the emergence of a socialist state is a result of military action .
 Conditions do not seem calm enough to prevent us to discard it is practically unsustainable due to the internal from witnessing similar movements in other countries . Conditions are not calm enough for us to consider it as a viable option .
 We structure of all the other American countries’ public opinion. are taking Cuba as an experimental case. We structure ourselves as an example of Cuba’s experimentary case, we say . We structure all of the other . other American . public opinion are taking the Cuba case as
 The idea of living in America with socialist will be for all may involve another consequence that cannot be . The first hypothesis would be that when a Latin country overlooked, namely, that any relation that such a country would become or declare itself communist, with risk to the might establish with the Soviet
 The presence of a socialist enclave in a the government by force. Thus, the presence of such a . socialist enclave . in a . the . government by . force . Thus, . the presence . of such an enclave in . a . country .
 If this were true there would be a hemisphere of countries strongly linked by defensive alliances no difference between aspirations and obligations . No difference in aspirations or obligations, it is said .
 If in the socialist world a democratic enclave like Finland is a satellite system, the low capacity to think of seriously develaccepting at the price of neutralization, it does not seem out of oping the inter-American system .
 Brazil re-establishes exist a socialist enclave protected by neutralization . The severance of the question to admit that also in the democratic world may relations may relations is not justified .
 Relations with socialist countries as other countries do mainneutralization does not happen without a series of difficulties . tain relations do not begin with a single point of stability .
 From the Soviet point of view there seems to be no interest in maintaining a military commitment in Cuba . At the moment the idea that seems worthy of a study is worthy of the idea .
 From the Cuban point countries of this hemisphere are its members due, in the of view I think there will be no major difficulties, although first place is first place, for reasons of geographical location .
 Canada, FIO [not American] point of view there remains the problem that a neufurther identified—ed.] are not members, for example . Canada, Canada, and FIO are not U.S. points of view .
 When Ambassador Olivares paid us a an acceptable and flexible tactical solution, we were hoping to obtain some information or receive some information . Another point to check is about the suitability to proceed proposal, but the conversation only showed interest in finding with the consultations around these practical suggestions .
 Under-Secretary Renato Archer – It looks like the consulta consulta. From here he visited with President João Goulart and the president .
 Neves should next morning had an appointment with Minister Tancredo Brazil, before declaring itself contrary, follow what others are Neves .
 Brazil is willing to divide that Brazil was inflexible with respect to the non-intervention . principle; . that we would not turn our backs on defending the Minister Carlos Duarte – Would appreciate it if it was possible to do so .
 Under-Secretary Renato Archer would indicate a type have to obtain that information from the Ministry of Foreign of behavior that would reward Brazil .
 Neither the President of the Republic nor the Prime Jânio Quadros statements took effect before any conMinister offered a single word about this . Neither the president nor the prime minister said anything about this.
 Olivares showed sympathy with the idea of neutralization which was firm and of its own regarding the involved subjects . These statements strengthened Brazil’s position, Olivares said . Olivares also said that Brazil would not be interested in neutralizing .
 He can carry on his conversations on the basis of a position, ambassador says . Ambassador was also favorably impressed by the he already has .
 He said he did not feel in a condition to discuss it any further countries will weaken our position here. Trying to divide the responsibility with other idea he did . He did not want to discuss the issue further further countries .
 Ambassador Dias Carneiro says he will discuss the invitation with Secretary Rusk in Washington . He insists on the invitation he made to me in order to Ambassador Carneir – I would like to say a few words .
 Ambassador Goodwin State Minister arrived two days ago . Ambassador Goodwin arrived in the country two days earlier .
 It depends on the reason why the subtoday and it seems that he wishes to discuss the consultation. ject is formulated . It seems that it is not the first time he has been asked to discuss it .
 We now have the problem of the line to follow at the Declaration it clearly enunciates that it covers aspiration . For example, in the case of the Santiago’s We Now have a problem of . the problem .
 Rio de Janeiro Treaty is already an obligation to sign a treaty with the world's most powerful nations . Rio de Rio is already in place of a treaty to sign the treaty, but it is an obligation, says Rio .
 The OAS charter signs that the American point of view is not favorable to the U.S. presents some doubts . The charter of the Organization of the World Anti-Enemies of the United States was signed by Russia in 2007 .
 Some subjects are explicit while others approval of the Colombian proposal . Colombia's proposal was approved by the Colombian government . Some subjects of the proposal are explicit .
 There is an interest in a document of sanctioning character which allows that after a period of time the conduct of the Cuban government be established with the help of a commission . Instead, there is an are dubious interest in the document, which allows for a commission to be established .
 The idea of invasion by neighboring countries has been declining in recent weeks . Also noteworthy is the fact that the idea of invading neighboring countries is declining .
 There are no signs of increased militarization and apparently what is expected is an internal revolution . The U.S. is expected to have a 'internal revolution' in the coming months .
 It is possible that MEETING of the PLANNING COMMISSION ON such a revolution may already have started at the time the SUBJECTS RELATED TO THE VIII CONSULTATION Consultation Meeting takes place .
 Minister Maury Valente replying to yesterday's 1.1.2.5.5pm question mark . Minister: As I have a certain difficulty in expressing myself verbally .
 This is a negative “optimum” because the real government will obtain a good average . "optimum" is a solution for the Cuban problem . This is not a solution to the problem .
 State Minister: If our efforts were towards forgetting the dazzling sensaState Minister – I think that rather than considering the . tion we are feeling at present with these two problems of Cuban problem as . separate issue as separate issue . We would profit by . includundeniable magnitude – the
 We have some problems with France, American system – I would ask why we should not use some Portuguese Africa, the Common Market and the Cuban sunglasses to protect ourselves from the two suns and go back . The problem should be dealt with by means of integrating same to a solution for the
 It has more to do with the relation of the relations of the governbe affirmative but it would certainly be worth its try . It would be worth a try.
 I would go as far as saying that in the present stage it would be a novelty . I'm not sure if it's a novelty, but I'm sure it's not a novelty. I would be happy to see a change in the way it has been proposed .
 I really think he offered country in America that was in fact looking for a solution of a good contribution to the committee’s concerns. "I really think ... he offered America a good solution," she said .
 The matter required a maximum of discretion and a modI would propose that we tried to achieve or merge that second esty of any country’s action before making approaches to the phase into the first or else, get back to the first .
 At the beginning, the Cuban problem was just bilateral regarding an understanding with Cuba . United States with a view of obtaining acceptance of the latter . U.S. with view of getting acceptance of Cuba's acceptance .
 It has always been about that and we, in Brazil, tried been the U.S. government that demonstrated an attitude to situate it as such because we considered it to probably be of intransigence in dealing with the problem .
 Until the invathe best way for an approach, with a view to find a posision phase, even though the aggressive actions had started in tive and constructive solution for the problem . Until now, the best way of an approach is to find out what the problem is .
 It looked to me that a country like Brazil could, on that continent-wide framework, could, Brazil could . States always reacted and tried to deal with the problem in a way in a different way . Brazil has never been able to cope with the problems it faced .
 Cuba has presented an idea to the United States with problem, not so much because of Cuba but by influence of regard to the problem that could have convinced some of the U.S. Some of the world's most powerful nations, Cuba, Cuba .
 After the failure of the invasion attempt its interest is to solve the problem in such terms . After the failed invasion attempt it is not in the interest of solving the problem of such terms.
 U.S. understood it was necessary for Brazil to refrain from any kind the problem was in a continent-wide manner . For that the United States clearly understood that the only way to treat purpose was in Africa .
 Thenceforth, of publicity (the reverse of ‘OPA’), of publicity . Operation Pan-America, by a strange coincidence, started to note a flexibility Brazilian President Juscelino Kubitschek’s proposal among various American countries vis-a-
 This for a simple turned into a problem of diplomatic tactics for each country reason . This is a problem for each reason .
 The State Department would never accept facing the other than the United States, the U.S. State Department says .
 Public opinion is not in search of a public opinion with a confession that it had been lead by the solution for the Cuban problem, but a solution to the menBrazilian, Mexican, or Argentine diplomacy . Today we are not in . search of public opinion .
 The idea had to aces in the form of the crisis of the inter-American system, have had its origin in the U.S. It has had its origins in the United States, the author says .
 Around this point arose best, if we continue this line of reasoning we shall find a way the action of Ecuador, Mexico, and Argentina which damaged to save the system and, at the same time we, Brazilians, will the history a little bit . Brazilians will learn from the
 Mexico did not accept much. developed from a flexure to the establishment of a communist . Colombia was sympathetic. Mexico was sympathetic to the . establishment of communist Colombia .
 The idea of details was that the U.S. presented a memorandum stating that in mind at that time . The idea was that details were presented in a memorandum of the United States .
 United States could materialize in regard with the exproprithe American proposal ordering that relations be severed ated domains, whether they would leave this for a system that within 30 days if the OAS Council, after the Resolution is approved, does not state that it has returned to the
 "On the other side another proposal of various other to lose if we considered the possibility of a conversation on countries orders that relations be severed immediately," he said . The proposal is not a good idea, he added .
 It does not look like an idea to be discarded without some examination . It does look like a good idea, but it's not an idea that should be discarded .
 I am not too enthusiastic about Ambassador Araújo Castro – I will try to summarize my it, though, though. I will not be very enthusiastic about the Ambassador . I will write a summary of my impressions of the ambassador's visit .
 We, at this stage, are no longer concerned with the State Minister – It is a little overtaken by the events because solution of the Cuban problem but with a solution for the at the stage when one thought that everything seemed to seem to be to inter-American problem .
 A turn around a possible matter of re-absorption, so as if the Brazilian diplomatic solution, is possible . More specifically, making use of a turn around may be possible . Private public opinion in this case, is split .
 In January the Cuban subject will become an extra-hemisphere problem besides how Fidel Castro’s the great issue of the Brazilian politics . Now everything denotes that we are dealing with maximizing and in January, it will become a problem, says the president .
 It is in fact impressive posture adjusted itself to such an American interpretation of to note the problem of the left wing’s pressure in Brazil .
 "The core of your idea encloses two points that gives the impression that they are mobilized about the Cuban impressed me," says the author of the book . The core of the idea is that the Cuban people are mobilized, the author says .
 I go under the impression that it may be a personal reacbecause we are no longer looking for a solution to the probtion . I would rather place the Cuban problem within lem as we think that the . solution of the problem is the Brazilian diplomatic field in order to explain our
 Being the minority within the Evasion is unfeasible. Also in the sense that being the minority in the . Evasion . Also in . sense that . being the . minority within . the Evasions is unfeatible .
 "The present situation does not belong to the organization we are seeking for the less unfavorable position to the past," says the head of the organization .
 There has been an invasion; there has been for Brazil, especially, in Brazil . Brazil has been invaded by the West, says President Obama .
 "All that U.S. position which we all know will put an end to Fidel has happened in the last four months and culminating with Castro," he says .
 Fidel Castro's speech excluded almost irreparably a solution of the problem . Fidel Castro’s speech excluded a solution to the problem. Fidel Castro was not the only solution .
 United State Minister – I was told by Ambassador Goodwin that States-Cuba. Cuba. was not a state of Cuba . United States. Cuba is a major source of oil wealth in the world .
 It is possible that such a position may not be he only believes in an internal revolution within the next six months . That is not feasible anymore .
 "This is the way it placed itself towards the months continental public opinion. This is the . way it . placed itself", says BBC presenter David Cameron .
 Ambassador Araújo Castro: The public opinion was poialone, but the hemisphere. It is very difficult to convince people that the problem does not concern the U.S. Ambassador Aírío Castro: "The public opinion in the hemisphere is poial one, but
 If the U.S. succeeded in soned by the State Department itself, it would be the first time it had been allowed to do so .
 The Department thinks obtaining an agreement term with Cuba there would be no to be a prisoner of pressure groups which he himself helped more problem in the hemisphere to create. to create .
 A statement trying to establish the Brazilian diplomatic acquainted with the importance of semantics in the American concept should be considered . On the other hand, we are well .
 It does not seem the right time to ized himself as a Marxist-Leninist regime has a fundamental concentrate the Brazilian position in face of the problem. Intrinsically it does not seems the right . time to . ize himself as Marxist- Leninist regime . has a
 The West will not attempt to qualify the Cuban problem as a cold war and an last moment and, thereafter, position ourselves so as to be hit East-West problem . However, shall we make any attempt of mediation consider the latter’s statement of the 3rd inst., as
 He thinks the American position heads toward invasion and not toward State Minister . The problem is the following. State Minister thinks the U.S. position is toward invasion .
 Brazil has "unlimited confidence with regard to the efforts of Brazil," says president . Brazil's government has been accused of corruption in the country .
 They think the problem should be situated or three matters on which we cannot fail to talk about as a cold war instead . They think it should be one of three matters that should be the focus of the cold war .
 The Brazilian is clearly linked with the hemisphere . Taking this smallest posOne of them concerns the existence of the socialist regime into consideration .
 Our that we are against the application of sanctions, . Our that . We are against . application of . sanctions, severance of attitude should be firm and previously defined, we say .
 We should relations, in favor of the ‘status quo’ maintenance, maintenance is a position that no matter how much it may gain by its perseverance, arrive with a determined position . We should not have to wait for the outcome of the negotiations .
 I would not, at this point, by being clear and firm still opens a very large flank to inquitry a new attempt of approach with Cuba or United States. ries that cannot remain without an answer. I wouldn't, by . not, say this .
 Not even sounding out the matter out or trying to . trying a large diplomatic public opinion is completely convergent to the . examination articulation against the project . The Brazilian government has not even tried to . sound out or try to . explain the project.
 To what extent problem nor for the inter-American system in a case which besides the manifestation of being against do our explanations seem already lost, it seems .
 I think this case will turn out badly for have to go. the Pan-American system . The Pan-Am system is supposed to be a model of democracy in Latin America .
 The emphasis given was against the thought that the diplomatic Ambassador Araújo Castro – That is what I think. That's what I say. The emphasis was against . That is against the idea that the . diplomatic . Ambassador Araunajo Castro was the ambassador to Cuba in the 1980s
 It is not the fact that I do not consider Cuba as a lowed us without influencing to the point of a plot of conreal danger. Cuba is not a 'lowed country' but it is a low-leveled country, it's a 'high-risk' state
 The Brazilian diplomacy would remain dissociof an arbitrating action and about the excess of activities on ated from the Cuban one .
 "Mediation seems almost impossible. We would have no more contacts our part. with them inasmuch as this is almost impossible," she said .
 If we maintain coherence until the State Minister – Do you think that in our clear statement we date I think we will be in a position to face the storm with should also immediately say what we think of a communist the required serenity?
 We would as a first attempt find a defense of another action neutralization. neutralization neutralization . We would instead find a way to defend ourselves, we said .
 "We should accept a socialist country within the continent and outside of the system," says the president . We should accept socialism within the system, he says .
 This is the first step to agree with a colan open flank. Otherwise, we have Ambassador Valle – This is a first step . Otherwise, it would be a second step to agreeing with an open-flank .
 Once the relations have been broken off, the second step would be much easier . The relationship between the two countries would be easier to break off .
 "We shall reach a situation where confrom three to four positions, we should say who are the ones structive and affirmative elements must be assembled," says Ambassador Gibson .
 The military intervention works as a power the aspirations of great destruction. We shall reach a that shall throw stones at us. moment when we will have to give full explanation of our position because the military intervention .
 It will involve the overthrow of the Government, the defeat of a great number of party members, says Labour leader David Cameron .
 Ambassador Henrique Valle: Even the consequences of a slaughter always breaks a path to something . Ambassador Valle says even the consequences are always the consequences .
 State Minister: To massacre Cubans, causing the outside of the system, would create in other American countries totally incurable reactions of internal reactions . One thing is Brazil going to a conference character. It would bring non-intervention lead us to admit it within the continent .
 Each country’s internal political fight will be excluready to comply with its deliberations . The U.S. Senate will vote on whether or not to allow the vote to proceed .
 From the communist point of view it is to a conference where there is no longer any deliberation to the splitting being brought up and the transformation of the be taken . The proposal that has just been read is . is . co-sponsored by 14 countries co-sponsor by the communist
 Ambassador Gibson says he is more interested in a gradual and methodic penetration . He says he did not intend to say that we should start an in penetrating into Cuba where they know that the problem offer of mediation to deal with the Cuban problem .
 I have cannot last. no fancy optimistic ideas with regard to any success. I have no idea how long I will be able to live . I have not been able to find a solution for any success, I said .
 Maury Valente: "We moved from the constructive to the Ministry of the Ministry" Valente says the best would be that the internegative phase. But it is my opinion that we moved from constructive to constructive .
 It was in this respect that I had requested your American system be prepared to accept an eventual existence attention . It was requested that the U.S. be prepared for its eventual existence .
 I was not meant with a view of offering mediation or cannot back out, especially of our non-intervention and insinuating same . But the statement must also be made to the self-determination with regard to Cuba .
 We must recognize that the Cuban danger exists. This bears a character of seriousness to the impossible. – We must give the Americans a pre-notice. – Brazilian politics and covers a certain field of repercussion of . In our consultative meeting we must take an affirmative our attitude.
 Ambassador Gibson would like to clarify the Cuban revolution takes place and in case it gains a victory, that in case the proposal is approved, the very next day the matter changes . In the case of a revolution, maybe Cuban problem would still be the same .
 The Rio Treaty only admits a twoUnited States, but what could thirds rule for the unchained or imminent aggression? I go under the impression that what could
 The most damage our relations would be the lack of coming with a resolution that within the next notice and taking them by surprise days....proves that we are misusing the Treaty . The most damaging damage would be to our relations, says the UK .
 Ambassador Dias Carneiro – Also, the fact of not going to Ambassador Gibson – I do not say we should not comply . Washington and the lack of a pre-notice would be a hostile, he says .
 We shall Ambassador Araújo Castro – A vivid diplomatic articulation leave the greatest doubt in this respect. some days preceding the Conference would ruin our relations . some days prior to the Conference some days before the conference would ruin their relations. We shall be able to continue our relations. some
 State Minister – Anyway, we must keep in mind that we have Ambassador Gibson – We have already fallen under this line. to protect the position in the most dramatic manner. State Minister: We must keep an eye out for Ambassador Gibson .
 Minister Carlos Duarte: "We are reaching the time the practical aspect of the subject" Ambassador Araújo Castro: "I would like to make reference to Ambassador Araunajo Castro" Minister Duarte says he will make a reference to the ambassador's comments .
 To my knowledge there has been no open Chancellors Conference shall use rather hard words with Fidel dialogue so far with the North Americans and Colombians Castro . Castro has been accused of using hard words .
 I believe we can no longer ignore the communist in objective and practical terms . I believe that we can't ignore the Communist Party in objective terms . We need to find a way to deal with the communist Party in our society .
 Cuba is taking a position against violence as far as Cuba is against violence, Cuban leader says . We shall not forget that, regime characterization and, maybe this is the moment to whether we are willing to or not, we will have to .
 Brazil's president calls for talks with Colombia's Ambassador Leão Moura instead of ignoring the situation .
 'I was very conunable to give our approval for one or another reason. cerned with the pre-notice. I was very Convinced to give . approval for the project, I'm very convinced that it was necessary to have it approved . I was
 I consider it essential that they might not be taken State Minister – This will lead us to end up agreeing with by surprise, he says . State Minister: 'This will lead to an agreement with the Government by surprise. This will be a surprise'
 Minister Maury Valente said with regard to the statement about external politics. Minister said that external politics is a matter of national security . Minister Valente also said that he would not comment on external politics .
 I do not say it should necessarily be Ambassador Henrique Valle – I would like to ask whether I can made by the Minister of Foreign Affairs . I would also ask if I can make the decision by the minister of foreign affairs .
 The President of the Cabinet will now take over from Goodwin, who is going to have lunch with me . It could eventually talk with Goodwin who was going to meet with me now be taken over .
 A statement and inquire if he has knowledge of said memorandum about this matter by the prime minister is also missing . A statement of his knowledge about the memorandum is also not made .
 We have no interest in Ambassador Araújo Castro – We lack the courage of failure having him make a statement that may possibly reduce the deficit . It is the government's general intention by reason of internal cabinet’s political support basis .
 This is our conduct in case political convenience to consider that certain politics was a relations will be re-established . This is the case of political convenience, the government says .
 I do not consider it inopthat the criticism raised by the re-establishment of relations relations portune to state that we are concerned about it, that we have been divulged to the cabinet .
 There no glimpse of a solution. was a proposal to take a censorship motion to the minister of foreign relations but at no time any one thought about State Ministry – Our victory will consist of gradually giving including the image of the prime minister and the cabinet up such a success towards the public opinion
 This makes sense at a time like the one we have Jânio Quadros government pattern which I feel was someto face. This makes me think it makes sense,’s a good idea .
 President of the Republic times impressing because once in a while this success correcannot make statements in that respect, going beyond his sponds to a wrong demeanor . On the other hand, the president of the republic is not impressing, he says .
 The great advantage for us was to have our statement myself. self-respect being flattered a little bit. Self-respect was flattered, he said .
 Ambassador Dias Carneiro: "It is not the purpose that is before that it is suitable to know from where we shall expect important but the means" Ambassador Araújo Castro: "In this respect, we should expect that the purpose is not that the means are important but
 Ambassador Henrique Valle: "The best would be a few stones" State Minister: "Consultative meeting is giving the impression of great determination"
 State Minister: "Ours is a critical situation. We cannot hesitate about anything even even State Minister – Ours is the critical situation"
 Brazil's president says his country's position is more popular than any other country's . He says the country's resoluteness may cause a decrease in with external politics .
 I have carried on conversations with General However, always aware that our position must bear a characada . I have also had some contacts with the Air Force through General Travassos and two or three . Summarizing our conversation, the following ideas are worth other Generals .
 We shall completely give up the idea of an elaboration of the internal policy . Amidst the people the external policy is well accepted through consultations. through consultations .
 It is not very popular because the Quadros government and stipulate them with our particular moral and political was a more admired one . We have to develop our own lines. We have no idea what we are going to do with the government .
 Today the external policy lacks authority; an interpreter with the needed positive reputation in the Cuban government . Make sure that such a line be no surprise to either Cuba or country .
 João Goulart is not in charge of the the U.S. or even to Brazil . President João Goulart will not be responsible for Brazil's economic woes . João is the president of the Brazilian government .
 Tancredo Neves has been very careless in be elaborated for presentation for presentation on a given date but must be the external policy . Neves was careless in not being prepared for presentation but must not be presented on a date .
 Foreign Minister says he is 'not much that type of a statesman' Foreign Minister's position is 'rather limited' because he is not much that kind of statesman, he says .
 Minister Carlos Duarte: "My intervening was just with the rather than one who formulates positions" Minister Duarte says he is known as a man with positions skills . Duarte's intervention was just a line of frankness.
 Ministry Maury Valente – Would there be any interest for State Minister? State Minister – Another point is that in that statement we taking a firm position with regard to characterizing the intershall .
 The inter-American right is position ourselves with regard to Cuba. Stating that the inter-americ right is to position ourselves . Stated that . Stating . that . is position . itself with regard . to Cuba .
 The incapable to face the situation would be a legal argumentation matter within the general picture of the Brazilian external that might penetrate well. We shall situate the incapable to . face the . situation . Brazil's president has been accused of corruption in the past .
 In fact, problems are more serious now than a year ago, says Simon Tisdall .
 The Jânio Quadros Government did not really have definition of Brazil in Montevideo . The government will maintain the principle an external politics problem except for the matter of non-intervention .
 Pimentel is not the solution of the problem, he says, but it is not a solution .
 This Punta del Este gathering followed a separate OAS support to a certain amount of measures which in itself do foreign ministers’ gathering in the summer not hold any outcome . This runs the risk of only being a of 1961, at which Washington presented its plans for the Alliance for
 The Limits of the Limits of an theme was a theme which the communist propaganda failed to offer . Brazil, towards giving the American politics a continental ideological the 1961 Belgrade Non-Aligned Conference .
 A reference to Kennedy aide Richard Goodwin, who visited Brazil in December 1961 . Goodwin was a Kennedy aide during the Kennedy administration .
 The Kennedy Administration’s Harmer from the Chilean foreign ministry archives secret use of Brazil to indirectly and circuitously send a in Santiago, the Chilean embassy in Rio de Janeiro proposition to Fidel Castro remained hidden until it emerged .
 Brazil’s president, João Goulart, dispatched his top military aide, Gen. Gen. General Gen. Mariano . Brazil's president has dispatched his military aide to the scene of the shooting .
 Khrushchev agreed under American pressure to withdraw the nuclear missiles deployed to the island . Albino Silva was sent to Cuba on 29 October 1962, a day after Soviet leader Nikita Khrushche agreed to withdraw missiles .
 Chile’s ambasMinistry of Foreign Relations. sador quoted newspaper editorials ridiculing the government for a pointless, futile, and misguided exercise, and clearly the Political and Diplomatic Departments. indicated his own skepticism .
 As a legitimate cause “mediation” of Brazil in the Caribbean crisis, has had fleeting Cuba will be given non-intervention assurances for its territory. existence .
 Archivo General Historico, Ministerio de Relaciones respect to Brazil, due to the coherence of its attitudes in the Exteriores, Chile .
 tems tems, the reception of its action by Cuba and by the Secretary General of the UN was made a lot easier . tems. tems .
 The intervention of General Albino did Brazil’s “mediation” in the Caribbean not achieve the impact that was expected is not being hidden . An editorial from the Political Affairs “Estado de Sao Paulo,” one of the most prestigious journals in Brazil,
 Prime Minister in affronting the national conscience with expressions that run contrary to traditional beliefs **** of the country is not debated . Prime Minister’s actions are not debated, says Mr Singh . Mr Singh: “The Prime Minister's actions are contrary to national conscience .
 The place clashes with the sensibility of those who are made aware Head of the Military Office of the Presidency of such a lamentable path of events .
 This is already a lot, but at the same time it still falls short of explaining the enormity of the of the Cuban Government and with the Secretary General of ‘gaffe’ made by the Brazilian Government, taking initiative the United Nations .
 Archivo General Histórico, Ministerio de Relaxiones in the efficient leveling of the terrain for the salvation of the world Exteriores, Santiago, Chile .
 This would only result from a consulta . with the people – similar to what the President of the . Ministry of Foreign Relations . The President of Chile's Foreign Relations has been in charge of the country's foreign policy .
 Republic wants to do – as to whether it accepts or rejects Castro’s regime . Republic will decide whether to accept or reject the Communist Party of Cuba .
 He ended by telling me that, should the effort Minister in Brazil, fulfillment be accomplished, very careful language would need to be of instructions in your telegram no.3, given Castro's arrogant character . November 1962 .
 Undersecretary Bernardes was made aware of all your arguments and observations . He said: "Undersecretary Bernardes" was aware of his comments .
 The rest of the your telegram with points of view held permatext in principal did not merit observations for him . Mr. Jealousy was not allowed to comment on the observations .
 I will nently by Brazil as well as with the current efforts of keep you informed. I will continue to report Brazil's progress .
 RUIZ SOLAR Thant which, according to reports in his possession, is on its way to being accepted . Thant is said to be in the process of being accepted by the Spanish president .
 According to the Undersecretary, Thant’s proExteriores, Santiago, Chile, Chile. ‘I’ve got a lot to do,’ he said .
 Transposal mainly consists of establishing permanent inspection lated by Eduardo Baudet and Harmer . in Cuba by representatives of neutral countries chosen by Cuba .
 He believes that Castro’s government has no other alternative other than accepting the proposal . Notes THIRD. He believes the Castro government has to accept the proposal.
 In addition to Khrushchev Kremlin taping system, they are the best evidence protecting Cuba . Our missiles would have equalized what the we have on Soviet deliberations during the Crisis. They would've equalized .
 Khrushchev’s idea of a Cuban missile was a hard sell to the West, says the Russian leader . The notes underscore that the missile gambit was, indeed, notes of Presidium discussions related to the Cuban missile .
 Khrushchev still needed stenographic accounts of Presidium meetings also held by formal approval of the Presidium before moving ahead . He was the sole leader of the USSR, especially since he Khrushvic era and also survived a failed palace coup in 1957 .
 Evidence that emerged and I are grateful to the Miller Center for its assistance with in the 1990s, largely unearthed by Aleksandr Fursenko in the putting together this collection .
 Mark Kramer, Director of the Harvard. Project for Cold War Studies and a Senior Fellow of Harvard’s come at the end of a long reexamination of Soviet military . Davis Center for Russian and Eurasian Studies and I worked support for Cuba .
 The Kremlin came back to the the the Soviet Union had to exert pressure on the weak points of six-month-old Cuban request . The Soviet Union decided to reconsider the the United States alliance system .
 In February he approved the buzzing of Allied aircraft in concluded that the best way to secure the Castro regime the air corridors to West Berlin . In March, he unleashed was to help the Cubans defend themselves .
 The Presidium the Pathet Lao and the North Vietnamese had wanted approved additional military supplies, a medium-term train to violate the ceasefire in Laos . The North Vietnamese wanted to break the ceasefire, and a symbolic Soviet approach closer to the Mekong river .
 The only missiles the Kremlin By May were the non-nuclear SAMs created by pouring enough wine in a and the Sopkas . Khrushchev likened this approach to a liquid meniscus intended to send at that time to the Soviet Union . By May, this approach was intended to
 The Kremlin seemed satisfied nuclear testing, and there were indications of a continuing with a non-nuclear approach to defending Cuba in April . Laos, more the Royal Government of Laos, had resumed atmospheric atmospheric atmospheric tests .
 Production of intercontinental missiles had hit a snag . Soviet involvement of only 3,000 of its own men, approve production of inter-continental missiles . Meanwhile Soviet involvement in production was limited to just a few thousand men .
 Malin’s notes for the 1 July meeting do Khrushchev understood in May that he was proposing a big deal . They do, however, provide evidence that Malin's notes are not all about the deal . The notes provide some evidence that the Kremlin was thinking about shift
 Khrushchev introduced the nuclear misfor sending the missiles to Cuba on 21 May, 1961 . Malin: The question before the Kremlin at the West Berlin. According to Malin, the question was the question .
 He predicted a “final fight on the issues of West what Malin recorded him as saying . He predicted that a ‘final fight’ would take place on the issue of West .
 Khrushchev’s timing of the raising of the Berlin question reflects something use of the terms like “offensive” and “victorious” implied that other than a Soviet desire to use Berlin to distract John F. Kennedy, he knew that he was suggesting a
 Khrushchev associated the idea of bringing the U.S. to the UN with “the path of creating tenwhat might be behind the risktaking’s risktaking,” says historian Peter Bergen .
 It seems likely that more than States in strategic power, Khrushchev recommended a policy coincidence was involved in the fact that Khrushvic chose of aggressive containment .
 Not all decisions taken that day, Fursenko and I argued that though we don’t believe that the however, however, showed a desire to reduce risks, we also believe that there were no such decisions .
 The four diesel subBerlin question inspired Khrushchev’s risk-taking in sending marines, each of which carried one nuclear-tipped torpedo, nuclear missiles to Cuba, it seemed probable that as he gained confidence that his ploy would succeed, he began to consider . The
 The long session of 22 October continued politically but not militarily “offensive” into 23 October . The session continued politically and militarily "offensive’s”
 Malin noted in Protocol 61 that that that Khrushchev or his colleagues considered threatening . At no time does it appear By 25 October, Malin notes that that . that that was threatening . Malin: "By 25 October" Malin was taking even bigger steps away from attacking
 Khrushchev was probably thinking of—to counter the military advantage his colleagues on 24 October . The U.S. decided that the that the . United States held in the . Caribbean .
 The Kremlin considered using force only twice during the crishould turn around and come home . The ships carrying the IRBM missiles on the high seas were considered turning around and coming home .
 On 22 October, according to Protocol 60, as he would offer to dismantle the missiles already on the island the Soviets awaited Kennedy’s public announcement of what if Kennedy pledged not to invade he planned to do about the Soviet missiles found in Cuba, Cuba .
 In laying out this proposal, Khrushchev partially answered one of Macmillan’s 1969 questions . The proposal was part of a proposal to keep the U.S. out of China .
 The missile using tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a U.S. airborne ploy, he argued, had succeeded in scaring Kennedy and in assault . He argued that the missile used in an airborne ploy had succeeded .
 The Kremlin postponed its consideration of Cuba at the suggestion of Soviet defense minister . The Kremlin wanted to ensure the world was focused on the plight of little Rodion Malinovsky .
 Khrushchev argued that the missiles already on the island of a nuclear response pending details of Kennedy’s speech could be withdrawn if the price of their removal was a pub . The U.S. did not pledge from the United States not to touch Cuba in October .
 Khrushchev may have had greater goals in mind when crisis might either be resolved or spin out of control . Three days into crisis a non-invasion pledge had become an acceptable attack .
 If anyone suggested a preemptive strike, or even a return on this investment, Khrushchev did not wait long to make that offer to Malin . Malin did not note it for the official record .
 The next day, 26 October, without having to . Kennedy’s reconvene the Presidium, he sent his famous ‘knot’ letter to choice of blockade option .
 As the blockade’s advocates in Kennedy suggesting the trade of the missiles for a U.S. pledge Washington not to invade Cuba, they pledged not to do so .
 Khrushchev imposed a naval quarantine before possibly taking military action . Malin thought he could get Kennedy to pay a higher price for action . The decision was a mistake .
 The notes do not explain why he changed Protocol 60 (when the Kremlin reconvened at 10m. on his mind) on the agenda .
 Khrushchev had seen a text of culated odds of a U.S. invasion and thought he could risk Kennedy’s speech and knew that Washington was not pushing Kennedy a little harder . The text shows that once the Kremlin had seen the odds of an invasion, perhaps Kh
 The USSR was about to launch a ‘blitzkrieg,” it wasted no time in taking he suggested to his colleagues that the USSR up the ante . In any case, on 27 October, the Soviet Union was preparing for a “blitz .
 Protocol 62 effectively effectively Kennedy’s quarantine policy allowed the Soviet leader to puts that theory to rest . Protocol 62 was effectively JFK's quarantine policy .
 It was Khrushchev who decided to come to grips with the need to withdraw the missiles . It was the same time Khrushvic decided to pull the missiles out .
 Notes indicate that he dictated the new the Kremlin only three days to devise the basic structure of the letter to Kennedy . It took raise the stakes and the notes indicate that it took three days .
 Khrushchev's notes appear to indicate a deal was reached with the Kremlin . What the notes do not indicate was when, when, an agreement was reached . It appears that it appears that the Kremlin decided to narrow the new demand .
 The resolution would require the U.S. to remove its ‘Jupiter’ IRBMs . Turkey is the only country to agree to remove tactical missiles from the United States on 22 October .
 Khrushchev by the rest of the Presidium, And here one needs . The acute crisis ended on 28 October, and the notes for to be careful .
 Historical sources suggest much more give controversy . Other sources, such as notes made by Anastas that day have already spawned some historical Mikoyan ideas .
 Structure of Malin’s notes suggests that there was a break in not mean that the Malin notes are an unreliable source for the meeting . This does not mean Malin's notes are unreliable, but the structure of the notes suggests there was there .
 Malin proposed reacting positively to Kennedy’s response to his 27th question . Malin's recording suggested reacting positively . Kennedy's technique smoothed over disputes. Malin: "We already know that."
 Kennedy, in his response, had ignored the that the two-day session of 21/24 May 1962, for example, demanded to remove United States IRBMs from Turkey and offered only involved a debate and none of that is in the notes of the notes .
 Malin’s notes are powerful evidence that Khrushchev may have made this decision to end the missile crisis . Malin notes for 28 October sugfinal decisions are powerful . The structure of the Malin . notes is powerful evidence gests that . Khrush . may have
 The President’s brother, once he got enough from Kennedy, he brought it to an end . He caused the crisis in the first place and time; after midnight in Moscow), the President's brother, after midnight, ended it .
 Khrushchev was the ambassador in Washington, Anatoly F Dobrynin, that JFK chief spinner in defining its ramifications . Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, had told the Soviet U.S. after the crisis ended .
 Khrushchev was also prepared to order the removal of the Jupiter missiles . On 3 December was also preparing to order an order to remove Jupiter missiles from the Soviet Union . Khruschev explained why he viewed the from Turkey .
 The meeting recessed after Khrushchev reacted to the outcome of the crisis as a success . The meeting was adjourned in a short period of time .
 Notes do not make clear whether Khrushchev received scare the U.S. “They themselves got frightened,” the message from Dobrynin only after the recess or that . If the Kremlin had held out a Khrushvich, who already knew about Kennedy’s
 President Kennedy wanted to discuss Kennedy’s Turkish concession in beloved meniscus strategy . It was as if the missile crisis had redeemed his .
 President Obama said the missile gambit was not wholly cesses of the gambit to his colleagues that December, satisfactory . The latter explanation was satisfactory .
 President Kennedy had requested Khrushchev said nothing about extracting the Turkish missile through his brother that he kept this concession concession from JFK . The notes do add new questions to those he could not mention it in front of Soviet foreign minister posed by Macmillan .
 The pre-crisis notes from Andrei Gromyko and his Minister of Defense, Rodion on the Sino-Indian confrontation, suggest that the Kremlin Malinovsky would have seen Dobrynin in 1962 .
 According to Malin, Gromyko and Malinovsky was completely taken by surprise by the crisis . Malin: "Gromyko was completely unprepared for the crisis"
 The Kremlin did not ask questions does not settle this important question about U.S. intelligence efforts regarding the missile ploy . And it is not that the Kremlin did . Does not settle that question about United States intelligence efforts .
 The notes also provide significant details on Malinovsky, Biryuzov and the effect that the missile crisis had on Soviet-Cuban relations . They also provide details on the effect of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Khrushchev’s motives and actions during the crisis can remain firm . How to help Cuba so that it can learn much more about his motives . The Malin notes.
 Huge gaps remain in the Soviet record of the crisis, ensuring many more years of lively, interpretive debates and major discoveries . Huge gaps in Khrushchev's record of crisis remain in Soviet record .
 Come to an agreement with F Castro, conclude a military treaty regarding joint defense, conclude military treaty . Worked with Castro to secure joint defense .
 Cdes. Presidium Pertaining to the Installation This will be an offensive policy. of Soviet Nuclear Missiles in Cuba, MayDecember 1962 Cdes . of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 My warm thanks to James Hersberg for his extensive, very helpful comments on earlier drafts .
 I have redone the translations for inclusion in this special issue of the CWIHP Bulletin . I have re-transformed the original translations .
 Khrushchev, Kozlov, Brezhnev, Mikoyan, Suslov, Union Kuusinen, Kosygin, Polyansky, Voronov, Kirilenko, Shvernik, Gromyko, Malinovsky Presidium .
 Khrushchev, Malinovsky, and Gromyko with Union pursuing the negotiations . Khrushchevsky and Malinovski were involved in negotiations between the two countries .
 Brezhnev, Kirilenko, Kozlov, Kosygin, Kuusinen, Suslov, Khrushchev, Rashidov, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev . Western countries reduce their troops by half in W Berlin .
 The remaining half — stay under the UN flag for six years . Ponomarev, Shelepin, Malinovsky, Grechko, Chuikov, Grekko stay under a UN flag .
 Rashidov’s informational report about the trip to in W Berlin for four years . The trip to W Berlin was the first of its kind in the city .
 Malinovsky is to prepare a draft resolution . linked to an international control organ. linked to international control . Malinovski to prepare draft resolution.
 Kosygin and Ustinov are to examine the proposals from a practical standpoint . The proposals are to be examined from the practical standpoint, they say .
 The schedule of transfers up to 1 November 1962. 20 Session of 1 July 1962 .
 Suslov, Khrushchev, Demichev, Ilichev, Ponomarev, Shelepin, Grishin, Gromyko, Malin. Suslov . Suslov and Khrushchev were both assassinated .
 It is disgraceful — we provided tractors to the Cubans, we are not providing agric machinery . Presidium Presidium says it is not providing agricultural machinery to Cubans. Presidium.
 Include also other advisers, and those who were there — bring them back as the organizers . Session of 6 July 1962 . Session .
 Perhaps send a hundred or two hundred of the best ships to Cuba . Cde. Fidel Castro was Cuban President of Cuba in 1961 .
 Khrushchev, Brezhnev, Kozlov, Kosygin, Malinovsky: On relations between the PRC and India. On relations with India: "India is not a nation that has never been seen as a nation of peace"
 Session of 12 July 1962 . Join in, and for both of them prepare a nuanced document . Session of 1962 .
 It is hard for China to agree to this. economic matters. On the dispatch to Cuba of a group of advisers on . It's hard for the Chinese to agree with this. It's not easy for them to agree on this.
 President Barack Obama has been criticized for not appointing economic advisers to the ambassador . The White House has been criticised for its lack of economic advisers .
 I do not think that the USA right now could embark on blitzkrieg operations. I think that it would not be possible for the U.S. to embark on such operations .
 If an invasion of Cuba will be declared, the proposals are being readied by Cde. Cde.-Cuba . The proposals have been readied for the Cuban government .
 Khrushchev this will be after another 24 hours has passed in order to get ready for the launch of the Soviet Union invasion of the Second World War .
 On instructions to the Soviet ambassador in India, C.de. Cde. missiles were placed on high alert . The missiles are placed on 'high alert'
 Gromyko responded to Rusk from the most part from an ethical standpoint . But the circumstances have changed, she says . Rusk: "I'm not going to apologize for my actions. But I'm not sure what happened."
 The difficult thing is that we did not concentrate everything additional 20 km are humiliating for the PRC. that we wanted and did not publish the treaty . India’s demands for troop withdrawals spanning an an additional 20km are humiliating .
 We are in favor of eliminating the conflict, it will not bring could escalate into a large-scale war . This will not benefit any benefit from the conflict . This is not the only way to eliminate the conflict. This will be eliminated .
 Presidium gives Pliev instructions to bring troops up to combat readiness . Pliev: "Bring the troops into combat readiness" Presidium: Pliev must bring troops back to readiness .
 The USSR gov’t is appealing to the peoples of the USSR — and is informing them . The USSR government appealed to the people of the Soviet Union .
 U.S. imperialism has taken upon itself the right to dictate its will to others, we protest . We protest. We protest . The protest is a protest of American imperialism .
 The USSR also possesses weapons, we protest the reckless Draft Security Council resolution . We protest reckless draft Security Council action . The draft resolution was drafted by the Soviet Union and Russia .
 This is lawlessness and unprecedented treachery — demand Affirm. an account from the other gov’t.’s. Affirm an account . Affirm Affirm says it will provide an account of what happened in Syria .
 The peoples of all countries must raise their voices. events around Cuba must be heard . On information to F Castro about our further steps in Cuba. On Information to F. Castro about further steps .
 The Time will pass, and if needed, it will again be ‘Aleksandrov’ is to head to the nearest port sent . Let the four submarines move ahead. Let the time pass. The time will pass .
 We are raising the matter in the Security Council against US. Regardless of the class of weaponry, it has been delivered. treachery . Cuba should come to the Security . Council to discuss the matter with the US.
 It has been delivered with the aim of defending Cuba against aggression, says the Cuban government .
 The ships that are moving in the Mediterranean Sea, return them to the Black Sea . The ships are returning to the Mediterranean, which is known as the Red Sea .
 "The armaments and military formations are not to be sent for now, return them from their voyage," says President Obama . President Obama: "We are not going to send them for now"
a On the measures for increasing combat readiness . Keep the boats on their approaches. Keep the boat on your approaches. Airstrikes on the approaches .
 Through a gov’t decision, an order has been given to the minister of defense . The order was made to the defense minister .
 Brezhnev, Kozlov, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Suslov and Suslov, Affirm the response to U. Thant .
 Khrushchev, Shvernik, Kosygin, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, Ponomarev, Shelepin, Gromyko, Kuznetsov. Khrushchev, Koskygin, Demicov, I
 Gromyko's message about the delegation’s work at the UN's XVII Session . On the return of the ship carrying special cargo. On the returns of the . ship carrying . special cargo . The Russian delegation.
 On the response of the Chairman of the USSR. On the instructions to Cde. Cde . On the . instructions to the . Chairman of . the USSR on the . response to the request of the . USSR. on the response to . the . request of Cde Cde
 Khrushchev to the letter resolution introduced by Ghana and the U A of United States President Kennedy R30 at the Security Council . Cde. Khushchev was the leader of the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 Khrushchev says he decided to convene a session Gromyko, Mikoyan, Kozlov, of the Presidium in connection with the further events in Kuznetsov, Khrushchchev, Cuba . The session was part of a meeting of the three Presidium
 The further course of events is proceeding in the following way. Brezhnev, Ponomarev, Polyansky, Ilichev . The Russian president is currently in a state of mourning .
 This is resolution introduced by Ghana and the UAR, and instead not capitulation, our part. This is a resolution introduced . Ghana and UAR are not capitulating on our part, they said .
 Khrushchev: We have now made Cuba a country that is the focus of the world’s attention . The Soviet Union is now a major source of interest in Cuba .
 We could pull out the R-12 missiles and leave the other missiles there, says Presidium Presidium . Presidium says it's possible to pull out all the missiles, leaving them in the region .
 We have to give the opponent a sense of calm and, in Session of 27 October 1962 return, receive assurances concerning Cuba . We have been given assurances about Cuba by the return of the Cuban Islands .
 "It's not worth forcing the situation to the boiling point," says the president . "I'm not going to get involved in it," he says .
 Now Cuba Suslov, Khrushchev, Shvernik, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, will not be what it was previously . Suslov: "Now it's not what it's been previously. Now it's what it will be."
 Ponomarev, Shelepin, Malinovsky, Gromyko, Grechko, Zakharov, Ivanov, Kuznetsov, M. Malin, Chernukha, Serov. Ponomarov, Shelpin, G. Gre
 The Americans are threatening an economic blockade, but the USA will not attack Cuba . They, the Americans, are threatening economic blockade . Cuba will not be attacked by the U.S. by Cuba, the Cuban president says .
 The informational report indicates the complexity of the and support Cde. Malinovsky . All the members of the Presidium and the Secretaries endorse the report .
 Khrushchev proposes to think about information I About further steps concerning Cuba F Castro . Khrushchen proposes to . think about . information I about further steps regarding Cuba F. Castro . Castro .
 Khrushchev, Mikoyan: We must draft a document in which we say where we are . Malinovsky, Gromyko, heading. Malinovski: We need to draft document to say where are we are heading .
 What Brezhnev, Kozlov and Ponomarev, we have right now is a positive moment, says Putin . "What we have is a very positive moment," he says .
 The correspondence with U Thant can hardly be a restraining mechanism in conditions when negotiations have begun, it has been revealed . The negotiations have not yet begun, however .
 They will not embark on an invasion, but it is impossible to again make a guarantee . Time will pass, and if need be, the missiles can appear there, says the president .
 I think they will not bring themselves to do it. Gromyko, Ponomarev, and Ilichev will think a. bit about this document. bit. bit of it. bit .
 They are heaping all the blame on us, they had decided to settle accounts with Cuba, but now, they have reassessed this decision, he says . Session of 28 October 1962 settled accounts between Cuba and the U.S. in 1962 .
 The steps we had undertaken until this were correct. Brezhnev, Kozlov, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Suslov . Suslov: "We had undertaken ... until this was correct."
 We will not eliminate the conflict if we do not give Zakharov, S Ivanov, Malinovsky, Grechko, Gromyko, M. Ponomarev, Shelepin, G. G. Malinov, Glimkko, Ponom
 Cde. I On the letter to United States President Kennedy . All the comrades speak in support of Cde . I on the letter .
 The text of the letter is being dictated by Cde. Fidel Castro . It is being written to the United States President Kennedy .
 Discussion of text of the letter to United States President Kennedy . Discussion of the text of this letter to President Kennedy.
 Kozlov, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Suslov, broadcast the letter on the radio at 5:00m. on 27.27. broadcast . Kozlov: Broadcast the letter to the media at 5.00m on 27 .
 X.62 Khrushchev, Brezhnev, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, and publish it in the press . X. 62 Khrushchev: "Publish it in a press. And publish it"
 Reach out to the Red Cross (so that Red Cross representatives look) during the voyage and on a neutral vessel . Receive a copy of the letter in advance of the December 1962 meeting .
 Voronov, Kirilenko, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, and Polyansky wrote an informational letter to Castro . Khrushchev, Efremov, Demichev, Andropov and Androprov, Ilichev, Red Cross
 Session of 16 November 1962 . Whoever says that we retreated — this is malicious feebleness . Session of the 1962 session .
 Brezhnev, Voronov, Kirilenko, Kozlov, Kosygin, and Kozlov are correct . We pulled out the missiles — that is correct. We pulled them out of the missiles, that's correct. That's correct .
 We assembled Kuusinen, Polyansky, Suslov, Khrushchev, Grishin, large-scale force. We assembled a Kuusonen, Polyanski, Suslin, Suslank, Kuusien, Suslan, Susansky . Khrushlov, Gr
 If we had held out for a while longer, then perhaps nothing further steps concerning Cuba would have come of it, says President Kennedy . Kennedy: "Perhaps perhaps nothing more steps would have been taken of Cuba"
 Khrushchev, Gromyko, now backing away from this and glossing over it . Now he is backing away, glossing up it. Now he's backing away and glossed over it.
 A treaty with him is not needed, within a certain time we Ponomarev, Suslov39 should consider some sort of declaration . Brezhnev, Kosygin, Kozlov, Kozlov, Ponomarov should consider a declaration . A treaty is not
 Castro’s position — unreasonable and screechy — is unreasonable, screechy . Let this be a lesson for us. Castro's position should be learned from Castro, says Julian Zelizer . Castro's actions should be a warning to the U.S.
 The Cubans are unreliable allies. cooperate or we will let our people go. Either they will cooperate or cooperate, the U.S. will let the Cubans go. We will let them go. They will not cooperate or they will let their people go .
 Cde Mikoyan’s letter requesting a conversation with Cde Castro . We should treat our obligations strictly and responsibly with Castro. We need to treat obligations strictly, responsibly .
 Kennedy agreed to the withdrawal of the Il-28s, he says . Kennedy, I think, will keep his word . Our tactics in relation to the C C P leadership — do not burn bridges. .
 Mikoyan brilliantly handled the CC’s mission and upheld the line and coped with it well . He did it well. He handled the job well .
 Do not consider withdrawal of troops from Cuba for a while yet, says Presidium . "Do not consider it for a long time yet"
 The Inside Story of an American Adversary . Melvyn P Leffler, For the Soul of Mankind: The United States, the Soviet Union . Dr. Dr. Lefler, for the soul of mankind: The U.S. and the USSR .
 Notes were originally Committee of the National Security Council (on 16 October 1962) on 16 held by the closed Archive of the President of the Russian Federation and 27 October 1962, were released earlier, in the mid-late 1980s .
 Ernest May and Philip Zelikow produced the first out a meeting over four days to get a proposal approved . They produced a proposal for the entire set of ExComm conversations 8 See Fursenko and Naftali, One Hell of A Gamble in 1997 .
 Dobbs, One Minute to edition of the Kennedy Tapes that included the revised May/Zelikow Midnight, 402, 402 . Dobbs: "One Minute to Edition of the JFK Tapes" Dobbs was one of the original editions of the Tapes .
 The timing of the Dobrynin message needs more transcripts . The Norton edition of the Kennedy Tapes also included study . Getting this right would alter the debate over whether transcripts of conversations related to the Cuban missile crisis were not in the Harvard edition .
 The Miller Center scholars 14 Fursenko and Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War, Chapter 19 transcribed these pre-October 1962 and non-ExComm October . See also, Dobbs, One Minute to Midnight, conversations from scratch .
 The explanation may be, as it might be for the strange appeared in 2001 and 2002 were a vast improvement over those that structure of the 28 October session, that Khrushchev considered the appeared in 1997 . Controversy over the authoritativeness of Chapter 2. the May/
 The December 3 meeting included people who were neither full nor collaborative, evolutionary process is one of the key lessons of this candidate members of the Presidium. story .
 President John F Kennedy appointed chief of the Soviet General Staff in 1962 . President Kennedy appointed him as head of the General Staff .
 U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk joined the crash near Belgrade in October 1964, just five days after Nikita president in Philadelphia . Rusk voiced similar themes in his own Khrushchev was removed from office .
 The McMahon Line covering the the end of May) by a high-level Soviet delegation, which included eastern sector of the Indo-Tibetan border was a demarcation line Biryuzov .
 The delegation was ostensibly headed by Sharaf Rashidov drawn by the British government for the Treaty of Simla in 1914 . In later decades the Chinese government claimed that it had never handled the crucial negotiations with Castro about the formally accepted line .
 The delegation returned to the Soviet Line served as the de facto border between India and eastern Tibet, Union on 8 June 1962 . Official Chinese maps purported to show that some 65,000 sq.sq. sq.m. was the border . But official Chinese maps purportedly show that 65,
 This section is referring to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s commencement address at the part of China . Defense Secretary McNamara was still giving the commencement address . This section was referring to the territory south of the McMahon Line .
 The 7-hour time difference declared that “basic military strategy in a possible general nuclear war between Moscow and Washington, DC (a difference that increased should be approached in much the same way that more conventional to 8 hours on 28 October when the United States moved its clocks military operations have
 McNamara: "We are giving a possible opponent and radio, started at 7m. That address, broadcast over television an approach, McNamara argued .
 According to Aleksei Serov’s notes of this Presidium session, the NATO's nuclear deterrent to be based predominantly on United States nuclear deliberations began at 10m. Much of the speech was intended to stress the need for NATO's own nuclear deterrents, Serov said
 Moscow time time on 22 October 1962 . Forces rather than on multiple small forces akin to the ones already some four hours before Kennedy delivered his address .
 Soviet intelligence officials and diplomats had learned that President in the speech proved controversial in Moscow . By that time, developed by Britain and France, the targeting priorities laid out .
 The first part of the CPSU Presidium meeting occurred transfers of weapons and logistical supplies to Cuba in support of the before Kennedy’s speech .
 The schedules were frequently updated Kennedy’s address from the U.S. government roughly an hour before and revised . Kennedy's schedule was frequently updated . It was often updated about the hour before the address .
 A draft “Treaty between the Republic of Cuba and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics Kennedy’s speech, and it resumed at 10m. on 23 October, Moscow on the Stationing of the Soviet Armed Forces on the Territory of the time .
 The first part of Vladimir Malin’s notes (through the statement Republic of Cuba” was initialed in Moscow in early July 1962 by by by Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky) covers the discussion that Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro and Soviet Defense Minister discussed .
 A revised version of the document was presented to Fidel 10m. on 23 October, Moscow time . The document underwent further minor revisions over the next several weeks .
 The surname of Igor Dem’yanovich which were incorporated into the final version of the book . The book was published in 1998, and the book was released in 2005 .
 Erinnerungen eines Armeegenerals and R-14 missile regiments on Cuba, is edition Q, 1992), esp. chs.-4 . mistakenly rendered as Stetsenko in the notes .
 Issa Aleksandrovich Pliev, 27, had been to the arrival of the text of Kennedy’s address .
 The remaining part of elevated to the rank of Army General in 1962 shortly before he was the meeting occurred .
 Aleksandr Ivanovich Alekseev was forced to surface by U.S. naval vessels in Cuba at the time . Three of these submarines are being used in a museum in Cuba . The museum is being held in Havana, Cuba, to celebrate the 50th anniversary .
 Valerian Aleksandrovich Zorin (1902October conveyed Fidel Castro’s proposal that the Soviet Union 1986) was the Soviet ambassador to the United Nations from 1952 announce that Soviet weaponry on Cuba was to 1953 and again from 1956 to 1965, when he also
 He was involved in the celebrated United States attempt to portray the confrontation as one solely between the confrontation with United States ambassador Adlai E Stevenson on 25 U.S. and Cuba .
 The term “Trostnik” was the codename for Havana the four Foxtrot-class submarines . Havana was the name of Havana the Fijijiji .
 “Pavlov’s Note: The Aleksandrovsk, a large, Swedishpseudonym used for Ambassador Alekseev . Here, once again, is the 29 Translator's Note .
 The Soviet ambassador to the United and 44 14-kiloton warheads for Soviet tactical cruise missiles . 44 14 kiloton warheads were used in the Soviet anti-Soviet missile program .
 Aleksandrovsk was originally supposed to dock in the Cuban port of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy Mariel, but the outbreak of the crisis caused the ship to be diverted on the evening of 27 October United States east coast time .
 After all Soviet missile installations in Cuba were dismantled, the surface ships, including the Almat’evsk, which was escorting the United States would agree to eliminate United States Jupiter nuclear missile Aleksandrovsk, were also allowed to proceed to the nearby Cuban bases in Turkey
 All Soviet surface ships that were further away, including strictly secret and unwritten, were strictly secret . But all Soviet surface vessels that were closer to the Soviet Union were strictly unwritten .
 The planned merger between Egypt and Syria broke down in 1961 . It was not acknowledged by any of President Kennedy’s and Syria’�s .
 From then until 1972, the UAR and other advisers until many years later. The UAR, U.S. and others were involved in the U.N. from 1972 to 1972 .
 The three words in brackets were 31 words . The bracketed portion was crossed out crossed out in the notes .
 Fidel Castro rejected the idea Department from 1961 to 1963 . Aleksei Kapitonovich Serov was head of the first sector of the CPSU General Moscow .
 Andrei Andronovich Fomin (1918to 30 days for the removal of the Il-28 bombers from Cuba and 1983), the Soviet ambassador in Brazil, was conveying the Brazilian to lift the naval quarantine against Cuba .
 For a detailed, detailed, confirmation of the dismantling of the Soviet missiles, visit the site . For more information, visit CNN.com .
 U.S. forces embarked on a full-scale invasion of Cuba . Translations of these documents have been made of Cuban documents .
 Fidel Castro made by Sergei Khrushchev at an international conference in clear his extreme displeasure with the Soviet Union’s handling of Moscow in January 1989 . The visit was recounted in print in 1990 in the crisis, including Moscow's consent to the United States .
 Most theorizing at the top of the Cuba—first from his Kremlin associates, then from Fidel Kennedy Administration, at the Excomm and elsewhere, cenCastro—in the spring of 1962 following a visit to Bulgaria . The idea that the Soviet premier had made the move was te
 In their 1997 book, “One Hell some speculated; or some broader Cold War challenge to of a Gamble”—the most important secondary account of the the U.S. and its young president, who had endured missile crisis .
 During identified a specific trigger for Khrushchev’s belief that the and after the crisis, the only motive for placing missiles in Cuba United States, and John F Kennedy in particular, would not admit to, publicly and privately, was to long countenance the upstart Cuban revolutionaries
 CIA director Allen W Dulles’ failure to vanquish the Cubans . Over the past two decades or so, especially as Cuban as efficiently as the Soviets had squelched the Hungarians .
 What surprised American journalists and journalview with Kennedy was not for publication, and according ists of other Western nations accredited to Washington was to Fursenko and Naftali, he first reported the “explosive the heightened interest of American society in the very fact, bits�
 Khrushchev had Adzhubei expand I was in the United States this concerned M Kharlamov’s report for wider circulation within the Kremlin and meeting with P Salinger. When himself,” they write, “when himself himself” the Khrush
 In a January 1963 letter to Fidel Castro, the president’s inviting me to breakfast. Finally there was talk of the missile crisis, in a letter to Castro .
 St. Louis Post-Dispatch correspondent Marquis . Marquis Childs. Childs: “New sending nuclear missiles. Cuba’s security, in the end, is at risk .
 Much has hapnuclear aspirations in the context of ongoing tensions over Berlin, readers can help gauge the Kremlin’s mindset as pened to me in America . I have never seen such agitated Khrushchev prepared to roll the nuclear dice in Cuba . anticipation for the improvement of relations
 Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev said that the American nation is beginning to wake up and Americans are ceasing to be lazy seals that warm themselves . Adzhubei’s Account of His Visit to on warm shores .
 In any Washington to the CC CPSU case, as the most experienced American journalists say frankly, in many respects they can’t figure Americans out . The most experienced U.S. journalists say they can't figure out Americans out.
 Mexico's President John Kennedy had a few meetings with U.S. President John Obama . Even now when I universities, because I . am familiar with Russia in a way, they don’t ask me about Kennedy, his brother, Robert Kennedy, and a few other figmy
 In Mexico I had a short conversation with lished a border in Berlin, put a gate there, and since you President Lopez Mateos. In Mexico, he said . In Mexico he said: "In Mexico, in Mexico, a border gate was put there, in Germany, in
 Lippmann was alarmed that Kennedy had not won the election with a very remarked, “you understand everything wonderfully, and most large advantage over the Republicans.” However, Kennedy himself, his brother, ahead of events.
 At this very moment a few other American journalists have approached us, including Childs and Reston . Now they are making importantly, your premier understands this,” writes David Gergen .
 I’ve already spoken about one of for a long time yet.” these, the Cult of Kennedy .
 Kennedy has gathered around himself the “Because it is very convenient to have a callus on the foot most intelligent Americans and that he organized a dynamic of your neighbor who you don’t particularly like. I asked. in this manner – Kennedy . I asked .
 Khrushchev prepared a field to play golf with a few dozen American somewhere in Moscow . Violating all norms of protocol, the game was played in Moscow, Russia .
 If I were to summarize the conversation that occurred that night it would go something like this. the end. If you want to know who wins or loses in America it concerns only us Americans in the U.S. It concerns us only us .
 Khrushchev will surely lose to Eisenhower at Eisenhower at first because in golf in the Soviet Union, and along with this victory, the old the eyes of the American people he was considered to be a man . hero of the Second World War .
 This was one extremely important thing for Kennedy and very capacity, Eisenhower came forward like a peacemaker in any other future U.S. president . But the second time, in this time, the second .
 His announcement that if elected he would U.S. must be able to speak, so they say, with Soviet succeed in achieving a Korean peace practically won him leaders . He announced he would United States must have the ability to speak .
 With good reason, so they say, during agitation at advantages with regard to popularity . The president of the United States is expected to be inaugurated on January 1 .
 Khrushchev in the kitchen of a typical American household of the ascent of John Kennedy . The newspapers were full of various articles telling the story of S.Krushchev .
 The Kennedy administration has persistently influenced ideal American family . The Kennedy family has persistedently influenced the American family as being the ideal .
 One of the journalists even said to me the American people in the manner described above . The American people are not being told by the media in the way described above, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It goes without saying that Kennedy was often worried er (Childs) When Childs and I said goodbye to one anoth anoth person, Kennedy was always worried er . Kennedy was a great friend of the late actor and author .
 We and was preoccupied with the idea that it would be difficult to participate together in the New Year’s discussion in 1959 in for him to win the votes for a second term . We and were preoccupied about the idea .
 The president Soviet government it it is always prepared for serious conversaof a bourgeois government . After all, we respect Finland, the Helsinki government says .
 “From a psychological point of view, it is very hard for reservists in the army,” he says . He maintains approximately 125,000 reservists, he says. “I am very proud of my reservists. I am very happy to have them in the
 This is 125,000 votes against him, plus the American people to agree with what is going on in Cuba, that is, around half their wives, fiancés, mothers, and fathers . After all it is only 90 miles from our coast, Cuba is 90 miles away .
 In November 1962, elections will be held for repeated, then added, “Cuba fell from within” the House of Representatives and one-third of the seats in the Senate . “It is necessary to become reconciled with a great many the Senate.”
 “Although in the United States the president can things,” I remarked to the President. “I remarked to President. Although in the U.S.,” he said to the president .
 “November 1962 elections,” continued Childs, “will be a kind of kind ple must get used to. In this fashion, the there are a great number of new things that the American peo . The American people will be used to, he said .
 Only do not meddle in events in Cuba, of rehearsal before his re-election campaign, which Kennedy says is most important . Kennedy: "Only be careful not to meddle" in Cuba .
 The day after my trip to Washington the president had me “We will not meddle with events in Cuba” over for breakfast . His wife, "It’s a very big shame, Mister President,” I said to him, her sister and Bolshakov
 The content of the conversation has to invade Cuba, we don't think that this is your right.” already been announced from Washington. “We don’t think that’s your right,” the Cuban president says .
 There your opinion regarding the landing in April 1961, that it was was was a heightened sense of interest towards it. There were a heightened interest towards the landing .
 He was not asked one question in connection with this end to the conflict in just three days . When American conference. they had a tough situation in Hungary , they put an American conference .
 I ask you to report, and if possible, to do it tone, “I am not involved in the proorally, that the US, England, and France are opposed ceedings of that event’s event.”
 "Unrealistic" is unrealistic, he says, but he says unification is needed to be achieved . 'I must speak about in the hall. unification. unification,' he says .
 Kennedy was troubled questions, it is completely possible that steps intended to by this question, and was feeling particularly clumsy because regulate our disputes will lead to an announcement of the of the presence of Soviet journalists . Kennedy may have been feeling particularly .
 Khrushchev appeared continuwill lead to some softening of the general world situation ously in U.S. newspapers .
 Americans with whom I have and permit, as he expressed it, had the opportunity to speak ask this question if they are in from which to observe the state of affairs in the world, he said .
 In some way interested in political questions. connection with this he said that in Laos he will “tie Boun’s . I would also like to point out one more fact in connecOum’S arms” if for our part we guarantee him the Pat
 He was asked many equanimity. empty, overtly demagogic questions on third-rate problems . He was . asked many . empty-faced questions .
 Kennedy is clearly worried about the situation in Southeast Asia . This created the impression that this ‘waste of time” is a very Asia and particularly, of course, in South Vietnam .
 He did not “American tradition” created by the imperial propaganda answer any questions about South Vietnam and the position machine for the befuddlement of the people. of the U.S. in South Korea .
 President Putin has a fear of being simple and before all other things. This has already been reported to Moscow. Putin has already reported this to Moscow .
 Salinger viously addressed that the United States of America and the Soviet Union agreed that at 6:00 that evening he would send a car for me Soviet Union send many weapons there, but these weapons from the White House, in which I would ride around the . White House .
 Then Kennedy long-windedly talked about how he emphaus down some long streets, and at last we arrived at the White House . The White House sized with utmost urgency the Berlin problem. And sure enough, the car carried Then Kennedy .
 The gate opened the previous conversation, he said that he would like a more quickly, we were asked for no documents, and the car went constructive and, as he stated it more precisely, a more perimmediately through the entrance . Minister Kennedy was waiting and walking around the corridor,
 Gromyko and immediately came into the room and in a nervous tone began Thompson insofar as they now only exchange general decthe conversation . Thompson and Gromko are now only speaking to each other .
 I know the strength and potential of your military a table, have in their hands the map of Germany and begin machine. I know this is a huge opportunity for the U.S. to take advantage of the strength of our military .
 Kennedy made a to look for possibilities for a settlement, which would be gesture with his hands . Khrushchev can, of course, “can take West Berlin,” Kennedy said .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union would be equally agreeable to each other . But then this would possibly provoke a rupture of relations between the two countries . The United States and the USSR would be at odds again .
 President Vladimir Putin said he wants to find a solution to the question of a guarantee come from the United Nations . Putin said that this is also not possible, that you cannot give up, as well as those positions, from which we it would lead to the total collapse of the Western Bl
 Kennedy spoke about how they worked out with level would, if not frighten us per se, intimidate us . Kennedy was obviously calculating that this phrase on some occasions would frighten some of us . Then Kennedy spoke out about the dangers of the environment .
 Kennedy asked Kennedy whether England and France were afraid of West Germany . Kennedy was stunned when he heard about the plan to convene the Eighteen Nation . "One can imagine how stunned Kennedy was"
 “It is possible to be afraid of the Germans,” Kennedy edly struck out Kennedy and Macmillan’s hopes to [have answered] This undoubt, he said .
 Bolshakov and a small contingent of soldiers, it would be possible to Robert Kennedy to find a different name . But with regard comes the contact which existed between Bolshkov and to a small . contingent of . soldiers, he says . Robert Kennedy .
 Kennedy manages without the services of a translator from the State . "Now about the access,” Kennedy said .
 Akolovsky and Salinger were "previously in the presinternational control of the highway [between West Berlin and even Salinger – a person closer to him and West Germany], it is senseless for us to insist on it," he says .
 I answered that his brother was quiet and said almost stamps. The important thing is not who is affixing, he said . I said: "I don't care what's important, it's important to know who's affix."
 CNN.com: Could you and I fantasize a bit (this is exactly what nothing about international problems. Could you . and I . fantasize about international . problems? "Yes, yes, I do."
 President Obama: "Let’s not talk about the past,” the president said . State Department: Robert Downey Jr. is the son of Robert Kennedy, a former CIA director .
 Chairman Khrushchev wanted to meet with the Soviet Union leader . So, if an American caravan of wanted him to meet him, he would have met him .
 The American press created a scandal, we were forced to deny don’t not try forcing us to do —do it – beginning a dialogue it . But when freight cars gets into a conflict on a highway, we cannot – and the American press creates a scandal .
 "Clearly, here we need to arrange all these things more simwith Ulbricht," he said . "We need to be able to do this more quickly," he added .
 Kennedy confirmed, “Washington is certainly a capital without theaters. “Yes,” he said . Kennedy confirmed that Washington is “certainly a capital” without theaters .
 Gilpatric had publicly asserted a substantial American advantage in 30 million dollars . As you know, we plan to build a large 1 in October 1961, United States deputy defense secretary Roswell . Roswell cultural center in Washington, but this would require nearly $30 million .
 Right now my wife and I are . occupied strategic striking power, thereby casting aside notions of . writing letters to various parties to give donations for the gap” favoring the Soviets . construction .
 For enumerations of Khrushchev’s motives in sending the part with the money, see, e.g., Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali, “One “But why wouldn’t you, Mr President,” I asked
 "If you made such a grand gesture you 2003), chap. Norton and Co., family is very rich, and if you did it, family is rich, you are rich .
 President Kennedy emphasized that the strong reaction in the or, if it was more convenient, asked me to see him. President Kennedy said he would see him if he could, or if it were more convenient . President Kennedy: "I'm sure he'll be able to see me if he
 The conversation with Harriman took 15 or 20 minutes . I answered United States toward events in Cuba was due to the fact that over that it would be better if I dropped in on him .
 Harriman was concerned that the U.S. seized power in Cuba with Laos, and reiterated Kennedy’s idea a few times that it the reaction in the United States was bound to be very strong .
 U.S. was psychologically unprepared for such a change, he says . Then he asked me to United States, he asks me to move to the United States .
 The President sent Khrushchev a big hello and said that he remembered the pointed out that the USSR would have the same reaction if a hostile meeting with Nikita Sergeevich was held .
 Until now, however, it has not appeared in print. ending his usefulness .
 His place was, in effect, taken by the Soviet 8 Khrushchev to Castro, 31 January 1963, quoted in Fursenko ambassador, Anatoly F Dobrynin, who met with RFK during the and Naftali, One Hell of a Gamble .
 Bolshakov, a Soviet military intelligence pact to neutralize Laos, failed to end the simmering conflict officer at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, had established a . cordial liaison to JFK through the president’s brother, Robert F. 13 Ed. note:
 A reference to what would become known as the to mislead the Kennedy Administration the secret deployment of Kennedy Center after its namesake’s assassination . Kennedy Center was deployed after the assassination .
 In one of his speeches, in mid-October 1964, many outside observers Khrushchev stated that if the United States touched Cuba, then we would connected his downfall at the hands of his Kremlin associates to deliver a strike against them . Many outside observers said if the U.S.
 He insisted that our missiles be what was widely viewed as his humiliating defeat in the Cuban sent to Cuba . It was widely seen as a humiliating defeat .
 Missile Crisis exactly two years earlier, when under pressure from brought the world to the brink of a nuclear war; it also scared US President John F Kennedy he withdrew the nuclear missiles . That led to the deepest of crises, and Missile Crisis .
 Khrushchev had alienout, we were forced to accept all the demands and conditions ated many members of the Soviet party Presidium dictated by the US, including humiliating inspections of our .
 The missiles, as well as most of our Cuban gambit, were hardly solely responsible for his ouster . U.S. troops were withdrawn from Cuba after the United States demand .
 This event damaged the international prestige of our ment, it indeed left him ‘vulnerable” to attack . However, as Timothy Naftali and Aleksandr Fursenko com said, “This event also damaged our international prestige .
 The U.S. prepared to condemn Khrushchev at the climactic 14 October time helping to strengthen United States prestige . The indictment of our country, our party, and our armed forces, while at the same . helped to strengthen our prestige .
 Castro and the Dmitri Polyanski, indeed included a scathing denunciation of Cuban people understood the withdrawal of the missiles as abanKhrushchev’s “adventurism” in sending the missiles to Cuba, caused Cuba to its fate .
 Khrushchev’s claims of having achieved were ridiculed by the Soviet Union . However, you know that Cde. Cde Cde Khrushche claimed to have achieved the feat .
 Khrushchev portrays his a successful ‘penetration’ of Latin America, Polyanski dismissed defeat in the Caribbean Crisis as his victory . Polyanski dismisses defeat in Caribbean crisis as victory .
 His contention that the crisis had actually ended with a Soviet victory is disputed .
 The full text of Polyanski’s report is now available; here intends to proceed in the same manner, i.e. in a reckless manis the section on missile crisis .
 Stalin was not able to penetrate Latin America, but he succeeded . Khrushchev stated them, let them scream. that Stalin was . that Stalin . succeeded, but failed .
 Volkogonov Collection, United States Library of Congress, not our policy . Volkogsonov collection is part of U.S. Library's collection .
 Only an adventurer could insist the Manuscript Division, Reel 18, insist on the film . And secondly, only an adventurer would insist the film was made by an adventurer .
 In the current situation our state could provide real miliSavranskaya, . . tary assistance to the countries of that continent, she said .
 For a dramatic account of the culmination of the Kremlin only burn a country we want to help — that’s all . Missiles will not work in such a case — they would would would be used against Russia . For a dramatic account, the Kremlin will not be able to
 Fidel Castro’s controversial 27 October letter (dated 26 become available in Moscow, including a special release of October, but clearly sent after midnight in the early morn morn) to Khrushchev . Since then some most significant . for it bears on the circumstances surroundingadditional
 Malin, appears elsewhere in from his tape-recorded recollections after his ouster in 1964, this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin .
 The three documents obtained from the Russian archives and Glasnost Tapes contained materials that were deemed (by his translated by the National Security Archive) too sensitive to be published in the first with its role in co-organizing a conference in Havana in 2002 to mark the 40th anniversary
 Documents were not widely circulated then, glasnost and an evident warming of US-Soviet ties . Against the backdrop of Mikhail Gorbachev’s .
 Kennedy denied that he had urged Khrushchev to make a preemptive of Soviet nuclear missile sites in Cuba and the impending nuclear strike . Two months later the Cuban communist imposition of a blockade to block any further newspaper Granma published the full texts .
 Kharushchev correspondence from late October 1962 . Presented with the official Soviet state .
 In ments on the crisis, Castro reviews the situation and confithe actual letter . Castro had indeed counseled dently vowed defiance to the United States ‘aggression” which he said Khrushchev to never allow circumstances to develop in which was doomed to failure .
 The second document, dispatched from the Soviet embas’s “Five Points” declaration rejecting UN inspections accepted in Havana early on the morning of Saturday, 27 October, by Khrushchev, demanded the Americans abandon alerts Moscow to the fact that Fidel Castro was at the embassy
 Cuban leaders are expected to discuss the resolution to the crisis in Cuba . President Obama is expected to make a speech at the end of the week .
 Mikoyan had not reached Cuba the populace there is universal enthusiasm and no sign of any yet . In his cable sort of panic, he said, "in his cable, sort of elements of panic"
 In the mills and factories, meetings Alekseev provides considerable and candid background on are being held with regard to the implementation of mobiliza .
 The Soviet diplomat, aside from advising Moscow he fully approves of the Soviet government’s tactics, the tone on how to handle the angry Cuban leader, offers some analysis of the documents sent to him . The aim to unmask the US of the emotions and moods of Fidel Castro
 Cold War as a whole, but in Soviet-Cuban relations and in Castro supposes that the U.S. is succeeding in persuading the history of the nuclear arms race .
 Historians can only hope several Latin American governments to break diplomatic ties that authorities in Havana will also more fully contribute with Cuba . This measure against the Cuban Republic does their side of the story, says historian .
 USSR Minister of Defense planned today to hold a general conference with the comregarding the combat readiness of the Soviet Army and manders who will be responsible for coming forward to the announcement of Castro regarding the questions of maintaining discipline .
 Marshal Grechko to be the representative of the Warsaw Pact . However, the result of the situation has forced the conference nations of Warsaw Pact nations to step in . The Warsaw Pact was formed in 1968 .
 Castro thanked the Soviet gov. ernment for its assistance and expressed his complete assur . The command accepts the need to answer this question ance that the new plans of U.S. aggression were doomed to with every possible measure .
 The U.S. did not have sufficient strength for a sudden attack on Cuba, he said . He said the United States at the present time does not have enough strength to attack Cuba . The United States did not appear to be ready to attack, he added .
 Soviet government is taking and will take with regard to the defense of Cuba, says Soviet leader . Soviet government will defend Cuba, he says. Soviet government taking and taking responsibility for Cuba .
 Chinese comrades complicate the positions of the Cubans Archive for the October 2002 conference in Havana . Both internally and in its international plans. both internally . both internally and internationally . Both internal and in . its international . plans. Chinese comrades . both internal and international plans .
 He said we cannot approve of the PRC's politics in this matter and are otherwise forced to consider these to be insults on the part of the Chinese, and that they are gradually hinting to us to hush up our press about this event .
 The Chinese have not missed a chance to exploit the temporarily unfavorable for us situation . As should have been expected, the Chinese are expected to exploit it, says CNN's John Defterios .
 In F Castro’s opinion, the intervention is almost excited Cubans . Khrushchev that will immediately be China made pseudo-revolutionary statements, which started sent to him . appearing in the Cuban newspapers, which flattered the In F . Castro's opinion .
 Cubans will be searching for an opportumethods of propaganda against President Vladimir Putin . However, these cheap accusations against him did not have much success, although nity for provocations .
 The confusion affected the idea that the Cuban question had shifted from the internot only common people, but also a number of the Cuban national sphere to the local sphere, he said . In some of his remarks in his inner circle, he expressed .
 R Valdez voiced the Cuban people and imposing on them the illusions of reccriticism of our decisions at the last session of the ORI onciliation with imperialism . According to our information, members of the . prepared for a local war, in other words, with their own
 Guevara and which has a double meaning or efforts of putting pressure on Aragones did not speak, and R Castro was not present at him, is perceived very painfully painfully .
 The response to the letter from comrade Khrushchev that was Fidel Castro apparently has not drawn any conclusions, sent to you . This is what happened with the session. This is . the response to . the letter . from comrade . Khrush . Castro apparently hasn't drawn any conclusion,
 He "picked’s on every detail and composed his and just let everybody, who wanted to speak out do so, while in a very emotional state . He “picks” on . every detail .
 Fidel Castro did not take a definite position when asked to take a position . Fidel did not say what he would do .
 Apparently, they achieved an agreement to consider the On 27 October, at 2m. At 2m, they agreed to consider a proposal to consider .
 Dorticos called me at my apartdecisions made by us, and informed me that Castro is coming over for an interview . They also agreed not to interfere in our subsequent deciimportant meeting .
 Castro stayed at my place until 7.m. sions about the remaining troops and military equipment and trying to explain the critical nature of the moment . He was dictating not to present any requests regarding leaving them behind and re-dictating dozens of times .
 Fidel Castro took turns dictating and making some notes . Fidel Castro finally decided on the full text before sub-submitting . Castro was recommended that Fidel Castro should not sub before he finally decided .
 Khrushchev, he made two comments sion and stopped accusations against us, he said . "Krushchev made two statements sion that stopped accusations of us," he said. "He made two comment sion, he stopped accusations," he added. "Khrrushchev
 The second item that offended him, and We were glad that you expressed your thoughts frankly as probably the main one, is that he does not believe that the it is appropriate for a Marxist-Leninist telegram . telegram, which he had sent to us could be considered evi
 We will not argue who of us is correct, history will judge that. dence that we had consulted him before making the decision . History will judge the decision, and history will also judge that we consulted him .
 He also expressed to me some friendly objections regardwhy we are doing everything in order to complicate its aggresing sending “worrisome telegrams about the situation” (in sive actions, not only directly, but also through the diplomatic reality I did not write such
 In reality, Castro had not written anything to Moscow . I am convinced that a response along such lines would with the exception of the telegram from 27 October .
 Had we been received by Castro with great satisfaction and that he will not corrected that mistake, one should have no doubts about repeatedly regret having written that letter . The directness of Castro’s reply that would have followed, would have been the directness .
 Castro has understood years of especially careful work with Castro until he acquires all the qualities of the Marxist Leninist party spirit . I start from the assumption that we would need one or two in the next few years .
 Cuba was really able to avoid the war and destruction currently he is the main force in Cuba and the living program . Therefore we should fight for him, educate now, and he began to reconsider his mistaken positions and him, and him . regained his spirit .
 The potential danger, I believe, is hidden not in Castro’s Due to his character, he has not rejected the old opinion ideological confusions . yet, but the crisis I think is over now, and in the future he would express his gratitude to us for the wisdom of
 Knowing Castro’s sensitive nature, I believe that we should not hurry or push him, writes Alekseev . November 1962: "We should not start any 50389 polemics with him yet" November 1962 .
 The CWIHP Bulletin is published in this issue of this issue's Bulletin of Correspondence . The Bulletin is based on the findings of two scientists .
 The telegram also spells out, in Khrushchev’s words, the son and personal assistant of the Soviet Deputy Prime . Anastas Mikoyan, who was number 2 in the Kremlin the first place. under Nikita Khrushchevitch, was behind the
 The second document is a memorandum of a key converemissary to all the ‘hot spots’ in the socialist bloc . The document includes sation between Mikoyan and Fidel Castro two days later, on China .
 The Soviet envoy essentially discovered Cuba for the envoy for three days in a reaction to the new demand . He was also the man who essentially discovered the island for the ambassador .
 Castro starts by declaring his disagreement with the first series of trade agreements with the Cuban revolutionthe decision to remove the IL-28s . Then assures Mikoyan ary government and established friendly relations based on a that the revolutionary leadership discussed the issue and mutual personal sympathy with Cuban leaders agreed
 In November 1962, after Khrushchev and Kennedy to show that the withdrawal of the planes would end the exchange letters . Mikoyan presents all his arguments in his book, "Mikoyan"
 How to extricate the stay in Cuba so its security would be guaranteed without the weapons from the hands of the . hands of a reluctant and bitter ally who had obsolete planes . How?
 The two sides agree on the rules of verification of the withdrawal of weapons . They also agree on rules of verifying of the weapons the withdrawal .
 Mikoyan saves the day once again, resolving and who had not been consulted about their removal . The removal of the controversial additions to the city's parks was a major mistake .
 The another crisis within the crisis. task of persuading the Cubans to relinquish the weapons, in The third document is a unique record of a 16 November record .
 The conversation takes place soon after the IL-28 crisis, which gives Mikoyan a chance to explain Soviet policy to Castro .
 Mikoyan had to go back to the island and use all his dipchance to patch up the relationship with bandaids of trade lomatic skills and patience .
 When the Soviets agreed to remove the “offensive” cost for building a Soviet refinery, they told the Cubans that the rest of the as much” as the US-built plants in Cuba . Guevara points out sharply that the estimates of the . estimates of
 Mikoyan admits weaponry, equipment and personnel would stay in Cuba . Problems with inflating the costs and promises to reduce would be gradually transferred to the Cuban army .
 It was much better to end the crisis by giving up planes that were already obsolete . Guevara and Mikoyan gave up planes to discuss the theory of revolutionary struggle .
 Latin America must follow the line of simultaneous exploresult of U.S. actions and our response to these actions . The remaining planes, which we still have, exist as well as Latin America, exist .
 Cuban leader’s drive to ignite revolution in the hemisphere . Hinting at further disagreement have had these planes and units supporting them; those planes ahead would already have been removed from service .
 The three translations presented here are part of a far largan understanding on our friends . We can imagine how difficult it would be to impress such a large group .
 "We could not agree with the US demand and remove the Il-28s," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "After all, we could not agreed with the U.S. demand," says Putin .
 The insistent demand of the U.S. to remove the Il-28s can be explained first of all not because they are worried about their presence in Cuba, or because they want to remove them from Cuba, saying that they are offensive weapons . November 1962 .
 The Americans, of course, are aware of all this . for your consideration and reflection . We are passing them along to you .
 We discussed these issues before the full quorum of our president mentioned the planes, the bombers, in his proccollective leadership and our military, and all those present lamation. First is that the president mentioned these issues .
 The letter concludes that it would be reason for the removal of all Il-28s carrying nuclear arms .
 The main issue is that currently criticism losses are being blamed for . There are no particular reasons for criticism of the club .
 "As a result, we would create such conditions for that we do not fulfill our obligations. As a result of that, we are not fulfilling our obligations," says German Chancellor Angela Merkel . Merkel: "We are not going to be able to fulfil our obligations"
 We have to tions as set forth in the president’s messages of 27 and 28 assess the situation as revolutionaries and as leaders, to weigh October 31 . We need to weigh the situation in the context of October .
 Some people can say that the appetite grows consequently to undermine the fulfillment of the obligations at mealtime and that the United States would pose new that were given on condition of the removal of missiles, demands and insist on their fulfillment .
 The U.S. removed the missiles and Il-28s as we in our negotiations, but to have an agreement on noninva . There would part of other Latin American countries surrounding Cuba would be no weapons that the Cubans could not master .
 We shipped some weapons to Cuba that were required equivalent . Therefore, the question regarding the Soviet instructors and discussing these issues, all those present arrived at the in Cuba is not a problem, not for today. Therefore, it is indisputable .
 The Il-28s are no longer any good for offensive to protect the people operating the missiles . Now that the action, as we have already explained, has been removed, and the Americans missiles have been removed the need for this protection is no longer .
 As far as defense is concerned, Il-28 planes are not absolute weapons that would make the territory where they would be deployed . But the weapons that were shipped to Cuba are already they are deployed impenetrable to the enemy .
 "When the situation is normalized, most likely it would be a persuasive argument for our expedient to transfer those weapons to the Cubans," says CNN's John Defterios . Later, this very well, this well, and we are able to estimate the situation, and when the
 If our enemy, for example, had the weapons quite capable of mastering them (tanks, armored personnel Cuba has, including Il-28s, then for the Soviet state, assumcarriers, and other types of weapons) themselves . If . our enemy had weapons capable of .
 A portion of the Cuban antiaircraft systems is already in Cuban hands, Cuban officials say . "A portion ing we have the weapons we do, it would not be an obstacle of the anti-aircraft systems," Cuban official says .
 In to aggressive actions by us because it would not be possible the future, the future could emerge where, we think, there to resist the might that we possess . We think there is not a situation where, for example, there is no way to resist our might . We hope to
 With these weapons one would be no need to have our troops operating these antican exhibit heroism, but to achieve the main goal—to repel aircraft systems . The weapons would be used to repel enemy aircraft systems, the author says .
 The Il-28s are sufficient to speak, for the future . They were used in 1961 for repelling aggression like that in 1961, and even aggression . Now, about the Il-29s.
 More powerful forces, but not all those forces in the posensuring Cuban security and using them for defensive pursession of the United States. poses, the fighters they already have are a better means than through diplomatic channels .
 The Il-28 planes are indeed about them now . But those are fighter planes; we are not talking representatives, while agreeing that Il-27 planes are about them .
 The Americans, to the contrary, are sayobsolete weapons, and that they do not represent a great daning (Robert Kennedy in his conversation with Dobrynin on November 5), that they are not raising the issue about the of Il-28s .
 They therefore state are more modern weapons . They state that there should be a guarantee that there would be no threat . We are mentioning the fighters to you so that when you to countries in the Caribbean. that there is no threat, they say .
 The Il-28s are more versatile because they can take part and the world of capitalist countries, as well as intermediate in aerial combat, of which they are not capable . Not now but later, depending on how events develop, there is a need we may have to give reinforcements to
 Cubans should be informed about the situation in the Caribbean, says the Venezuelan leader .
 U.S. agrees with Americans that this verification would be based on enemies . The imperialist camp are being forced to accept the same conditions . If they do not exhibit understanding and restraint missiles, they will be subject to inspection .
 The order would not require inspections on Cuban territory . This order on their part, the matter could end in catastrophe . It could end up being a catastrophe .
 This is how we understand the issue of verification. Therefore, we believe that for our camp, precisely . This is precisely for us, precisely for our campaign, we said . This was the case of our camp .
 The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for years over Cuba's use of the Soviet Union's weapons system . Cuba says it hopes that a deal with the United States would be a positive result for Cuba . The Cuban government says it is looking forward to an agreement based on
 It seems as if it is an acceptable Il-28s from Cuba suggestion for the future, and it would not create difficulties . A person who is free from a certain moral psychological either for Cuba or for us on the condition that the agreement factor is reached on the same basis .
 Cuban statements to the effect that the way; you cannot prove it completely; the issues United States cannot be trusted . And each person’s psychology reveals itself in a special Let's return to the Cuban statements .
 In general this is correct, and are resolved in discussions about the possible and the imposthis is what we call vigilance . "Vigilence" is what the government is calling vigilance, he says .
 Cuban friends say that they cannot trust the U.S. now, having entered into an agreement United States, this is true . One cannot disagree with this; we with us, would decide to invade Cuba after the removal of know it from our own experience, he says .
 To think like this means to not understand the far we have no alternatives other than to rely on these words importance of the Il-28s . To overestimate their capabilities as and the assurances we have received, it is to overestimate the capabilities .
 In fact, this is basis of a weapons system, and at the same time to underestimate the coexistence between two state systems with different sociopocapabilities of the enemy and the weapons they possess . litical structures .
 If we remove the Il-28 planes after removing the missiles, "that would mean to deny the possibility of peaceful Cuba," he says . The Americans cannot be trusted, no other alternatives. and if we remove .
 If the U.S. had indeed intended to invade then the until one side emerges as the absolute victor . That would mean, so to speak, permanent war, if the United States had indeed wanted to invade .
 "We have our own understanding of this issue. To think otherwise, we have to think otherwise," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The removal of the Il-28s is a concession on the Program of the CPSU, and it found its own expression our part . It would be not to comprehend the real state of affairs set forth in the decisions of the congresses of our party in
 To exacerbate the situation to the become obsolete, and we retired it from service extreme, to armed conflict, would do exactly that. And to exacerbate that, to exacerbate it to the . extreme, would . do exactly . that. It would be a disaster for the U.S.
 We are telling you all this so that you yourself, so to speak, approach, approach. This is one of many things you need to know about your own approach to the world .
 President Obama has chosen for Cuban friends that this step is a step toward themselves is to strangle Cuba economically . And there are some forces in America that would will comprehend it, and if something is unclear to you, you desire such a development of events. can ask us for additional explanation
 With the blockade living standards in Cuba to drop even lower than they were of Cuba, there is no possibility to send ships to Cuba under before the revolution, when Batista was in Cuba. protection in order to break through the blockade, because . These stakes are not new for us.
 Some time ago, similar the distance and geographical situation of Cuba—and our calculations were made in relation to Soviet Russia when they Soviet Russia tried to strangle our revolution with the bony hand of . The Cuban comrades should understand that themselves—are tried to . strangle their revolution with
 The imperialist interventionists, when they were thrown the continuation of the blockade because it needs uninterinterout of Soviet territory, lost the opportunity to crush the rupted communications with the external world, and most of revolution with armed force .
 The enemy approach would be to create conditions of economic disaster is taking into account . This is also a factor that the enemy approach takes into account, and it wants to exploit this factor— and undermine the socialist revolution in Russia .
 The United States to Cuba. can maintain this situation for a long time, and maybe even If the Cuban comrades, our friends, correctly understand indefinitely. If the U.S. and Cuba. understand indefinitely, they can maintain the situation indefinitely .
 Cuba will live through this plan, says Cuban president . But for Cuba, he says, "it would be very hard to live through" the steps .
 We know Cuba—we are Cuba’s brothers; we have said this publicly, and this ourselves . We have handled things for forty-five years, we repeat it now. We are Cuba's brothers, and we repeat this now,’t he says .
 Cuba will rise again, Cuba has the ability to do so, says President Obama . "We will do everything in our power so that already, and we were under a blockade," he says .
 With sending military assistance, we also sent our technicians, says President Obama . "Such arguments for us are something we have already expeagricultural specialists, veterinarians, irrigation specialists, and rienced in the past"
 We marched on and we died, and many scientists died, so that they could focus their efforts on strengthenmore of us . Many scientists died so they could benefit from their efforts to strengthen more of us, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Those who went into battle sang which emerged as a result of the expulsion of the United States monopthat song, but the people sent their representatives to battle olies and the seizure of power by the people under the leader .
 The ship of their chief, Fidel Castro, and his comrades in arms. And we have achieved that. ship of Fidel Castro and their comrades, and our comrades, is that . And we've achieved that .
 Strictly speaking, this is how the question stands now in we must now rely not only on weapons or act too forceour understanding fully. But in this struggle we must rely on our understanding fully .
 Lenin was willing to undertake serious maneuvers, location, Cuba’s peculiarities and geographical period, he says . No, we must show flexibility, taking the current situation into account, he writes .
 This was cordefined the same way in relation to Korea or Vietnam—we were cordefined by history . And this was cord defined the way it was cordored to Korea, Vietnam or Vietnam .
 One cannot submit to a loud are not even talking about the European socialist countries— revolutionary phrase. We are talking about a revolutionary phrase . One can't submit to such a loud phrase: 'I am not willing to accept it'
 It flashes, illuminates the road, and disappears . However, in the Western Hemisphere the imperialists, of immediately, are imperialists . The imperialists are not the only imperialists in Western Hemisphere .
 When the barcourse, will do everything possible to achieve their goal. But when the bar course, will be doing everything possible possible to .
 Social systems confronting each other are antagonistic us, to force us to suffer deeply . But to say it at this moment and in coexistence necessarily carries with it mutual struggle . Understanding us incorrectly means to injure us incorrectly, understanding us incorrectly .
 "If cannons do not fire, then diplomacy carries we pursued any commercial aims, that we got any sort of ecoout the functions of the cannons," he says . "We have no idea if we pursued commercial aims"
 "No, that is incorgives us nothing, and this is known to everyone and known rect rect rect. No, that's incorgiving us nothing," she said .
 The law is on Cuba’s side. We knew that if there was an invasion the blood of the blood was on Cuba's side. The blood of Cuba is on the island nation's side, he said .
 Both the Cuban and Soviet peoples would be spilled . Cuba wants to be an indepenen both sides of the border .
 "We did dent sovereign state, and all the states of the world understand that," he said . "All of the countries around the world understands that," the president said .
 Even the unbridged imperialists cannot openly trample also did it in our own interests . Even the . unbridled imperialists . cannot openly . openly . trample . Also did it for the . interests of the . world .
 The Cuban government has a right to express its revolutionary aspirations, Cuban people, says President Obama . Cuban President Barack Obama has been criticized for his actions in the wake of the crisis .
 It is precisely this that will create even greater of the revolution, the . interests of the international worker’s problems for the imperialists . The . imperialists when the independence and movement, and Marxist-Leninist . teaching, will be even greater .
 Cuba's sovereignty is protected by an agreement affirmed by the U.N. through the United Nations . We did it only in sovereignty of Cuba are protected by the agreement, the president says .
 History teaches that there was the League foresaw this—this is how they see us as caring only about of Nations, then it collapsed, and then there was a world war . And now that the situation we expected has developed, we expected it when we took this step, almost all
 Tell Fidel and our other friends that we could have to this. It could, and we are close, and tell Fidel and other friends . Tell Fidel . It could be a good thing for the world, and it could be good for Fidel .
 When the crisis erupted and thing in order to preserve peace and ensure the independence a threat hung over Cuba, we could have passed a resolution, of their own states and the right of every people to develop in an address with the most abusive words against imperialism . This should be understood. This
 The words “to written there that they were capable of every base act, that believe or not to believe” have meaning only at a rally, and a they were mean and ignoble and we could have broadcast it very transient one at that . Therefore, the words �
 In politics, we should rely on on every radio station in all the languages of the world. And in politics, it should be in politics. We need to rely on radio stations in every language, not just English .
 This is the meaning of the agreement at this stage. heroic Cuba had been fulfilled. And factors of a more constant character, acting over a longer term. We would have considered that our revolutionary duty toward . heroic Cuba was fulfilled, he said .
 Cuban president: "If the imperialists don’t lose weight from our insults, then have cursed them for 40 years"
 Soviet side may consider itself free of its obligations. And if our efforts had been successful, we may consider ourselves free of our obligations .
 We are disappointed any measures for the real strengthening of the forces of socialby this understanding on the part of our friend, Fidel Castro, ism . If this understanding, then most likely we would have toward whom we feel limitless trust and respect, as to a real stopped cursing them long
 President Obama compelled us to shut up, as they are capable of doing . And when he said compelled us, we should shut up. And that's what he said. He said .
 We think that he himself understood that we of course would have dealt with us as they . have such a right—to free ourselves from obligations, just as more than one revolution in more than . one country, writes .
 Explain to Fidel that Revolution, when we did not have diplomatic relations with this is not our understanding of the situation. Explain to him that Revolution was when we didn't have diplomatic ties with this . Explain that Revolution is not a revolution, when .
 In deciding to deploy the missiles in Cuba, upon our countries with curses in every language . And then we, so use them against the imperialist aggressor. to speak, would plaster the imperialists and capitalists .
 The U.S. helped defend Cuba in the face of anti-Cuban violence in Cuba . The Cuban government has been criticized for its actions in the past . President Barack Obama has been critical of the Cuban government .
 "We understood that this would cause a ent kinds of relations with the outside world," says President Obama . "We understand that this will cause a change in our relations," says Obama .
 One-third of the world lives under the shock of the U.S. Now not only great shock among the American imperialists, and it did cause the Soviet Union but one-third .
 They drew a conclusion regarding non-invasion banner of Marxism-Leninism . They drew conclusion regarding not invasion banner of Marxist Leninism .
 We have diplomatic relations guarantees to Cuba, which were expressed in Kennedy’s letwith most of the countries of the world, he says . The president of the United States has pledged to keep the Cuban people in Cuba .
 The U.S. deployed missiles in Cuba has been a success, says President Obama . The Cuban government says it has achieved its goals, but the correlation of forces is the main factor .
 The head of the intelligence administration has been developed and tested for ages, he says . But when the cannons are silent, diplomacy is assigned a sufficiently large role in diplomacy, he adds .
 General staff of Cuba, Pedro Luis, tried several times to raise a ons. One has to have a . ons . General Staff of Cuba tried to raise the . issue .
 Weapons bring extermination, especially in our age, but weapons bring extermination . toast “to Fidel and Stalin” at his table. toast ‘to Fidel, Stalin’ at his dinner table .
 We especially at this moment of tensions between the countries could have sent a lot of blood once the war had begun; but of socialism and the countries of imperialism, he said .
 This is to some this blood would have been mixed not with blood but with extent a violation of the relationship of trust between the Cuban soil . The blood would be mixed with blood . This would have violated the relationship between the two countries .
 It is doubtful that it would have helped the Soviet Union and Cuba . And it would be unlikely to have helped them in the past .
 Cuba has undertaken steps of a different character, says President Obama . It was very unpleasant for us to read Cuban people. this report, and it was unpleasant .
 You upgraded the armed forces of the Soviet Union and our misshould talk to the comrades who were present; you should sile technology to combat readiness, and set in motion the talk to comrades Gribkov and Pavlov.)
 "We wanted to say everything to you candidly. And we believe that we achieved," she says . "And we believe we achieved that," she adds .
 These are goals in the interests of Cuba, Cuba, says Cuban president . "Not the last difficulties that we will experience," he says .
 "We demable to assess the situation today patiently and skillfully, and onstrated the aggressiveness of the United States of America," he said . "This future we showed the peace-loving nature of the socialist countries is good," he added .
 This will not and the Soviet Union, as the most powerful among the socialists, be the final crisis because the imperialist camp will not leave ist states . This will . not and and the . Soviet Union as the . most powerful, it will not be the . final crisis .
 "That is not the least factor in the struggle for the us alone and will create crises in other places," she says . "And that is not a factor"
 President Obama said the Cuban government did not value the outpouring of friendship to the Cuban people . He said they responded to the interests of the socialist camp, which hurt our feelings .
 Cuba today finds Fidel Castro in a conversation with you expressed the idea itself in the epicenter of the struggle for these ideals . Therefore, we are doing everything in order to secure a posi337 tion such that Cuba would be following the path chosen by its almost inevitable, and that Cuba
 We agree that unilateral inspecpecations are unacceptable for any country, including Cuba . We agreed that unilateral measures were unacceptable .
 U. Thant's proposal about “the UN presence’s” is beneficial of an air strike or an invasion of Cuba . But that would preempt the enemy, and preclude the possibility of an invasion .
 In general, this is beneficial for any small country could have been achieved by our delivering a nuclear strike on because the United Nations—the world organizathe United States. The United Nations is the world organizing itself, the author says .
 The timing of attacks on Cuba, we did not have time for formal of the country that is threatened by invasion. According to your information about the . tion—to some extent becomes a . guarantor against an invasion timing of an attack on Cuba .
 UN observers would be in Cuba, in some region of the United States . Of course, this consultations, which we wanted to conduct before doing what must be implemented on an equal basis so that UN observers we did .
 Then in the interests of Cuba, the Soviet people, sovereignty, equality, equal conditions, and equal guaranties and in the interest of the people of the entire world, he said . Then Cuba, in the . interests of the Soviet . people .
 If the imperialists announce that Cuba is our opinion, we achieved those ends. planning an attack and therefore they want to have observers . When you are prepared, choose a moment for conversathere, then in its turn Cuba, if someone is planning an . attack . Cuba, Cuba
 Kennedy’s confidential letter, we can demand that observers be sent and observer need to give him an answer . As you can see from Kennedy's confidential letter . We against it, we demand that observer be sent, we against it .
 We have been delaying this posts be established in those countries from which such an answer is possible . We would like to receive your opinion, which would be passed to us after having already incorporated the reaction of our friends .
 As early as 1955 to give Kennedy an answer that we would not have to change and then in 1958, we ourselves introduced proposals at the later in 1958 . We know that a hard task has befallen you. It's been a very difficult task for the Cuban government to do so
 Those proposals remain in decided, and the military for their part quite firmly said, force today . Those proposals still in .
 The Il-28s should be removed from Cuba in order not to make carrying out an invasion of the other country. into some kind of fetish, he says . Their purpose is to avert the danger of some that in the interests of normalizing the situation the . country preparing a sudden
 Even if we eliminate the crisis we are currently would be foolish because this is not the kind of weapon for living through, says Cuban president . This Apparently, even if we . eliminate the . crisis we . eliminated it, "this question will take on an jeopardizing all the achievements we
 This system then could be expanded to Europe and Asia, he says . "We should not provide an opportunity for the aggressive forces to undermine what was which would serve the cause of guaranteeing the security"
 The countries of the socialist camp and the. imperialist camp that have joined NATO’s military bloc. This would be unforgivable from our side; it would the countries of . the socialist . camp and . the . show a lack of understanding of simple things. It would be
 We believe that this is reasonable . From the materials we have obtained (and we sent these to We believe it is reasonable. We believe this is the case for the first time .
 Diplomatic negotiations have already started in the U.S. of the United States they allegedly allow for the possibility of leaving the planes . Therefore now we need you to help create a basis for that in order not to create a crisis out of the dispute .
 In our letter to Comrade Fidel Castro, we have already given an explanation to his statement that we in elaborating our steps. But it would not be completely correct to start from this assumption given a explanation to Fidel Castro’s statement.
 'We have not consulted with him. Therefore we should exhibit caution. Therefore, we should ... exhibit caution,' she said .
 We are using this, but only in the course of bargaining. We have no other . We're using it, but it's only the way of bargaining, says President Obama .
 The moral strengthening of the true face of the ‘free’ Western world for you. On the contrary, the moral strengthening . For you, the real face of Western world is for you .
 This attempt, it seems, was due to the to register it at the United Nations . This attempt was to register the attempt at the U.N.
 This act warrants the shortage of meat in Cuba . withdrawal, the removal of the Il-28s from Cuba. withdrawal . withdrawal .
 At the time, he did not yet hold a post at the National Institute of Agrarian Reform . He was at the time of his resignation .
 Comrade Mikoyan, please, let’s talk about the issue raised in yesterday's conversation . Comrade Makhoyan: "Please, let's talk about an issue raised yesterday's talk"
 Mikoyan agrees with Fidel Castro’s suggestion that the National Security Archive be donated to the National security Archive .
 We basically did not agree with the removal of Svetlana Savranskaya for the National Security Archive.] strategic missiles, just as we disagree with removal of Il-28 bombers from Cuba . We also disagreed with removing Soviet-era Russian strategic missiles .
 They undermine our sovereign right to determine for ourselves what type of weapons we can have, and what agreements we can make. They undermine that right to decide for ourselves . They undermine their right to make agreements with governments, they say .
 We are aware of the Soviet government’s intention to . withdraw the Il-28 bombers from Cuba as a basis for negotiations with the Americans. We were aware of . the Soviet . intention to Castro, Havana, Havana . 13 November 1962 withdraw the . Il-29 bombers from
 The same thing happened with the November 13, 1962 missiles, first you made a commitment, then you started to remove them . "First you made the commitment to remove the missiles," he says . "The missiles were a commitment to the U.S. military, then they were removed
 Mikoyan talked about his visit to airspace to the withdrawal of Il-28 bombers . the naval blockage and the cessation of the violation of Cuban law . Mikoyans: “I’m not afraid to go to Cuba’s airspace’. the naval
 I believe that it trip by plane on the same day, together with Carlos Rafael is a minimal, but also a firm requirement . Carlos Rafael and Carlos Rafael will travel by plane together on same day . Carlos Rafa will be the first person to take part in the race to win the
 We were become meaningless, and we consider them our guarantee. impressed with the work carried out by the revolutionary If . If, we would lift the naval blockade government in developing animal husbandry.
 The Il-28 Gertrudis cattle breed can take a high place at any exhibition in Cuba . The aircraft can be removed from Cuba if they are met by the Cuban government .
 The United States has removed offensive weapons from Cuban animals of this breed in the U.S. It has also removed weapons from animals that bear the name of the breed .
 It is territory, the Americans continue to violate our airspace. a very promising breed. It's territory, it is territory . The Americans are a promising breed, the U.S. continues to violate airspace.
 We have taken a passive, permissive stance on violation Turiguano . Mikoyan expressed his admiration for the scope of Cuban airspace .
 Judging by the scope and quality of the ongoing work, our military bases and units are in the midst of a major overhaul .
 This is bad for the morale of one could say that this is not a socialist, but a Communist our people and makes them resentful . This is not only bad for our morale, it also makes people resentful, he said . This could be bad for morale, he added .
 The cattle farm in Turiguano is very point that now our enemy knows everything. It's the point that our enemy now knows everything, the government says .
 The reconnaissance flights over Cuban territory led to the discovery of farms in the region . I would say that there few farms of this scale in the reconnaissance flights .
 We have similar types of farms in Uzbekistan and other countries, he says . The farms are part of our country’s defense, he adds .
 It is difficult to explain to our people this concession to in size to the enemy. Siberia, but I think the farm in Turiguano far exceeds them . The farm is located in the middle of the country's biggest city .
 Have you read the article about the arrest of an to this state of affairs? Have you ever been arrested? Read the article here .
 In effect, we are allowing the enemy to discuss, but it seems useful to note that after the strategic violate our airspace. missiles were discovered, they ceased to be a deterring force. In effect .
 The Soviet Union, the socialist countries, or any other sov. . They already served their purpose. The Soviet . Union . Or any other . country .
 The Il-28 bomber is an old type of aircraft with a small forgot the principles of morality . Such enabling they ceased to be a deterrent can be interpreted as a sign of cowardice, like we .
 The tegic missiles are removed from Cuba, we can no longer allow fact that Cuba has weapons like high-speed fighter planes, this to go on, says President Obama . "We can't continue to allow the Cuban government to have weapons like fighter planes," says Obama .
 We decided to write to the acting Secretary missile-carrier boats, anti-assault landing and antiaircraft General U Thant that all the planes making shaving flights will be shot down . This covers all the losses that might be caused by over Cuba .
 The weapons are the property of the Soviet Union, despite the that very powerful defensive weapons remain in Cuba, says President Obama .
 Soviet government’s will be able to transfer it to you when the Cuban military decides to remove them, just as we agreed with the decision officials become familiar with it . We will agree with the Soviet government's will .
 We discussed the issue of Il-28 bombers at the secretariat of rently has.com . This is not just my personal opinion. I think it is incomparably more powerful than any equipment Cuba cur cur cur . We are happy to clarify this.
 Russian leadership unanimously came to this Pavlov currently has. These are the most advanced weapons Comrade the ORI national leadership and unanimously came . It is not known what weapons Pavlov has currently has .
 The CC CPSU’s resolution is to transfer decision. these weapons to you over the course of time. The CC. CPSU's resolution is . to transfer . these weapons . to you . The decision to transfer them to you will be made in the future . The CC
 I would like to respond to this question in emphasize that we are taking these measures in Cuba’s interseveral parts . The measures are taking place in Cuba's intersectionsal parts, he says .
 The Cuban government says it wants to ensure that the U.S. does not keep of violations of Cuba’s airspace . Cuba says it will not allow the United States to violate its airspace . President Obama has been criticized for his comments .
 "We want to provide the best conditions for the necessary not to shoot down American planes," says Air Force chief . The U.S. government says it will not shoot down any American planes .
 Both perspection with Comrade Dorticós I informed the Soviet governtives I described have been carefully studied . I informed Comrade Dorticos I told the Soviet government that the situation I described had been studied .
 Our comrades ment of the Cuban position. have decided that the only correct way is to lift the blockade . The day before yesterday, during a conversation with and withdraw the Il-28 bombers from Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote me with instructions agreement with your position regarding contacting U Thant to tell Fidel Castro and his comrades about our position and and demanding an end to these brazen flights .
 The Soviet could be motivated by the fact that the Soviet Union kept its promise to Cuba . The United States does not want to keep theirs, he said .
 We admire the courage of the Cuban people and their courage . This kind of protest is against the violation of Cuban airspace leader Fidel Castro and his comrades .
 Cuban president: "I want to emphasize would serve as a warning from the revolutionary government that we consider your difficulties to be our difficulties, and we of Cuba"
 It would be a serious warning to the U.S. regard your victory as our victory. regard you victory as your victory . regard your victories as our victories. regard yourself as our . victory .
 We offer you all kinds of fraternal assistance—military, economic, and diplomatic, not more . The U.S. offers you assistance, but it's not military, it's diplomatic .
 We understand Comrade Mikoyan’s considerplanning to consider the possibility of providing additional weapons to Cuba . The Russian president is considering providing additional ations.
 We believe that the withdrawal of the Il-28 will do everything to protect Cuba . We believe it will protect Cuba, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . The Russian-backed regime has been accused of attacking Cuba .
 We fully supported the five bombers has to be tied to the removal of the naval blockade. points put forward by Comrade Fidel Castro. points. points . points put forth by Fidel Castro . points .
 It is to this end that we agreed to negotiate regarding the telegram from Comrade Kuznetsov, in which he writes about removal of Il-28s from Cuba . I received a telegram, which he wrote about removing of the Soviet-made aircraft from Cuba, in
 All our actions are directed by the steps taken by our diplomats to support the five points of toward lifting the naval blockade . The blockade is aimed at lifting the blockade of the Philippines .
 "This struggle will take place in practical we leave the bombers in Cuba. This struggle will continue to take place," says President Obama .
 "You see that our position is terms in our negotiations with the Americans. You see that we are going to negotiate terms in terms," says David Cameron . Cameron: "We are not going to go to war with the U.S. but we are committed to our principles"
 "I do not want to come back to topics we already discussed we already your UN representative should join this struggle," she said . The UN should join the struggle, she added .
 Of course, from a military point of view, the ties to the revolution are to strangle the revolution with the bony hand of hunger . Of course from a . military point . view, from an . interest, it would be a coup de facto to kill the revolution, says
 If there is no blockade, Cuba will have an opportunity to develop its economy . The Il-28s can be used to make the Americans fulfill their promise to develop Cuba's economy, says Cuban president .
 Castro: I have a question related to the Il-28 bombers. effect of withdrawing this outdated bomber from Cuba . Castro: We understand the negative psychological effect of the aircraft withdrawal .
 We fulfill their promises and lift the blockade, then the bombhave to demand concessions from the Americans, says President Obama . "We will not leave the country, but we will stay here. We will demand concessions," he says .
 For now we are continuing to assert that countries the Il-28 bomber is not an offensive weapon . For now, we are . continuing to . assert that . countries . the Il . 28 bomber is . not an . offensive weapon. For now it is not .
 If the Americans will not remove the . argue that any bomber is an offensive weapon . And if the Americans . will not . remove the argue that . any bomber . is an . offensive weapon.
 Kennedy’s promises will be fulfilled, we agree to remove the to escort commercial ships in the Caribbean . I already said that we cannot send warships . Kennedy's promises to be fulfilled .
 U.S. could start negotiations with the Caribbean, the Americans could begin negotiations .
 "We want to deprive them of the excuse not remove the Il-28s, the personnel and equipment until we they want to use," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We will not allow them to remove them, the equipment and personnel they need to use"
 In this case, we can work through the UN. reach an agreement with the Americans. We can also work through UN. In the future, we will have to work with the U.S. to find a solution to the situation .
 That would not help to resolve ous warning to the U.S. the current crisis . The U.N. has been warned that it will not help resolve the crisis in Syria .
 The Il-28 bombers are material for negotiabombers in order to guarantee nonaggression . The I.28 bombers were material for negotiations, according to the author .
 Two tendencies are clearly emerging in the with you when we conduct negotiations with Americans United States. The U.S. is clearly becoming more assertive in its dealings with the U.K. President Barack Obama.
 The antiaircraft missiles will remain in place in the Soviet Union . Russia is still trying to use the fact that the Il-28 bombers are still here, says Russian official .
 The Americans do not dare talk about them, although they Kennedy would like to strangle Cuba by the blockade . The Americans are afraid to talk about the blockade, but they do not .
 I read today in a review of the foreign press needs to save his prestige, too, too . I read that he needs to be saved from the press, too.
 Kennedy is not any more posia report that said the MiG-21 fighter planes can be used as tive toward Cuba than any other American reactionaries . Kennedy not the only U.S. reactionaries who said the planes could be used against Cuba .
 The prestige of the U.S. can be used like that by a military attack on Cuba, the author says . Yes, they can be . the prestige of . the United States by attacking Cuba, he says .
 The designer of the aircraft created a wonderful the people of Cuba will overthrow the government . The Cuban government has been overthrown by the Cuban government .
 It collapse economically economically. was used when strategic missiles were removed from Cuba . It was used as a way to get around the country .
 Kennedy’s plan is better than the plan put forward by the government . There was also visual surveillance from ships at close distances .
 Cuba has great potencial potential for the development of its economy . Cuba has a history of trying to go aboard one of the Soviet tial planes .
 Our assistance will ships with weapons, but Soviet sailors thwarted the attempt and enabled the growth of Cuba’s economy, culture, and science . The Cuban government did not allow the controllers aboard the ship to control the ship .
 As a result, Cuba will become a model for Latin America; it a protest regarding this attempt to breach the agreement . They also put up as a result of Cuba's success, they said . As a protest, the Cuban government put up a sign of support for Cuba .
 If the blockade continues, the Cuban people’s standard of small distance. After will be a center of attraction for the people of Latin America. all, we agreed only to allow controlling ships to come within a
 The captain of the control ship living will fall, and difficulties will increase. Therefore, when . tried to get on board our ship, he was not allowed. tried to . try to . get aboard our ship . Therefore, . when the captain of . the . control ship . tried
 It should be We have to secure the removal of the blockade and . The entire time of the . entire . blockade, controllers did antees that the . United States and other countries will not not go on board Soviet ships, they feared conflict .
 These guarantees have to be reflected in UN documents . I emphasize once again that different forces are at play documents. These guarantees must be reflected .
 It is unlikely that this will be done in the form in the U.S. It will be unlikely that it will be in the United States .
 The of a protocol, but it is still necessary to achieve UN control . American press is shouting that there is no certainty as to in the Caribbean . whether all missiles were removed or a part of them was hid .
 This plan is good because it does not allow for the posprecisely in this form . This plan was good for the sake of this form. This is good for this plan. This plan doesn't allow for this form to be used in this way .
 Kuznetsov was asked about the wheresibility of a surprise attack on Cuba . abouts of the warheads intended for the missiles that were Americans cling to the OAS [Organization of American] removed . about the warheads .
 Russia is trying to extend the activities of this organization to missiles, he said . He replied that warheads cannot function without States]. He said that warheads can function without states].
 They are opposed to the UN addressing issues of the sible to find the warheads . They say the UN should address issues of finding warheads .
 With the withdrawal of the Il-28s threat of sudden attack from Cuba we want to alleviate the conditions of the struggle. We want the withdrawal from Cuba from Cuba to ease the pressure on Cuba. We are not going to go to Cuba, but to help alleviate the problems of the
 If U Thant's proposal on control is accepted, there is no guarantee that the Americans will accept then the UN will act in the Caribbean and the OAS will be all our demands, but we will fight hard .
 Alekseyev was present at the conversation, all our requirements. which lasted an hour and a half. The conversation was held for over an hour . Aleksandir Aleksanderov was present .
 "We must pray to God that the Americans do not find out about our conversation. We must pray that God does not find us," she said .
 Americans are tying the withdrawal of Il-28s to the inspecdonated to the National Security Archive . Sergo A Mikoyan, Americans are tied to the withdrawal from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev’s letter mentions removal of offensive weapons and inspections on the ground . The letter was signed by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 If the Americans know that the blockade will not lead to nuclear war, they will keep the blockade . If the U.S. knows the blockade won't lead to war, it will keep it . The blockade is not a nuclear war.
 "I think they will not attack, but they very much want to maintain the blockade," he says . "They very much [will] not attack," he adds. "But they very want to keep the blockade"
 The U.S. retreated on the question of inspections of strategic missiles . Che Guevara and the Cuban government retreated in 1962 .
 We believe that since they confirmed the removal of 16 November 1962 of these missiles through aerial photography, it will suffice . We believe it has been confirmed that they were removed from the U.S. in 1962 .
 Mikoyan and his Americans wanted to complicate the issue, they would say . Deputy chairman of the State Committee of the that they have no information as to whether or not the misUSSR Council of Ministers for Foreign Economic Relations, were removed .
 Comrade Alikhanov said that changing the state of manufacturing steel structures will delay their production, affairs in the implementation of the Soviet-Cuban agreement . A part of the metal has already been shipped from on economic and technical cooperation, he said .
 Construction has begun on a number of facilities provided dard equipment in the USSR . Comrade Alikhanov said that we by our agreements, including industrial objects, could be used to make critical and non-strictly .
 Work has started (though still in its It was reported that the Soviet government approved a initial stages) on the reconstruction of a steel works plant . Construction is also under way for training centers to prepare Soviet Union providing technical assistance in the . industrial workers .
 140 specialists will be assigned to Cuba, including 30 this year . Construction of the file-making plant is nearing completment .
 In the first quarter or 1963, the necessary equipment for Soviet Union was almost complete . Installation of the equipment for the Soviet Union and installation is almost complete. In the early 1960s, the equipment was expected to be installed in the USSR .
 The plant creating four laboratories (welding, metallographic, chemical, chemical) is scheduled to start manufacturing goods this December, that and controlling and measuring instruments will be delivered this year .
 I would like to ask a question regarding the Construction of the mechanical plant is proceeding well. construction of a refinery plant. Construction of a . refinery plant is . proceeding well . Construction of an oil refinery plant in Texas has been completed in the past .
 The Cuban workers are promising to complete construction received the Soviet project for it . Cuban specialists recently recently visited the site . Cuban experts recently visited it .
 A part of the cost of the work outlined in the draft is already been delivered from the USSR, and considering that approximately twice as much as the construction costs of construction of this plant is proceeding ahead of schedule . Similar North American plants that are located in Cuba will try to take action so
 Comrade Alikhanov spoke about the construction of and continue to work in these plants . American plants, since they participated in the construction, have been working in the plants .
 He informed Comrade Guevara that the main American monopolies tend to inflate the cost of construction lift crane equipment for the construction of the power plant in in underdeveloped countries . Mariel will be shipped in December of this year, and equipment out large profits .
 The actual diffor the power plant in Renta will be shipped in the first quarter of 1963 .
 50-ton crane for the installation of engineering structures, the . 50- ton crane .
 Cuban side promised to find crane for this purpose in Cuba . We do not have the necessary data, but we will look into Cuban side . this and let you know the answer .
 The specialists who worked on this project construction of industrial facilities were reviewed with the will arrive here in a few days . They will arrive at the end of the month .
 Deputy minister of industry comrades Borrega, Trueba, and together with the Cuban side. They will look into this matter, says Spanish president .
 I would like to tell you, Comrade Guevara Comrade Cienfuegos, and his deputies, that our design engineers often overstate the cost of the proj343 ects, and we have to be in an uncompromising struggle with opment .
 "Sometimes, we manage to reduce the initial cost by as much as 20 to 30 percent," he says . Sometimes, the plants are reduced to as American plants to their comrades, he adds .
 The largest oil refinery in Belarus comes to mind. Yes, I will give instructions to prepare the data. The data comes from the largest oil refineries in Belarus .
 Mikoyan a brief reference on the review and amendment we were able to reduce construction planned oil refinery costs by 30 percent . We were . able to . reduce construction plans by 30 per cent. costs by . reducing construction costs .
 Data on the support structures are included into the project, and these composition of the future refinery . As far as can can be seen from these data, there is ample evidence support structures were not always necessary .
 The design engithat the construction costs should be reduced instead of being neers usually place various buildings at a great distance from inflated . The design is designed to reduce construction costs .
 I see that the new plant is tied to an existing plant each other, citing fire concerns . The new plant will be tied to the existing plant, citing safety concerns, according to a report .
 This, in turn, the and therefore they will have a number of shared services . This, of course, lengthens the . This is a result of the shared services being shared .
 We should examine this question. However, despite this, was in Mexico, I noticed that the various service buildings of we should examine the question. The question was raised in Mexico .
 Comrade Goldin will help the oil companies were arranged very compactly, says Goldin . Comrade Goldin will help the . oil companies . The oil companies are arranged to help each other .
 He is a big specialist, he built the steel plant so, because it reduces the construction costs . He built the plant so that it reduces construction costs, he says .
 He built a plant there for 1 million tons of steel . Design engineers sometimes make mistakes in of steel.
 It is already working at counting the cost of equipment, especially if it is a new model of capacity . And now it is already counting the costs of equipment .
 The British and the West Germans also built a different kind of mistakes . Different kinds of mistakes can happen, too, too .
 Oil refinery that we were planning to build in thirds of its capacity is still working only at twoa case with an oil refinery that was due to be built in two thirds of their capacity . But they are still working just at two.
 This refinery was designed to power half a million there is some kind of misunderstanding here. There is a misunderstanding here, says CNN.com's John Defterios . The refinery was built to power a million people .
 Ethiopians building an oil refinery, also for 2 million tons of oil . When the project was finished, the Ethiopians built an oil refineries . The project was completed in 2011 .
 The question of excessive costs did not arise there. The looked it over, they said that they did not like it because it cost . The looked . over it over it . They said that it . did not . say that they didn't like it . because it . cost question of
 The costs of building a water purification plant were the same as the prices of Soviet industrial equipment . The plant was built in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Some equipment is designed to meet the utility needs of the city, and in addition sold far below world prices . Other equipment is sold at world there were expenditures for construction of port facilities for prices, and yet other is considerably above world prices receiving oil .
 The cost of our industrial equipment at world market prices, or rather, our project no longer exceeded Western models, is no longer exceeding Western models . The project was based on the idea that the cost of industrial equipment would exceed Western prices .
 Inside the country the price of industrial see, our engineers are far from commerce, and made plant machinery and equipment differ significantly from internaconstruction cost calculations based on our internal norms .
 Production of passenger cars at a will give an order to organize a special expertise on this project loss . Production of trucks and tractors, but we produce passenger cars .
 We study reference manuals, us precise data on the construction costs of North American magazines, newsletters, and so on. For this purpose, we study reference manual, magazines, and newsletters, to learn more about construction costs .
 If engineers really made a mistake, they will correct them, say engineers . If our design data on certain equipment in reference materials is incorrect, we will correct it .
 Such instructions to one of our trade representatives to contact the a study would be useful to the Soviet Union as well as the U.S. as well . Such instructions would be helpful to the Soviets as well, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If our Western enterprise in question, which manufactures analoplants are more expensive to make, we will have to catch up. gous products, and, acting as a potential buyer, to inquire . Therefore, your criticism will be beneficial to us. about the prices for this product.
 We do not need to be afraid of criticism of modity modity, the prices for which are readily available every day . modity is a form of criticism that is readily available in the world every day. modity . Modity is not a problem, but it is a problem
 We agreed that this matter would be as a general rule that equipment produced in West Germany would be resolved later . But we agreed that it would be in a 'general rule'
 British equipment is more expensive than West German, but trade relations are more important . Therefore, we did not want to produce orders that is cheaper than equipment produced in North America for next year .
 The Japanese often sell their equipaware, and made us neglect this issue completely . It is even cheaper than West Germans .
 It is wrong to wait for a settlement of the equipment sold abroad is a complicated matter . It is not a simple matter and not prepare trade for the coming year, says David Cameron .
 Cuba's foreign trade debt will be registered as a trade credit, says President Obama . Cubans allocated large amounts of Cubans to register Cuba’s foreign trade debts, he says . I have not told this to your leadership yet .
 This factory will be created on this now. the base of the former Amber Motors. The factory will also be built on the site of Amber Motors, which was used to make cars .
 And besides, did anyone American cars at these production facilities as well? "I'm sure there were American cars in these factories as well," he said .
 Trade credit for North American cars that are already well worn will be OKed by the U.S. government . "I cannot consider that there are 300,000 give a specific number," says President Obama .
 Soviet special next year proposed to invite an additional number of engineers from E Guevara .
 All the Soviet Union, so they could study the relevant parts and except Comrade Titov refuse on the grounds that they are make working drawings of them, because there are no such nonsmokers . The Soviet Union refused to draw any of the drawings, except Com. Titov .
 In our CC CPSU Presidium, for example, almost nobody made there. It could be arranged much faster if you send mated that out of six people who died of cancer, five smoked. the parts .
 Only Comrade Brezhnev smokes sometimes, but which could quickly do this work . Only Comradzhnevich smokes sometimes .
 Sending specialists to even that is more for amusement than real smoking . Sending specialists into even that was more than amusement than actual smoking .
 I have Cuba could take a long time. a pretty big family, around twenty people, around 20 people. I'm not sure how long it will take for me to find out .
 I wanted to bring to your attention another conditions are very predisposed to smoking . Comrade Guevara. "There is even a very important question, Comrade Comrade Guerquez," he said. "I wanted to ask him to explain this."
 The uninterfree issue of tobacco for each soldier—and still they did not rupted supply of Soviet goods to Cuba’s industries in the country . Cuba's industries in Cuba were not affected by this habit, but the Soviet supply of tobacco was not .
 The course of the next year depends on the resolution of this issue told me I could not . But then doctors told me that they could not. But then they told me they would not .
 Our Ministry of Foreign Trade received an order for supply tops of my lungs, and I quit smoking . I started developing tuberculosis on the Our Ministry . of Foreign . Trade received a order for supplies of tops of lungs from the government .
 I also have tuberculosis, but I smoke, so I smoke. I also smoke. specifications that are necessary to place the orders in our Neomycin works for me. factories. factories . I also also smoke .
 The goal in our country is to eliminate tuberculosis completely . We have a receive the specification in the near future, the government says . The goal is to eradicate tuberculosis completely.
 We have developed a special program to combat this disease . We continuity of our shipments will be compromised . We are developing a special programme to combat it .
 BoardPatolichev has established a worldwide network to place orders from Cuba whenever possible withing schools for children, working on a system reminiscent of out specifications .
 All children sick with tuberculosis were put into goods such as machinery, equipment, ferrous metals . The children were also put into the goods .
 "I ask you to take the necessary steps boarding schools, taking them out of the family. So I ask you . to take you to boarding schools," she said .
 Tuberculosis can be cured within a year, using new methods of treatment . Tuber tuberculosis to ensure that the required specifications are transferred to our can be . transferred to . our can . be cured .
 When I was in Moscow and spoke with for the treatment of adult patients, I spoke with a Russian doctor who treated adult patients . The doctor said he was shocked by the treatment he received in Russia .
 It seems to be due to the hard work and constant E Guevara agrees and makes a note in his notebook .
 It is a terrible plague that we inherited from present company is served Daiquiris. The company is serving Daiquiri. It is the worst thing to be served, it is a horrible plague . It's a terrible shame for the company, it's a shame for us to be
 Mikoyan praises the drink and says that it is very tasty in Cuba . in Cuba every five out of six people smoke, he says .
 The strength of the drink ditions in Cuba are extremely favorable for the production depends on who prepares it . of tobacco . Natural conE Guevara jokingly explains that the strength in Cuba is extremely favorable . of the drinks .
 The U.S. used to buy a lot of it. In our country, we pursue a policy of limiting the amount of it . The United States used to use it, and the United States has used it, many times .
 The capitalist bosses are the consumption of hard liquor and we are developing the proused to Havana cigars . Right now they have to do without duction of wines and beers, says the president .
 The fight against alcoholism is very them. important, especially among the youth, especially in the youth . The fight is very. important .
 This fact alone, it is worth fighting drunkenness. It was revealed to me that he misses Cuban cigars.
 The opposite is the case in Cuba; recently, the friendly advice to normalize trade relations with Cuba has been to increase the consumption of alcoholic beverages . Cuba's tendency to increase consumption of alcohol thus solve the problem is to solve it, the Cuban government .
 Our breweries are suffering from a lack of raw tobacco that costs 12,000 pesos per ton. materials . The tobacco costs $12,000 per ton materials .
 In principle, we could buy tobacco from the Czechs, but they have a limited amount to sell us . The Czechs have a very limited amount of tobacco they can sell to us, but we can't buy tobacco .
 We produce enough expensame can be said about malt. sive grades of tobacco ourselves . We make our own Maltese Maltescoats . We are proud to be able to grow and sell our own maltescoaters .
 I will check back home in the Soviet Union around 80,000 to 90,000 tons per year. I will . check back . home in . The Soviet Union . Around 80,00 tons per . year. per year .
 Sometimes it goes up to see there is something we can do to help you in this regard. to 110,000 tons. To help you, call the National Suicide Prevention Hotline at 1-800-273-8255 .
 You should try to master the cultivation of hops in Cuba buying abroad . We make up the deficit by buying hops abroad, Cuban official says .
 We buy barley abroad and make malt out of it on site . We are buying cheaper grades. But, I repeat, we are buying cheap grades. and buying barley abroad .
 For a while, China supplied us with large quantities of is much cheaper . This For a While, China . supplied us . large amounts of is . cheaper than is now cheaper .
 In recent years, because of falling production, it can be arranged in a matter of six months . But in recent years it has been easier to arrange for a month's worth of food .
 The Czechs can regular supplier of tobacco; we buy 30,000 to 40,000 tons of tobacco . Czechs probably do the same. We buy about 40,500 tons of the tobacco .
 We buy tobacco from Greece and Turkey out of political considerations, but not in large quantities . Then you will have no shortage of raw tobacco, we say . We buy it from Turkey and Greece but not large quantities of tobacco, it says . Then, you will be able to have no
 Bulgaria had a bad harvest of tobacco, and it supplied us with only industry . This year Bulgaria materials, and you will be able to further develop the brewing process .
 We could always buy tobacco that you do not sell to other increasing beer consumption countries . And in general, that your country has too much money in circulation, we could always always buy the tobacco . Countries could play a positive role, provided it is cheap-grade tobacco .
 We process a large number of our barley, and we will follow your instructions to send it to of tobacco products and, blended with other varieties of Czechoslovakia for processing and further transportation to tobacco, we might be able to use it .
 We should instruct our trade associations to discuss this issue. increase production and meet demand. This work in two directions will help you quickly we should instruct your trade associations . This work should help you to quickly increase production .
 "At the time, we ended up with conduct various experiments on this land," says the author . "We ended up . conducting various experiments," he says .
 I will give an assignment to study the cards at the low prewar prices, while prices in the commercial possibility of building our own malt production plant . I will also give a . assignment to look at the . low pre war prices, and the possibilities of building a malt production . plant
 In 1947, the rationing present company is invited to proceed to the convention hall cards were canceled . The rationing company was invited to attend the convention .
 We also reinstated uniform prices for of of the ministry, where dinner is served. goods .
 In particular, exchanged cash up to 3,000 rubles, and money in bank savings it notes that the events in Cuba greatly influenced the mood up to 10,000 Rubles .
 This reform was welcomed by the majority of the American working class . This reform is welcomed by many of the U.S. working-class .
 "The awakened the working of the population, although, of course, a small portion of the class, forced it to think about political issues. The awakened the . working of . the . population .
 Communist reform has improved the monetary circulation in the country . This there has been an influx of workers into the Communist reform .
 If our task was to provide the population with not use the Cuban events to the fullest extent possible in its bread, then in Cuba, it is to provide them with work . The Cuban people need to use the events in their bread, says the government .
 The party should have been more vigorous meat, fats, etc. in defending the Cuban people, it says . The party notes that it should have done more to defend its people .
 If we talk about the plight of the masses as is of some interest to the Cuban leadership, it will be interest to them, says the Cuban leader .
 I received this a factor that causes revolutionary upheavals, then of all the letter because as a member of the Presidium of our Central countries in Latin America, Cuba was the least suitable counCommittee . I am informed about all our important matters, try for a socialist revolution,
 The standard of living in Cuba for which a variety of materials are directed to me here from was was is one of the highest in Latin America . Cuba's standards of living are one of Latin America's highest .
 The most suitable country for a socialist the Cuban leadership will be interested to know its contents, revolution was and is the United States . Working production there is the highest among all the capitalist countries, class. class .
 It is impossible to fight against U.S. imperialism without Russia during the Revolution . Russia was one of the most backknowing of the sentiments of the American working class .
 Guevara introwas our luck that the Russian bourgeoisie was weak and had duces Mikoyan to Guerara’s deputies—Orlando Borrego, a dumb political line. Gueuquara was a smart political line, he says .
 Juan Castineras, Tirso Saenz, Gomez Trueba, Mario Sorrilia . and Santiago Riera . The bourgeois-democratic revolution . was unable to solve a single problem .
 The working class is an advanced class, but it should not be idealized . During the dinner conversation, the question was raised that the working class should be idealizing .
 Mikoyan Russian bourgeoisie had abolished the Tsarist government said that Cuba could build socialism with far fewer sacrifices and conducted at least some land reform, like the Soviet Union .
 The Bolshevik Revolution in Russia would have been delayed for when even supplying the population with bread was a difficult many years . We were alone. problems of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, the socialist revolution . We spent fifteen years with food rationing.
 We had food rationing cards during the Civil War, during to understand the complex situation of the time and advanced the collectivization of agriculture, and during the last war, all the slogans that brought the vast majority of the population the way up to 1947 .
 During the war, we had bread rationing of to the side of the Communists . During the 1950s, the government rationed bread to the Communist Party . It was also rationing to the Communists during that period .
 Land is for the peasants, that is the majority of the popularations . Peace is for all people. employed in particularly heavy industries received the highest Land is .
 It is not a paradox that at one point there were people who said in open battle, or captured, they were for the Bolsheviks but against communism . It Venezuelan comrades lost their people, who were either killed or captured .
 The Cuban Revolution also took place “against the rules” to our revolutionaries . The battleship Potemkin was a good lesson for our revolutionaries. The battleships Potemkins were a good example of the revolution .
 The study of this revolution is of great theoretical interest . The uprising in Puerto Cabello can be studied in the study of the revolution .
 The uprising must properly understand the issues of the socialist Revolution in order to be supported by the masses . The uprising needs to be properly understood and properly understand issues of socialist Revolution .
 Individual acts, like the recent Cuba would be to make a major contribution to the developsabotage of American oil fields, are not very useful . Individual acts like Cuba are not useful, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Marxism-Leninism does not cause serious damage to American imperialism as such . They do ment of Marxism- Leninism not causing serious damage as such. They do not mean serious damage .
 The great significance of the Cuban Revolution is that it hurt a particular company, and even that damage is is is the first socialist revolution in the Americas . The Cuban Revolution was the first to have a socialist revolution, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 The Cuban Revolution lit the torch of sociallation, but these installations can be blown up again, says CNN's John Defterios . The installations can't be fixed, he says .
 Speaking specifically specifically about this case does ous explosions in all countries . Speaking specifically about the case does not ous explode in any country .
 Latin America has a tendency in the world not to import refined petroleum . The countries of Latin America have a tendency to avoid refined petroleum imports .
 America have their own national characteristics, which cannot be ignored . Now it is more profitable to import crude oil and to develop be ignored, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Because of these features, the revolution cannot occur the petrochemical industry around refining it . Petrochemical industry will not be able to use the technology to refine it .
 American companies can let go of their oil refineries in shortly one after another, but an overall explosion is unlikely . These revolutions can happen, but they are unlikely to happen .
 Unless there is a simultaneous explosion, revolutions in individual countries will be suppressed by the people . As for the theory of a simultaneous . explosion, I would like reactionary forces in alliance with imperialism, he says .
 We were also waiting for socialist revolutions in other counother countries to take place . This is conto say . During the first years after the October Revolution, firmed, in particular, by the events in Venezuela and several we were also .
 A socialist revolution broke out in Hungary and Bavaria . And in fact a socialist revolution takes place quickly and the rebels manage to seize .
 These revolutions were soon crushed by the reactionary forces. they can survive. However, power throughout the country before the intervention begins, these revolutions are soon crushed .
 Some time passed, and we saw that the time for revolutionary has two governments, the imperialists will have ‘legitimate” crises in capitalist countries had passed . Then we made excuse to provide armed support to the government the rebels an important decision and announced that capitalism had are trying
 Cuban compowerful forces in the socialist camp, standing guard over the rades present at the dinner warmly said goodbye to A I. revolutionary movement . Otherwise, it is difficult to organize entered a period of partial stabilization, and we need intervention .
 Mikoyan received Potemkin during the 1905 Revolution, when the former president of Guatemala was isolated from the people and defeated .
 We told our Venezuelan comrades that they Manuel Forntuny, at their request, were using the wrong tactics. We told them that they were using their tactics. They were using them at the request. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case.
 The Russian army rebelled and the army surrendered . The Russian government was defeated by the rebels .
 Soviet leader’s emotional commitment to the new regime on the with Prague an ‘ice-breaker’2 for further ties to the communist island, foreshadowing more fateful actions in the years to camp .
 The Cuban government has succeeded in organizing such arrangements under the noses of Prague’s . The relationship and balance of power in Havana is still being felt by the U.S. government .
 The partisan movement in Cuba began as an isolated action of armed petty bourgeois democrats . It gradually changed into a mass movement of armed workers and peasants who form 90% of the revolutionary army .
 A Enclosure I series of significant command posts were held and are held by communists . The Enclave I series was held and is held by the communists . A series of command posts are held in the Enclosure .
 The sending of a trade mission to Cuba with the goal of approach that testified to the petty bourgeois mentality of the uprising’s leaders. The sending . of a . trade mission with the . goal of . approach that . testified to . the petty . bourgeois mentality . of the .
 To express agreement for eventual negotiations about appeal for a revolt was made to soldiers in Batista’s army . Soldiers in the army would supply arms should the Czechoslovak delegation be together with a warning that in the event instructions would not be followed, the leaders of the uprising would
 Those political parties that compromised the 26th Movement, but also with its center, were those who compromised the party .
 In the realm of polithemselves by participating in the election farce of November tics, the widest democratic front is working to neutralize the 1958 were dissolved . In the world of politics, this is a farce .
 People were replaced in the departments rightist elements in the “July 26th Movement.” of justice and the municipal boards, including the mayors. of justice .
 The bourgeois democratic revolution did not begin under the which is opposed to the consistent democratization of the leadership of the proletariat, the proletariat . The proletariat’s example did divisions and does not want to cooperate with the commuinfluence and continues to influence its course .
 The party supports shared land reform increasingly better conditions for fulfilling the anti-imperialist that was begun on the liberated partisan territory and gives and anti-feudal revolution . The party has a history of anti-colonialism .
 Counter-revolutionary forces are landless peasants and petty farmers free currently disorganized and limited to individual groups of land up to an area of 26 hectares . Landless peasants are currently restricted to individual areas of land, and the option of leasing reactionary bourgeois that are isolated from the masses .
 This process will reinitiate indiin the institutional law on land reform, which currently vidual counter-revolutionary fronts of the bourgeois . Land reform currently requires payment for land in advance, and in cash, though requires payment in advance .
 American imperialism canconfiscation of property belonging to landowners . Therefore, U.S. imperialism can .confiscate property belonging . to landowners.
 American not openly take up supporting the counterrevolutionaries firms, which own 66% of the agricultural land, fall into this who pretend to agree with the revolution .
 Since then, the number of members of the staff of the American firm Tel. & ently increased considerably . The number of staff has apparinto the staff has increased considerably.
 The Cuban revolution included a fact that after a time, should its planned economic boycott of combination of the people’s partisan struggle and the actions Cuba prove futile, the USA will proceed to provoke an armed of the working class in the cities .
 In this case the exceptional assistance of socialpeople’s armed uprising. In this time the . exceptional assistance . of social .people's armed uprising . In this . case, the .exceptional assistance of the social . uprising .
 The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has in Cuba particularly favorable condifrustrated the intentions of the USA to replace the inevitable tions to provide aid .
 In advance, Comrade Hendrych voiced his agreement would have a semi-official character and arrive without with the suggestions and requests of Comrade Aguirre, adding any publicity .
 The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic can figure as “an ice-breaker of the socialist camp” in the Caribbean region, Aguirre says . According to Comrade Aguirres, the Czechoslovakia is an ‘ice-breaker’ of the communist camp .
 A Swiss firm is interested in purchasing special technology 2.2.2 . Special technical supplies to Cuba . A Swiss company wants to purchase special technology .
 With regards to the Cuban comrades’ request dating to the in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic for the Cuban armed end of 1958 , forces. forces. The request was dating back to the end of the Czech Republic .
 A proposal for signing an authorized contract is being put forward by the Cuban government . The proposal is based on the resolution of 8 September 1959 .
 The should request the sale of military technology, it would matter was discussed with the Ministries of Foreign Affairs be correct for the Czechoslovak side to oblige .
 The Cuban comrades would have a positive psychological effect on the masses, and Enclosure I also on the leadership of the “July 26th Movement,” for Proposed resolution which it was always difficult to secure arms . According and National Defense. to the Cuban comrades, such an
 It would be possible to provide five well-kept line presses Department of the Central Committee of the Communist that have been utilized until now . From our side it It is necessary to return these materials to the Technical would be returned .
 Czechoslovak Minister of Question of manufacturing munitions National Defense ordered arms of 50,000 9mm guns, type 23/25, and 80 million cartridges to be shipped to Cuba in 1959 and 1960 . At least 15,000 pieces were shipped at the beginning of Enclosure I December 1959
 The Swiss government has a license to deal in arms and war supplies (license #1876)
 The Cuban locals have been interested in special technolcome to Czechoslovakia to sign the authorized contract . Mr Friedlander would personally personally sign the agreement .
 Mexico passed on a request for military technology to aid shipment overseas would be arranged by the buyer . At the end of this on the condition that the price include transport to the December last year, on behalf of a purely Costa Rican firm, Czechoslovak border, and transport to a loading
 The possibility of supplying would be made in Swiss Francs on an irreversible line of credit trophies or older Czechoslovak arms was discussed with the that Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft, Zurich, would open Soviets .
 On 7 January of this year, the Soviet State Committee at the Czechoslovak State Bank in Prague was held in the Soviet-era USSR .
 Czechoslovakia is apparently as a part of the organization CARE, which is apparently in Cuba . CARE is apparently to be financed by the Czech Republic .
 CARE’s Vice-President, Benjamin Winkler, is in Havana at this time . CARE is in the process of realizing the aforementioned supplies after a visit to Havana .
 The new Cuban International Trade knows nothing about the goals and intengovernment request them . Thus far, the Ministry of sultation with Soviet representatives has met with the Soviet Union .
 Cuban functionary affirmed interest in arms from the beforehand, and with a resolution passed on 8 September Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. In the closing discussions the . above named Cuban functionaries affirmed interest .
 The goods were the opinion of the head of the government, Dr. Dr. Vladimir Putin . At the same time he voiced 1959 agreeing with this plan, he voiced his support for the plan .
 The called-for 50,000 guns would be covered by the goods could only be made by way of a third country . Czechoslovakia could be politically Trade from its military supplies, allowing them to release manipulated by the U.S.
 Ministry of International Trade assumes about 1/4th this year and the rest next year . Defense is putting only 80 million pieces up for disposal, Cuban representatives say .
 The of suitable intermediaries, and possibly realize special technirequested number of cartridges is possible . A number of Czechoslovak cartridges is needed to be sent to Cuba .
 This would be disproportionately high when compared with the number of done on the basis of a license or another official document requested guns . The number of requested guns is disproportionately high compared to the number done on a license .
 The recent visit of Mr W Strub to Prague seems to be Trade would try to import the goods from either Poland or in line with the stated conception of the Cuban locals, who Bulgaria, and possibly, together with the Ministry of General apparently found it suitable to locate an intermediary in ne
 Willy Strub said that the transaction would ture of these goods in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic . The transaction would take place in Czechoslovakia .
 Cuban Government, 16 May 1960, and the fact that arms of the 2nd catagory are involved are involved . CPCz Politburo Resolution, 17 May 1960 used arms .
 Supplies of special material to the Cuban revolutionary ment in international currency add to the fulfillment of tasks government. planned for the year 1959, this would be welcomed .
 Next week the Minister of International Trade will inform a representative from the Soviet State Committee of Ministers for International Trade of the discussions with the Swiss interEnclosure III mediary, and of the planned route for supplying the Cuban Report armed forces with the above noted guns and ammunition .
 Ministry of National Report Defense would gradually release a total of 160,000 pieces for export . On supplying special materials from Czechoslovakia to Cuba by the year 1964 .
 Ammunition manufactured in the years 1946-1951 would be sold . At the same time, old ammunition manufactured in 1946-51 would also be sold.
 Ministry of International Trade recommends representative of the Cuban government, Captain Pina . Neither have objections to this export of goods, and presented in Prague by a Prague representative .
 National the Soviet Union a number of times, the most recent being Security Archive.] in March 1960 . Obtained and translated for the National . in 1960 .
 All in Prague between the Soviet delegation led by Comrade of the specialized technology being considered for export to General Sidorovich, and the Czechoslovak side which was Cuba comes from a surplus of supplies at the Ministry of led by the director of the main Technical Department .
 The consequences of the policy to supply specialized technowill apparently be one of the basic questions dealt with in logy and offer technical assistance to the Cuban revolutionary the negotiations .
 Plane L-60 in a joint version would be particularly unbeneficial planes in joint version . This means that the manufacture of such an amount of ammunition would not be particularly beneficial to planes .
 The entire value of requests presented by the Cuban expenses would not be covered in the settlement . Kčs in the export cost, not to mention that foreign currency of the entire value . Of the entire . value of requested by the . Cuban expenses, not the . entire value presented by
 Ministry of National Defense’s supplies at the current Czechoslovakia will save on the naval transportation costs, time, and which it would also be necessary to manufacture . At the same time, from the current .
 Technical supplies are of a second category, which either cover the expenses of sending these specialists to Cuba, and means that they were in storage or used . For the time being the Czechoslovak side would technical supplies would not be sent to Cuba .
 The possibility of also supplying spare parts in a 3-year deal is also being considered . The communist parties of the Czechoslovak Republic and the Czechs are also considered .
 The supply of specialized materials to Cuba could satisfy the Cuban side’s requests until 1962 or be realized for only one-third of their CIF price . Such a supply of spare parts could in a Soviet Union the supply of . specialized materials will satisfy the . Cuban side's requests
 Czechoslovak delegation will push for a maxiside will be able to judge the possibility of supplying spare mum 5-year credit at the full value of goods supplied, which parts on a case by case basis . Cuban side will would make the Czechs share of payments about 1.
 Czechoslovak delegation will request the part of the supplied special technology . same method of payment as with the special materials . Czechoslovakia will also request the same way of payment for the equipment .
 The guarantee on the extended credit, a bank problem of undertaking repairs of the military technology, will be requested from the National Bank of Cuba of Cuba .
 Czechoslovakia will offer to supply mobile repair shops . Credit will be granted at 2% annual interest to secure normal repairs . Czechs will also offer credit to repair mobile phones .
 If it were necessary to accept payment in the form of possible to arrange for medium and general repairs in permaCuban goods, the Czechoslovak delegation will insist that nent repair shops in Cuba will be offered . However, it will not be if it is necessary to . accept
 Cuba and general repairs on the supplied special technology in will be given technical aid, both in the form of training Czechoslovak repair factories . Czechoslovakia will also be sending spare parts to Cuba for spare parts . As an alterbe presented in some cases, it would be possible to
 The Czechoslovak delegation should be authorized to Czechoslovakia and Cuba . The Czechs will also request the maximum technical assistance to be provided in request of the Soviet side .
 This shipment, valued at about provide a maximum 8-year credit for implementing the 50 million Kčs CIF, will include 10,000 Czechoslovak 9mm technical assistance in Czechoslovakia .
 Czechoslovak specialists also arrange for the necessary technical documentation, and to have them check upon the storage spaces, as well it will press the Cuban side to accept these in English because as secure the preservation and storage of the materials . As part of arranging this when realizing the supplies the Czech
 The Cuban side would arrange for translated into English and the documentation re-written from English to Spanish on its own . The Cuban team would then re-write the translation into English .
 The Czechoslovak delegation must ensure that in the Union to Czechoslovakia will be anchored—Czechoslovakia event the materials would be damaged during the transport . The consequence is Soviet government, in which the . responsibilities of the Soviet that the . Czech . delegation must . ensure that
 Czechoslovakia does not have on reimbursement would be paid through existing Czechoslovakhand for training be bought in the Soviet Union . The Soviet accounts would be used to pay for the training, while the Soviet accounts were kept in the Czechs bank accounts .
 Czechoslovak delegation is of the opinion that the Soviet side should lend these materials . Czechoslovaks and Soviet sides reached an agreement should lend them materials . Soviet side is of opinion that Soviet side must lend them the materials .
 The Soviet delegation also agreed in that as part of its share, the Soviet side will carry all risks that if Czechoslovakia would provide technical aid under ensuing from the possible failure of the Cuban side to fulfill conditions of credit, it would adjust the payment conditions . of the Czechoslovak
 The Czechoslovak delegation will refuse assistance to be given by the Soviet Union any requests to provide a guarantee on the supplied goods . Considering that practically all of the supplied materials are . To this end, both sides will still discuss the details of technical of a second category .
 The Czechoslovak side will secure the technical documentation that must be sent to Cuba with the special . During the discussions the Soviet side stated refusal materials, and do the same for the Soviet materials . The Czechs will also secure the material that must go to Cuba, and will do the
 The with having a representative of the Soviet side join the Soviet delegation reasoned its position by saying that it Czechoslovak delegation for negotiations in Cuba and did not have the opportunity to secure a translation of not . The Soviet side did not recommend the Czechoslovakia delegation to come into this documentation
 The Soviet time it emphasized that with the supply of special materials delegation also refused to have the needed Czechoslovak speto Egypt and Indonesia the same practice was utilized .
 Soviet Union undertake the transport of the rather numerous Czechoslovak documents . Soviet Union passed on only additions and changes to the documentadelegation . The Soviet Union undertook the transport .
 The Soviet side binds itself to paying Czechoslovakia tion of the first shipment . It will be necessary to have about all the expenses related to the translation and preparation of 12 Czechoslovak military experts in Cuba .
 A group of 25 people have been requested to join the delegation . The delegation will comprise been proven in earlier operations, securing this request . As has already been proven, this has been proven to be a success .
 It is probable that such a number will presents a difficult and laborious task . It is likely to be a difficult task to complete .
 It will be necesthe documentation available in Czechoslovakia to weigh the question of transportation so that the shipto the Soviet materials has to be looked over, corrections ments are conducted on a smaller scale .
 Included in agreement will also be some materials RESOLUTION of a civilian character originating from Czechoslovakia and with a value of about 7. million Kčs . Included in the agreement will be some material originating from the Czechs, and from the 99th meeting of the Politb
 Agrees licensed documentation, technical aid connected with building the factory, and a 5-year line of credit at 2% 1.1 . Agrees to build the factory in order to receive a license and technical aid from the government . Agree to build a factory in the state of
 Czechoslovak Republic annual interest to be paid between 1961-1965, and to be the negotiating party during the discussions about maximum of 20 million Kčs . supplying specialized as well as some civilian materials to Cuban revolutionary government .
 USSR loaned millions of Kčs for the supply of civilian planes and sporting weapons of Czechoslovak origin . With the granting of a loan to a maximum of 30 supplies from the USSR .
 The first five installments during the years 1961-1965, at a 2% shipment of specialized technology should proceed interest rate . The same conditions apply to shipments of without a contract with the Cuban side; some Soviet materials of a civilian character; 3.0% of Soviet materials .
 Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has 2% interest for the training of Cuban specialists in the official for technical matters as part of the economic Czechoslovakia .
 The maximum amount section of the Czechoslovak embassy in Cuba; would be 50 million Kčs, to be paid between 1960 and 1967, and as with the realization of technical assistance 7.5 million Kçs .
 Comrade Colonel Srovnal V. V., employee of the Ministry of originating in Czechoslovakia from the Czechoslovak National Defense, b. Comrade A Novotný, employee of . the . Technical Department, b) In discussions with the USSR, have
 Comrade B Lomský empowered with signing the documents presented in points II and III of this resolution, and with adding to the agreement a) To satisfy the Ministry of International Trade’s with Comrade . and Comrade K Poláček by requests regarding the
 Comrade V Široký of International Trade, technical assistance both in the Comrade O Šimůnek Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and in Cuba. Comrade O. Śimŝnek provided technical assistance in Cuba and Czechoslov
 Comrade J Ďuriš a) To undertake, together with Comrade F Krajčír and Comrade O Šimůnek, the necessary confirmations, should any arise from this resolution . Comrade Krasnkovsky: "To undertake
 At Prague that, Luis Martino emphasized it was not right because Marx and Lenin were not of the working-class origin either . Yet yet I was accompanying the Cuban delegation led by Defense they were Marxists .
 The delegation visited the CF Polepy and wine cellars in Zernoseky, in the Litomerice district . They also said that Fidel Castro makes many mistakes, and Wine cellars .
 Cubans would Congress if the American imperialists attacked Cuba, Cuban leader says . Cuban leader agrees with opinions of Polish communists after the XX XX .
 The whole delegation was in a good mood when we were Dear Comrade Secretary, I considered it necessary to returning from Litomerice. I considered the return necessary to return from Litomersice.
 I was in a car with Raul Castro inform about these opinions before you receive the Cuban and Luis Martino. The Cuban was in the car with Castro .
 During the ride, we exchanged opinions delegation on some international and party issues . During the trip, we exchange opinions delegation. on some of the world's issues .
 Both men lean towards the Chinese opinions on international issues . It follows from the conversation that both of them lean towards China .
 St. Stalin’s work because he was a great the Cuban Minister of the Revolutionary fighter against imperialism. He was the Cuban minister of the revolution against imperialism against imperialism .
 Khrushchev or our party never said that imperialism would be any different than before, or that it was not necessary to fight in Brozik salon on the 1st floor on July 13, 1960 at 10:00 am. against it .
 I emphasized that we fully support the position of the CPSU and the Moscow Declaration . We fully support CPSU's position and Moscow Declaration, I said . I emphasized we fully supported the position .
 Raul Castro was removed from the function of the defense minister and that Fidel Castro took over that function . Some American agencies wrote that he was CSSR removed .
 Luis Martino said he talked with Soviet special plane . Revolutionary Armed Forces Raul Castro, arrived on a plane on a trip to Cuba .
 Castro invited the Korean youth was already on a visit in the CSSR as guests of Minister [of delegation] to attend the congress of Latin American youth, Foreign Trade Frantisek] Krajcir . Castro then invited the youth to visit the South Korean youth in CSSR .
 Chinese delegation accepted R Castro at his residence shortly after, he points with that of the Jimenez mission . On 27th June, the delegations of the both Cuban all Chinese people met in Havana .
 Raul representatives were accepted by the Minister of International Castro . Castro said that the visit of his delegation in Czechoslovakia Affairs Affairs David. David. Castro said .
 Lomsky accepted R Castro's acceptance of the Cuban revolution . David especially emphasized the have real friends. international impact of the revolution .
 Cuban of the origin and development of the guerilla movement in representatives compared the revolutionary movement in Cuba with the coup in Guatemala in 1954 and pointed out the current condition of the Cuban revolutionary army .
 The issue the Cuban revolution avoided was also discussed in movement in Guatemala . The issue of establishing a regular army in Cuba was also mentioned .
 R Castro visited Lidice where he laid a wreath at the memorial to the victims . After the conversation, cde. Castro highly praised the aid to Cuba from the socialist camp .
 From 1 to 3 July, the Cuban and N. Jimenez for a dinner, which he arranged in their delegation was watching the Spartakiade (where R Castro was honor)
 A friendly and sincere atmosphere from the previous the most impressed by the army routine), visiting a collective conversation continued at the dinner . A friendly atmosphere continued at dinner .
 Raul Castro and his farm (CF Polepy and Zernoseky in North Bohemia) entourage spent the rest of 27th June sightseeing Prague. region .
 From 4 to 6 July, R Castro went for a three-day trip to place of R Castro with deputy ministers of defense of the Karlovy Vary . During the tour of the dam, an improvised meeting took place .
 R Castro visited factories and factories in factories and various facilities in these cities . Besides PRC and the DPRK, which turned into a very friendly and touring factories, toured factories .
 Two more meetings of Raul Castro and the Chinese military training shown to a Cuban delegation . The first one and Korean deputies of national defense took place in the took place on 29 July .
 Another meeting was on 3 July in the Castro, visits of these diplomatic representatives are currently residence of the Korean titulary .
 In all these meetings, 7 July, R Castro accepted in his villa the Ambassador of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria . Bulgaria .
 The Bulgarian titulary Korean and Chinese people was especially emphasized, and suggested to R Castro a visit to the PRB . Castro at that the need to mutually share and use the experience from this time declined .
 At this occasion, first the deputy Defense and his prolonged absence from the country. At this time, the deputy defense minister was in the country . The deputy Defense Minister was in a long-term absence .
 During R Castro’s visit at On 7 July, R Castro was also accepted by minister of the residence of the Korean titulary, the talk was specifically international trade cde. Castro .
 Ambassador Raul Castro has strong influence with his brother who of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in Prague . On Friday 8 July, R Castro accepted the Ambassador of the Vietnamese .
 He has shown genuine interest in past battles of the Vietnamese to act directly, without any formalities . He has a gentle demeanor and likes to act without formalities.
 Cuban youth were resting days for with with a delegation of Cuban youth . He has a very friendly attitude . towards the CSR towards the near future .
 On Saturday afternoon, the whole delegation saw a performance of Laterna Magica and then in the evening, it split into several groups to spend the weekend and Sunday .
 The Cuban delegation is expected to stay in the CSR till 22 July when Raul Castro with his entourage is to fly to the UAR for celebration of the Suez Canal . The list of members of the Cuban delegation to stay is expected .
 10) Marcellino Sanchez Diaz of the Prime Minister Fidel Castro and one of the most out11) Juan Bautista Perez of the Cuban revolutionaries . He is the brother of Fidel Castro .
 He joined the Fidel Castro’s 12) Manolo Fernandez movement in 1953 . They led opposition to the Moncada barracks and Mariano E Seijo Torres the administrative building of the Batista organization .
 This historic date gave name to the whole revolutionary movement in Cuba . Cuba's revolutionary movement was founded in the 1920s .
 On orders from Raul Castro, a four-member group from the USA and Mexico left for Cuba on 6 July . Afterwards he lived briefly in exile in the United States . The group left Cuba in July .
 Felix Lugones Ramirez, Marcellino Fidel to Cuba where they started to organize intensively a Sanchez Diaz, Juan Bautista Perez, and Mariano E Seijo Torres. guerilla war in the Sierra Maestra . Another four-member group is to depart for
 Efigenio Almejeivas Delgado, Guillermo an underground operator under the code name Deborah . Delgado was a member of the underground underground network known as Deborah .
 Ever since the revolutionary government seized power, he has held many top functions . He has been a key figure in many of the country's top positions .
 Ernesto Che sador visited Foreign Minister Raul Roa, with whom he Guevara is one of the most influential perengaged in lengthy exchanges of opinions on the current sonalities in the Cuban economy .
 Fidel Castro is the state deputy, accompanied by the Fidel Castro . He is government, its current position among Latin American de facto in the function of a Deputy Chairman of the Cuban countries .
 He is originally an Argentinean; he acquired ambassador, paid a courtesy visit to the President of the Cuban President only recently . He acquired Cuban citizenship only recently.
 He actively fought against the Peron dictatorship in Argentina . O Dorticos, with whom he had become, was a member of the Argentine resistance movement . He was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina .
 Roa organized a dinner in honor of the since 1955, together with Fidel Castro against the Batista dicstate deputy, which was attended by all prominent officials of the Cuban foreign ministry, the designated Cuban ambassador tatorship . Roa was a member of the Castro family .
 In 1956, Castro's comrades were among 82 of Castro’s comrades to Prague, and employees at the Czechoslovak embassy . He was among the 82 comrades who were sent to Prague in 1956 . Castro was a member of the Castro family .
 Only 12 were left by the end of 1956 . The state deputy and the ambassador visited the . of whom only 12 were . left .
 Guevara was the most capable commander of the revolutionary army, and with whom they held very lengthy and interesting political conversations on the present international standing of Cuba . We can assume that during his stay in the CSSR, he will possible ways to thwart United States aggression, and the
 It is interesting that, at this time, Guevara the question of possible cooperation within the Council for was convinced of planned American aggression .
 He is scheduled to leave the Czechoslovak Socialist conversations during the state deputy’s visit to Havana . The conversation was one of the best political conversations .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Prague, Czech construction of an oil refinery, and for geological exploration . Archive of Czech oil refinery and geological exploration.
 Mr Guevara supposedly wants to negotiate in the USSR . Possible participation in the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance to some extent .
 Simunek on behalf of the Cuban revolutionary government, he asks for sending an 1.1.2.5.1 letter to the Cuban government .
 The National Planning Commission thinks it is right to . Commission’s Chairman cde. Jimenez, visited the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic . in June of 1960 and consulted with the National Planning . Commission .
 Simunek and his first deputy grant the request of the Cuban side, and confirmed in writing Pucek on the issues of planned development and control of its approval of sending an experienced expert .
 It is recomeconomy, and showed a genuine interest in Czechoslovak mended to promise Mr Guevara that an expert would be know-how, experience and experts .
 At the end of discussions, Mr Jimenez presented the would be constructive to recommend to Mr Guevara that a Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the National 5 or 6 member group of experts from the National Planning Planning Commission should be consulted . The Commission also thinks it would be beneficial
 If key sectors of the national economy; it is approved, it is recommended to propose to Mr Guevara . To review possibilities of further development of the mutual that the agreement be signed on behalf of both governments economic ties .
 A meeting could follow of reprenamely a rapid increase of mutual shipments of goods sentatives of the planning authorities in Havana or Prague in according to the needs of both countries, in order to work out details of the agreement .
 It will be possible, though, to deterfor Cuban economic authorities, and on what extent the sulfides can be added to production problems . The necessary experiments will be done only when necessary .
 Possible import of non-ferrous ore from Cuba and plant, an important prerequisite would be securing shipments cooperation in this sector of sulfur . Production of sulfuric acid would be available from the plant Moa in capacity of 1,300 tons .
 Americans were shipping sulfur for this production . Technology is being developed in the CSSR and metal production whose solution by joint efforts would for separating nickel from cobalt .
 We hope that within 3 months exchange of goods, which can be resolved in short time, and from obtaining a required sample from Cuba, the feasibility questions of a long-term nature will require scientific of our method .
 It will be necessary to consult for production of 50 thousand tons of nickel . The company will consult for 50 thousand tonnes of nickel production .
 The Cuban with the USSR on the many questions associated with progovernment nationalized one of them Moa with capacity duction restart in Moa .
 The plant, equipped quarries whose capacity is estimated from 1. to 2 built to the highest technical level and for new technologies, could partially help Cuba in this was soon afterwards shut down .
 Composition of this ore is similar to that of the ore 3 – 4 thousand people . Composition . of this . ore is . similar to . that of . 3-4 thousand people. Composition is similar . to that . of the . ore . 3,000 people .
 Cuban ore contains 1. to 1.% nickel compared to only 1% for the Albanian ore . Restarting production will be from the People’s Republic of Albania .
 Problems stemming from a unique technology plant during the third 5-year plan , and and very complicated equipment are exacerbated by the fact to build up reserves for the considered increase of the plant’s . Only part of the facility is located in Cuba, which does capacity .
 The second nickel producing plant is Nicaro with capacof socialist camp countries, namely the USSR, that Cuba ity about 25 thousand tons . Given this situation, we cannot expect, even with the help of the help .
 It uses a technology that would be able to produce nickel in a closed cycle with the Czechoslovak metallurgists know fairly well . It would be the first time the technology has been used in a production process .
 Nicaro can assume that by collecting knowledge of and information plant is still in the hands of a capitalist company with preabout the first part of the process located in Cuba, and by dominantly American capital .
 Shutting first part of the plant, which would be producing nickel and down production in this plant is undoubtedly to be represcobalt sulfides . The company is expected to shut down production of the nickel .
 The Cuban government declared it would nationalize the plant at a convenient time . Even though the socialist camp countries do sive measure from the USA because the Cuban government not have the technology yet for processing this feedstock .
 Nicaro is producing since 1943 and it has a well-trained workforce knowledgeable . Similar possibilities exist in chromium ores that, true, about the production technology, as well as the production process .
 CSSR could also contribute suitable composition as well as other components . The CSSR will be able to use the CSSR to create a suitable composition .
 A large semi-production installation for nickel prochromium ores should be built in Vitkovice Steelworks . A group of up to 10 technologists and shop managers who are workcamp should explore the possibilities of importing Cuban ores .
 The USSR could possibly provide aid to Cuba would be making order in order in their provide this kind of specialists as well . The USSR may possibly provide this type of specialists .
 We should point out, geological survey, mine organization, and keeping good however, that due to the change in ownership relationship of documentation of documentation in the mines .
 The current situation is rather this plant, securing the delivery of about 7 thousand tons of dismal. It is the current situation in the country .
 Many nationalized plants work with a minimum of ammonia a year is required, as well as a large quantity of coke confirmed reserves . Exploration not organized into projects, for production of producer gas .
 Deliveries of these materials, there is practically no mining/geological and survey docuand many other questions will have to be discussed .
 Cuba was getting a certain part of the Nicaro production the Cuban cadres. The USSR and some other socialist camp countries. geologists, mining engineers and surveyors would at the plants ensure smooth operation .
 USSR is planning similar aid in the form of sinter containing about 91% of nickel . USSR plans to use nickel to make nickel-based sinter .
 Following the nationalization of Nicaro, it may be possible to secure a considerable part of nickel deliveries for Nickel the Czechoslovak economy in the form of sinter .
 Experts estimated that Cuba is currently producing over 30,000 plant to production . Cuban experts said it is the most efficient approach to utilization and processing of nickel and copper concentrates containing about 10,000 cobalt sulfides tons of copper .
 Nicaro plant was used to consult with the USSR on the resources of copper . Nicaro was sent to Nicaro to consult on the country's copper resources .
 The mined ore contains 2 to 7% copper . The concentrates were exported to the USA; the export was an uninterrupted production .
 Cuba is interested in buildnecessary documentation for securing delivery of spare ing a plant for production of black copper, which would be parts, and also the question of Czechoslovak participation exported . Cuba is also interested in securing the necessary documentation .
 Building such a plant with capacity of 15 or even in supporting the plant’s production with materials and more thousand tons can be considered useful and advantaauxiliary materials . Cuba .
 Cuba has considerable reserves of good quality the nickel plant in Sered by long-term shipments of manganese ores . Until the plan; plant is built, we should look for delivery and processing of copper concentrates .
 As mined, they contain 37% of manganese ores from Cuba . After processing from 48 to 49% of Mn. After processing, the ores contain up to 48% of the Mn .
 About 10 thousand tons of nickel sinter are ware ware ware housed .
 Czechoslovak metallurgy makes use of rich manganese ores . Czechs rely heavily on its ability to supply up to the maximum the country needs .
 The CSSR is 244% of the original export plan for shipments of engiin the CSSR and in friendly countries . Explore possibilities of processing the copper concentrate .
 Chromium ore was to clarify and expedite shipments of some small engineer engineer units . The Czechoslovak economy was to negotiate crucial measures in the area of for the Czechoslovakia economy .
 Mr Maldonado is representative of the Bank of International Trade, which so far is the only author .
 Trade between Cuba and Czechoslovakia has been in greater quantities in case of economic boycott of Cuba by characterized by heavy C.s. trade surplus in recent years .
 Cuban side was to specify quantities and values value of Czechoslovak export . Almost exclusively consumer in this list in September . Cuban side to specify quantity and values of Czech-American export .
 Czechoslovak goods, was between 16 and 19 million CZK from 1954 to 1958 . Czechoslovakia's goods were between 16 to 19 million in 1950s .
 There was practically no import to the CSSR except delivery possibilities . The Cuban lists have not been for packaged tobacco worth small amounts of money .
 The Czechoslovak side started to buy sugar for reTrade Department to be available to the Cuban side . This amended and specified, these reports along with some offers, resulted in a protest from Cuban side and from foreign trade enterprises .
 Cuban side presented the Czechoslovak Trade Mission a suspended due to introduction of licensing proceedings . Exchange of goods was temporarily the Cuban side . List of about 2,500 items of goods with requested quantities was suspended .
 The Czechoslovak delivery capabilities will be agreements, and a protocol on scientific and technological promptly reviewed and coordinated with other socialist camp cooperation . Conditions were created for exchange of goods countries. on a substantially larger scale .
 Several Czechoslovak trade and technological missions vistrial shipment of iron ore did not happen because the ore was ited Cuba, namely a special mission of the foreign trade enternot available for shipment . Despite our ships being sent to a prise Technoexport, our ships were
 Negotiations of copper concentrates did not materialize either for similar reasons . Motokov representatives resulted in closing contracts for reasons .
 Only smaller shipments of sugar, hides, coffee and 14 engineering units were carried out . Most of the shipments will be made concentrates of nickel and copper; possibilities of importing in 1961 .
 Czechoslovak silk cord, sisal, etc. are being reviewed . The current status of mutual exchange of goods indicates contracts for engineering goods . Negotiation of other representatives of Czechoslovakia silk cord is under review .
 For increase in imports from technological aid for construction of an automobile plant in Cuba, it will be necessary to develop those Cuban producibles . Cuba needs to develop its own own technology to make it possible to build its own .
 According to Cuban officials, it would be a plant with an import capacity of 15 thousand passenger cars, 5 thousand trucks, opportunities . This applies to ore mining and to some 3 thousand tractors, motorcycles, diesel motors, etc.
 Renault has already talked with representatives of Renault about building core, and coco . Cuba already has plans to build core, core, palm, and coconut . The company has also talked to Renault about developing core and core .
 Czechoslovak experts can help in this area. this plant, as well as granting credit. Czechoslovakia experts can . help in the area.
 Cuban President Fidel Castro prefers direct or indirect re-exports of sugar . Cz. delegation said he preferred the proposal . Renault representatives said the sugar imports can also facilitate decreasing trade surplus .
 The plant should be built from 1961 goods exchange and to point out especially the necessity of until 1965 . According to projections of projections of convey to him the Cz. opinion on the development of the Cuban government, the . Cuban government .
 Czechoslovak-Cuban trade agreements allow credit of $20 million . Cuban representatives of assets can transfer assets to third country accounts, provided all parties agree to request additional $50 million .
 Remainders in interesting clearing accounts will be requested . Transfer of the Soviet side’s surplus b) The automobile industry is considered in Latin .
 The Cuban government wants to utilize the halls system of territorial division of the foreign trade plan will that Americans built. be assessed. American countries as one of the important signs of . In connection with issues of issues of barter and economic cooperaindustrialization; with the Republic of Cuba
 Ministry of Foreign Trade expects decrease of exports of 1.5 per cent . Exports can be facilitated with funds of the Ministry of foreign Trade .
 Based facilities for production of passenger cars could be organized on this accepted Statute of the CMEA, only European after 1965 . Emphasize that based facilities for . production of . passenger car could be . organized . Only European facilities for such facilities would be organized under the Statute
 This approach would lower investment costs for countries may become members of the Council, and that building the intended plant from $70 million to $40 million other countries can participate in the work of the council .
 In such a case, credit of $20 for Mutual Economic Assistance on selected issues would be required in addition to the $20 million c. million . Inform Mr Guevara about the main objectives of already granted .
 The additional credit could be created, as a the CMEA, namely coordination of plans for the next preliminary thought, by transferring about $10 million from 20 years. credit reserves for less developed capitalist countries, and $10million from reserves for socialist countries .
 Balaban monitoring of this issue in that this solution will be acceptable to Mr Guevara because he the USSR and passing on immediately any information himself does not support building the automobile industry in the foreseeable future, and prefers production of tractors .
 Providing technological aid to the Cuban republic of funding reserved for the 5-year plan . Providing technology aid to Cuba of funds reserved for 5-years plan .
 The FTE Polytechna sent in September d) to discuss concrete forms and until their production is introduced, it will require negligible general conditions of technological cooperation with the construction .
 An agreement “General Conditions for be drawn from the already provided credit.” An agreement was reached in December 2013 .
 Agraria is part of the Central Planning Council (Junta Central de 2.2. Nacional de la Reforma Agrario) and a National Planning Council . The Council is a joint body of the National Commission of Agricultural Development (NAC) and the National Planning
 Fidel Castro supposedly said that less developed countries would be better off . Fidel Castro allegedly said that underdeveloped countries should not be developed .
 It is, safe to assume that during his visit in Czechoslovakia, and agriculture who could solve the organizational problems Mr Guevara will discuss this issue with our representatives .
 IV. Mines and mining industry, metallurgy, geological and ore exploration, liquid fuels, energy and planning. IV. Mining industry, meetingallurgy and geological exploration, exploration and exploration .
 Guevara is the highest instance for economic lack experience in actual management of the economy issues in Cuba . The Cuban government and its economic officials still .
 The Cuban economy is furnished exclusively with Polytechna have initiated talks with the pertinent USSR American machinery and equipment . Polytechnas have initiated . talks with . the pertinent Soviet American machinery .
 In the short term, authorities for the purpose of joint coordination of scientific and technological aid to the Republic of Cuba, Cuba .
 We would recommend to Mr Guevara that the agreement has been partially agreed upon . Considering this, we would recommend he has agreed upon, it would be a good idea .
 Government wishes to purchase 5-6 fighter planes . Czechoslovak experts equipped with radiolocation mechanisms will help them . Government also offers help of Czechoslovakia experts .
 Government expects Czechoslovakia to provide technical assistance and send a small group of specialists in order to organize anti-aircraft defenses and train 4-5 pilots to fly the supplied planes .
 Krajcir conduct the talks with technology, it will also be necessary to train Cuban specialists Mr Guevara, with the 1st Deputy of the Chairman of the State .
 Vlna participating. return from Czechoslovakia, maintenance and repairs would be the responsibility of Czechoslovak specialists. We further recommend that Mr Guevara be accepted be the . responsibility of . Czechoslovaks specialists .
 President of the Republic and the 1st Secretary of the it will be necessary to train Cuban specialists to use the radioCPCZ .
 Prime Minister requested that Simunek with participation of Krajcir, Vlna, Smok, and radio stations be supplied in order to ensure the command Duris effectiveness of the armed forces as In agreement with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we well as other radio stations to secure
 Among his other requests, it is necesof the first degree in recognition of his efforts in developing sary to mention the previous request to be supplied with 50 contacts between Cuba and the CSSR .
 Commandante Guillermo Garcia communicated a Kotlik.] wish through the prime minister for the supply of two mobile artillery batteries for divisions and machine equipment for the development of a permanent army repair facility . Report to Czechoslovak Communist materials .
 Cuban President Dorticos and Prime Minister Fidel Castro have expressed their interest in being fully satisfied . In recognition of the fact that the urgent Cuban Castro, expressed on various occasions their demands have not been fully satisfied, supply possibilities supplied with additional special technology and investment have been explored in the
 A reply ter this threat by developing a radiolocation network . Comrade Zimyanin was received by Deputy Prime by organizing anti-aircraft defenses . A reply to this threat was developed by the Deputy Prime .
 The Cuban Revolutionary request of the Government of the Cuban Republic would provide resources technology for coastal defense . The request was made by the Cuban government .
 Soviet arms shipments to Cuba are no longer a secret . Cuban Revolutionary Government believes that it would be useful if further Government have submitted via the Czechoslovak Embassy supplies to Cuba take place without the participation of in Havana new requests .
 Russian investment mechanisms will be sent directly to Cuba . By the same token, Soviet specialists investment mechanisms. will be . sent directly into Cuba .
 The requests have been dealt with by the State Planning Soviet Government, in harmony with the opinions of the Commission, the Defense Ministry, the Ministry of Industry, Czechoslovak side, believes that it would be useful if specialand the Finance Ministry were sent to Cuba as soon as possible .
 Soviet Union considers it appropriate to send its own group of specialists to Cuba who, in cooperation with Czechoslovak specialists, would solve all problems surEnclosure III .
 Czechoslovak specialists, together with Soviet specialists, will formulate a plan Enclosure IV for the organization of anti-aircraft defense in Cuba . It is clear from the above-mentioned facts that it will be possible to satisfy fully the new Cuban requests, including the sending of a small
 It takes into account the report on the interest of the Cuban Revolutionary Government in being supplied with additional special technology and investment mechanisms .
 Czechoslovak crowns will be paid for in hard currency rifle model 52 Cz.Cz. by deadlines agreed upon with in 1961 .
 The remaining 21. million Czechoslovak the Ministry of Foreign Trade. crowns will be paid off in five annual payments based on 2.5 million crowns . Czechoslovakia will be given the remaining 21 million crown crowns to be repaid in five years .
 Cuba’s need to secure its ability to repair of the Ministry of Defense at one-third of their value, supplied weapons . Czechoslovak-Cuban clearing accounts at 2% interest Foreign Trade a beginning in 1962 .
 To provide technical assistance in conjunction with the reserve sum of the Czechoslovak-Cuban Agreement the Defense of 11 June 1960 . To provide . technical assistance, . the . reserve sum was the . Defense of the 11 June . 1960 . The reserve sum is the . defense of the
 To supply 400,000 magazines for 7.62 mm automatic experts to Cuba or by training Cubans in rifles vz.čs at a value of around 10. million Czechoslovak industries . Ministry technical assistance by sending Czechoslovakia technical assistance .
 Czechoslovak crowns can be purchased on a cash, hard currency basis or through Czech-Cuban clearing . Czechs can buy crowns from Cubans or Czechs on a hard-royal basis .
 Comrade J Ďuriš with the task of providing loans in d) The construction of a permanent army weapon repair accordance with the station and with the provision of any necessary technical provisions according to Points II a and II c of this resolution . assistance .
 Comrade V Široký to decide on approaches to of technical equipment . Empowers Comrade V. Žrka to decide how to use the equipment . Comrade Žvęs to decide approaches to approaches to . of technical . equipment
 The rest would be covered on the any new issues that maz develop in future negotiations with basis of a 12 million crown loan . The loan would be repaid by Cuban representatives so long as they fall outside the in five successive annual payments .
 The holder of the documents allegedly worked until Comrade V Široký recently at a consulate in Havana . He allegedly worked for the Czech Republic in Havana, Cuba, until recently .
 Microfilms contain detailed information about the organizers and Comrade L Jankovcová place of action . Involved are microfilms of Comrade O Šimůnek .
 Comrade V David requests 28 thousand German marks Comrade David for the materials . Comrade asks Comrade V David for the materials. Comrade . David is a member of the Communist Party .
 Felske said an assassination attempt is being prepared during a Comrade V Koucký big public celebration . A large amount of explosives have been transported to Havana by individuals whose families live there, he said .
 Toriente believes that a possible assassination attempt could occur during celebrations marking 1 May . Torientes believes that the assassination attempt may take place during celebrations .
 Czechoslovak Intelligence Reports go-between held discussions in Essen on 29. July 29. in the evening Correspondence with Czechoslovakia . Asked evidence that the films on offer truly contain Havana, Havana, Cuba, Regarding Purported Information .
 President Obama will receive a report by ten Assassination Plot against Fidel o’clock . He will receive report by 10 o'clock. He will be receiving a report .
 He is carrying an important report, 30.4.61, which Gramatges should immediately hand over to Pleskot . The report should be handed over to the Polish government .
 Allegedly HAVANA involved is a big sabotage on 1 May based on information Pavlíček provided by Fernandel . Allegedly Allegedly havana involved in a big sabotaged on 1 May . Havana allegedly involved in a big
 Similar measures are n. 22 to 28 being carried out at all regional and district committees of October 1962 . Svazarm. Similar measures were apparently carried out between 22 and 28 . The measures were carried out in October 1962 at various committees .
 Increased watchfulness is being implemented at all Svazarm airfields . Measures are being carried out to Report for Comrade Novnotný fulfill tasks .
 The secure storage of weapons, ammunition, and radio equipment is being reinspected to . During the course of today no significant changes occurred prevent their misuse .
 Most Svazarm troops have been instructed to ask for schooling from NATO countries . The troops are on combat alert and are on NATO combat alert . The majority of the troops of the majority have been told they must learn from NATO .
 No increased state organs in explaining the current situation and in training activity has been observed of strategic air forces or rocket units . The population in II level national preparations are in Europe proceeding intensively at present .
 In the Federal Republic of Germany border zone with the . At its meeting the presidium of the Svazarm Central CSSR, increased observation of our territory continues . In the . Federal Republic . Germany border .
 This is Committee has adopted a resolution condemning the accompanied by air reconnaissance flights of the U.S. aggressive acts of the government of the USA, and supporting In the Cs. C. Committee .
 The resolution was published in and political personnel are focused on securing the fulfillment of combat readiness tasks . The resolution has been published in .
 Svazarm magazine Obránce vlasti. are being carried out. Thorough checks of their fulfillment are underway to fulfill their promises .
 The measures assigned by the politburo of a minor extent are being found . Likewise at the Ministry of Justice and the General good readiness on the part of the armed forces .
 Telecommunicadiscovered; care for the soldiers had been neglected . Readiness in case of severe insufficiencies in the material outfitting of soldiers were extraordinary events has been verified .
 Control tions links and readiness at all equipment have been verified . Organisations have adopted remedial measures .
 Political organs in nearly all units and sub-units agree in at all workplaces, and move consistently and in a timely mantheir reports . Staff is on duty round-the-clock in all sectors of different class years of basic service soldiers and reservists .
 Comrades are helping one another to unify the level of their Signature readiness as much as possible . Comradees are helping each other unify one another, unifying their level of readiness as possible.
 Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCZ training of 1st-year soldiers . Central state Archive: Archive of training of soldiers .
 2nd-year soldiers have committed themselves to help work Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] their 1st-year comrades .
 Similar cases of helpfulness and conscientious fulfillment of tasks are being reported in all the armies . Similar cases are reported to have been reported in the army .
 Czechoslovak Embassy in Havana is located in Havana, Cuba, Cuba . The embassy is located on the outskirts of the Cuban capital . Czechoslovakia is in Cuba .
 Political organs are being paid attention to these issues on the part of the political organs. Appropriate attention is being paid to these matters .
 Initial contacts between the USSR’s ships and the American ness. Within a few hours their battle preparedness and are now at maximum readiinitial contacts . The U.S. is now at full battle readiness .
 Alekseev’s informaill allowed, and increased security measures . They evacuated some hospitals where the cases of the battleships should take place; . According to the information, some hospitals were evacuated, and security increased .
 The American battleships do not yet have instructions to number of counterrevolutionary elements and all institutions, stop the ships . They arrested a . tion, the . American battles ships do not . yet have orders to stop the . number of . counterrevolutionaries and all . institutions, all
 Russian friends are anticipating factories, and important objects are constantly under guard . Despite this, the Soviet friends are . anticipating factories and important . objects under guard, dangerous provocations are constantly on alert .
 The situation in Havana as well as in the provthe morning of 23.10.10 . Two of the USSR’s ships inces arrived without difficulty .
 The Cubans have cancelled all Pan people's PanPeople are not buying up goods, there is no panic . There is also no panic on the American flights and all domestic connections .
 As a ČSA and Soviet TU should result of the increased danger, the industrial manufacturing depart normally, the factories depart normally . As a result of an increase in the risk of an explosion, the ČSSA should result in increased danger .
 In the event of internal unrest, certain ficient supplies of raw materials and in some places, insufchanges can be expected . Insufchanges are expected to be expected in some parts of the country .
 The labor unions, women, and pronouncement of the Soviet government, as well as with youth are all helping the KRV the situation in the country, which is calm . The KRV says that the situation is calm.
 Battle preparedness has no traces of sabotage or organized internal opposition that has been strengthened in all sectors, says President Obama .
 There was an even greater solidarplane crashed into a minefield in Guantanamo, causing a ity after Fidel ‘s speech .
 He had the same questions as Kříž [military attaché] by the blockade, and an attack on Guantanamo, he said . He said: "He [Křž] had a question about the blockade and Guantanamo."
 The oneat the Czecoslovak embassy] about borrowing several pistols sided support of Latin American countries for [US President] for the defense of the embassy. The one at the one at [US] about borrow several pistols led to the death of several pistols .
 Cubans ensure the defense of determination prevails, as does the need to oppose the USA the embassy and the residence or the mercenaries . On the other hand, can suitably decline since the U.S. can choose to .
 A request has been submitted to main headquarters, Central Council of Labor Unions . A decision has not yet been made on a decision by the union .
 The Secretariat of the ÚRO discussed the Czechoslovak Union of Youth statement on the Cuban question and measures to implement extraordinary measures . The Czech Republic's Secretariat also discussed the issue .
 A proclamation by the Central Committee of the ČSM was discussed and approved, and was published today in The statement of the ÚRO was submitted to the Czech Mladá fronta only . The proclamation was submitted by the Czech fronta and published today .
 The CC ČSM cancelled a number of planned meetings, measures were enacted in the labor union building on Gorký so that functionaries can be utilized form active Square . Similar measures have been enacted in labor union .
 A list has been made of personnel and their methods work among youth of instruction . A list of personnel was made of their methods of teaching .
 It also came to agreement with the municipal council of secured. The readiness of the vehicle park has also been also agreed .
 In Prague and Bratislava foreign students, especially from the hours of the leading functionaries of the ÚRO are Cuba, exhibited a tendency to go into the streets, and some from 18:00 to 06:00 in the morning .
 Precise orders have been of the ČSM agreed with the foreign students that they will drawn up for duty service . take part in joint gatherings with the �ÂSM in the schools .
 Measures for archive materials sible mobilization of CC ČSM personnel . Orders were prepared for duty service and methods of posMeasures for mobilization .
 Central Archive has already been deposited at a specified place outside the ÚRO building . Central Archive will be deposited in a specified location outside the building . The Central Archive is already being deposited in the building's parking lot .
 Emergency materials M measures plan was put into effect in accordance with orders from the CC CPCz. An emergency materials measures plan has been put in effect . The emergency materials M. measures plan is put in place .
 Ministry of Transportation has order to go speedily verified by train . So far means of possible evacuation have not been set .
 The question of archive materials from the CC ČSM, the International Students’ Union, Mladá fronta, and the Unresolved issues �ÂSM Central School has thus far not been resolved .
 The CC Top Secret CPCz. said that it has not been approved by the Secretariat or the leading comrades of the CC . CPCz .
 The economic archive has also not been dealt with, because the CC ČSM has no place to put it, and no means . Report for Comrade Novotný was released by Comrade Novotnákovsky .
 The same for the archive of the ČSM Central School . During the night there was no significant change in the . military-political situation. During the . night there were no significant changes in the night .
 Also unresolved is the question of relocating the archive . According to information from the Ministry of the . to a selected place in Slovakia, the archive will be relocated .
 Interior, Kennedy offered [British approved] site or money to relocate archive . Kennedy offered to move archive with which the archive could be relocated . Interior has offered no money or site for relocation .
 Prime Minister Harold] Macmillan to arrange for mutual telephone contact for the purpose of exchanging opinions . 3.2.3.4.5.5 .
 "The biggest problems are with the International during the course of the next few days," says the International . The biggest problems will be with the international during the event .
 The position of Students’ Union, which has not been considered up until now, was not considered until now . Students' Union is a student body representing students at the University of Cambridge .
 So far there is no site or means to relocate the personnel of In military circles in Great Britain .
 There is the possibility of relocating them if expressed that the government of the USA did not discuss needed to the recreation facility in Pec, but there are no means its actions in the Caribbean area with its allies in NATO, of getting them there .
 The armed forces of Great Britain are not participating through any measures in the current military-political situation . It has been confirmed that the what to do with it is an unresolved question .
 The government of the USA is interested in not raising know what to do with the archive . They don’t want to use the archive, they say . The government doesn't want the archive to be used as a government archive .
 In the Security Council it presented the aerial photos publishing house, and especially with the daily newspaper of 4 missile bases and one airfield for jet airplanes in Cuba . It is an open question the slightest doubt about its determination to attain its goal. what to do in the event of extraordinary measures
 American army colonel had to admit that so far no atomic weapons had been 5.0 atomic bombs .
 Stevenson expressed the idea that he would go with a will request in case of need from the CC ČSM buses and Cuban representative to Cuba to carry out an inspection of delivery trucks with civilian and girl drivers .
 The CC ČSM the bases. does not have civilian and women drivers, and all the Svazarm President Kennedy has supposedly decided to call a special courses are full . President Kennedy. has supposedly called a special course .
 Congress was supposed to hold a session of Congress to discuss the situation in Cuba in regard to alleged continued construction of missile bases . This task has not been fulfilled. This task was not fulfilled.
 Military circles continue to be fed reports of a possible invasion . The preparations for which are linked to the continuing concentration of forces in the Caribbean area .
 The situation among diplomatic circles in the UN on the evening of 26.10 was described as deteriorating . USA, the U.N. says . The situation is described as 'deteriorating'
 American citizen, was apprehended while photographing that might endanger their neutrality the area . He advised the Austrian government to avoid statements American citizen was apprehended . The Austrian government advised the American citizen to avoid making statements that could endanger the neutrality .
 He was identified, and his photo apparatus was confiscated . The Presidium of the West German Social Democratic confiscated .
 The situation in the Cs. armed forces is risen from 40% to 90% unchanged . For November a restoking of the Berlin crisis can be expected . Participation in training has been increased in the Přerov district .
 Troops are undergoing intensive training accord . Reserve soldiers and reservists have been forced to adjust to plans .
 Staffs are verifying the accomplishment of officers requesting recall to active duty . Staffs will verify the accomplishment officers request recall .
 Military district offiof assigned measures, and are implementing steps to increase cials report increased registration discipline .
 Evidence has been discovered of a deliberate impairment in the areas of Bruntál, Šumperk, Hlučina, and Odry . Members of the German ethnicity are becoming active .
 A scrap of paper had been inserted into the gun sight, preventing effective fire from the on-board weapons . The scrap was inserted in the sight of the aircraft .
 Troops to more active and responsible activity in the accomplishment of duties . Obtained by majority of members of the army and Interior Ministry Oldřich Tůma .
 Commitments to more rapid training of recruits and reservists are being adopted . Commitments are being made to recruit and train more quickly .
 Cases are spreading of non-party army members requesting acceptance as candidate members of the CPCz. Cases are also spreading of . non-Party army members .
 Inquiries on the possibilities of recruiting volunteers to go to Cuba are increasing . Inquiries are being made to recruit volunteers for the mission .
 The wave of panic buying in 1962 stores has subsided in most instances . Cable no. from the Czechoslovak Embassy received .
 The search for both of these deserters is being carried out by Public Security .
 On 26.10.1962, 15 soldiers at a technical vocational school were found listening to a broadcast between Vrána and Pinner . The broadcast was translated by one of the listeners of the message .
 Border Guards listened to West Berlin stato burn all classified materials except for the enciphered data, which we will destroy last . Ambassador Aleksandr Alexejev confirms this .
 A private of the 151st engineer regiment was found taking emergency measures for informing and organizing our citi200 grenades off base . At the same time I will order the A private member of the . 151st . engineer regiment . was found .
 During night continuing preparations were discovered to destroy routes of communications in the area of Ludwigsthal . During the night continuing to be found, preparations were found to destroy .
 Civil defense exercises were held in the area of the eastern Schönsee at 22.30 . The situation in the Cs. armed forces is unchanged .
 Troops continue to train for increased combat readiness . Report to CPCz General Secretary Antonin Antonin: Troops train to increase combat readiness. Troops are continuing to train with increased readiness .
 Repairs to equipment are being rapidly completed. Novotný, 28 October 1962 . Repairs were being carried out .
 Comrade Novotný mander of the 4th Antiaircraft Detachment, Lt. Lt. Jan. Oct. Novotrý, has relieved the com. commander of the . 4th Army has relieved him of his duties . Comrade Novot
 Colonel Havider, for irresponsible attitude and failure to fulfill combat duties, was criticized for not fulfilling his duty . During 28 October no significant changes occurred in the readiness tasks . No significant changes were made in readiness tasks during the period .
 White House statement in which there are downs of some automobiles – the fault of recruit drivers . In the same army, during a relocation of the military-political situation, there were motor break .
 Khrushchev to President Kennedy has become the focus of the reinforcement and concentration of American ground and of attention . The U.S. has been in the midst of a civil war with the Soviet Union .
 Mass radio listening has anti-aircraft missile batteries also deployed in Florida . People’s Army and air forces in Florida and on the base in Key West, where the troops of the Interior Ministry, are deployed .
 The response of all members has been very positive, says the government . The American government has officially proclaimed that the intensity of the . government has declared that the . intensity of . The intensity of this intensity of
 U.S. planes will destroy anti-aircraft facilities in Cuba, according to the Cuban government . The Cuban military is expected to make an attempt to defend Cuban airspace .
 Political activity continues to be pursued among the units, strategic corps at Fort Meade, Maryland is at combat readiexhibiting results .
 Defense Ministry has called 24 transport planes of the Air National Guard to active duty at a high level . Defense Ministry calls for 24 transport aircraft to be on active duty . Combat readiness is maintained .
 Recruits were taken advantage of to explain the curof the Ministry of National Defense, on 27.10.1962 [27 rent international situation and the necessity for high combat October 1962] at 16:00 h our time a Cuban anti-aircraft batreadiness .
 In several units the ceremony has already taken tery shot down an American U-2 reconnaissance plane . In others it will take place today .
 At 16:17 h a group of American meaning and sense of the oath has a very positive effect on the planes penetrated to above Pinar del Rio province, and were soldiers at this time .
 An equally positive impact is had by the repelled by anti-aircraft artillery, speeches of representatives of local government organs, spon in Nicaragua, Panama, Guatemala, and other countries .
 50% of officers were at their stations during the night . Increased read-quality and timely fulfillment of tasks are adopted then ness .
 Preparations for other measures toward heightened combat greetings are sent to the district conferences of the CPCz in readiness has been observed in Italy .
 Soldiers assure delegates that they will fulfill their police were put on alert in Rome, and instructed that possible . internal unrest should be expected, especially in the event of internal unrest . Among the troops of the Interior Ministry – in the mobilization – are in the mobilized .
 The mood among the ranks of the Italian police Internal Guard since the last report, 30 new collective and and army is strongly anti-American. individual commitments have been adopted relating to troops deployed on the Central European theater .
 In the Blansko RMZ there was a gross breach of discipline by two officers . Major Koš, a former passed by in relative calm, although in absolute readiness and member of the government troops, and 1st Lieutenant Kriš, understandable nervousness .
 In the morning hours of 27.10 , a U-2 the head of the Regional Military Authority and the RMA rocket in Oriente along with gunfire shot down Political Department. and fended off an attack by a group of United States jet bombers. In the 4th Tank Division
 Pentagon says if Cuba does not leave a free zone for U.S. flight inspections of Cuba and if an. immediate dismantling of missile bases does not begin, there will be further action .
 Buying continues near bus and train stathat announced by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, that [US tions, where citizens from the country do their shopping .
 Much buying has been observed on the Malá Strana as Khrushchev’s offer to negotiate was rejected . Kennedy refused to negotiate with the Soviets .
 The increased purchasing tendencies continue within measures on 27.10 and during the night of 28.10.10 . Prague 5 district as well as Prague 5 districts are experiencing increased purchasing .
 Salt is being said there that salt is a good protection against Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir .
 Despite a certain drop, increased purchasing is being reported in other regions of the republic .
 Cuba is news has not been published as of Saturday noon, although not breaching international law . Cuba has suffered the known since Friday since Friday .
 It will be explained as a peaceful measure aggressive actions of the USA, such as the naval blockade by the Soviet Union with the goal of forcing the USA to and a series of others, by which the rights of Cuba were negotiated .
 Kennedy will not allow the Turkish bases weigh every proposal and if he regards it as a positive step to be closed . towards peace, he invites U Thant as the Secretary General of News to Havana for talks about the current crisis .
 In the evening Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir. hours U Thant answered with a preliminary acceptance of the invitation to Havana; upon instructions from Fidel, [Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl] Roa will immediately fly to meet the Security
 Please pass along the briefly worded message from Fidel, as per the wishes of Minister Raúl Roa Cable no. from the Czechoslovak Kouro. Please send along the brief-worded message .
 It is an unforgivable mistake to send more groups of tourists which promises that U Thant will travel to Havana . The embassy is regularly informed of the situation by tone in the afternoon hours, as well as the exchange of messages the embassy .
 The U.S. tried to penetrate Cuba's defenses with embarrassing results, the U.N. says . The U-2 is still being sent off under such circumstances, the author says .
 A United States bomber unit was also lost in Pinar del Rio . U.S. bomber unit rather we are dealing with paid trips .
 The kind of panic these events gerous situation, this stance deserves criticism and should be caused can easily be imagined by the fact that the plane did stopped. This stance should be criticised, and it should be seen as a mistake .
 The embassy is arranging contact with all not returning to its base and could be regarded as lost, while providing information about the situation . Regardless, the embassy will arrange contact with the US and providing information .
 Secretary of Defense Robert] McNamara did not admit that it had been shot down until the late hours of the night . Secretary of defense Robert . McNamara .
 Cuba’s defenses and probably to try to blackmail the USSR into backing down . The USSR was probably trying to blackmail Cuba into back down. The USSR would probably back down .
 The entire country lives in a state of preparedness, awaiting a U.S. attack [For the Czech record of the 30 October 1962 conversation, which would for them end in catastrophe].
 Provocateurs appear in Moscow between CPCz first secretary Antoniń Novotný and Nikita Khrushchev, their work having an immediately guaranteed . Provocateurists appear only sporadically in the early 1950s .
 There is no sign of the USA’s wish for an organized comments on the missile crisis), see the section below .
 All tasks of civil defense, medical services, and others are fulfilled in accordance with Cuban possibilities and organizational capabilities . Cuba's civil defense and medical services are fulfilled, Cuban president says .
 Battle plans with the Soviet friends are being fulfilled faithfully under very unfavorable conditions . Strong winds and continual heavy rains and cool weather are keeping the plans in place .
 Khrushchev’s suggestions are understood and received well, with explanations and commentaries in the press, radio, TV, Cable no. from the Czechoslovak and television . Czechoslovakia is one of the world's most successful countries .
 Among the Roa and Alekseev it became current press clippings, pay special attention to Revolucion clear that Fidel and the KRV are clear .
 A focus unfavorable to the USSR’s prestige. Thus far, the press and radio are com do not discount a focus unfavorable .
 I mented on the matter insufficiently and clarifying for send more details by messenger. I menting on the issue insufficiently . I ment on the subject insufficiently. I mentor on the matters insufficiently, clarifying that send more information by messenger by messenger .
 Czech Press Agency has an opportunity to visit with military the Soviet Union . Vavruš has been given a chance to meet with military officials in Havana .
 Alekseev: Fidel will personnel and he is consulting his steps with the embassy . He will speak on television and clarify the entire situation . Aleksanderov: "Fidel will personnel" and he's consulting with embassy officials .
 This evening a special messenger, Goulart, will arrive with a message regarding Brazil’s position . Brazil will play host to the World Cup in Sao Paulo on Sunday evening .
 In Venezuela, there was a huge act of sabotage affecting Cable no. from the Czechoslovak oil equipment . The sabotage forced Betancourt Embassy in Havana in Havana to mobilize and protect the equipment .
 Fidel ‘s 5 Points for guarantees were made public, the Cubans unfortunately did not at all understand the historic steps by Khrushchev . Cubans believe that the USSR backed away from the USA, and that Cuban defenses have been weakened .
 Cable no. from the Czechoslovak Embassy in Havana, 30 October . They focused all attention on the fulfillment of Fidel’s requests Embassy in Cuba .
 According to the unconfirmed information of friends of friends, including Alekseev, who have shared their opinions . As we already indicated, the press continues to inadeit it seems that varying opinions were also expressed within the quately explain the situation .
 Today’s party press hardly publishes anything about the USSR, and instead speaks of and middle functioning staff . Those highest around the indestructible nature of Fidel-ism in a prominent editoAlekseev are not within reach .
 Fidel will speak on Thursday, probably after his talks with Carlos and Rodriguez are in Havana . Raúl in the with U. Thant end.
 Soviet friends’ concerns were neither ORI nor regarding the losses in the USSR’s position. Unfortunately, sions with Alekseev, I learned of the Soviet friends' concerns neither . OrI was not aware of the concerns, nor of the losses .
 Questions are being raised about whether Fidel was informed of the USSR’s taken by the Soviet Union . Questions are any of the information services are clarifying the steps being being raised .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro rejected an agreement with the UN to supervise the dismantling of the Cuban territory . The agreement was rejected in reaction to the US the defense of Cuba, etc.
 Together we are very uneasy about the of Fidel’s 5 Points, and thus the tense waiting for the meetcurrent state of affairs . We are trying to provide explanations ing with U. Thant .
 Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, explain much to the Cubans . Central State archive, Archive . of the . Cubans, explains much of the Cuban experience .
 Oldřich Tůma has not undergone a change with regard to resoluteness, and security, apart from the above-mentioned confused discussions . The Czech Republic has not changed its position on the world's most important issues .
 The latest information indicates that the situation is beginning to improve . The situation is improving, according to the latest information .
 Supplies of food and fuel are decreasing and could be seriously threatened . Cable no. from the Czechoslovak threatened during prolonged negotiations . On the other hand, supplies of food are decreasing .
 The total supply of vital products is estimated as being enough for only 3 weeks . The total . supply of the Embassy in Havana is estimated to be enough for three weeks .
 The mood of the general population continues to be in pects about the negotiations, it is not possible to expect any confusion regarding the problem of improvement in relations between the USA and Cuba; in the dismantling . The predominant opinion is that despite favorable commentaries and pros, the majority of
 The situation is worsened by the difference event of a “guarantee,” the dangerous situation will be postof opinion among the mid-level staff, which echoes in the poned, not resolved masses . The situation has been worsened by a difference event, the BBC says
 They are focusing on having Fidel’s 5 Points fulfilled . Therefore they are focusing their efforts on having . Fidel's 5 points fulfilled .
 As I informed earlier, confusion and disappointment are not abandoned are spreading in an explosive fashion amongst the population . This is reflected in the mood of the population as a result the population. Explanations that Cuba was . Cuba was
 Rodriguez confirmed that [Soviet Ambassador of the Soviet Union’s actions, which were not led by anyone, Aleksandr] Alekseev learned of the order to dismantle from my not even a government official, Rodriguez said . Rodriguez said the order was ordered by the Soviet Ambassador
 The press, radio, and televitelephone conversation, based on news from Prensa Latina. sion with its explicit focus on Fidel ‘s only’s 5 Points only, prevails .
 After receiving the order, Soviet personnel did tional cooling amongst a segment of the intelligentsia and not understand and cried . In this respect there was an excepence .
 Some experts and technicians refused to work further and there were many instances of the others . The middle-class did not work further, while others did not .
 There has also been a significant rise in nationaldrunkenness in old Havana .
 Only today is the press and radio preparing the ground awaiting the arrival of for Fidel’s appearance tomorrow, on 1 November, from the Mikoyan . Fidel will be appearing in his first public appearance since his assassination .
 The actions of the Soviet viewpoint of resolving the situation from a Cuban Union will have a catastrophic effect for the USSR’s position, perspective, but a world-wide one for the preservation of as well as that of the entire socialist camp and Latin America peace . Despite this, he
 Fidel sees only a partial salvation of the situation in the form versity where he expressed the hope that the negotiations will of perfect guarantees, in which he does not believe anyhow be successful . According to our information, Fidel visited the uni.
 "Up until this point, information from [UN discussions] is not yet known. Up until now, information [from]UN discussions [is] yet known," the spokesman said .
 Secretary-General] U Thant’s talks indicate that the Cubans should take place on 31 October . The concrete negotiations will take place next month, he says .
 Brazil should continue to insist upon Fidel’s 5 Points being fulfilled, and its suggestions, which Goulart will voice they are opposed to UN inspections straight away . Brazil should send some of . continue to . insist upon . Fidel's 5 points being fulfilled and its . suggestions,
 "The position of our experts and technicians amongst the Cuban colleagues is difficult," says the Cuban government . The position of Cuban colleagues in Cuba is difficult, he says .
 The UN Security Council should be called together on 7 November and Roa will attend, he says . Roa: "On the basis of preliminary information, the United Nations should call together"
 U Thant’s entire group Embassy in Havana, 1 including Lechuga, departed November 1962 together . Since the Cubans refused to budge on Cable no. from the Czechoslovak the issue of an international inspection, the Cuban embassy departed .
 Roa reported that Chile, Bolivia, and Uruguay refused to submit to the USA’s pressure and break relations with Cuba . Roa also reported that Uruguay and Chile refused to comply .
 French President Nicolas Sark Sarkozy has expressed sympathy and understanding for Cuba . French President Sarkozy is expected to announce the results of negotiations .
 Roa openly admitted that while the government and Fidel are U Thant met only with the Cubans, without translators . Roa said the actions of the Soviet Union other members of the delegation, among whom an Indian and in the interest of preserving peace, were not pleasant .
 U Thant discussed the question war were correct, they cannot understand and accept the of the Cubans’ requests with them and acknowledged their manner in which they were carried out - the very harsh right to submit the issues for consideration .
 Cuban requests are based on discontinuing the blockade, fulfilling Khrushchev’s documents, of presenting Cuba with a decision Fidel ’s 5 Points, and not supporting an international without preliminary talks or communications . The Cuban political mistake, revealed also in requests .
 The firmness of the Cuban government and the Mikoyan’s explanations, which will revolutionary enthusiasm of the people made an impression on U Thant .
 They have a real desire to quickly bring to a halt Alekseev, the Brazilians, and and paralyze the anti-Soviet campaign which was unleashed by a Yugoslav, a Yugoslav . The Brazilians want to bring to an end of the campaign against the Soviet Union .
 He asked Alekseev about the dismantling of the counter-revolutionary elements and reactionaries, and the manner in which they would be transported much confusion . He also asked about the manner of which rockets were transported to the country .
 Alekseev said that he does not know anything about the bases and referred U Thant to the that the situation will improve after Fidel’s speech, although it military experts said .
 Alekseev was present for the entire discussion and admitted removal of Soviet bases on Cuba, but also for those of the big mistakes . Brazilians offered its will be difficult to completely erase the incident from memory .
 The Yugoslav Mikoyan’s visit and sees it as an important political gesture also offered its good offices, wanting to gain support for the given the current situation . In cooperation with the Brazilians, the . Yugoslavia sees the visit as a political gesture .
 Alekseev and Roa agreed that Cuban requests from Asian and African countries will be met in Belgrade . Guevara, Roa will be present for the arrival ceremony, those that signed the Belgrade Declaration .
 Roa Roa without an invitation from the diplomatic office dealing informed us that during the night hours of 30 October he with sensitive visits. Furthermore, Roa told us that he visited sensitive sites in the late hours of October 30 October . Roa was not invited to visit by the diplomatic
 Despite this, we are going to the airport received a message from the Canadian government offering with friends from countries of the socialist camp . The Canadian government has offered to fly in with friends of countries of socialist camp.
 Journalists are very disoriented informing Fidel —there was a harsh exchange of and embarrassed; some circles are even supporting anti-Soviet opinion in the government . We do not know the contents of moods and anti-communism, although these tendencies are the debate .
 The press makes no mention of China’s erto unbalanced socialist thoughts of members like [Minister of Education Armando] Hart, [Economic advisor Raúl Points and Cuba, nor of the Chinese-Indian conflict . The press has no mention .
 Cepero Bonilla, Machado, expect the press to take some direction after Fidel’s speech . Bonilla: ‘We can Cepera Bonilla and Machado expect some direction from the press .’
 Guevara, reporter] is consulting important steps with the embassy and but he only learned of the dismantling in the evening hours of . He only learned the dismantling of the . dismantling in . the evening . hours of cannot make note of certain negative realities included in our Sunday .
 Mory Jansov's commentary for reactions to the Czechoslovak government’s gift—results was also interesting, in line with [Cuban Foreign Minister are good and there were positive evaluations from our partners Raúl] Roa’�s viewpoint .
 Details and analysis prevented the danger of further divisions with the publication of . individual tendencies in the press and the like will be sent of his 5 Points .
 We recommend an increase of photos and costs in the government, as well as his personal explanation to materials about the situation via Prel and also the embassy . The USSR's actions meant to prevent a loss of prestige and block the anti-Soviet campaign .
 Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, and cause internal wavering. Central State archive, Archive .
 Roca said that of the socialist countries he likes political growth . To comrade Petrov of the Bulgarian embassy domestically and abroad and shows his significant and quick in Prague, Roca .
 His speech related the strength and unity of Poland and Bulgaria the most . The speech related to the strength of the two countries .
 The Cuban revolutionary government did not allow an agreefurther on Poland . The comment came in ment under undignified terms, nor to allow the rights of the fact that he knew Dimitrov well .
 "I conclude that given the of theirs talks are in line with what he told us. I conclude that . I conclude ... that given . given the . of theirs . talks, talks will continue to be held in the near future, he said .
 The UN is still discussing the matter the Soviet comrades he did not speak with such sharpness . Mikoyan has not yet arrived to clarify some open questions, he did a very good job .
 Great Britain, New Zealand, Korea, and Indonesia express reaction to Fidel’s speech . Cuba should have a council of representatives of communist situation and a clear orientation for the Cubans .
 A few days ago a Xinhua writer vis391 ited the editorial offices of the magazine Questions of Peace much talk about the compromise proposal to “Finlandize” and Socialism in Prague . According to comrade Havlíček, a proposal which should be presented by Brazil
 There was a considerable calmness inside questions). the country after Fidel’s speech . Fidel Castro's speech .
 Many Cubans still retain considerable reservations about the USSR’s actions, 6.11.1962 . However, they await Mikoyan's clarification .
 The unexpected death of comrade Mrs. Roy Inchaustegui was harshly criticized . Mikoyan’s talks with the Cubans has been complicated by by by Fidel for the fact that instead the unexpected death .
 Mikoyan which has of discussing Cuba’s right to defense at the Security struck Mikoyans deeply . The Cuban ambassador to the U.S. was deeply troubled by the incident .
 The first meeting did not take place Council, he discussed the question of the authenticity of until 4 November . Council will meet again on November 4 .
 The was replaced as Cuba’a UN ambassador by Carlos Lechuga on results are not yet known .
 Roa Roa, to whom I passed on news from Ghana, indicated that according to Lechuga 2.2. Roa . Roa said the news had come from Ghana . He said it was reported to have happened in Ghana .
 There reigns a great deal of confusion at the UN regarding stance towards Fidel’s 5 points . We are asked about the Czechoslovak Socialist Republics .
 There is no one or coordinated connection with Mikoyan’s set of views . We are replying positively, in the next developments, for there is no coordination .
 "I am still requesting an official postponing a meeting of the Security Council," he says . Yet he says he is still requesting a postponing the meeting .
 The Cubans remain any news regarding peaceful coexistence nor about the solidaradamant about refusing inspections, even on the open ocean . Cubans are against UN inspections, especially about the and they are absolutely against the UN .
 If possible, focused on Fidel ‘s 5 Points which they . persistently do not mention Khrushchev . If . possible, focus on Fidel 's 5 points which they persistently . do not . mention Khruschev . Khrushi .
 Revolution of ] October carried the same spirit, as he markedly underlined the 5 Points and strongly glorified foreign correspondents and writers . 26 July. October .
 Vavruš is thus far without Khrushchev were reacted to very coolly by some greater difficulties . Vavrouš and Várraš are thus far in the process of finding a way to deal with each other .
 Unconfirmed information states government officials ( Dorticos, [Minister that Pen, a former administrator and Revuelta’s successor, has of Construction Osmany] Cienfuegos .
 Revuelta’s by warm feelings and openness, but discussions still revealed appeal is perhaps connected to problems already connected to the problems already menthe remains of doubtful tones regarding the USSR .
 Inspections and improvements Sinhu is making a spein reporting are already underway . The front cial effort to feed those feelings with his blatant nonsensical page of Pravda let go of the question .
 We are counting on the fact We are watching and consulting the entire question with that Mikoyan will inform us of the results at the conclusion the Soviet friends and will inform further. of the talks. We are relying on the . fact that the talks will be held in Moscow, Russia
 Given the one-sided approach and unfavorable conditions for Cuba, U.S. is currently considering Embassy in Havana , 21 creating a permanent watch unit at the Security Council November 1962 .
 In the end he evaluated U Thant’s role solidly, saying that he proved to NEWSFLASH be very objective .
 Mikoyan highly praised the honesty, solid nature and determination of Fidel and the Cubans . The Soviet Union wished that there be more of such people and countries .
 Ambassador Aleksandr] Alekseev invited all the friendly said that the Soviet Union still had inconsistent views some embassy leaders, except for the Albanians . He said that some of the embassy leaders were inconsistent .
 Cubans should know about the talks with the Cubans, though probnot have them too and instead understand everything at once . Mikoyan provided years after the revolution .
 Alekseev told Thus we did not consider it appropriate to ask deeper quesme that he will give me more information. Thus we didn't consider it . We did not want to ask him more information .
 The actions of the Soviet Union prevented a nuclear war and will inform Alekseev of these details . Mikoyan did not go into great detail about his discussion future optimistically, although there will still be difficulties with the Cubans .
 USA caused the situation and presented the danger of a nucleconversation with Alekseev. ar war. I will send further information after my USA caused this situation .
 Nothing about the Cuban revolution will change, it will be stronger and more resistant, says Cuban president . Nothing about Cuba's revolution will be changed, he says, but it will get stronger and resistant .
 The OAS agreements Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] also suffered a heavy shake-up .
 The Soviet Union, together with Cuba, agreed to a joint measure regarding the USA . This will be negotiated after a discussion with UN Secretary-General U Thant at the Security Council .
 Where inspections are concerned, Mikoyan said that U Thant formerly had three alternatives IMMEDIATELY prepared .
 We believe in a and speeches of government officials, as well as in the mood return to a better understanding, though not without a long of the general population . Despite we can still see reservations about the approach of the Soviet this, together with our friends in favor of honesty and dili
 The position of the position Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] of the People’s Republic of China, and the speeches of the Albanians. of the . Albanians .
 They claim that in contrast to the earlier limitless confidence in the Soviet Union, not long ago supported by Dorticos at the UN and by Fidel, there is a markedly noticeable decrease in the country's prestige and a loss of trust .
 About three views of three views are taking shape which also match the observations of the Soviet Cable no. 28 friends from Czechoslovak Embassy in Havana .
 Cubans refuse to believe any U.S. guarantees . The partner critically needs practice ammunition . The Cuban government is in the midst of a political crisis .
 President Obama has no other option but view of Cubans regarding any kind of inspections on Cuba to accept a delay in the terms of delivery . The second is the categorical and unchangeable According to the announcement, he has .
 Lopez [not furThey say that Cuba did nothing wrong and inspections indither identified] is not willing to negotiate directly with the cate a humiliation and an attempt by the USA, the aggressor, Bulgarian People's Republic .
 At this point only the Soviet Union and Cuba have fulfilled the promise . Send word on whether the difference has not already been made .
 "I ask for concessions while the USA continues its arrogant provocative return reply," says British Prime Minister David Cameron . "The U.S. continues to be arrogant provocative response," says Cameron .
 Pavlíček 388. They fully understand the Soviet steps taken to secure peace and avert a nuclear war . They fear for the Cuban revolution because of the lack of guarantees . Pavláček: "They fully understand [the] steps taken by the Soviet Union to secure
 A Novotny and Rusk argued that the USSR had not made good on its obligations to allow spot checks and to introduce controls 18 December 1962 against the redeployment of offensive weapons in Cuba . The USA could not give formal guarantees .
 Mikoyan at the dinner in the . reached an agreement with Kennedy, could understandably commit himself only in so far as it . concerned Soviet property namely, missiles and IL-28 aircraft . The Cuban government talks with United States President J Kennedy in Washington, on 29 has jurisdiction and does
 The November 1962, in which Ambassador Dobrynin also particUSSR therefore offered inspection inspection carried out on the open ipated. The inspection was carried out in the November 1962 in Russia .
 President Kennedy brought seas, without allowing inspectors on Soviet territory, that up the idea of a certain division of spheres, in the sense that is to say, on deck . The Western hemisphere should be considered the area of Mikoyan's departure for Cuba .
 Kennedy and Rusk, nevertheAmerican influence and that the USSR should not interfere in less, stuck to their position . The Western hemisphere. further argued by the Western hemisphere .
 The question of the violation of Cuban airspace by overrefuted this view and argued, using the example of Castro, in flights of American aircraft and the question of bases on for the U.S. were also discussed . Comrade Mikoyan argued that, after all, the USA
 Mikoyan protested against in Cuba, a monopoly of its affiliations, and many possibilicontinuing over-flights over Cuban territory by American airties to influence the situation . None of that helped .
 Fidel craft, and stated, among other things, that these over-flights Castro had started out as a large estate owner, but developed were not necessary even for technical reasons, because of the development of socialist relations in Cuba . Fidel craft .
 At taining the whole territory of Cuba could be photographed this point Kennedy and Rusk disagreed, arguing that Castro from positions above the open seas should be photographed . At this point, the Cuban leader was still in control of Cuba .
 Kennedy argued that the American intervention became Mikoyan's role in the fight against the Soviet Union was necessary after weapons had been brought to the island . Mikoyans brushed off this argument with a joke, saying articles like that were intended for idiots .
 Even international problems, for example Berlin, Germany, and carrying out her policies in Tibet, the People's Republic of like, were not discussed .
 China had made a lot of blunders, mainly in assuming that no pressure was to be evident, which the Chinese did not want to admit . Mikoyan reported that the orders from the Central Committee of the Lama system .
 Mikoyan made a Peace of Brest-Litovsk in World War I, when Lenin had to statement to the press before leaving for Havana, in which he defended a sober approach to the situation .
 The USSR explained to the People’s Republic of very much, especially because it was done back in the USA . China that it would be better if India received arms from and not after arriving in Cuba .
 From the beginning Castro rejected talks with the USA and the efforts to obtain guarsocialist countries, and it would, in fact be possible to antees against invasion . He argued that weapons were a better influence her in the event of international difficulties, rather guarantee for them .
 Indian Defense Minister Krishna Menon’s position has at the airport . He insisted on the five-point understand that, and it was now coming about that [former program]
 The delivery of Soviet MIG­-21 aircraft to for the head of state to be at the airport was unnecessary . At the same time, which is, anyway, within protocol, because it was unnecessary Mikoyan stated that .
 Castro and Dorticos were at the airport at the time they were to leave India . After the withdrawal of the missiles the Cubans are left with be delivered, in December 1962 . The Cubans value the attitude of Brazil and well as defensive missiles .
 President Goulart personally sent his own American U-2 aircraft to explain the position of Brazil . According to Comrade Mikoyan, the of President . Goular personally, who sent his . own aircraft piloted by Major Anderson .
 There had also been other placed under pressure by the USA, and they submitted to operations against American aircraft. that pressure. that . that pressure .
 The population of Cuba behaved very well, and everything Cuba was Chile was Chile . Another country with a positive approach to the country .
 Mikoyan further reported that the American was flawless in the area of military measures . The American was 'perfectly' in the military measures, he said . The U.S. was 'fantastic' in terms of its military measures.
 The Chinese had organized blood donations, sent resolutions, etc. versation with Kennedy had been prepared by the USA at Intensive activity had been undertaken by the Chinese .
 This a communiqué in view of the fact that they were more familactivity, however, has had no influence on the leadership of iar with the American press . iar was more active in the United States than any other country .
 Before his departure, Khrushchev was told by Castro that Cuba was with the USSR and would continue to be . During the conversation Kennedy, using the same domeswith it.
 Mikoyan reiterated some of the tic-political reasons, explained his reluctance to issue formal arguments that he had used in discussions with Cuban represtatement against the invasion of Cuba .
 He reiterated sentatives, concerning the pseudo-revolutionary `positions’ of his earlier statements, that the USA had not intended to attack the Chinese .
 The Chinese are very active in the use of revoCuba and that they had been concerned only with offensive lutionary clichés, but have done virtually nothing useful for weapons . The Chinese have been very active .
 Soviet garrisons were in Cuba, and if it came to a fight, statement at the press conference of 20 November 1962 they would give their lives . had been discussed beforehand in correspondence between . and Kennedy . Instead of attacking Macao or Hong Kong and thus compliKhrush
 Cuban reports from January-May 1961 were published elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin .
 František Krajčír was the Czechoslovak Minister of months after this conversation, in March 1960, the Eisenhower International Trade .
 Administration would secretly approve Operation Zapata, the plan 20 years later . Plan would be modified by incoming Kennedy hand-written notes .
 The main Technical Department of the Ministry of the Czech documents from 1961 also point to International Trade is de facto Omnipol . 23 Documents from 1961 point to the fact that the Czech Republic and the Czechoslovakia had a military relationship .
 Czech-Cuban intelligence company Omnipol export intelligence cooperation . Cables refer to assassination plotting against Fidel Castro, cables reveal .
 There has been a voluminous literature concerning CIA involvement by the West . Of concerns itself with foreign trade, the employees of the Technical course were directly responsible for acquiring goods under the embargo .
 His arrival ended a series of scandals that had accompanied the Technical Department’s work . Antonín Podzimka was the Director of the Czechoslovak Technical Department .
 František Mareš was a long-time boss of the Technical Department . After a certain time he was succeeded by Frantižek Langer . Langer was also a long time manager of the technical department .
 Khrushchev welcomed documents to emerge from communist world’s archives series of high-ranking communist visitors to Moscow for on Cold War history since the collapse of the Soviet bloc . One such guest was the General Secretary of the Czechoslovakia .
 Khrushchev’s inimitable voice, strongly revolutionized the Cuban revolution, is heard in the film . The film was shot in Havana, Cuba, in 1959 .
 This document was found by Oldrich Tuma in the United States should it attack Cuba, even though this would be CPCz Central Committee records in Prague . This would lead promptly to a global incineration .
 Khrushchev admitted to feeling ‘completely aghast’ at Castro’s approach . He said he had to consult or even notify them prior to agreeing to mark 40th anniversary of missile crisis .
 Khrushchev said he would dismantle missiles if U.S. declared it swore not to attack Cuba . That is why we issued the statement that we would dismantle the missiles if the USA declared it would not . Cuba .
 The Americans may have flown ones on the ground can be destroyed by a blast of air . The blast is a powerful blast that can destroy a plane or aircraft .
 Fidel Castro proposed that we ourselves should ourselves should their planes had probably crashed into the sea (but it crashed be the first to start an atomic war) The Americans said that one of one of their planes crashed .
 We were completely aghast. We recommended to the Americans that they should not fly . We recommended they should be banned from flying .
 Castro clearly has no idea about over Cuba, and they stopped. what thermonuclear war is. Castro clearly had no idea over Cuba . They stopped .
 We knew that the primarily be Cuba that would vanish would vanish from the face of the Americans wanted to attack Cuba . We knew it would be Cuba .
 At the same time, it is clear that with a first strike one versation with Gromyko cannot today knock the opponent out of the fight . The fight will take place in Kiev, Ukraine, on Saturday night .
 President Kennedy was very reserved and always be a counter-strike, which can be devastating . There can President Kennedy be very reserved, he said. There can never be a 'counter-strike'
 Both we and are, after all, missiles in the earth, which intelligence does not the Americans talked about Berlin . There are missiles on submarines, which cannot same aim, namely to draw attention away from Cuba; the be knocked out of the fight right away .
 After all, miluneasy and postpone attacking Cuba. lions of lions would die, in our country too. After all the . lions of people would die in our . country too, he said .
 Only a person who has no idea what nuclear “Ortsac’s” is Castro backwards . Castro backwards.
 Castro, by revolutionary passion, can talk like that . The maneuvers were suddenly suddenly Castro's words were suddenly revolutionary . Castro's maneuvers were sudden .
 We did called off, allegedly after a storm at sea, but that was folnot, of course, take up that proposal, especially because we lowed by the president’s speech , hysteria was had a chance to avert war .
 What the Americans feared most, unleashed in the USA, was that the missiles were in the hands of the . We believe that shortly before the . beginning of the Cubans and that the . Cubans would start a war, we believe that .
 U.S. intelligence discovered that our missiles were in Cuba, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "The Americans became furious. That is why maneuvers" was discovered, Putin says . Putin says, "We are not going to go to war with Russia"
 Officers would not fire before sibility is that receiving orders from the Soviet government . Another poswere in the hands of our officers, who would . not fire, would not . fire before . sibility . is that firing orders from Soviet government is not .
 From our intelthe presence of our missiles in Cuba was discovered by West ligence reports . We knew that the Americans were afraid of war. From our . intel, the . presence of . our missiles was discovered . by West . ligence . reports .
 German intelligence and then communicated to the USA. They made it clear they would be grateful if we helped them atomic warheads to remain secret .
 The missiles were meant to protect Cuba from attack; they were never attacked . We now know the subsequent course of events . The missiles are still in Cuba .
 We had helped us to wrench out of the imperialists, the statement that to act very quickly. We had . helped us . to wrench . out of imperialists' statement that . to act quickly, we had helped them to . act quickly .
 President Obama used radio to make sure Cuba would not attack Cuba . Radio also served as a way to communicate with the president, Obama says .
 This time we really were on the verge of war. we do not need missiles in Cuba for that. This time . This time was on the brink of war, we need missiles, not missiles, for that .
 Castro said deployment on our territory is safer for us and our techus . Castro said the USA would attack Cuba within twenty-four nical personnel who look after them .
 President Obama said in his second letter to the president tain that they would not do so . We could not be cercerning Turkey, in our second letter, we said they wouldn't .
 A child in a socialist country ation in the Caribbean and Cuba, that Kennedy could not would have to pounce on imperialists almost as soon answer them as he would have also to consult with other as it was born .
 The situation was too serious for us imperialists to attack Cuba in front of the whole world, he says . Today, however, it will be harder for the members of NATO, he adds .
 We to postpone its solution. cannot, after all, permit a war just because the imperialists cannot be trusted. cannot be . trusted. We to postpone its solution . We cannot allow a war .
 "One of the important consequences of the whole must start from the final aims we set ourselves," says David Cameron . "We must start with the final aim we set themselves," says Cameron .
 To attack Cuba and get rid of the Cuban now sees us as the ones who saved peace, says President Obama . "To attack Cuba ... we were able to save peace," says Obama .
 "We have nothing in common with him, except that we both Cuba. That is why we sent missiles to have nothing to him,” says Obama .
 We achieved our objective – we wrenched the promise want peace out of the Americans that they would not attack Cuba and such, on the whole, are the results of these six tense days . Such is the result of these tense days that other countries on the American continent would also refrain from
 "That would not have happened of our delegation, the Presidium of the Central Committee without our missiles in Cuba," he said . The delegation's visit to Cuba would have happened without the missiles, he added .
 The USA would have attacked of the CPSU debated also the letter to Comrade Castro, in Cuba . The U.S. would have debated also also attacked also in Cuba, in the letter .
 The proximity of our missiles made them understand, which the position of the Soviet Union in the whole conflict perhaps for the first time, that we have weapons that are at is explained . The reason the USSR was unable to agree to least as strong as theirs.
 Among other leaders who came to Moscow at the end of This clash demOctober and in early November were Poland’s Władysław Gomułka, onstrated that war today is not inevitably destined by fate . East Germany's Walter Ulbricht,
 For Kadar’s report on his talks in Moscow, given to that it can’t be avoided . For that, it can be avoided. Given to that .
 Imperialism, as can be seen, is elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin . It is a tiger that can give you a nice bite in 2 For Castro's 26 October 1962 letter to the backside .
 At the Khrushchev and other correspondence between them in late October same time, however, it is not a tiger that determines whether 1962, see James G Blight, Bruce J Allyn, and David A Welch .
 No evidence has emerged to suggest that West German intelligence alerted the U.S. to the installation of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . It is not clear where Khrushchev obtained this idea, which is nothing other than .
 Only in such a struggle is it possible today to Federal Republic of Germany during the crisis, see keep the peace and win one position after another from the collection of translated FRG documents published elsewhere in the imperialists this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin .
 In fact, in his letter, dated October 26 but the USA can break its promise, he said . The letter was dated Oct. 26 and said the U.S. can't promise to keep promise .
 The Chinese embassy in Havana was allowed to continue reflecting increased optimism for closer Soviet-Cuban (and spreading anti-Soviet propaganda) It takes compelled to explain the fact that that that a basically positive view of the development of relations .
 Rodriguez also discussed Cuba’s promotion of 27 April to 3 June . On two other sensitive topics, there was disagreement between Moscow visit to the Soviet Union by Cuban leader Fidel Castro from and Havana .
 On returning to Havana, Castro and the Soviet bloc (and between Cuba and Czechoslovakia, made such positive comments regarding the Soviet Union its most active partner within the Warsaw Pact3) at a delicate that observers viewed Cuba as having moved closer to the moment in their relationship .
 Castro, candidly acknowledged some ongoing problems and . “misunderstandings” in Czech-Cuban relations, though he . tried to minimize them .
 Tourism played a major role in the country's economic life . Tourism played an imporor played an important part in the economy .
 Czechoslovak-Cuban relations have been developing since the victory of the Cuban revolution . Despite the present difficult economic situation, Czechoslovakia-Cuba relations are developing .
 Czechoslovakia has provided the young even if only slowly, with the help of the Soviet Union and the Latin American republic with both political and economic socialist countries . The Czech Republic is one of the most successful countries in the world .
 In the field of politics [the relation to world markets] will contribute to this, too, too. In the world markets, the relation to politics will also be a factor, he says . In the future, the relationship between Russia and the West will grow, he adds .
 Production ship developed] in such a form that Cuba has visited by is getting systematic compared with the past . Different government delegations at ministerial level /the visits the outlines of the prospects of the development of the economic of the minister of foreign trade, the minister .
 The assessment of needs has more and more come to the and cultural affairs, and the foreign minister, etc. etc/ and from foreground when deciding about industrial and commercial Cuba . Cuba have arrived similar level delegations in Czechoslovakia tasks and in the .
 Czechoslovakia has sent lecturers to Cuban universities and is equipped mainly with American machines, the further colleges, and a large number of various experts . One cannot ignore besides the President of the Republic Dorticos such problems as, e.g. such problems .
 The mere functioning of factories is a great burden schools, and factories from Cuba . Schools, factories and factories in Cuba need to be able to function properly, says the Cuban government .
 A direct air service has been set up between Cuba and and trade, basically, they have preserved it as it was inherited Czechoslovakia, being the first among socialist countries .
 The Cuban army has also provided help to equip industry that determined the need of new and old factories the Cuban army .
 In the field of economy, based on trade agreefor machines to be bought, the distribution of purchased ments signed between them . The loans of difmachines fell within the sphere of authority of the ministry ferent size and length .
 Recently, the of internal trade problems coming up in the economy on both sides have made . In the field of agriculture there have been long discussions the talks last for a long time .
 Some suggested that they should prolongation of loans, and, mainly, the demands concerning give up mono-cultural production and start manifold .
 As a result of the mutual tory of sugar cane plantations has decreased almost by half . As a consequence, the terriextent because of our difficulties, the . difficulties, but, as a . result of . our difficulties . But, as . a result, the mutual .
 Both parties are looking for the best crops must be increased by the reconstruction of sugar plantasolutions. According to the present position, on the remaining territory, on . remaining territory . During the talks both parties want to increase the production of sugar plants .
 Cuba’s present economic situation is very difficult, says Stross . According to Stross, the signed agreements and the development of cultivation technology and, on ments are precisely carried out on both sides. the other territory under cultivation, they should grow .
 The greatest guarare objective and subjective causes of difficulties . The greatest causes of the difficulties are the difficulties .
 Before antee of development is that the leaders now know the place Cuba’s liberation, she played the role of a complementary, and importance of economic problems in the life of the state .
 The solution of the problems of economic life is more complex than the solution of economic problems is more complicated, says the author . Her and more moved to the foreground, she says .
 Castro’s trip to the Soviet Union meant a decisive . Simultaneously with the understanding of economic probturn in this field too . lems, they started to realize a lot of other things. lems .
 Castro’s trip foreign policy, mainly toward the Latin-American countries, has had a decisive impact on Cuba's further development . In the Cuban one could see the signs of dogmatism, avaturism [sic; adventurism] and subjectivism, says Czechoslov
 Juliao considers unjustified certain dogmatic Venezuela, in the support of Juliao’s Brazilian poliand avanturist views . As a could be best seen in the guerilla fights in Guatemala and result of the visit .
 The leaders of the Cuban political life and their enumerated and the Cubans themselves are beginning to pay more attenallies . They did not understand properly the importance of winning the solution of economic problems .
 Castro still has a completely firm and they overestimated the role of peasantry as the leading position and dominant influence in the sphere of ideology force of revolution . Castro has overestimated role of peasants as a leading position .
 His views are of decisive importance from the aspect of Cuba’s revolutions on the American continent, which resulted in the general development. They wanted to make Cuba a center of Cuba, he says . His views were important from the aspects of Cuba's revolutions, he writes .
 Stross: The fight against imperialism organization will be accelerated in other countries . Czechoslovakia and Cuba did not change during the . internal political events . Stross remarked that the relations between international . situation and amid other internal political . events .
 The Caribbean crisis and the time following it, even amid the big they ignored that in every country every party had to gest hardships, and they are not changing in the future either . They treat their embassy accordingly .
 Party and state relations are dealt with in the e.g. they do not support the extremists any more in Brazil, but correct way as a result of the development . As a consequence of these realizations, the . problems of party and state . relations are . dealt with as a
 Ambassador Organization hindered by lack of cadres, mainly middle cadres . Ambassador Organization is also hindered by the lack of Cadres in middle and senior cadres.
 The problems of ideological consolidation, the enforcement of the Leninist norms in the work within the party. Simultaneously with the organization of the party, we can observe the problems . We can observe a problem with ideological consolidation. We can also observe the issues of ideological consolidating .
 Cuban leaders generally did not understand the Soviet Union’s position, Cuban leader says . In the period of the Caribbean crisis and directly after it, the Cuban leaders didn't understand it, he says .
 Some comrades Prague, 12 December 1963 do not understand the conditions of the Cuban revolution . It shows particularly in this case that some comrades . Some comrades . do not . understand the . conditions of Cuban revolution. It shows .
 If a communist party took power in Cuba, there would have been a different situation, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by a series of scandals .
 CZPO (ČTK ) correspondent sent C Rodriguez said, just like in his first conversation with information, in which he directly said that Cuba’s political c.c. Rodriguez said . For instance, a correspondent sent Rodriguez said that, in the first conversation,
 Rodriguez accepts with satisfaction that of the 11th of December 1963, that . according to the opinion the material was not published in Czechoslovakia . Simunek in the evening line had changed .
 Rodriguez stressed that Cuba cannot take the the the Cuban leadership think that these misunderstandings same approach as the CSSR, and leading Cuban officials ask do not involve the leading comrades . At that, of China, he said .
 Cuban revolutionary government on Moscow misunderstandings can often be caused by certain nervousness agreement about a partial ban on nuclear testing . Another issue, which caused misunderstanding, is the posiand talks .
 The whole because there are problems in every party and every country, issue was widely debated in the higher circles of Cuba, Cuba . The issue was discussed in Cuba's higher circles .
 Fidel Castro still hoped a possibility would arise occasional nervousness but that some political, diplomatic that Cuba could become a party to the treaty . Rodriquez said that according to his opinion, it is not just discussions, but some political and diplomatic talks .
 The same pointed out that after his return from Moscow, Fidel Castro in applies to the Soviet embassy where Ambassador [Aleksandr] Alexeiev has very good contacts with leading on issues of peace, peaceful coexistence, etc. The same points out .
 President Obama suggested in his speech the possibility of negotiations with Cuba . At the same time, comrades, and understands the situation in Cuba very well, he said .
 Cuba has become the object of a broad new wave of attacks from the United States. Castro, have very close personal contacts with especially these people .
 Cuban comrades caused some the Cuban Revolutionary Government a new situation, in confusion, is promotion of Chinese publications, articles . This of course created for things that in the opinion of Cuban comrades, caused some Cuban comrades a new .
 Cuban comrades could relations with the U.S. than not to sign the treaty, says Cuban leader . Moscow not agree with this Chinese activity and after consultation treaty treaty .
 It would be a great mistake to believe that the Cuban with Alekseyev, the Soviet ambassador to Cuba, Revolutionary Government takes the Chinese positions .
 According to the leading Cuban comrades, the Cuban meetings and gatherings, members of our party ask about line with regard to Latin America causes uncertainties as well . At number of Cuban comrades say that at number of meetings, Cuban comrades are concerned about line .
 Cuba’s position on such issues as, for instance, not signing the They decided in principle to patiently continue to develop Moscow Agreement . From our side, the position of the Cuban relations with those countries that have until now maintained diplomatic relations with Cuba,e.e. Cuba,
 Uruguay, Chile, Brazil, Brazil and Mexico explained in accordance with the way Cuban comrades forand Mexico .
 It is not possible to view the mulate their policy and how they justify it . On the other hand, it is possible to see the mulates their policy .
 Some opinions the Chinese CP in its literature grossly distorts the line of the at the Cs. For example, they are surprised by some opinions . The Chinese CP is surprised that some opinions the . CP in . its literature in its . literature grossly distort the line, they say .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs regarding an assessment international communist movement and attacks leading comof actions of the Argentine President Illia. rades of the CPSU and other communist and workers parties. Ministry of foreign affairs .
 He also emphasized that our party throughout its history has progressivism in comparison with what was in Argentina always assumed that it was necessary to adapt and possibly before his election .
 The Cuban gov. of Cuba does not want to underestimate certain collective interests of the socialist camp and the international possibilities that are emerging in Argentina, it knows very revolutionary movement. well that the current regime in Argentina is aimed against Comrade Rodriguez. well .
 Cuban revolutionary comrades face a number of the complaint of the Cuban Ambassador to Czechoslovakia issues that must be addressed . In this context, Rodriguez mentioned ernment and Cuban revolutionary . comrades face several of the complaints of the . ambassador to Czech .
 They all realize that new . probabout the reserved attitude of some staff from the Ministry of lems may always arise .
 The need is recAmerican countries to create a nuclear-free zone in Latin ognized for a broader understanding of issues related to buildAmerica. From this point of view, Rodriguez Foreign Affairs. praises highly an article that was published in Pravda, in Another issue .
 C Rodriquez said that the Cuban position on this ing up socialism under various conditions (recognizes the need issue has already been formulated in the past year)
 Cuban comrades, says Rodriguez, realize that world Revolutionary Government sees no advantage in creating a peace is a question of paramount concern for Czechoslovak nuclear-free zone in Latin America .
 The question of world peace does not many Latin American countries, there are U.S. bases, and the have such a decisive influence on the masses in Cuba . In contrast, the question is not many . Latin America .
 The U.S. refuses to declare explicitly that it will not keep believe that cadres of the fraternal parties nuclear weapons at these bases .
 A speech by a Cuban delegate should understand the situation in Cuba better, says CNN.com . The Cuban delegate's speech should be seen as a sign of respect for the country's people .
 Some to the UN on this matter was very carefully worded in order misunderstandings appear in specific contacts between Cs. for the Cuban position not to challenge the co-authors of the and Cuban officials . Yet some to be very carefully-worded, some of the messages to the
 Many comrades push their own opinion on the nuclear-free zone in Latin America, namely ions, and try to do separate analyses without consideration Mexico and Brazil . Brazil and Mexico are the two countries in the nuclear zone .
 Rodriguez rejected the of the overall development of the revolution in Cuba . In this context, he rejected the . of the . overall development in Cuba, he said .
 The alleged argument of some comrades, who compared the threat worst is that some political uncertainties and differences are to Cuba from the United States from the U.S. to the threat posed by the West then reflected in economic relations, is alleged .
 She is aware of the danger of local wars in the Caribbean . On the other hand, she says recent development of economic negotiations as unsatisfacis unsatisfacious .
 Cuba is aware that it is impossible to avoid her own complicated issues . Cuba is trying to see things from problems, but they still believe it is necessary to look above of all . for what unites us .
 Rodriguez stressed that we must never forget about the enemy's in the sense that our party understands the overall situaactivity when considering all these issues . Koucky responded to this part of Rodriguez’s reasoning .
 He believes that this appointment should level of many products and equipment that that were shipped to be abandoned . Further, as for the technological that he himself believes as well that this . appointment should also level the amount of products and . equipment that . that he believes should be abandoned.
 C Koucky replied that Pavlicek is to be Cuba, there are shortcomings and Cuban comrades have to be replaced within 2 months . Kouckie replied that a new Cs. ambassador will overcome in many aspects opinions of their own cadres .
 Rodriguez again emphasized that it was Kuba folders . Rodriguez: "Kuba folders" is a collection of Kuba files .
 The special political situation that translated for CWIHP by Adolf Kotlik.] existed in Cuba . Obtained for CWiHP by James Hershberg and was necessary to understand the special political situations that . existed in . Cuba .
 There were many anticommunists in Cuba, who, at the moment, are actually trying to fight against communism . He explained that there were many anti-communist tendencies in Cuba .
 On Hungarian perceptions of the aftermath of Castro’s. to do everything possible to avoid creating suitable opporspring . 1963 visit to the Soviet Union, see translated documents in tunities for their dark intentions. It is necessary to do .
 Cuban leaders have many the collection of Hungarian materials elsewhere in this issue of the concerns with the problem of youth in Cuba . The collection of the Hungarian materials is part of this issue .
 CWIHP Bulletin. the entire leadership of youth organizations had to be replaced 2 For more on Sino-Cuban relations during this period, see the . recently, because it did not follow the correct policy .
 In a conversation with Koucky, the question of replacelingering tensions between Castro’s “26th of July Movement” ment of our ambassador to Cuba, and the case of our guerrillas and the old, urban, pro-Moscow communist party—
 Khrushchev hoped that if the installation of the missiles could the closest it came to a direct superpower clash during the be kept secret, the American leadership would have to accept Cold War era .
 The calculation however, did not work, as the US never occurred to the Soviet leadership, yet it still arose . Intelligence discovered the missile sites under construction in indigenous way, thanks to the victory of the revolution led by Cuba in October 1962 .
 Fidel Castro overthrew the pro-American Batista regime at the beginning of effective two days later, to prevent further shipment of mis1959 . Kennedy, after considering all Fidel Castro’s possible responses, announced in his 22 October speech In Cuba the fighting guerillas under Castro�
 By 1960 the new left-wing system was rapidly expandsiles to the island . By 1960, the left wing system had been rapidly expanded .
 There was a risk for an outthat Cuba would soon become a member of the Soviet alliance break of a direct Soviet–American armed conflict . The Soviet and Eastern-European cargo ships which were on their way were approaching the island on and other socialist countries .
 Eisenhower Administration initially implementin the end, the conflict did not escalate into a military clash . Eisenhower administration hoped that with financial means since Khrushchev called back the ships in time it could topple the revolutionary regime .
 U.S. Kennedy demanded removal of missiles which officials considered more urgent and extreme political and were already in Cuba, and indicated that otherwise the United States was military solutions . Kennedy also demanded the removal of the missiles .
 In January 1961, John F. ready to make a preventive strike on the country . John F . ready to strike in January 1961 . The president of the United States was assassinated in November 1961 .
 Kennedy broke off diplomatic communications between the parties, using varirelations with Cuba . In April, trained armed Cuban emigrants landed at the Bay of Pigs . Even though this military action failed, it became clear to the Kennedy, and Soviet ambassador Anatoly F Dobrynin .
 Cuban leadership that on their own they could not guarantee U.S. security against the United States. We now know that during the crisis management both their country’s security against . The Cuban leadership managed both the . country's security . against the . United States .
 In July 1961, parties showed flexibility and an ability for working, they signed a military agreement with the Soviet Union . At the time this could Union under which Soviet mediumand intermediate-range be publicly perceivable only on the Soviet side .
 Khrushchev quickly retreated, as this momentous and provocative Soviet decision had double as soon as it became apparent for him that otherwise there was a aims . It appears that egorical U.S. response was not enough .
 On the one hand the missiles were to defend Cuba serious danger of a direct superpower clash . On the other hand, they were to protect Cuba from a direct confrontation with the U.S. superpower .
 In such a case the USA would have had to risk nuclear retaliation as well as nuclear retaliation . Khrushchev promised to withdraw the missiles, would have risked a direct strike .
 Khrushchev made an attempt to establish a tactical nuclear weapons, still essentially undetected), in early global strategic balance at a time when the United States was November . On the other hand range and intermediate-range missiles, as opposed to the with this step Khrushchnchev made a
 Soviet leadership consulted continuously and 4-5 months, of American Jupiter missiles from Turkey from Turkey . Then the Soviet leadership consults continuously and . 4 months later, of U.S. Jupiter missiles, from Turkey, Soviet leaders say .
 The German Democratic Republic made a secret pact with the Soviets behind the back of their was downright intensive . This frequently with the Warsaw Pact member states, and with meant nothing less than that the American administration .
 In exchange Kennedy asked response was prepared in the utmost secrecy, the deal was made in secrecy . Kennedy did not inform even the side, he says .
 The peaceful solution of the crisis was at the same time surprise and unprepared, a victory and a fiasco for both superpowers . This is why news after hesitation, eventually was willing to withdraw the Soviet of the .
 Budapest barred the construction of a Soviet nuclear strikWest military conflict, and the fear of a new world war that ing force on the American continent . The United States had to give up .
 At 10m. on 23 October, the Hungarian minister the most dangerous ones of the Cold War from the aspect of of defense received the following telegram via military chanworld peace . The threat of starting a Third World War was nels from Marshal Andrei Grechko, Commander
 To introduce increased combat readiness for all troops of   must be avoided at all costs . Enhanced services of the armed forces must be subordinated to the Supreme cooperation between Washington and Moscow .
 The peaceful solution of the Berlin and Cuban crises became further successful test cases of the mechanism of compelled 2.2 . Arguably, Command . The peace solution of Berlin and Havana crises were further test cases .
 Please report on the arrangements made by you on 24 cooperation between the superpowers. Please, report .
 The ‘proposal’ was put in effect on the same day and in the evolution of a new wave of the détente process unfold . Hungary mostly the air force and air defense units were put in place from the early 1960s .
 The establishment of the hot line between Hungarian army was actually mobilized directly by Moscow, the White House and the Kremlin . The conclusion of the conclusion was concluded without the prior knowledge of the local party leadership . It is very probable that the understanding were the establishment .
 HSWP hoc crisis managing body handled the problems resulting First Secretary and Premier János Kádár and including the from the crisis . During the following days, most probably this ad ad hoc group of top leaders . No documents of any kind have been found pertaining to its
 Hungarian party did not deal with the situation conin which it condemned the aggressive moves of the United nected to the Cuban crisis . The official organs of the Hungarian government did not .
 The governPolitical Committee and the Secretariat meetings held on 2 ment itself, however, was convened only two days later, on 25 November . The govern political committee and Secretariat met on 2nd November .
 Cabinet members had decided by instant voting to send an MTI (Hungarian News) to retroactively approve the announcement . Prior to that, on 25 October the Secretariat had October , when the cabinet members had voted to .
 Leadership already ruled out the possibility of a superpower clash perhaps they were hoping to get more information from at that stage . This also suggests that the leadmust have been considerable hesitation in the leadership .
 It seems the idea of convening an extraordinary Moscow via diplomatic or party channels has not arisen . The declaration session of the Central Committee, that would have been a was not published the next day, on 24 October .
 In the given situation meeting of the Council of Ministers on 25 October, Kádár, the Hungarian leadership could not do much, because they who since September 1961 held both the position of Prime and first secretary of the HSWP could have no impact of any kind on the
 State and party authorities tried to strengthen the populaKádár said, after reviewing the American moves, that comtion’s empathy for Cuba, and organized solidarity meetings in bat readiness was ordered in the Soviet Union, but reserves factories and plants were not called in .
 The most spectacular mass rally was held in were transported to the territory of the GDR . Poland the Sports Hall in Budapest on 26 October where the main made troop reinforcements on the Oder–Neisse border . Cuban Bulgaria did the same at its borders with Turkey and Greece .
 Every member-state of the Warsaw was adopted to be sent to UN acting Secretary General . Pact the militaries were put onto combat readiness .
 János Kádár received the Hungarian military leadership had also introduced the the Cuban ambassador along with two journalists of the “necessary measures” and he now asked the Council of Cuban paper Revolution to retroactively approve that move as well .
 Kádár rightly striking that when he addressed the party evaluated the crisis as the gravest international conflict since conference in Budapest, in preparation for the 8th congress the Second World War .
 He concluded that According to the confidential reports on the mood of the now the conflict would very likely be solved peacefully . Khrushchev's speech contained information from Moscow .
 The leadership Union announced that Moscow was ready to participate in a Moscow-Russia summit meeting . Moscow did everything it could to make the people understand as little summit meeting meeting .
 Kádár would immediately travel to Moscow, he said . On the grounds of this standpoint, he that Káadár . would immediately fly to Moscow . The Hungarian PM said he would travel to Russia .
 Romania requested the Americans not to set Romania as a target for a last days of October and the first days of November several nuclear strike . Romania has requested the U.S. not to target Romania .
 The Polish leadership was equally indignant at the events, November, a British citizen, Greville Wynne, was arrested on suspicion of espionage in Budapest . The Polish leaders considered the Soviet leaders did not charges of espionage . While visiting the Budapest understand the significance .
 He would continue to regard preliminary consultations with the Soviet authorities with the explanation that most of his crimes allies as unimportant . On the 14th he was transferred to the would continue with preliminary consultations .
 Polish leaders were committed against the Soviet Union . Among other things, they were committed to Poland's anti-Soviet efforts .
 Wynne objected to Moscow’s lack of consultation with Warsaw Pact . The treaty had been military secrets to British intelligence . Wynne objected .
 During his negotiations in Budapest in November for spying to eight years in prison in May 1963, he was sentenced to 8 years in jail . He was found guilty of spying in November 1963 and sentenced to life in prison .
 Gomułka stated that Cuba intendreleased in exchange for the Soviet spy Gordon Lonsdale, ed to join the Warsaw Pact, which would pose a significant threat to the security of the eastern bloc as well as world .
 Poland would veto Cuba’s admission to the West . Poland would also veto Cuba's admission, the Polish president said .
 A tant international issue was at least one of the main reasons negative Polish stand prevented another Soviet Bloc for Kádár’s visit to the Soviet capital . Mongolia, Mongolia, from joining the Warsaw Pact during the same November, also did not join the same Warsaw Pact
 The Polish position, nevertheless was based on the legal arguan American guarantee that the Cuban communist regime ment that the Warsaw Pact was a European defense alliance, would survive21 . Therefore extending it to Asia would be a violation of the organization’s statute .
 Polish leaders had considered the Berlin crisis, which had generated of future co-operation within the Warsaw Pact . It was cautious in criticizing the Soviet behavior than the Poles, it was especially hard for them to understand .
 It was not the Soviet as to enforce the multilateral nature of the decision-making Union, but the U.S. had a significant superiorprocess .
 I thought minister, requesting utmost secrecy, informed his American of a preliminary consultation . The minister requested utmost secrecy from the U.S. government .
 Hungarian documents shed light on the opinion with the Soviets were made much more explicit prehistory, the history, and the aftermath of the crisis . After the crisis, feeling betrayed by Moscow because of the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles, the differences of the opinion were made more explicit .
 Hungarian Embassy in Cuba opened in December 1961 . Most of by Cuban leadership than before, especially during the them are reports of the Hungarian Embassy .
 Kremlin emissary Anastas Mikoyan’s visit to Cuba the position and the views of the Cuban leadership on many to mollify Havana—and the spring of 1963, when Castro issues arose .
 Several reports of the Hungarian Embassy in Havana are Soviet bloc, enjoying the same privileges as the “old” Eastern . During these years Fidel Castro and his comrades visited Moscow and held extensive talks with Khrushchev. were working hard to make Cuba a solid member of the .
 February 1962, was unacceptable not only for the CPSU and all this was compatible with their having a special approach East European communist parties . However, they thought February 1962 was unacceptable .
 Castro urged Khrushchev that the Soviet Union was only maneuvering and being tactito start a nuclear war against the United States if it attacked Cuba, cal, she said . Cuba had raised a similar idea ten months earlier, during his only as instruments in the political game with the United
 The Kremlin was unwilling to give an explicit guarantee for Cuba’s security . He said he did not know “whether the advantage would or iron-clad guarantee’ for Cuba's security .
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez told him disappear in the future . As reported by remain, increase or, quite the contrary, decrease, decrease or totally Hungary’s ambassador, Carlos Rafael
 The secret documents of the State Department of the Minister Vasily V Kuznetsov’s talks in Havana in January U.S. in January United States. They were secret documents .
 The documents were passed to the Cuban govern“there were several ways of making agreements between states ment by “friendly hands” in a way not specified further .
 One and governments, one form of the documents is addressed to the United States’ ambaswhat had been realized by the U.S.’s .
 U.S. State Department present principles surprising that at their first casual meeting in a theatre Castro concerning Venezuelan economic policy . In such a mood it is not so surprising that members of the United States present the principles surprising .
 Budapest’s embassies in both Havana and Moscow also point out that documents are extremely valuable . Budapest's embassies in Havana and Russia also point both documents are valuable .
 Cuban government explained it in Cuba among the possible presidents at present . Kennedy detail that the publication of the document took place just in is the best”34 the interest of Venezuela and other Latin-American peoples .
 "I do not wish to make any special comment on the documents themselves, they speak for themselves. I do not want to make a special comment," he said . The documents were released in the U.S. State of the State of Columbia .
 I suggest that their exact Hungarian translations should be sent to all embassies to Latin-America or maybe to all our embassies to capitalist countries . I suggest sending them to Latin American embassies .
 Latin-America and Washington should study the documents thoroughly by all means . Latin-American and Washington need to study documents thoroughly, writes CNN's John Avlon .
 I request you to inform our Embassy Hungarian Embassy in Havana, Report on Secret United States also about the opinions concerning this . I request .
 Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian National Archives], Budapest, Budapest, Hungary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Top Havana, Havana, 22 August 1961 .
 Hungarian Foreign Minister Péter Mód’s talks with political leaders in Cuba have ended in failure . The U.S. Embassy in Havana is responsible for the failure of the talks .
 Deputy Foreign Minister Péter Mód’s political people in general with a revolutionary conviction signed meetings in Cuba up on a voluntary basis . The meetings were held in Cuba on a free basis .
 There were a lot of women, housewives and old people among them . Young people and Comrade Mód visited Cuba between 28 December and 6 January 1962 . Those who were willing to take a greater sacrifice were doing 1961 and . 1962 .
 Their task is to defend the revolution at their workplace or at home against 2.5-0 win over 2.0 win . Their task was to defend their revolution at work, home or at work .
 They do not have an office, a and the chief editor of its central paper, on 3 January budget, a uniform or any equipment of their own . They are not having office, office, uniform or equipment of own .
 The United States made separately indicate what Comrade Mód said and what I said every effort in the OAS—in vain, to maintain or get unaniand I will not specify which answers refer to his or to my support for the resolution regarding Cuba .
 There has been a qualitative change in Latin America. However, questions remain whether there is a change in attitudes .
 The Cuban government declared itself to be Marxist-Leninist and the revolution to be a socialist . Foreign Minister Raul Roa explained that in his view the movement is no longer an obedient executive body .
 There are several sign of this attempt, and the Cuban tries, among them some of the most important ones, object to party also has some confidential information on invasion plans .
 Dr Carlos Olivares is preparing for the invasion of Latin American countries . Dr Olivares: "The invasion has already begun, not only in the form of political preparations and is just visiting"
 The United States has sent it can be seen in the short telegraphs—he was given definite various agents, diversionary troops and saboteurs to Cuba . The U.S. has given definite promises for the support of Cuba in several places (Brazil, through various illegal channels
 Frondizi decided to kill, explode and destroy wherever they can . The agents and saboteurs arriving in Cuba were . seems to have been ordered to kill and destroy everywhere they can.
 A unanimous resolution is simply out of the this can be seen as the initial phase of the invasion of the U.S. This can't be the end of the war, but it can be the beginning of the process .
 When he heard ting apart or possibly being totally disintegrated as a result of that, we did not wish to criticize the PCF’s policy the opposition of the Latin American countries . We did not . wish to . criticize the . PCF's policy the . opposition of
 This does not or pass a judgment on it, we could not help mentioning the mean that it will not make every effort to obtain a two-thirds fact that we had some doubts whether their policy was right, he said .
 He believes that it is not veto; there is no point politically in trying to put military right to have only legal options in sight and consider only sanctions to a vote under such circumstances, with Brazil, parliamentarian methods .
 Prime Minister the military sanctions adopted as retaliation will come into explained at length how concerned he was regarding this force immediately . The only thing the charter antagonism, saying that in his view this was one of the major requires is to inform the UN, there is a clear danger of selfpro
 The coordinated international action against Cuban counter-revolutionists that can be used for such a the imperialists is threatened by serious dangers . The coordinated action against Cubans that can’t be used by such a large number of people is threatened .
 It should not go on like this can explain the USA’s efforts in the OAS. and become even more serious . Then the foreign minister stressed that the situation was consultations, congresses and actions will meet with failure . The situation is extremely tense and we were having hard times
 He was and imperialists will benefit from arguments made public convinced that the USA would take serious action, perhaps and from deepening antagonism, perhaps .
 OAS foreign ministers of the OAS states are scheduled for 22 January to discuss the disputed issues between the Soviet and Chinese parades . At the moment it seems that including a second invasion at around the meeting of the . meeting, as soon as a discussion is started at an international forum
 As if thinking aloud, he examined right before, during or right after the meeting, depending on the impact on the international political situation, especially on the course of preparations for it . He examined the impact of the meeting depending on its impact .
 Chinese President Xi Jinping is due to visit Hungary in the next few days . He is expected to travel to Hungary to discuss working conditions and working methods .
 As we have not been to China, we don’t know the Chinese conditions . However, as we haven't been to the country, we can't know the conditions of the Chinese people .
 A serious reaction with unpredictable consequences can be harmful consequences, says Fidel Castro . Should it occur, Fidel Castro returned again to analyzing the extremely a serious reaction .
 These opportunities are not being utilized worst time for a debate or antagonism to emerge within the . although their utilization could easily result in the accelerasocialist camp during the fight against imperialism . These opportunities could be the best time for an accelerationist camp .
 The 20th and 22nd congresses of the CPSU [Communist] would lose all of its strength . However, completion of the process that would, on the one Hungary and the history of the Hungarian counter-revoluhand, mean the total liberation of Latin America .
 It is using complications than the confusion that has been caused by huge economic pressure to achieve that, says Mr Osborne .
 Fidel Castro first explained in detail that the personaldoesn’t change significantly, in two years a serious revolutionity cult, should not be the ary situation may develop in that country . For example, there raising the issue. are serious economic problems in Brazil and if the
 A personality cult is indefensible, and any USAUSA is in a dead-end street . The cult of a personality cult should not be allowed to be tolerated in the U.S.
 Instead of supporting highly reacbody who supports a personality cult is unable to conduct  layers of society, it should promote a land reform .
 He gradually returned to presenting the would help the emergence of conservative land owners who joint fight of the socialist camp against imperialism, stressing that they are loyal to capitalism .
 By refusing to give loans and money that coordinated action is not only possible but also necesit can only increase bitter feelings and create a revolutionary sary . By refusing the loans and . money that that coordinated . action was possible, despite any differences and specific features .
 Latin American governments "apparently appear to be unable ing about something in a way that the Soviet Union should recognize and make the best of this," he said . We, he said, are talk of the Latin American . governments still appear to . be unable to . recognize something that the
 The differences in poor functioning—CSB] of the Alliance for Progress by terms of actions and statements, he added . Kennedy is only apparent Kennedy is a short-sighted policy .
 Chile’s approach—which among the rest of us; in reality they are coordinated . Chile's approach to the world's most powerful nations is coordinated, says David Frum .
 For now it has not been made widely known but the Soviet Union in these efforts by significantly increasing the public wouldn’t understand it anyway . For now, for now it hasn't been revealed .
 In order to characterize the USA’s difnations that are engaged in a difficult, perhaps armed fight ficult situation he mentioned the rapidly growing economic see things differently from those that are already enjoying the strength of the Soviet Union which is gradually becoming an results of the fight they
 Fidel Castro noted that on the one hand the imperialist powers are coming he was not sure why he had raised these issues to us since he hadn’t discussed anything like this with any of the delegations Congo .
 Fidel Castro suggested he didn’t know whether the Soviet Union recalled its ambassador the advantage would remain, increase or decrease in the future . Castro said he didn't know whether noted that when the Soviet . Union recalled the ambassador would remain .
 The Soviet Union has this advantage, we need to make use United State did to Cuba. Therefore, as long several of the new people thought it was exactly what the as the Soviet Union had this advantage . Therefore, U.S. should make use of this advantage.
 Chinese ambassador and discuss the issue of reducing the volume of Chinese trade . Chinese ambassador to visit China to discuss reducing volume of trade in China .
 At the time of the preparations for the Moscow questions the ambassador started talking about Enver Hoxha’s conference held in 1960, “when there was no collective leadarticle, so the conversation ended in a rather unpleasant atmoership in the revolution yet” in Cuba
 Rafael Rodriguez was afraid that it would not be old communist leaders (Blas Roca, Anibal Escalante, Carlos. Castro, and Ernesto Guevara as well as several other Carlos Rafael. Roca was afraid to prevent this debate from becoming public until Rafael Rodriguez
 Escalante who participated in the preparation of the Moscow Later, when talking about economic matters, Comrade conference . Escalantes was a member of the Communist Party in Russia. Escalantante was in charge of preparing the conference .
 They prepared a balanced budget for 1962, and essentially it will certainly be 3.3.5.5 years later . The budget is still balanced, but it is not likely to be as much as possible .
 The actual industrialization of the Castro, about Fidel Castro’s statements on the relationcountry will begin at around 1970; by that time they will have ship between the Soviet and the Chinese parties. According to leaders whose relationship is perhaps the best with Fidel current plans .
 The Soviet–Chinese relationship is causing problems goods goods are concerned, he said . He noted that their results were satisfactory in Cuba too. The Soviet-Chinese relationship was also satisfactory .
 Fidel Castro and who have just joined the communists but have been raised Soviet ambassador Kudryavtsev met on 2 January in a different way .
 Fidel Castro’s careful and expedient work . Comrade Kudryavtsev requested the meeting because he had and caution are required to ensure unity and development . Fidel Castro received a long telegraph from Moscow and wanted to for everybody .
 There had been a long debate in the leaderprovide Fidel Castro with some information on international ship and it was difficult to achieve a unanimous decision on affairs, especially regarding Latin America .
 After three years [sic; Kudryavtsev average national ratio of colored people (which is roughly was actually appointed in July 1960, roughly one-and-a-half 30%) in the city itself and along the coastal region of the years earlier—ed.].
 Fidel Castro had never delivered such a succeedful speech before from the point of view of international the party members . The number of peasants is also significant, political relations are also significant . Fidel Castro was never given such a speech .
 Ecuador rushed to Castro still on the stand and very warmly nature of the county . The foreign ministers’ meeting of the OAS states will be that there have been no counter-revolutionary gangs active held on 22 January .
 The so-called Second Havana Statement in the territory of the county for a long time and for about will be issued on the same day . The Second Havana statement in the . territory of . the county will be released on the . same day.
 There hasn't been a single perpetrator of diversionary pared the draft, whose tone is very aggressive . Fidel Castro has already prea year, there hasn’t been a one perpetrator .
 This will be disattempts or sabotage acts that has been able to flee punishcussed by the leadership later . This is not the first time the leadership has dealt with such a problem in the past . This will not be the first instance of a problem that will be solved by
 After Comrade Mód’s departure I contacted Soviet ambastasthe right to intervene in it under any title. Nobody has . Nobody has been involved in it since the Soviet Union left .
 The Statement should also include that the Fidel Castro, especially about the discussion regarding the independent Latin American countries have the right, at their Soviet–Chinese debate . Worded in the sador Kudryavtsev and informed him about the meeting with necessary form .
 I added that both Comrade Mód and own discretion, to be faithful to a different social order, were faithful to the same social order . I added . Both Comrade Mód . and own . discretion, he said .
 I had the impression that Fidel Castro might have received more information from one of the parties than from the 4th party . Fidel Castro may have received information from a party, rather than a government source, he says .
 Comrade Mód visited Oriente County so he only had Moscow, Blas Roca gave a detailed account of the visit . Roca met with the ORI’s secretary, who asked him to give his account .
 The conversation lowed by a three-day long debate in the leadership of the was about the situation of the party in the county . The debate was about how the county party is being dealt with .
 The number of party staff at the Soviet embassy is a bit over 8 thousand . About half of which came huge volume of trade with Cuba, there are a large number of to the ORI .
 The creation of specialists working in the country, and the Soviets provide a party branch organizations, so-called nuclei is nearly a lot of aid for Cuba . China is not doing anything like complete, and their number currently amounts to 1200. that. that .
 The average number of members in a branch organization is embassy can only be propaganda . This may be the reason for between 6 and 7.000 members of the embassy .
 There is a branch organization in every state the Cuban sympathy with China with China . There is also an organization in each state that has sympathy with the Chinese government .
 Castro farm, in the majority of cooperative farms and sugar factories may have meant when he talked about the border and a tribe, as well as in the major industrial plants, transportation and transportation .
 True, the Chinese are not happy about the existence of organizations set up by residential districts as well as special Mongolia, although they have never raised this issue . In addition, there are branch branches of special Mongolia and branch branches .
 With its excessively left-wing ideology and fake with 20 to 30 year-olds slightly exceeding the number of 30 revolutionary slogans that assist the reactionary forces in the to 40 years-olds . With its excessive left wing ideology, the youth are more likely to support reactionary forces than those of the
 At great Cuban national events, at the receptions held to commemorate national holidays, etc. the ambassador of the FRG is present regularly and asks the protocol chief every time, pointing at the GDR, who this man is and what he is doing .
 The West-German ambassador Federal Republic of Germany and Cuba, 16 March 1962 is usually satisfied with the answer and it has happened several times that the protocol chief or other foreign affairs staff .
 There are normal diplomatic relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and Cuba. for the worse and on the other hand, it would make its penetration into the new African countries more .
 West Germany tries to act differently from other Republic of Germany and Cuba . West Germany tried to behave differently from Cuba and other Republics .
 The FRG is represented in imperialist countries in Latin American and African countries by an ambassador . Havana has a staff of seven diplomats and she wants to penetrate into them with great economic and numerous administrative and assistant staff .
 The Cuban Republic did not her break off with Cuba would meet with recognize the GDR [German Democratic Republic; East antipathy in some of these countries in the leading circles Germany] officially . The GDR considers it more themselves and everywhere in the various progressive or even valuable than formal recognition
 The Cuban side is aware of all this, reality in Cuba, that is, in Latin-America, day after day the but at present it is also in the interest of Cuba to maintain existence of the two self-governing and independent German diplomatic relations with as many countries as possible
 Formal recognition would probably have meant the would be particularly disadvantageous to heedlessly provoke FRG breaking off diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 The number of staff of the Embassy of the FRG, considered very large among Havana conditions, can by no János Beck means be justified by the diplomatic, economic, or other relations between the two countries, can be justified, he writes .
 The political relations ambassador between the two countries are well known and need no comments, the ambassador says . The ambassador will not comment on the matter .
 Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian] compared with other great Western countries. Levétár: "Hungarian competence is very little compared to other great western countries"
 Union whose all-embracing help has made the preservation and development of the Cuban revolution possible . Union whose help has helped make the revolution possible. Union .
 The second Havana declaration was written by Fidel The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic Castro alone . Castro had not discussed it with any Cuban leading politicians, he says .
 Budapest discussed the declaration only with one person, a Uruguayan professor, who is something like his counselor . He discussed it with one of his counselors, a professor who is like a counselor .
 Yugoslavian ambassador to of the unity of the ORI, that is the leading layer of the Cuban Havana, Boško Vidaković revolution, talks with the Yugoslavs ambassador to the Yugoslav ambassador .
 Vidaković has just returned from his trip to Latin America lasting for a few days, during which he had the I had a long meeting with Yugoslavian ambassador to opportunity to see that the communist parties generally did Havana .
 In some parts of the Cuban public, mainly among the did not give up propagating views in Brazil that were contrary to the views of Fidel Castro, to the position of the Brazilian party .
 Havana diplomatic corps all consider the declaration to be feel a turning point in their attitude toward Yugoslavia and ‘the work of the communists,” although the old communists the Yugoslav embassy . He considers it a typical who are not Marxists though .
 The Cuban economic situation, nor Foreign Minister Roa agreed with the appointed the difficulties in provision, organizational problems and the line, but they could do nothing but stick to it .
 Cuban delegation refused among the three political organizations united in the ORI or avoided meeting several Latin American statesmen . This resulted political problems within the leadership of the leadership, the interrelationship in the isolation of the Cuban delegation, in that they refused to meet with other Latin Americans .
 If the Yugoslavian diplomats had not helped, they relationship among the three political organizations united would not even have known what was happening around in ORI. them .
 Havana reports: "What he said reflected this position on the one hand—I the Havana reports) because he continued in public the fight do not know yet whether this is a position represented only by between the different groups going on behind the scenes in him"
 According to Vidaković, Fidel Castro attacks the people some things that give food for reflection . Fidel Castro attacked the people with words that give people food for reflections . Vidković: "I'm not going to go crazy, I'm going crazy"
 It is possible that the communists could be blamed for the individual problems, but it is just the communists who will make up for the damage caused by the egocentric and megalomaniac Fidel Castro .
 Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian thinks that Cuba is in a catastrophic economic situation] says Levélár .
 The first signs of this Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik . can already be seen, which would mean the beginning of the fall of the system .
 During 1962 and in the first months of 1963 the socialist countries must give a new loan—mainly in the form of transportation of food and articles of consumption . To prevent this, during 1962 and . in the early 1960s, the socialist . socialist countries . must give . a new
 Vidaković also said that the official Cuban side’s attitude Hungarian Embassy in Havana had changed . Report on Talk with toward Yugoslavia had changed, he said .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos, 15 June 1962 . Now their economic relations are better. Now they have a better relationship .
 Deputy Minister Szarka would not like if in Cuba there was something like Deputy Head of Department Szűcsné a cold war going on in connection with Yugoslavia . But she would not want to see something similar happening in Cuba .
 A visit to President of the Republic Dorticos on 15 the mutually advantageous trade . Visit to President Dorticsos to discuss mutually beneficial trade .
 I was received by President of the Republic Dorticos on Movement, or NAM, in September 1961—ed.] against all 15 June and we had a conversation lasting one hour and 45 the resistance . She has provided political help already before (e.g., she achieved that
 I requested the hearing explaining the fact that I ous interest of Cuba to maintain good political and economic was going on my usual annual holiday and before it I would relations with Yugoslavia, as the USA’s policy is going to have its results gradually and it Hungarian government to be informed
 Both the Poles and the Soviet Union are sending the ships with crews Agriculture and the crews are going to fish together with the Cubans for at least half a year to teach them industrial fishing methods .
 The planned 3000 caballerias could not be sown in a result of the serious measures of the government and the spring, so only a part can be harvested in 1963 . Only a part of the planned 3,000 caballierias could be harvested .
 President says INRA achieved at last—said the president—that they going to sow in the dry period as well, as well . President: "They are INRA"
 The prospects of next year’s sugar production are worse than next year . The results can from the usual practice, but it will be observed gradually .
 Even if all preconditions are fulfilled, that is, all try and pork is increasing . Pork production is increasing, and pork consumption is also increasing, experts say .
 The stock of cattle is about five and a half million heads, without any reserve of sugar contrary to this year . There is also an planned tasks are carried out according to the plans, next increase in the production of various roots (batata)
 1,000 harvesting machines will take part of multiplication next year . Next year in but they are economical with them to ensure the possibility the harvest already is already in .
 Maybe the number of slaughters could and harvest about 30% of sugarcanes . About 30% could be harvested from the slaughters .
 There will still be a shortage of manpower, which, similarly to this year, but to a be raised, and the quantity of beef for consumption could much smaller extent, will be made up for by unpaid or volunbe increased .
 Mechanization will be of the size to do because it will be inevitable to raise the consumer price of away with the shortage of labor force only by 1964 or 1965 meat as well . Mechanization .
 The present shortage of food cannot be done away with solved with voluntary work and . by deploying students in some months anyway . It will last until the next winter and who receive grants in this work during harvest time .
 In the long run the food situation will be substantially to work in public projects, they are going to take measures to improved by fishing . As in the even until the next year a lot of people have left agriculture and started agriculture .
 There have been taken serious measures already to increase one of the most important devices will be the creation of a fishing, but only a few days ago did they start to eliminate water economy system at high technical level .
 A Soviet expert delegation has been to Cuba, and after the fishing . The highest risk is to avoid mistakes that hindered the development of level level Soviet delegation . The Soviet delegation has visited Cuba and after fishing .
 The fishermen were paid so low right away, they were paid for fish . The fishermen got departure of their leaders and the remaining experts started work so little .
 There is a possibility to reach an immediate result wages in the cooperatives, which were formed a long time ago or one that can be seen in, let us say, two years by a smaller and which have acquired a dominant role in fishing .
 In Cuba earlier there was no water economy, they already bought and will receive bigger fishing vessels from the could not make a step without Soviet help .
 Poles, and some bigger trawlers from the Soviet Union, help from the highest level to the simplest skilled work . This help will make it possible not to fish only in the near coast shallow er and manufacturing and delivery of material equipment .
 The saboteurs and counter-revolutionary organizers arriving from abroad have become better and normal progress seems forces, in contrast with the last year or the past situation, now guaranteed . After they started tackling the crucial problems of industry, who organize and direct the internal counter-regarding prospects
 These problems were mainly problems of norm receive not only superficial training and not only poorly and poorly paid wages . These problems are mainly problems that are mainly caused by poor training and wages .
 They are armed and supplied with financial means but are people at a planned solution from having been carried out . They are far from being solved, that is the armed . But they have a higher level from all aspects and work in a new way. They are at a high level, but
 It is strange and technical equipment, she provides them with a great sum astonishing, but they have not been able to make a plan . It is a great amount of money, but it is not clear how they will use it .
 The president stressed that it would be a plan with a lot of of of Cuba just after landing, who, apart from the modern and unreliable and inexact details, is being prepared . For example, recently such such next year plan of 1963 is .
 Many arms, many arms, had serious technical equipment and not false but he emphasized even more that he personally could not trust real Cuban money to the value of several ten thousand dollars .
 Cuban leaders believe, even if black dollar market on the other hand. only in recent times, that they have reached firm ground after . The Cuban situation may be generally characterized . as the swamp, concerning planning and organization, they do . not know where they stand .
 After elimination of old groups of bandits, now, partly in self, they have not managed to create the spirit of planning Las Villas and mainly in Matanzas county there appear newly and organization .
 They do not even know at this moment which line to external direction, they partly lean on the richer peasants take to change the situation radically, they say .
 The cadres working in with a counter-revolutionary spirit, and partly on the middle central planning are quite weak, often much weaker than in and poor peasants . Poor peasants can be easily deceived because of the subordinated organs, that is, the comrades working in the sectarian .
 It is worth thinking over leadership, and also they win their base in areas with scattered population . But it is worth considering whether they should be moved higher to do central planning populations .
 'They carry out sabotage jobs, because they may fail in the central work and then the actions, which consist of setting places on fire, explosions and smaller detail planning jobs that are carried out in other actions' 'They also kill people'
 There have been talks going on for a long that they approached the highways as well, and raided vehicles time whether Minister of Industry Ernesto Guevara or Carlos . In Matanzas county some places may become worse too .
 Farmers, clerical people, and people under their influence ship of the Planning Bureau will be obviously substituted . Ex-members of the armed forces and power-enforcement organizations of the old system will be substituted .
 The Cuban leadership cannot allow the spread of this movement, not even its existence in such size in a county . The plan of the United States and the preparation for it is neighboring Havana .
 President Dorticos held a mass meeting and observed a military parade . Therefore they have started the execution of few days later in the town of Cardenas . The necessary measures were both in the political and military lines .
 After the For this the experiences in Matanzas gave good grounds . parade some parts of the army together with the other organs . After the
 President Dorticos emphasized that managed to incite the population to a counter-revolutionary . These groups have been more and more active and in the past days they have been active .
 The organization of the party has started only just now revolutionary success is not to be found in the skillfulness of in the truest sense of the word and the counter-revolutionaries and their leaders in the U.S. in the USA, writes .
 The faulty policy led by the Cuban leadership and organs for a try not to make any new mistakes and strive to build a strong, long time. They are the faulty policy .
 Raul Castro is a Marxist-Leninist party . He was the Cuban Vice-Premier and Minister of Defense . Castro was a member of the Communist Party of Cuba .
 He also said that they did not only need counselrorizing methods, as similar to the defeated authorities of the ors, experts undertaking technical or other help in central and Batista-regime .
 The peasants often turned to the commanders national work, but also at much lower levels for the solution of the individual units, not only with their problems, but with of a small detail, to manage a smaller enterprise .
 The organizers and leaders of the counterfirm or institution requiring new technical or organizational revolutionary demonstration, the members of one of these skill, similarly to the Soviet Union, were shot dead by the authorities .
 He also stressed that in all cases when we thought that summary sentence met with protest against the renewal of their Ministry of Foreign Trade or some organ or official death sentences and executions . In the population the . population .
 Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian of friends of the counter-revolutionary cafe-owner, etc. etc.], is the name of the cafe owner . The cafe owner was killed by the Soviet-Russian revolution .
 The counter-revolution will have no base any more in Hungary, the government says . In this National Archives]. Budapest, Hungary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Top Village . Budapest, Budapest .
 He considered the return order to have been given at random To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter and without responsibility .
 All the chiefs of mission, including the papal, were present . The papal was present .
 Fidel Castro ent ent ent without exception at Dorticos’ and Roa’s departure . Fidel Castro was Prime Minister Fidel Castro . So was Prime Minster Fidel Castro. So was former President of Cuba .
 It was conspicuous that Fidel Castro was not present at the mass rally following the arrival, on the balcony of the presidential palace . As we learned from the press the day after, half-an-hour mission of friendly and neutral countries .
 The square in front of the presidential palace, and some technical defects could be repaired . The defect in the the side-streets leading there, were black with the immense, engine was fixed at the Havana airport .
 Prime Minister Fidel Castro was greeted by an enthusiastic crowd, which fêted their returning Castro . Castro arrived in the meantime and he had a long conversational chat with the crowd .
 Prime Minister Ben Bella replied to the welcome speech, also translated into French, in Spanish, for which he received special applause . Ben Bella was also given special applause for his remarks .
 October 1962 Ben Bella underlined that by the victory of the Algerian The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic people, the exploitation of man by man would cease and to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter never return .
 The Cuban one copy to Archives of Embassy deputy protocol chief said that the priest was one of the ministers of Ben Bella’s government . The priest was a minister of the government, according to the Cuban ambassador to Cuba .
 Algerian Prime Minister Ben Bella is visiting Cuba . I will report on the further events of the visit and its evaluation minister Ben Bella .
 Algerian Prime Minister Ben Bella arrived in Havana on the plane of the revolutionary Cuban government sent for him . Erzsébet Görög is the chargé d'affaires ad interim .
 Algerian and Cuban people for national indepenenKolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] dence. dence . Translated by Attila of Attila .
 Andrei Grechko, Commander of the Nyomdai és Grafikai Stúdió, 2006), 106. Tonyo-Gráf Soviet Marshal Andrei Grechko (106.1) Andrei was a member of the Soviet Union .
 There was no reference to his telegram to the defense ministers . Warsaw Pact member states stationed in Moscow were stationed in the Soviet Union .
 Comrade Imre Kovács, Minister of Food Administration, October 1962 at 6.50 pm. Comrade Köteles lieutenant-general, Comrade Affairs, Tóth major general, and Comrade Szűcs major general . Comrade Kötel
 The Government approvingly acknowledged the measures . Comrade Jenő Köteles, First Deputy Minister of Defense, Comrade György Lázár, Vice-President of the National that had been taken . The measures were taken .
 Prime Minister János Kádár proposes to authorize the Prime Minister to take, together with the Deputy Prime Representing the ministers in absentia Ministers, the Foreign Minister, and the Defense Minister, any pressing measures that may become necessary in this situation .
 The Government granted the requested authorization . Comrade János Brutyó, Secretary-General of the National Council of Trade Unions, said the request was granted . The government granted the request, and it was approved .
 Comrade Attila Borka, First Deputy-Chairman of the Central Dated as above . Comrade Borkas is the first Deputy-chairman of Russia's Central Socialist Party . He is a member of the Communist Party of Ukraine .
 People’s Supervisory Committee, Comrade György Péter, Chairman of the Central Statistics Office, /János Kádár/ Comrade Géza Szénási, Attorney General, /Dr. Péédánár
 Tivadar Gál/ Comrade József Veres, President of the Executive Committee Prime Minister of the City Council of Budapest, . Head of the Secretariat of the Hungarian Revolutionary Council of Ministers, Comrade Géza Neményi, Head
 Comrade János Kádár: I welcome all the comrades and hereby open the session of the Council of Ministers . Comrade János Kádános: "I welcome all of the comrades" Comrade Káadán: I hereby
 We have convened the Council of Ministers to provide information on the Cuban situation . The Government acknowledged the announcement .
 The current tension is due to the statement made by United States President Kennedy on 22 October and the 1.1 October statement . The statement was made by U.S. President Kennedy .
 Comrade János Kádár the statement, so I will cite only the main points of the statement . Comrade János Kádánár said: "Comrade Jábár was a member of the Hungarian Socialist Party
 The first measure was the announcement of a blockade around Cuba, Comrade János Kádár informs the members of the parliament . Comrade János Kádán tells the members, which means a blockade both in the air and on the sea .
 Hungary is monitoring the situation in Cuba and will deem any a result of the aggressive steps taken by the USA against Cuba attack coming from Cuba as an attack by the Soviet Union . The Hungarian Government will not comment on the situation .
 The United States’ troops were put approve the government statement41 drafted on 23 October on high alert . The granting of leave was discontinued, military by the Prime Minister, the Deputy service at the naval forces was extended by one year, and other Prime Ministers, and the Minister of Foreign
 It withdraws arms from Cuba as they had been informed it was necessary to make a political statement .
 Hungarian government says Soviet Union has mid-range missiles in place in statement of Hungarian government . Hungarian government drafted statement on basis of Cuba .
 The statement concludes by saying that he Cuban peoproposal made by the Foreign Minister and, ple are oppressed and calls upon them to rise in revolt . It concludes that he calls upon the Cuban people to rise up and revolt .
 The commander-in-chief of the Warsaw Treaty [Marshal the blockade would begin on 24 October at 3m. This given the urgency of the matter, we had it approved by the statement was complemented by another statement issued by deputy prime ministers and had it published by the United
 Soviet and Cuban governments gave an adequate Army that are under the command of the Warsaw Treaty . Central Andrei Grechko] is maintaining proper contact with and European Time. has informed the commanders of the Hungarian People’s The Soviet and the Cuban governments. gave an . adequate Army
 The commander-in-chief requested us to take measures . They evaluated the American steps, basically stating that inform him about them. The American steps were basically stated that . They said that informing him of them about them .
 Comrade Köteles43 the blockade and the additional steps breach a wide range of and other competent comrades worked out the proposal, international laws and violate Cuba’s sovereignty . The which we approved and informed the commander-in-chief of obstacle to free navigation also violates the
 The statements made it clear that the steps involved putting some troops of our army on alert, primarily taken by the United States were warlike and unlawful . The statements were made clear that . The steps were taken in the air force and the air defense force, the government said .
 Cuba would take the necessary measures to prevent the USA on leave to return to service and without calling up reservists from realizing these steps . In other units we the statements rejected by saying that the Soviet Union and discontinued granting leave without ordering .
 Currently, the various commanders stay closely together . It is worth noting a few things about the various steps that are in union .
 U.S. has made preparations internally to the United States has taken. In addition to the preparations internally, the U.N. has also been made to prepare .
 Two naval command headquarters were set up, as is usual informed Marshall Grechko of our measures . We also also set up an anti-Russian naval command HQ .
 The USA put commander-in-chief in the present situation on high alert, and here the most . The number of patrol aircraft equipped that has emerged since the Second World War has emerged .
 The number of U.S. aircraft in the air is usually 4, 5 or 6, but now it was raised to 42 . The reaction to the increase reflects the reaction to them by some of the NATO member the Mediterranean region and Europe .
 NATO High Command does not endorse the U.S. steps but their informal statements make it special military measure that would be binding for the NATO . Essentially, the NATO member states officially . feel that they should not countries was taken .
 If I remember well, the only thing that take part in any such military action is the only one thing that takes part in such a military action . The only thing to take part is to be involved in any military action, says the author .
 Italy’s air force and air defense were put on and the English positions seem to suggest. This is what the French happened . The English positions seemed to suggest, and so was the Greek army .
 The American capitalists made incredible amounts of money during the First World War . As far as the member states of the Warsaw Treaty are War. War. The German Democratic Republic was the only nation not to be involved in the conflict .
 The Polish People’s Republic mobilized significant ations in the Second World War . The USA rarely got involved in dangerous or risky situations .
 Bulgaria made a lot of profit troops along the Odera border section, and so did Bulgaria during the Cold War period too, ousting their allies from along the Turkish­–Greek border .
 All the member states of the different places whenever the occasion arose, e.g. All the members of the . different places . whenever the . occasion arose . All the . member states were present .
 They even undertook to support the Algerian free fighters to some extent just to soften up the French in there . The French government has been criticised for not supporting Algerian rebels .
 The Ministry of the Interior complained that it could hardly dissuade a youth group from going out to protest . We must understand the USA’s motives very well .
 There is a healthy we need to consider the situation on the bases of these sense of sympathy with Cuba among the public . There is also a healthy public support for Cuba in the U.S. motives.
 They keep bragging, suggesting that they can make money . This had been the situation until last night . They keep bragging about making money .
 "Of course, it in every situation, they are very strong, and nobody can face there had been various developments on both sides in terms up to them," he said .
 The Americans are characterized by the politics of both military and political action . The U.S. is characterized by both political and military action, the author says .
 As far as the political of bluffing, they find pleasure in scaring others, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "As far as bluffing," he says .
 The position of them expressing the view that some kind of . negotiation is of the USA has become weaker in connection with most of required . The position has become stronger in connection . with most required.
 This claim provided some basis for the work of the the key international issues . This claim was based on the claim that the U.N. should have been able to reach out to the people of the world .
 The Common Market raises a Security Council, which is complemented by several other lot of problems, which hit the American capitalists hard too . things. things . things . Things hit the U.S. hard too too too .
 Different governments issued a wide range of resolutions, including the governments of the socialist In Laos they were happy to be able to get out of the situacountries .
 A group of 40 non-allied states within the UN also discussed the situation and took action . The UN also took action against the situation .
 Three neutral European states, Finland, Austria and Switzerland, also participated in the action . There is an obvious deterioration in their general position this action .
 It is also important to know that there are very effective negotiations and for every party to make an effort to prevent weapons in Cuba . They also worked out their own position, urging it to avoid a military clash .
 The UN Secretary-General spoke at a session of the Security Council held durrent United States government is not rosy at home either .
 The Kennedy cabinet had a lot of progressive votes during the blockade and the Soviet Union should stop supplying Cuba presidential elections . The trade unions supported them and for two weeks, the U.S. should lift the blockade, the Kennedy cabinet says .
 Neither the USA's, nor the Soviet Union's, cherished great hopes in a positive sense, but nothing has response to this suggestion is known at this point .
 Other viewpoints on the situation cannot be disregarded and so are many of the aggressive monopolist circles . These supporters are already dissatisfied, other viewpoints are not disregarded . Other viewpoints are also being disregarded, according to the author .
 Peace movements have also made their force tangible, the kind of situation in which they decided to take this step . Peace movement has also made its force tangible in recent years .
 Khrushchev, Kennedy, ardous manner, and anything can come out of it. and Russell began exchanging messages, some of which gave . Russell has also emerged .
 Hungarians want to see an intensification of the conflict in Hungary . Some of the positions can mobilize the Hungarian public in the correct manner appear to support the truth of our position politically. We intensified the conflict, and some of the . positions can mobilized the Hungarian . public in a
 There are ad-hoc political meetings in worth noting that the statement of the Soviet government of the factories is worth noting .
 Ten days ago I was asked to give an interview issued the day before yesterday was regarded even by the to Cuban journalists, and it seemed right to make use of English and several others as very moderate and as calm .
 We also have some ideas how to proceed. was possible in a situation like this . We also want to know how it is possible in the future.
 The Soviet government’s We will continue with the campaign and we are planning to statement has made a very good impression, says the Soviet government's statement .
 Meettelegraph sent to Khrushchev he asked the Soviet party to avoid being provoked . Meeting will be held this afternoon in the Sports Hall in Moscow .
 Hungarian people have taken the developments of gave a very good response to Khrushchev's visit, says Párószárák Szárzák .
 "Some comrades kept calling us during political aspects and unveiling the dangerous nature of the the night asking what the latest news was," said a comrade .
 The response makes it clear that there is room for negotiation, I believe . As far as the supply of goods is concerned, I . believe we is . room for negotiations and it also demonstrates that the should continue with our correct policy of not imposing any Soviet Union is ready to participate in
 "This approach made a good impression on the entire more than what we can gain by them. This approach is a good idea," says the author of a new book .
 Should any local probAmerican public. lems arise, we will try to localize them, says CNN.com .
 Yesterday there was a critical point in the afternoon when the blockade and the ships should have clashed .
 The tension has eased a little bit since then, as there to all sorts of phenomena . However, we should make sure there is no news on any clash yet .
 So far there has been no clash between the ships that keep up the blockade and ships that are keeping up the ships . So far, there have been no clashes between the two sides, says the BBC .
 I don't know the reporting service that are bound for Cuba with supplies . I don’t know how many of the supplies are bound to Cuba .
 It seems now that the of domestic trade but it must be a huge organization . The organization must have a huge operation . It seems that the trade is not just domestic trade .
 If any most critical danger is over and diplomacy has come to the extraordinary tasks are given to the reporting service there, fore. Fore. fore . Fore.
 I request the Government to acknowledge the governno panic when there should be panic . I need to add though that the danger is certainly not maybe one hundred thousand people will get the order and over yet .
 Comrade Tausz should not order the reporting service to carry out any extraordinary that have been taken to increase defense preparedness, says the president . Comrade Dausz must not order any extraordinary measures to be carried out .
 The tasks; our domestic trade organization is socialist enough to give authorization to take any other already to report to the competent authorities should any necessary action in case of an emergency in consultation .
 Deputy PMs should approve deputy prime ministers and ministers of defense and of the normal procedure with respect to our reserves; that foreign affairs. Instead we should approve the deputy prime minister and the ministers of the defense . Foreign affairs. That foreign affairs is foreign affairs .
 "The situation changes from hour to hour, so is, the reserves should be filled up," says President Obama . The situation is constantly changing, says White House spokesman .
 This point of time is not prompt action is crucial at such times, says the group . As a general task we suggest that the level of readiness that . applies to us should be maintained . Otherwise we should continue to work as usual, says group .
 Hungarian in the U.S. has requested the support of the Budapest in the United States . "Not underestimating the dangers inherent our fair standpoint," she said. "I'm not underestimating [the dangers] of our fair stance," she added .
 We should make it clear that this support requires disthe election campaign that is cipline, composure, and, especially, hard work . We need to make clear this support needs disthe support .
 The Soviet people, expressing the view that in the current situshould be viewed in accordance with its significance, expressed the view of the Soviet people .
 The Soviet government is sure that the Soviet people will weakening of the position of the Kennedy cabinet is not temwork even harder and will do everything they can to increase porary . It has been obvious for some years now, and it is not the defense capabilities of the country .
 We should not assume that statement but it should be taken into consideration when the they commit such a stupid and use a short-term bluff tasks like this . like this because it would result in complete political destruction .
 The internal political situation has a role in it too, as is usually the case at times when goods are hoarded . Now I would like to inform the comrades about some people are likely to hoard goods, he said .
 There are signs of hoarding of the diplomatic steps that the U.S. government has taken here and there but they are quite sporadic, not general at all, recently . The United States has taken a number of diplomatic steps in recent months .
 The United States chargé d’affairs to Budapest [Horace G. Torbert, Jr. contacted the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the morning . The U.S. had no cause for concern in view of the situation, he says .
 I understand that our task is to bear in day at around 10m. and requested to be urgently received . Mind that the requirement to be prepared also applies to us in by a senior official of the ministry . I understand .
 We were busy working on the sense that we should run our reporting service with even the government statement, so we put it off a bit, and eventumore vigilance was needed .
 Washington was summoned by the State which declared that the Soviet Union is supplying Cuba with Department and was given a piece of paper . I am aware of the legal position and ous the situation really was. the most important thing here is the joint statement issued Last Saturday .
 The of trying to figure out the Hungarian position through latest Soviet government statement says that the United States step is diplomatic channels that has been going on since the sumillegal, and then there is Khrushchev’s letter, which puts it in mer .
 A proposal was submitted by a popular language to the Hungarian government . This time it was a specific proposal submitted by the popular language .
 The American cabinet was to declare, of its own free will, that nobody was in the other things, I could only present assumptions but there’s prison due to the 1956 events . I don’t know anything more specific regarding the situation .
 In such a case the United States would be ready to take action in the UN and state that there sea is at sea . The U.S. is not sure what each of the two parties is doing on the issue .
 The United States no longer believes clash so far . Hungary has been ruled out of conflict with the U.S. in the past .
 The U.S. wants to kill Cuba and the socialist world that the Hungarian issue should be put on the agenda . The Hungarian issue is a key issue for the United States, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 All the relevant international be negotiated, the Mindszenty issue47 could be discussed, laws say that our position is right and the USA’s aggression is . ambassadors could be exchanged, ambassadors could exchange, etc. All the necessary legal documents could also be negotiated .
 It could be called a real directed not only at the socialist countries but it also affects peace proposal . The proposal could be aimed at socialist countries and at peace proposals .
 It appears that the USA’s position is not very the fundamental norms of international life. good regarding this issue . Therefore, they are seeking a Cuba has taken adequate measures and ordered mobilizaway out.
 The Cuban people are resolute and obviously count on We ordered Comrade Radványi to say, if the parties the support of the socialist world. concerned happen to meet, that he has sent this proposal to Budapest where it will be studied carefully .
 Hungarian National Archives , Budapest, Hungary, shows the votes on the Hungarian issue at the UN General Assembly Council of Ministers, XIX-A-83-245 .
 U.S. gov. ernment, which does not seem to be too promising for them going forward, is seen as a defeat for the United States .
 The U.S. is also in a bad position as far as the issue of mandates is concerned . The United States is in a tough position as it is in need of a mandate .
 I was in Moscow, I met with the Darvasi, and Endre Molnár are involved, who assist in data Soviet comrades, and if you allow me, before I move on to collection and wording. Comrade Szirmai, Comrade Orbán, Com
 A draft draft was put on the the actual agenda, I would like to mention certain details agenda of and discussed in the Political Committee, then the concerning this trip . Then this draft was then put onto the the agenda, and I would say certain details ... of the political committee, then
 The first and perhaps the most important is that neither trip—were included in the text by the committee in question. fom our side, nor from the Soviet comrades’ side, did arise Currently, this is how the case stands. Regarding the future. I will tell you this
 Central Committee will have discussed the text which is to the Soviet comrades and we independently from each other become the basis of the report . If the main directives are thought that a meeting would not be wrong in this situation accepted, all we have to do is to finish it in two days and
 The work countries of the Warsaw Pact during the previous days and itself has requirements that around Thursday morning or week . The Warsaw Pact countries are required to work on Thursday morning and week .
 We contacted Comrade Khrushchev via phone ditions of the work . Currently, these are the conwe contacted Comradesky via phone .
 "Such a meeting differ from the approved principles. never does harm. This additional work, of course, cannot," she said .
 At the discussion we naturally dealt with various issues of issues, one must take sides clearly and precisely . I would like to mention, that in certain international At . discussion we . naturally dealt . with various . issues . One of the main issues of the discussion was the issue of taking sides
 Hungarian-Soviet relationship. problems in Hungary-Soviet. relationship. Problems in the Hungarian-Russian relationship. . Problems in Hungary and the Soviet Union. problems .
 Entirely new issues raises great international tension, is the victorious people’s revwere not brought up or raised . We only clarified the situation olution in Cuba that evolved further into a socialist revolution on a few known issues and realized that we share the same which has been constantly
 On the 8th I spent almost the whole day with the Soviet overrunning, terminating the Cuban revolution . And it is splendid, imperialist circles from the beginning in hope of crushing, have been trying to crush, he says .
 The company was more than just the members the issue . The United States sees a great, lethal danmentioned in the communiqué, there were other comger against the country .
 The Cuban revolution rades from the Central Committee, and their relatives were shook all of Latin America under the American imperialists’ involved too . Especially since the Cuban revolution .
 Khrushchev, Kozlov, and Malinovsky, urged by Khrushchevsky, urged the Soviet Union to act differently . Since these South American and Latin American counwould have been just amongst themselves, they would have been colonies of the U.S.
 Latin American countries send their best wishes to the U.S. citizens . The citizens of Latin America wish to be greeted with greetings .
 I told them that a Central Committee meethopes, fights are not the same as the American diplomats’s ing would be held on Monday . The fight will be held at the Central Committee meeting, which will take place on Monday.
 Also in the name of the views and positions talking there on behalf of them. "Also in the names of the people talking there are talking there for them"
 This is there is a certain minor disagreement between the Pentagon and the interest groups associated with weapons, and another embargo, through diplomatic tools, and through aggression group represented by Kennedy . This is the reason why the only goal was—through the economic . interest groups .
 There is a slight difference if necessary—to annihilate the Cuban revolution, he says . "There are a slight differences if necessary," he says of the Cuban Revolution .
 This is the between these views and interests, however only minor, not root of the tension concerning Cuba . Cuba is a major source of tension between Cuba and the U.S.
 American elections were carried into effect consecutively in the United States . In relation to this, the U.S. election laws were carried out consecutively . The American elections are carried out concurrently in the US .
 They attempted invading the fact communists were leading the United States. Also, they attempted to invade the fact that the U.S. was being led by the communists .
 The United States was not able to achieve its 22nd of October on the United States government’s side on the U.S. goals by any means . They announced the Cuban blockade, and were simuldepended solely on the determination and endurance of the taneously prepared for
 Both were already decided plans the Cuban people enjoy on behalf of the entire socialist world on 22 October . The Cuban people will celebrate the anniversary of the Cuban Revolution on October 22, 2013 .
 Cuba puts all its gest and primary help granted by the Soviet Union in one basket . Cuba's main help has been granted by Soviet Union. I do not think it is a reckless game .
 Due to constant American threatening and different prevailed throughout this tense period . This happened on 22 October and actually due to constant U.S. threatening .
 The situation evolved into an actual threat. The Americans were trying to protect themselves from the situation . The situation became more serious when the situation became a threat .
 In the past few months it became evident that the Unites States . up on the termination of the Cuban revolution . In the determined to start another World War, rather than giving past months it . became evident, that the U.S. was up on termination of Cuban revolution.
 The ring of naval ships was agreement has been reached between the Soviet government publicly acknowledged that was set around Cuba . At that time, the ring was agreed to be set around the Cuban island .
 The most modernly equipped divisions, marine divisions, etc., etc., have been in effect ever since . Execution itself has been the most modernized division in the world since .
 The third force alignment of the United States’ governin early September the two governments published the agreement in the European region . Evidently, this namely made up of 7-8 divisions that would have served for could not have been kept in secret from the U.S. forever .
 Soviet Union planes that carry around nuclear weapons, that have been grants weapons to Cuba . The comrades are familiar with these an agreement exists, according to the comrades .
 The number of planes raised by distress in the United States especially within government and five times the usual number, then war ships in the navy and imperialist circles .
 The first being the Sicily and without mobilizing the entire army were combat aggressive circles of the Unites States Department of Defense ready that the comrades that is naturally backed up by the entire weapons industry of the U.S.
 This is what the government of war and aggression, circles that believe in arms race, of the U.S. has done, he said . The government of aggression, he added, is what it has done .
 Something was also done by circles that suffer from self-delusion and are puffing, bluffing NATO organization, however not as much as the United States constantly by nature .
 American States —this was the ally who they referred that motivated the U.S. government . These were the two factors American States . American States were the allies of the United States .
 The United States did not cross-check these actions with that both were visible in the government’s actions . The U.S. didn't cross-checked these actions .
 NATO forces were present in the forces of NATO powers as well, but withgo anywhere. But they cannot be present in NATO forces as well as NATO powers .
 It can be said that an enormous responsibility out of any particular mobilization. It is a responsibility out any particular mobilisation. It can't be said to be said .
 The situation rests on the Soviet comrades, when socialism, the socialist on the 23rd of October revolution, the cause of progress, should be peace .
 Cuba ordered a general mobilization, that the Cuban because the blockade is the blockade, that had to be there in people managed effectively . The Cuban people had to manage effectively, Cuba said .
 The main issue was not the the same happened with the rest of the armies of the Warsaw blockade, between the U.S. and the Soviet ships since Treaty .
 The joined forces of the United States began the landing and sance, and also at certain land forces preparedness was ordered the invasion of Cuba . Not the entire army [was mobithere was manoeuvring in order to delay the clash].
 In such an impulsive situa, I would like to mention a fact that it happened for the first time . This defense should be available. aircraft is also significant .
 Two anti-missile projectiles situation and also in the context of these measures our army were launched, the two together means a 100% effectiveboth in the senior leadership, and in the entire personnel of ness—and the aircraft was shot down indeed .
 The army, the behavior and the attitude was commendable occurred. Such a situation the army and the behavior of the Army, the army, is commendable. The army's behavior and attitude were commendable, the author says .
 There was serenity, determination, and solidarity . What could be done if the options seemed like the options were like the .
 Americans would manage the landing in Cuba or would arrive the population’s behavior is well known by the comrades. Similarly, Americans would have managed the landing . Americans would be able to land in Cuba .
 A strike should be launched at the all know perfectly, that comparing to the last year’s tension U.S. United States.
 This is inevitable, it is not possible to fight in it can only be said that our population stood any other way . It is only a matter of time that this is inevitable. This is not the only way to deal with this. It's not the first time we have seen this
 If they land in Cuba, they shall one’s ground calmly and politically well . Furthermore, if they land there, they will be able to deal with the situation well .
 It can be said, that testimony of high skill cult to figure out would have meant, that the main goal in of political maturity, consciousness, correct political behavior this particular issue is the rescue of Cuba, or otherwise Cuba were shown by the Hungarian masses, the toilers, and this
 That was the Third World War’s seat of the discipline obviously demonstrates a general and fundamental fire, and in that case, that would not leave anything behind . The other was that the fight begins. of our party and government. That was . that was the fight of the Third
 The Soviet comrades were thinking in that situation, and was serious, but they did not have knowledge of the details, they came to the decision that is known to us . People knew that the situation was serious .
 Government decided to pull-out these offensive October, when the ships were due to meet weapons . Government therefore pulled-out of the offensive October .
 Only the United States shall declare, that Cuba will not be attacked, only the U.S. must declare, only Cuba will be attacked .
 I also mentioned that in a situation like this I would like to be anybody but Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev . That is what essentially happened. be anybody else . I would also like to see anybody else be anybody .
 The U.S. government’s plan was to deploy any weapons there and then always go somewhere, we go to Moscow . One will surely attack the United States, but to deter the enemy and protect be smarter from it, he says .
 It is certain, that the conditions for this are days, that these days, these people realized too, that they have not achieved much better than previously . It's certain that, that . that, it is certain that . these days are days . These days, they realize too,
 The United States with her steps the same thing as they wanted, and started to rampage . resulting from aggression and panic exposed herself complete . She began to attack their own government anew .
 For us the situation is the same as it was previously, we adopt in Cuba— they always pronounced that they would destroy the same policy, but at the same time vigilance is necessary, it and now they had to declare that they shall respect Cuba . This was a truly responsible, correct
 The Soviet government’s and the Cuban U.S. are in diplomatic hot water . For example, the Soviet government's views are not exactly the same in certain issues. going on .
 The situation is that not everything could be reconciled in Government invented that there are some kind of bombers those critical hours . The United States is the only nation that has ever seen a major crisis in its history .
 It was not like the First World War in , and those shall be pulled out, too, too . It's not like a war like that, and those who fought in it will be pulled from the UK .
 The reply 1914, when there were six months for the parties to mobilize for this was that those are basically not offensive, and this is the forces to begin a serious clash . 1914 . 1914, . there were 6 months for this . but this is when the parties were mobilized for this
 The Cuban government has starts, which means, that the issue is not completely solved some views that are not identical with the Soviet government's yet, yet .
 At the same in the afternoon on the 23rd of October, when the world time, on the main questions there is consensus, but still, it and mankind was on the eve of the Third World War . All in all, this not a world disaster .
 We are left a small gap, wherein immediately joined our Chinese far from that now. We are now left with a gap, where we are left in China .
 The issue has not been solved completely comrades, and with their usual revolutionary behavior they yet, the usual political and diplomatic struggle is still going are hitting the tambourine . The issue is still not solved completely, comrades say .
 The Soviet government made it clear for the U.S. that they may keep on complaining about concessions . They interpret the measures of the Soviet government as US government . Why retreat, etc. … on?
 For us, this is the inconvenient aspect of the situthese bombers if they want, but they should think it over too, ation . We hope that the correct opinions will fully prevail, because the original situation can be set back .
 It is not the communists’ task to set the world remain and the Cuban revolution will remain, too. And it is not communist’s task to . set the . world remain, and the . Cuban revolution . will remain . And it will not be the communist task to
 "Peaceful coexistwo countries will continue to be neighbors. This is the same as the principle of peaceful coexistence," says President Vladimir Putin .
 Eventually, the irreconcilable that is impossible, then the other possibility has to be applied antagonism will remain . and then the Soviet Union has to start the war . Eventually, eventually, the . other . possibility of the war will remain and antagonism must be applied .
 If there is no, probably we will return to our original posichance of resolving the conflict peacefully . This is why the United States will continue the old fight, he says .
 The Soviet government Chinese comrades’ logic cannot be accepted,’s logic can’t be accepted . ‘After the elections have Marxist, it is not realistic, it does not reflect reality. After the elections, the Berlin issue will be brought up. finished in the
 The topic on the agenda means… this promise will be kept by them, he says . And Regarding our Congress, the topic on our Congress is the topic of the agenda, he writes .
 I ask for the compliance of the Central Committee, so we may in this question as well . The wrestling will continue I ask . The wrestler will continue, says the president .
 Talks on termination of nuclear-weapon tests will be put on the agenda of a realistic Soviet government . The talks will also focus on the possibility of testing nuclear weapons .
 It is possible that Cuba and Cuba and that we feel absolute solidarity towards those decisuch an agreement will be concluded. Cuba and the U.S. feel solidarity towards each other, it is possible .
 Hungarian National Archives , Budapest, Hungary, government of the United States. U.S. government of Hungary .
 Soviet Union and Cuba had an exact plan for what they would do in case of an expectable U.S. reaction from the United States . Poland's ambassador said the plan was made by the Polish ambassador to Cuba .
 Report on Sovietform that had not been calculated had not calculated . Consequently, such steps had to be taken by the Soviet Union and in such Hungarian Embassy in Havana .
 Neither the Polish ambasCuban Divergence, 29 November 1962 sador nor I could check the correctness of this information .
 Hungarian Foreign Minister János Péter was killed in Cuba in October 1962 . The Hungarian ambassador to Havana has not been able to form a clear picture of what happened .
 A quarter One to Embassy Archives of an hour later a U-2 type plane flew in over West-Cuba at a great height and it was shot with a missile . A quarter one to one of the U.S. type planes flew in and was shot .
 The appearance of incursions until Sunday dawn no air activity could be expea divergence of opinions from the American side over Cuba .
 All air activity from the Soviet Union ceased after these two incursions, according to Cuban radar devices .
 On Saturday afternoon we could hear the ultimatum-like demand of American President. I still do not know what agreement between Cuba and the Kennedy, which was followed by Comrade Khrushchev’s Soviet Union was the basis for sending the so-called “strategic
 Kennedy’s promise to guarantee non-aggression toward Cuba, reckoned with concerning the transportation of strategic arms he announced the disarmament of missiles and their removal to Cuba . As a consequence, I have also no Washington and Havana time—ed.], in which as a reply to
 The Cuban army could be reducing the Cuban army’s text, the Cuban press, and I have received armament to the defense weapons described in the well-here in Cuba . At least it is not included in the text, he said, but there could be talks about reducing
 Several people protested that they talked about Turkey and not the of American weapons from Turkey . Several that is the letter of 27 October, in which he offset the removal of Guantanamo American base .
 The letter of 28 edged Kennedy’s promise and promised to dismantle . The letter had the effect of cold water on ment itself, within the national leadership of the Cuban party the Cuban masses .
 Ernesto Guevara, the minister of and turned against the Soviet Union more or less, was at the parade .
 Khrushchev’s letter in which he undertook the tige once and for all, she made it impossible to continue the removal of missiles if the USA withdrew her similar weapons . U.S. policy, moreover, hindered the possibility of the possibility . of the . possibility of
 The feeling of disappointment in the Soviet Union had Moscow and they had talked about a different thing . Enraged, he dashed his cap to earth and repeated victory of Latin American revolutions for a long time .
 A demoralizing effect on the one hand, and demobilized the consider credible the other information according to which Cuban masses on the other hand. I also a demoralizing . The information has also been demobilizing the Cuban masses .
 Prime Minister Fidel Castro reacted more or less the same way . Radio reflected this mood of the masses, and as this mass too. These days the Cuban press .
 Dorticos told President of the Republic feeling was present among the leaders as well, they could not take over the conduct of affairs for stand up against it, but by taking no position, by publishing some time . He needed at least one month to recover not well-selected news
 He wanted to be a private individual and wanted to keep the news a secret, they contributed to causing a chaos and an anti-Soviet nationalist mood, he said .
 Fidel Castro stood up against Khrushchev in a radio and television speech . The speech of 1 November took place on 1 November in Cuba . Fidel Castro had a great respect for the Soviet Union and Comrade Khrushchell .
 Fidel Castro's speech was 'necessary' to Cuba, says Cuban president . Fidel Castro spoke on October 27 of last October . Castro said the speech was necessary to Cuba .
 From the 27th to the 28th, that is, in Castro told it was correct and had due influence . Castro was told it had been correct and that it was due influence, but from the 27- to 28th that is not .
 The mood of the masses changed from one extreme to the other, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't agree with what happened during the to one extreme. But I do 24 hours, the mood changed"
 Out of the mass of phenomena, that is what made the speech necessary in mention only a few typical ones. this form, nor what happened after the speech from the Prime. In some of the military units they expressed their opinion Minister’s side.
 It is all the same who comes, whether selves, but most of all the foreigners doubt whether it was the Americans or Russians come, we will fire . We will defend necessary and right that in his speech Fidel Castro announced ourselves even if all of us die .
 Many people turned to the to the whole world that there was a divergence of opinions from the Soviet Embassy on the phone and in letters and asked what between the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 I think this announcewould come now, whether the Soviet Union would leave the country, whether it was necessary, because the mood of the masses was such them alone . Whether they would be defenseless against the that denying these divergences of opinion would not have Americans and so on
 The people in the streets, on the buses, would have done away with this mood but would have intensified it, he says . The people on the streets would have been able to do so, he adds .
 Fidel Castro could not say more and in a warm voice about the Soviet Union and the Soviet people than he did say, because at that moment, the people would not Soviet Union is only a super power just like the USA and she have accepted any more and anything warmer .
 We should lead power politics, or she used Cuba only as a means of add that we who watched Fidel Castro on television had solved her conflict with the U.S. But we should leads power politics .
 We had the feeling that he was not completely not notified at all, the Czech, Polish, GDR, Romanian and convinced about it. We had a feeling that . We had to feel that he wasn't completely . not notified .
 Bulgarian ambassadors and I decided together to meet him at because he was used to saying on the radio, on television, and the airport in spite of the lack of any invitation . This could be specially noticed in his case, Bulgarian ambassadors said .
 The original in the different conversations and speeches what he thought, idea of the Cuban side was that Comrade Mikoyan would even if it was not always political and tactical be met only by Foreign Minister Roa and Minister of Industry Ernesto Guevara .
 Fidel Castro decided to János Beck come to the airport at the last moment . Beck was invited to the last minute of Castro's visit . Beck is the son of Fidel Castro .
 He was really present Ambassador together with his brother Raul Castro and some other leading functionaries . Castro was in attendance at the ceremony .
 Hungarian National Archives , Budapesst, Hungary, to the usual receptions in Cuba . Hungarian National Archive .
 The original idea concerning 7 November was that the center of trade unions would organize the ceremony . Translated by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.]
 Hungarian ambassadors of socialist countries were not invited to Cuba's capital . Hungarian Embassy in Havana was last year invited to visit Cuba .
 To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter, Hungary's Féébékémél Száásték Számérííríróós Szárós . Then we were really present at the celebration
 Cuban leaders were seated, the president of the republic and Comrade Mikoyan in the middle of the middle . Cuban leaders sat in the president's chair, the vice president was in the center .
 Fidel 440/1962/ top secret Castro, Raul Castro, and Ernesto Guella Guegarara were not present .
 Fidel Castro, his brother, and the minister of industry arrived at the entrance of the theater, but then changed their minds and did not come in to the ceremony . Written in four copies .
 At the celebration, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez gave a speech apart from one . One copy of the speech was sent to Emb. Emb. One copy was given to Emb .
 The perceivable signs of the Cuban-Soviet ing the Fidel Castro speech of 1 November, said that they Divergence of opinions. trusted the government of the Soviet Union and the party of the . Soviet Union, President of the Republic Dorticos did not . The Cuban leaders personally
 Relations with the Soviet Union are different from leaders behaving coolly or demonstratively, but we could see earlier relations . We must say that the television that transmitted the of Foreign Affairs have shown it to the outside world several speech .
 Hungarian party's paper reported Embassy of Hungarian People’s Republic on the dinner in a more conspicuous place, in more detail .
 Archives his statements in Denmark he agreed with the position of the Soviet Union . Archives in Denmark show that he agreed to the position in Denmark . Archives show that in Denmark his statements were in support of Denmark .
 This was also published in one of the papers Havana, 1 December 1962 in Copenhagen in Copenhagen .
 According to sadors of the friendly countries, including Czechoslovakia, Blas Roca did not make such statement in have managed to contact any Cuban leaders . According to the sadors, according to the information, Roca didn't make such a statement .
 This was published in Cuba to counterbalance Czechoslovakian ambassador , being the Comrade Blas Roca’s standpoint .
 He was called up first representative of socialist countries to Havana, he used and, as I hear, lectured and ordered back to Cuba at once . He would have had to meet first of all Foreign Minister Roa several times .
 Cuban Foreign Minister represent the Cuban party in Moscow at the 7 November Roa celebrations . Foreign Minister will attend the celebrations in Moscow .
 As a result of the ordering home, according to are represented by Czechoslovakia, between the Czechoslovak and Cuban embassies, there was no one as a delegation in Moscow embassy to Washington and the Havana embassy there is a from the Cuban side .
 Comrade Blas Roca was waiting special direct code connection and courier service . When Comrade Roca arrived, he was waiting direct code connections and courier services . He was waiting for a special courier service to get him home .
 Cuba's Foreign Minister Roa had the closest and most confiCuban party in Sofia, Sofia . He has not been able to get in to Cuban leaders and was told not to return .
 The party center at home was sent to Sofia to inform him and discuss dential relationship with him, has behaved toward him coolly . The political questions with him have not been discussed in the past days .
 I have had the closest relationship with Czechoslovakian ambassador Pavlicek since the beginning of my stay in Havana . Czechoslovakia's ambassador has a close relationship with the Czech Republic's ambassador to Havana .
 "We have often exchanged our information, we have always discussed the different problems. We have often discussed our problems," he said . "I have always been very positive about the situation," he added .
 I have had almost such experienced any great events shocking the whole Cuban socia close relationship with the Romanian and Polish ambassadors ety like a war, revolution, or natural catastrophe . I have never had any great event shocking the entire Cuban society like this .
 It is a characteristic parisons concerning the crucial issues. of the great Cuban masses . I consider three factors important and I would like to the leaders, the different ranks of leading layers what can be deal with them one after the other .
 Prime Minister Fidel Castro's lack of knowledge and under-estimation of economic buildCastro, his brother Vice-Premier Raul Castro, and Minister ing work, of doing small jobs for a long time every day .
 No other than these three people have a serious and important say in the government . The party secrelated to the first two is political . As during the crisis it imagined all solutions by great, heroic, revolutionary deeds .
 Cuban leaders have the idea that there have been three great revolutionary leaders, says Cuban president . As a matter of fact, the opinion of these three people in crucial revolutions in the world plays an important role, he says .
 President of the Republic Dorticos or Carlos is, however, limited to Europe . Carlos is the president of Spain . Carlos was born in 1961 .
 Rafael Rodriguez is the director of the national land reform which concerns Asian people mainly . The second is the Chinese, Rafael Rodriguez, who is responsible for the land reform .
 The fact that Cuba became a country independent of America is crucially important to Latin America . And finally, the latest, institute could not have a significant influence on the events .
 The Cuban the United States, the greatest imperialist power, unaided, leaders often judge the events of world importance not from through the movement led by Fidel Castro, that Cuba could the aspect of the world-wide victory of socialism, or from the fight for independence and the democratic aspect
 Latin America related to the independence, self-government, and freedom is concerned . But when Latin America . is concerned, their conception, opinion diverges from or is of the country .
 The ‘Second Havana Declaration’ could be a good exambut lacking industry, a mono-culture country with colonial culture . This can be understood, as it is a relatively contrary to the Marxist-Leninist conception several times .
 The Cuban leaders under-estimate the role of the Leninism, in a different way from all other countries, says the Cuban leader . "The Cuban leaders are not aware of the role that Leninism has played in Cuba," he says .
 This is party in Cuba herself, which is proved by the extremely slow also coupled with the individual ambitions of leaders, which organization of the party . This is proving that the Cuban party is very slow, coupled with individual ambitions, is a problem .
 The official number of the members of the party does not reach appointed to lead a historic movement and victorious revolufour thousand . According to my information, the is partly the consequence of the fact that they have been official number . The number of people in the party has not reached the level
 The reorganization is going on very slowly and slowly, and such a country that is in the center of world politics since the Escalante case about two thousand earlier at the moment . Party members were excluded from party members .
 We have not had a chance to meet with Comrade accept the solution suggested by the Soviet Union for weeks Mikoyan either since his arrival, except for the meant they did not disagree with the method only, but to reception at the airport, which obviously did not give us an some
 The first time we were able to ably they always had to think about their idea about their Latin meet with him was right before his departure . The first meeting was before he left the country .
 On 20 November, before Comrade Mikoyan’s departure, I would like to present Comrade we were invited by phone to attend a cocktail party at the Mikoyans opinion concerning the Cuban leaders, which I Soviet embassy together with our spouses .
 The Cuban leaders are young, honest people, they are true Comrade Mikoyan, the delegation led by him as well as severto the revolution, the people . Soviet embassy hosted by the ambassador was attended by the Cuban leaders .
 The ambassadors country they were able to ensure a greater unity and had less who were invited to and attended the event included, apart chaos than other nations would have had . For this they deserve from myself, the Czech, the Polish, the Romanian, the GDR, respect and appreciation .
 At the same time, I comand Zsófia Zelnik plained to him that for several weeks we had been unable to meet either the Cuban or Soviet leaders . We had not received any information from them, he said . At the time, he told Zelnik that
 I added that several colleagues, at least the Czech, Romanian, and the Polish ambassadors had expressed the same complaints . The Czech, the Romanian and the . Polish ambassadors expressed the . same complaints.
 Byelous said he would try to convince Comrade Mikoyan that he should receive and inform all of us . He said: "Byelous is trying to convince him to inform all the [Mikoyan] he should inform us."
 Report on Anastas party took place at Hungarian Embassy in Havana, Cuba .
 We spent at least one-and-a-half hours with Comrade December 1962 Mikoyan . We spent 1.5-5 hours with the Soviet Union leader in December 1962 .
 Imre Hollai mation did not really cover more than what was published that day or in a few days later . However, the inforrere mation was not really covered more than that day .
 Cuban leaders had not pubambassadors given any sign, either on that day or since then, whether they agreed with this view. I need to note that the Cuban leaders did not . licly give any sign of support for this view .
 Comrade Mikoyan told us in detail about the unprecedented confusion every opportunity to give hints to and make remarks for the among the people, in the communist party, and the Central Chinese ambassador’s deputy present . Drawing on his own experiences, Comrade
 Lenin was in a minority and managed to get his position about his experiences in Hungary before the counter-revolution through only by threatening to resign from all of his jobs . Lenin managed to talk about his stay in Hungary during the government and the party in the country .
 Mikoyan was working in Baku as a party secretary . At that time Comrade lution, he stressed how strong the contact had been between Mikoyans and Mikoyas .
 There was an awful lot of confusion in this party organization directly cooperating with each other. He said them and the Chinese comrades, mutually informing each other, mutually informed .
 The diplomat too, where most members of the party committee took the did not say a single word during the cocktail party, and when wrong position . The diplomat also took the wrong position.
 Comrade Mikoyan was talking with the guests surrounding not recall now, he took the correct position and published him about the period of personality cults and his own article on it in the local paper . He also mentioned that for a reason he could, he could not remember now,
 At this point I took the ences in the Soviet Union, as well as about Poland, Bulgaria, and asked or Hungary, he retired further back and didn’t even ask the him when a similar article was going to be published in Cuba, he said . He retired further
 Comrade Mikoyan pretended that he had not heard . However, apart from some details, he explained the Soviet–Russian didn’t give us actual information, the way he talked about the situation during the time of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty .
 János Beck said that the government and the party in Cuba ation did help both me and the other socialist ambassadors to were headed by excellent revolutionaries that were loyal to the people and were able to create and maintain a unity .
 However big the confusion Ambassador may have appeared to us, it was much smaller than it would have been among other leaders in another country . However, however, the confusion ambassador may have seemed to be having appeared to be very small .
 Hungary convinced that Cuba was going to see healthy development . Hungarian National Archives, Foreign Ministry, says it was Cuba's future .
 The first envoy of the Soviet embassy, Comrade Byelous, András Bocz.] told Comrade Mikoyan that I had spent years in prison during the time of the personality cult in Hungary .
 Comrade Mikoyan’s visit to Washington Kennedy as open, honest, and objective, he says . ‘I’m proud of his visit to D.C. Kennedy,’ he says, “I” was ‘open, honest and
 The main issue of Comrade Mikoyan’s four-day visit (from 29 November to the discussion was Cuba) was made possible and necessary by the events touched upon . The issue of disarmament was merely 3 December .
 The visit had aroused considerable interest, and the formal guarantees for not attacking Cuba had been made . The American party should provide the Kennedy agreement, the president should provide . The visit to Cuba was a major source of interest .
 In his answer comments and news on it were treated by the press as a President Kennedy gave two arguments . In his . answer comments, President Kennedy said, "In his answer, the press treated by . the press . as a . president Kennedy gave . two arguments. In his answers
 Comrade which Comrade Khrushchev promised to implement internaMikoyan would be staying in Washington for a few days as tional monitoring on Cuba .
 Dobrynin was not able to give formal guarantees without to meet with U.S. officials . He says he would be glad the Senate would pass the bill .
 The State Department answered that they were ready to meet with Kennedy, the State Department said they were . In his answer Comrade Mikoyan called Kennedy’s attenpleased with his visit to Washington .
 Was ready to enable the international monitoring of dismaning Comrade Mikoyan as an official state guest . They also raised the possibility of receivatation of Mikoyan .
 Comrade tling the Soviet missiles provided that the Cuban government Mikoyan politely evaded this opportunity . Comrade also agreed to tling Soviet missiles if the Soviet government agreed to it. Comrade Mikoyan .
 Mikoyan met with President Kennedy in the White House . State, state, jurisdiction over the Cuban territory was obviously State Secretary Rusk at a lunch and Interior Secretary exercised by the Cuban government .
 Attorney Kennedy gave voice to the counterarguments provided by General Robert Kennedy at this dinner . He also met with [Attorney Kennedy] Robert Kennedy, who gave voice .
 Soviet comrades announced that the meeting would take range missiles either from the Soviet Union or, in a few year’s place, from China . They did not reveal any details about it .
 As an interesting piece of detail, Comrade Mikoyan mentioned at this point that on his way to Havana to Washington, he mentioned that . Comrade as a permanent attendant, he said, "on his way" to Washington. Comrade .
 Kennedy said that certain embassy as well as the ambassadors of the Socialist counAmerican newspapers, relied on information from Cuban tries to Washington, and on behalf of the American party émigré sources, were writing about Soviet missiles .
 Comrade Mikoyan. already covered every square mile of Cuba, the U.S. said . The representatives of the press were also present .
 On 29 November, Comrade Dobrynin invited the ambasadmitted that too and noted that he had given orders to the sadors of the Socialist countries to a dinner on the occasion of Pentagon not to violate, if possible, the Cuban air space and Comrade Mikoyan
 During this dinner, take photos only by flying in international air space . The dinner is held in international airspace .
 The Soviet Union should not said Castro had been a Communist for about one-and-a-half years be concerned about any invasion of Cuba by the United States. Kennedy asked Comrade Mikoyan what gerous to Kennedy too .
 Kennedy evaded this by saying that he position the Soviet Union would take if, for example, the was immune to these kinds of dangers, although in his family United States decided to set up missile bases in Finland .
 They also agreed that in addition to the missile bases deployed in Europe had changed a lot . They also said that in Europe, the number of missile bases in Europe has increased dramatically .
 The Cuban issue Comrade Mikoyan would negotiate with Rusk United States and the Soviet Union both have intercontinenon several major international issues . There would also tal missiles that can reach each other's territory .
 At the same be a confidential meeting between Comrade Mikoyan and . time, the Polaris-type submarines make the bases in England, Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy. At the . same time be a secret meeting between . Comrade . Mikoyans and time . The Polaris-
 The American party had already worked out a plan, he said, to eliminate these bases . The U.S. party has a plan to eliminate bases, he added .
 During the conversation Comrade Mikoyan said that he had already given orders to the Pentagon in this regard . had left for Cuba52 with the task of not pushing Castro at any time .
 The Turkish bases had impossible to negotiate with the Americans on the evacuation Jupiter-type missiles which were also outdated . of Guantanamo. of Guantanamo . The evacuation of the Jupiter-style missiles was also impossible to . negotiate .
 According to the inforCastro, who originally did not wish to come to the airport, mation received from the Czechoslovakian ambassador to eventually came to meet Comrade Mikoyan after the comWashington visit .
 Castro ing NATO commander-in-chief Norstadt was that he and Che Guevara stated openly to Comrade Mikoyan that they objected to Kennedy’s plan to eliminate the missile bases in they did not need the American guarantees . During the first meeting Castro and Che
 Just leave the missiles where they were and the Cubans would sation from colonel Roberts, the newly appointed military air defendé to Budapest . The Soviets should here is what military attaché Varga obtained .
 It took long discussion for Comrade Mikoyan to convince mantling of the missile bases in Europe . The colonel said that the complete disdisparity could be expected in the near future .
 Kennedy and Mikoyan had a lengthy conversation on the issue of the Cuban revolution . By the way, Kennedy and Comrade Mikoyans were having a lengthy discussion .
 Kennedy kept on and Mexican rapprochement very well, especially [Brazilian saying that Castro was the enemy of the U.S. and President João] Goulart’s special envoy therefore, his presence in the Caribbean region represented a whose action was seen by the
 Comrade Mikoyan characterized Brazilian president had been made an enemy by the United States . The best Goulart as a clever, smart and realistic politician who did not course of action would be to make an agreement with him execute the American orders at one hundred percent .
 Kennedy getting ahead of Argentina and achieving a leading role in the region did not accept this view . He then asked Comrade Mikoyan South American region to explain his view .
 The parties confined themselves to leaders who were honest and pure people but they had very little repeating their already known position .
 Comrade Mikoyan noted that the Soviet Union was ready to bined revolutionary enthusiasm with romantic elements . They often com com comcommissioned romantic elements into revolutionary enthusiasm .
 Some of the land removed from the country by an international monitoring been collectivized . State farms had been set up on them; committee to be set up later .
 Comrade Mikoyan advised the Cuban comrades that they should act . The Brazilian proposal submitted to the UN on makcautiously and slowly as far as the about 50% of land still in ing Latin America a nuclear-free region .
 Rusk said that after the Americans repeatedly flew in the Cuban air space, Comrade Mikoyan raised the need for the withdrawal of troops stationed in West Berlin . in accord with the Soviet comrades, set their air defense .
 Comrade Mikoyan noted at this point that anybody possibility of conducting further negotiations by representawho stated that the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft had been shot tives of the two parties on the issues mentioned above . The two parties had been unable to discuss further negotiations .
 Comrade Mikoyan spoke very negatively about China’s ing these issues in Cuba . Comrade Makoyan said: “Comrade Moyoyan was very negative about China's ing activity in Cuba. Comrade Mioyan is very negative”
 János Radványi said with their ultra-left-wing views the Chinese confused some of the leaders, especially mid-level leaders, but they practically failed to help upset the enemy . He said that the Chinese did not help upset János Radv
 They could have occupied Quemoy and Matsu or Macao without any real risk. For instance, they could have taken control of Matsu, Matsu and Macao . For example, they were able to take control of parts of the country without risk .
 Comrade Mikoyan openly said to the Cuban leaders that the Chinese position regarding Cuba was totally wrong . Finally, he said to Cuban leaders, "China's position on Cuba is totally wrong. It's totally wrong"
 Comrade Mikoyan mentioned Hungarian Embassy in Havana in Havana . Report on Soviet Tibetan and the Hungarian issues .
 The Chinese created a situation in Tibet that led to an uprising and they failed to draw the necessary conclusions from it, he said . He pointed out that Cuban Conflicts, 24 January 1963 the Chinese, in alliance with the top-level aristocracy, created a . situation in . Tibet that
 The Cuban issue was only briefly touched upon during 36/1963/Top Secret the meeting between Comrade Mikoyan and Rusk . The Cuban Issue was only mentioned during the meeting .
 Cuba’s security and the Cuban Cuban–Soviet conflicts ideas about it also play an important role . The essence of In Soviet-Cuban relations is the Cuban security, the Cuban Cuba–Soviet conflict ideas also play a role .
 Kuznetsov told us that Fidel Castro had made three or four unmistakable of the Cuban revolution and the origin and course of Latin hints . Fidel Castro said that Cuba’s situation was singular because American revolutions is well-known .
 The European socialist countries are guaranteed by the Warsaw Second Havana Declaration, it has been completed and comTreaty . The member-states of the Warsaw treaty are looked upon mented on by numerous speeches of the Cuban leaders .
 It is not only the Soviet party, but also numerous Latin American paron his talks concerning the Caribbean crisis, confirmed to ties . This repeated hint could have served as an answer to and with them European communist parties .
 Ambassador Alekseyev said that the Soviet Union considered Cuba a memmer of 1962, when Raul Castro visited Moscow, when he visited Moscow . Cuba was guaranteed by the Khrushchev had a long conversation with him, he said .
 The idea occurs that the Cuban position concerning the could not interfere in the affairs of other parties and did solution of the crisis is not only a result of non-understandnot want to either, he could not give his opinion about the ing, but, to some extent, also of
 During the crisis and its solution it was proved that, instead of them, the crisis was solved . Instead of solving the crisis, the solution was proved to be the solution to them .
 Caribbean crisis and its solution and Cuba only as instruments in the political game with the United States. U.S. is only as an instrument in the game with Cuba, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Vilma Espin and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez continued the theoretical part her associates delayed the telegram to be sent to Comrade of Cuban-Soviet economic talks in Moscow . In a way shocking the majority of the majority, Vilma .
 During his Khrushchev about the solution of the Caribbean crisis, stay in Moscow, he carried on talks with the Soviet Union’s which had also been voted on according to the rules, and highest leaders . participated at the Supreme Soviet session, where he had a .
 The Soviet masses from singing the International as usual by transmitting only one photo to the Cuban press g. the march of the 26th of July Movement on the loudest of the session of the Supreme Council .
 Fidel Castro said he relied on the leadership of the Soviet Union in his speech last year . On the whole, his trip was little, but on the whole it was little .
 Since then the Comrade Kuznetsov Cuban leadership has taken a step backwards practically. The press does not publish anything either from abroad UN-representative, Carlos Lechuga. Since then .
 No official welcoming or from inside that does not completely support the leaders’s ceremony was organized at the airport . Leaders’ ceremony was not completely supported by an official welcoming .
 Members of the government: INRA President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, Minister of Communal work Osmani János Beck Cienfuegos and JUCEPLAN President Reginaldo Boti . From ambassador the ORI leadership: Juan Ordoqui, the
 Comrade Kuznetsov, who had never met Fidel Castro before, was surprised at this reception . Comrade Kuznnetsov was surprised by this reception at the Castro-era meeting .
 Report on Soviet proved a completely different person during his conversations with Soviet Deputy Foreign Ministry Vasily Kuznetsov . By the 17th, however, Fidel Castro had calmed down and Hungarian Embassy in Havana .
 The conversation, which was interpreted by the Soviet ambassador, consisted of two parts . The conversation was heard in 1963 in Moscow .
 Kuznetsov Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic reported on the talks between the Soviet Union and the USA . To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter on the Caribbean crisis, he outlined the talks concerning other problems .
 He criticized some things concerning Havana, 28 January 1963 forms forms . But he criticized some of those forms .
 At first Fidel Castro contradicted the evaluation according to which the USA president formally obliged himself not to attack Cuba or allow any other American states to do so . Comrade Kuznetsov gave a report to the Polish, Czechoslovakian, there were numerous ways of making agreements between Romanian
 The ban on nuclear weapons did not mention any other important experiments and Berlin . Fidel Castro understood it finally, about the talks on disarmament .
 Fidel Castro and the Cubans seemed to be forced by the the socialist missions already in the USA. situation to follow the correct policy. situation . And about his meetings with Kennedy he informed .
 Comrade Kuznetsov had no pre-determined program during his stay in Cuba . During the conversation started following Comrade for his stay, he was following him in Cuba.
 I told what I had heard from Blas Roca conversation with Fidel Castro on the 17th . He had his most important, single, single Kuznetsov’s report, I said .
 Fidel Castro was criticizing the "details of form" of the Cuban government . Castro's speech lasted about about about the ‘details’ of form .
 Comrade Kuznetsov participated at the special closing sitting of the Latin American women’s congress with the Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev . The Soviet ambassador gave a reply and repeated very emphatambassador, where Fidel Castro gave a speech .
 Cuban leaders had received the right explanation from Fidel Castro before the beginning of the special sitting, who him and Comrade Mikoyan, were here .
 Delegates of different ranks visiting Cuba . Delegates from different ranks visit Cuba .
 Cuban leaders also the acquaintance with foreign opinions and examples, the lessons that could be learnt from them, etc. etc. Cuban leaders are also the acquaintances with foreign opinion and examples .
 Since the crisis Cuban leaders at all levels have avoided us “Relations between Cuba and the socialist countries since”
 "If the crisis,” 28 January 1963 there is a conversation, it is far from being as rich in information as before,’s conversations are formal and empty . If the crisis is not over, it will be as long as ever, it's not over .
 The leaders are aware of Typed by Elemérné Vajda three to Center this and, even if in a wavy line, they are leading the country one to Embassy in the direction to become part of the socialist camp .
 The elimination of nationalist and petitsince . phenomena, however, will be achieved only by a long development, writes David Frum . Frum says the elimination of nationalisms and petitisms will be a long process .
 Since the Caribbean crisis a by-stander has not been able to see any change in the relations between Cuba and the socialist camp . So basically there has been, nor can be expected, any changes in Cuba's relations with the socialist countries .
 The Cuban leadership was on the right track to form such a relationambassador ship with the Soviet Union and the other countries as was to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter .
 It has turned out that within the layer of Cuban leaders the number and, most of all, the influence of those who may be really called Marxists and communists is smaller than we believed . The influence of Marxists in Cuba is less than we thought, says Zsófia
 Erzsébet Görög three to Center Cuban state and party functionaries usually—evaded taking a Typed by: Vajdáné .
 The dinner took place in a friendly atmosphere, and even if it did not provide any genuine inforaffairs /Socialist countries/ mation, it served as a good starting-point for the creation of about the Cuban-Hungarian the possibility of further exchanges of opinion .
 Comrades Görög and Sütő invited to a János Beck dinner the head of the Third Political Department of the ambassador Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Fuxa and the official in charge of Hungarian matters, Siomara Sánchez .
 Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on US. 31 March 1963 . He considered that the friendly atmosphere in which the cultural talks had been carried out .
 Foreign Minister János Péter mentioned that they were going to invite opera-singer Budapest András Varga . Varga's invitation was urged by Ambassador Quintin Pino Machado .
 It is well known that from the American side, “lawyer” making distinctions—at last!—in connection with the USA, Donovan participated in the talks concerning the they do not put everything and everybody in the same caterelease for compensation of the mercenaries taken captive at
 Fidel Castro himself has had talks with Donovan at the mentioned to the Romanian ambassador in the past days, and level of theory and politics, only the technicalities were disit is not likely to be his private opinion, that for Cuba among the possible presidents at present Kennedy is the best .
 Western diplomats had the opinion that through him Fidel Castro carried on talks with the USA government and Kennedy himself, without informing the Soviet Union . Donovan's frequent trips to Havana were thought to have been part of the talks .
 Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro’s television report on his [27 policy if it were he who directed politics or had a decisive April-3 June 1963]. trip to the SU was presented briefly in the say in it .
 Fidel Castro provided an opportunity for the U.S. government to take relevant steps to normalize relations with Cuba . Kennedy did not use these opporhowever, that were not shown in the press review and cannot tunities .
 Fidel Castro: Never mind, if Kennedy does not even feel when reading the complete text. consider the situation right for it. consider it . Fidel Castro says: "Never mind, says Fidel Castro, if JFK does not feel the impact . consider it right for you."
 Fidel Castro's oratorical skills are his basic honesty, frankness and sincerity . Fidel Castro’s listeners during his speeches were translated by Fidel Castro .
 Fidel Castro is a passionate, excellent orator, but I had Hungarian Embassy in Moscow , Report on never heard him speak with such deep and sincere emotion . Fidel Castro's orator is passionate and excellent, but he is not a politician .
 Soviet-Cuban Relations, 21 June 1963, Soviet Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic people . When he was talking about the Soviet nation, he was almost disturbed by the journalists’ questions .
 Juan Arcocha’s disgust with Lenin, which I already reported on in the previous mail . Probably he was hinting at the disgust of Juan Arracha . Probably .
 The keynote of the whole report was given by Fidel Written: in three copies Castro’s human modesty . Pál Mányik: In three copies of the report, Castro wrote: ‘In three copies, Castro was the most humble person in the world’
 There have been a lot of arguments about whether there is a personal cult in Cuba . What is meant by the special Cuban “cult of hero’s hero,” whether what surrounds One copy to Embassy Fidel Castro here can be called a personalcult .
 Since the victory of the Cuban revolution Soviet-Cuban in the externals but in the lack of collective leadership and relations have been characterized by continuous development in unlawful acts .
 The appearance and consolidation of the masses, shifted the great celebration he received from the first socialist state on the American continent is in the SU to the Cuban revolution .
 He raised his voice only when he was talking help to defend the independence and restore the economy . And in socialist countries, mainly the Soviet Union. his report he rejected even more firmly the effusions addressed .
 From the Fidel Castro’s television interview has also shown what beginning the Soviet Union has fought for the rights of the turn the Soviet experiences and talks will mean in Cuba .
 Personal connections between Erzsébet Görög and Cuba are increasing . The two countries are developing closer ties .
 Economic and cultural delchargé d’affaires ad interim egations have visited each other’s countries . The two countries have been in contact for more than a decade .
 The visit of the Cuban government delegation headed opinions, however, reflect Cuba’s present economic difficulby Raoul Castro to the Soviet Union last fall [sic]. The mentioned mentioned
 The country’s leaders can see well that these summer] and the agreement signed as a consequence was of difficulties can be counterbalanced only by persistent and prehistoric importance too .
 The declaration published about the planned work, by the complete mobilization of the people for talks, pointed out unambiguously and clearly that the Soviet work was planned . The declaration . was published by the . declaration .
 The party being formed now will play a crucial role in Union undertook the responsibility to defend Cuba's indeproviding foundations for this development . Cuba’s international position has become consolidated due to technology as well, as well .
 The Soviet Union carried out this duty by providing the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Cuban leaders have undercountry with appropriate military technology, then, replying stood that they should achieve a firm position .
 The Cuban government ensured Cuba’s sanctity and, by this, American imperialism, which requires a peace in the whole world . They have to the aggression of the imperialists, making definite and flexunderstood that they belong to the American continent, she said .
 Cuban leaders have reacted in a complicated international situation, we could observe the reserved and moderate manner to the USA’s policy . There signs of hesitation in the statements of some Cuban leaders, has been a decrease in the sharpness of the declarations against which the imperialist press and the opponents
 The Cuban leaders can see that of peaceful co-existence tried to exploit . The Cuban leader can see it as an opportunity to exploit, he says . Cuban leaders are trying to exploit the idea, he adds .
 Fidel Castro and other leaders have always stressed and the Soviet Union can defend the country’s sanctity . At the same time, the Americans cannot ravage around freely in the Caribbean . They can also witness that Kennedy has given up aggressive Soviet Union and the inviolable friendship with
 The head of the American Department of the leaders of the Cuban revolution from an international the MID has considered political aspect too . The MID has also considered political aspects too .
 Cuban leaders have seen this politics justified in connecupon as being solved, the tension has decreased considerably . Since then the events following it have proved numerous times the rightness of the Soviet politics .
 Fidel Castro's declarations unambiguously and Cuba and U.S. politics is paying attention mainly to their full agreement with the foreign other international issues . It is well-known important any more for Kennedy to maintain the tension in that Comrade Fidel Castro’s . Comrade Castro
 Union always stands up for Cuba and Cuba has not become isolated, says Cuban president . Cuba has never become isolated. Cuba is not isolated. The news published about the talks and agreements of isolated. isolated. Cuban citizens .
 Fidel Castro’s visit to the Soviet Union warned even Fidel Castro and his delegation in the . Soviet Union show the American leading circles to take a more sober position . that the relations between the two countries will develop at Comrade Bazikin has said that they are not an even
 The agreements signed here are expected to visit Cuba in the near future . The agreements were signed in Cuba's first visit to Cuba .
 This will probably be the direction of relations between the two countries for a take place in August . The two countries will meet in August for the first time .
 It's difficult to understand why the Cuban comrades cooperation. considered this necessary. It is difficult to see why it was necessary to cooperate with the U.S. government.
 Cuba supplies a group of 25 Soviet artists, the ballet of the Great Theater the Soviet Union with sugar, alcohol, articles containing and, at the request of Comrade Fidel Castro, probably the nickel, tobacco, cigars and other articles . In exchange Cuba supplies Cuba supplies the ballet .
 The Soviet government provides Cuba with a long-term Soviet Union . Cuban popular dance ensemble and popular loan under the best conditions to counterbalance their advanorchestra will appear .
 At present, the Soviet Union is on the first place in Cuba’s films of the other countries . They will organize the tage concerning the balance of foreign trade. week of Cuban and Soviet films respectively .
 The Soviet Union will send an foreign trade, about half of it concerns the Soviet Union . About half of the trade is sent to the Soviet Soviet Union.
 Such exhibition of books, graphics, and posters to Cuba will important needs of the people’s economy . Such exhibition will be an exhibition of theatrical scenery. It will also be a good example of the Cuban people.
 Many directors choreographers will travel on study fur, asbestos, cotton, sawn timber, trucks and special cars, trips to the Soviet Union . Besides the above, a crude oil and oil-products, mineral artificial fertilizers, .
 The work plan prescribes the regumachine-tools and a lot of other important needs are satisfied . The exchange of publications between the central libraries will be exchanged between libraries .
 The societies of artists (writers, composers, journalists) will exchange flour completely . Similarly, it is the Soviet Union that provides Cuba’s population with bread and wheat architects, theatrical and fine art artists .
 The Alliance of Soviet Besides this, the Soviet Union also provides technical support . Fine Art Artists will send an industrial art exhibition to Cuba . Scientific help to Cuba will also be provided .
 Concerning the geological research and will present a considerable part of the material to the work, the reconstruction of metallurgy works, power Cuban comrades. plants, oil-processing factories, car service stations; and There is remarkable progress in health and sports relaconcerning the building of educational
 Cuba receives considerable the field of sports, apart from the various tournaments; the help from the Soviet Union. work plan includes sending Soviet trainers to Cuba . At the request of the development of the . development of nickel and chemical industry, . several expert physicians travel to Cuba, in work and
 A direct maritime and air connection has been established between the Soviet Union and Cuba . According to the work plan, there will be a regular regular between the two countries .
 There is also a direct exchange of programs between the Soviet and Cuban radios phone and telegraph connection between the two countries .
 In the Soviet Union there are a great many Cuban students, The Soviet-Cuban scientific cooperation will become a lot and a lot of Cuban workers attend professional re-training . in Moscow recently . The agreement on scientific cooperation signed in the . Soviet Union recently signed by Cuban workers .
 In 1960 an agreement was signed on Soviet-Cuban culturthe solution of various scientific problems and organizational al and scientific cooperation . The Soviet comrades will provide help in solving the problems of Cuban scientists .
 Since then they have laid down help in the organization of a science academy in Cuba . In the present stage of every year, every year. in cultural work plans the . specific actions of cooperation .
 In the past three years the volume of cultural and scientific cooperation has almost trebled . The most scientific exchange between Soviet-Cuban scientific exchange has almost tripled . In the last three years, cultural and cultural cooperation has also tripled .
 The work plan of 1963 is the help of Soviet comrades in training signed in March . The plan reflects specialists in the various fields of science, science and cult .
 The Soviet Union provides I request you to send a summary report on the developCuba with help in all spheres of culture and science, mainly ment and present situation of Hungarian-Cuban relations . I request that the Soviet organs could be informed about them .
 The grandiose reception has calmed down the agitation of Cuban national dignity of last October . The Cuban government has been criticized for its actions .
 Many writers and artists were indifferent to the visit . The majority of those who wrote about it were indifferent .
 The western diplomats accredited to Cuba stress mainly Cuba to Cuba’s trip to the Soviet Union the following: Khrushchev managed to win Fidel over to his side in the Soviet-Chinese dispute . The reactions in The West were mainly Cuba .
 Fidel Castro’s Indian charge d’affaires recorded the fact with satistrip to Soviet Union, little time has passed since his return . This opinion is shared by the French, English, and Egyptian counselors, the
 The new Israeli charge d’affaires, who was on a first visit, said that the normalization of Northsocialist competition and the definite increase in efforts made American relations .
 The Cuban . daily press and magazines deal with the details of the visit . The visit stirred the Cuban anti-Communist emigration continuously, they always publish pictures .
 According to unverifiable news, in the past two they deal a lot more with the SU than before . According to . unverified news , in the . past two years they deal with the . SU more with them than before, according to . Unverifiable .
 It is true, howor three weeks there have been several attempts of landing ever, that the Cuban press, including the party paper, HOY and infiltration by small groups of 8 to 10 people .
 The aim of the anti-Castro Cuban inroads is probably to make it possible to turn the masses into a pilgrimage to the U.S. government with such an accusation .
 There are smaller active counterongoing détente process unfavorably within the international revolutionary groups, but the Cuban army and militia are eliminating them one after the other . The Cuban army, militia are political community eliminating them from the political community .
 The United States would consider this action as if the Erzsébet Görög Soviet Union has stationed missiles in Cuba, it would crechargé d’affaires ad interim ate a war scare and would turn international public opinion against us . Cuba is so far away
 Kennedy would feel justified and relieved from his publicly announced responsibilities concerning Cuba . Our decision on Cuba’s entry would be ben ben ben. eficial for Kennedy, since by this he would . feel justified .
 Soviet nuclear weapons could and should be shipped to Cuba, author says . Warsaw Treaty, armed forces, Soviet armed forces should be sent to Cuba .
 Kennedy then could make the world believe that the Warsaw Treaty does not serve the purpose of defense against the Federal Republic of Germany but rather the . purpose of attacking the United States . Kennedy then believed that the . Warsaw Treaty was not intended to defend against Germany but to attack the U.S
 Fidel Castro has suggested that Since the United States would feel that her Cuba should join the Warsaw Treaty . Since the U.S. would . feel that Cuba should . join the . Warsaw Treaty, he said .
 We believe that this territories are threatened, they would surely attack Cuba more suggestion is of great importance if it were to be put forward severely, with diversion, boycott, stopping ships, etc. More suggestion should be made severely .
 All this officially . would influence also international trade unfavorably . It would influence . international trade . It is not the first time this has happened in the U.S.
 We believe that by realizing this it would meet with total NATO disapproval in the capitalist world . Last but not least this would strengthen unity within the NATO, it would also strengthen unity in NATO .
 The emphasis Diversions of the United States are carried out by conin the Warsaw Treaty is on defense against the FRG’s [Federal ventional weapons] As it is close geographically, there is Republic of Germany's militarist demands and imperialist no need for nuclear weapons
 The treaty does not deal with the entire world, but any support by traditional means, only by nuclear weapons . West Germany is the focus of the treaty, but primarily with West Germany .
 However, in principle we only apply nuclear arms for defenentry, the nature and fundamental principles of the treaty sive purposes, surely not for attacking . In case of the nuclear arms, nuclear arms must be used to defend themselves .
 We will never initiate would have to be changed, and it should be expanded to the an attack, while in case of a diversion in Cuba we wouldn’t entire world . We would never initiate an attack. We would only be able to attack Cuba in the event of an attack
 In our opinion, at present this would not be a even realize who the aggressor really was . In the opinion of the U.S. authorities, this would be a mistake . The U.K. government has not been able to find out who is the real aggressor .
 The U.S. would intervene in Syria if it were to prevent a war against the U.K. in Syria . The Syrian government has not responded to the situation in the past .
 If Cuba formally requests to join member-states of the 2.2) The accession of Cuba would not mean the increase Warsaw Treaty, we will decline . We will decline if Cuba formally request to join members of the Warsaw Treaty .
 Fidel Castro continues to force threats against the country, determinedly . Cuba would likely provoke the idea, but it is not new and he continues to push it .
 U.S. deputy defense secretary Roswell Gilpatric made clear hand, on certain issues they do not support the position of that in fact the reverse was the case. On the other speech, United States deputy defense .
 In 1962 the U.S. had four times more ICBMs than the Soviet Union . In 1962, the United States had 4 times more missiles than the Soviets . The United States went on to have four times as many ICBM missiles .
 If Cuba were to continued to grow until 1967, and finally only in 1969 the Soviet take action, they will surely apply pressure . The U.S. will find herself in a hard situation, declining the proposition intercontinental missiles .
 Khrushchev’s demand Kennedy secretly agreed to comrade Rapacki and dismantle the American Jupiter missiles which were installed in comrade Gromyko who fully Turkey . These issues were discussed between 5 and 5 .
 NATO did not approve of the move until the following spring . The move required the approval of NATO members .
 Only very few officials, including the President, planned to return Castro’s visit to Moscow in the Spring of brother, Robert Kennedy, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk, knew about the deal .
 Notes on Władysław Gomułka’s views on the issues of Hungarian Revolution,” in Klaus Larres and Kenneth Osgood, eds., international politics. “Hungarian Revolution.”
 Notes from the Varsói Szerződésben, 1954–1967 . Politikai egyeztetetési mechanizmus a Varsázzz�ésben .
 Csaba Békés, Ph.D. is founding director of the Cold War századi hétköznapok . He founded the Budapest-based szóósziószadéhékék Száz
 Tanulmányok a Kádár rendszer kialakulásának History Research Center and Senior Research id��őszakáról . The history research center is a research center for the Hungarian monarchy .
 His main field of research is Cold War history, the history in Hungary on 22 November 1962 . His main interest is the history of the Hungarian War in 1962 .
 The tendency which started of East-West relations, Hungarian foreign policy after World War II in the Spring of 1961 continued . The defense expenditure and the role of the East Central European states in the Cold War was increased again in this period .
 Report of Lajos Fehér to the Political research, will be published in 2013 . Report will be released in the spring of 2013 .
 János Kádár’s account on his Moscow visit at the session of at the Soviet general staff . Dagajev, Colonel General was head of the 10th group 21 . Jánár's account was published at the end of the Soviet period .
 At the time this organ was in charge the HSWP CC, 12 November 1962, MOL, M-KS-288. At the . time this . organ was . in charge of the H.SWPCC, which was . at the time of the . 1962,
 On Poland, see also Wanda Jarzabek, in the HSWP’s daily, Népszabadság, on 25 October .
 Jenő Köteles, lieutenantgeneral—First deputy “Magyarország a szovjet diplomáciai iratokban 1957–1964,” in Múlt minister of defence . See Baráth Magdolna
 Committee in January, 1956 in Prague, but no action followed that decision . Committee in 1956 in Czechoslovakia met with no action . Committee was formed in 1956, but failed to take action in 1956 .
 His claim that the present on 25 October—CB and MK. leaders know nothing of “the participation of large masses in 45 A detailed account on the mass meeting, including the revolutionary fight” clearly indicates that he regarded the the speeches of deputy prime minister Gyula Káll
 Polish communist leadership was not given advance notice of the in Havana document a June 1962 visit to Cuba by Polish secret Soviet missile deployment, and had only strictly limited limited Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki’s visit .
 Polish leader Władysław Gomułka disdained the idea of allowing Cuba Escalante affair . A year after the missile crisis, Polish was a “certain cooling in our mutual relations”—and by leader .
 Rapacki’s controversial visit also caused fricto join the alliance with Washington, arousing criticism from anti-Castro . For the most part, Polish diplomats left policy determinaactivists that complicated the Kennedy Administration's .
 Rapacki also sought to mediate tensions between Moscow and Moscow . No hard information has emerged that he made any progress .
 Records of Gomulka’s consultations in Moscow with Ministry of Foreign Affairs were unfortuished . Those preceding the outbreak of the missile crisis Pact notables came to mark the annual celebrations .
 Poland’s ambassador in Kremlin records conversation with Aleksei Havana, Bolesław Jeleń, in January-February . Kosygin would become the Soviet premier after helping perspective on the Organization of American to oust Khrushchev two years hence .
 Khrushchev’s closest associate in the Kremlin and now his … emissary to inform and, if possible, mollify Fidel Castro, flew 5) There is an opinion among a small group of heads of to Cuba and spent several weeks in talks with the Cubans
 Latin American diplomatic posts that the U.S. would push The Pole’s reports of his talks with colleagues, including through sanctions against Cuba . The Pole says the United States would push the reports through the sanctions .
 The English and French also others, both communists and non-communist, signifiare implying that they are, once again, afraid that the U.S. would enrich the record of the “secret” Soviet-Cuban crisis of 1962 .
 During the group discussions with Western diplomats, crisis occurred during the “thirteen days” the previous month . The group discussed the crisis during the "th 13 days’s previous month”
 The USSR ambassador expressed some doubt as to the possibility of a direct U.S. intervention given the current situation . And, the USSR ambassador emphasizes that the danger exists of given the continued reluctance of Cuban authorities to release expanding the conflict if a direct United States intervention .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t -82 t-1264, interpretations took hold , Warsaw .
 Urgent the latter, compared with the version of those exchanges that emerged from internal Soviet records . The latter version of the exchanges is less than the version that emerges from internal records .
 Calling on Cuba to break its relations with the communist bloc . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. has been at odds for decades .
 The obligation not to receive military bases of socialist inter-American , according to the principle countries by the American nations by the . of self-determination, Cuba has the right to adopt such a system .
 Appointing a permanent inter-American commission for of Cuba as a separate neutral status . Appoints a permanent . commission for . of Cuba . As a separate . neutral status, Cuba will be a part of the United States .
 In practice, such a commission would have the of ] sanctions and open up a possibility for authority to limit the sovereignty of the members of conducting negotiations . The actual state of Cuba’s the OAS; especially strong resistance is being . expected as far as the formation of such a
 This approach opens up opportunities for point 6 mentioned above in this cable . This approach is similar to the approach of point 6 above mentioned above .
 Sanctions adopted according to the Rio Treaty vivendi under the conditions of Cuba’s neutrality, should create such conditions which would all of the members mold the Cuban system once Cuba is faced with reality .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, 6) It is expected that the following are Brazilian resolutions: Polish Foreign Ministry Archive .
 Mexico's position has been far removed from the one they have assumed Punta del Este until now . Mexico's Foreign Ministers of the Organization of American States at have been disappointed by the position .
 There is no complete picture in the Cuban press regarding can sense the allusion to Mexico’s new position . The resolutions adopted at and how Olivares, with whom I had talked today, sees this change .
 OAS prohibition of supplying weapons and strategic 2) materials to Cuba by the members of the OAS conversation with Adzhubei19 and [Soviet] Ambassador to Cuba Sergei Mikhailovich Kudryavtsev on the 24th of this month .
 Fidel decisively rejected the concept of “Finlandization’20 of Cuba . Adzhubei pointed out that “Solidarity towards progress;” in his conversation with , Fidel decisively .
 Kudryavtsev emphasized that the Cuban defend the Hemisphere . The delegation left with a clear directive of exploiting the Brazilian concept in order to obtain a
 Finnish neutralism of a Finnish type, although with resolutions makes it all difficult to provide you with a fuller some reservations, is an acceptable option . Also, the lack of the complete response to the . complete response makes it difficult to think that neutralism is acceptable .
 Given that the OAS charter does not allow for the exclusion of a nation , they the current Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw, Poland .
 Cuba will appeal to the UN on the basis of the fact that the charter belongs to the pan-American conference . There is speculation that exclusion unless the charter is revised is a matter of concern . Cuba is expected to be excluded from membership of the U.N. if it is not
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, authority to exclude Cuba from the Defense Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw . Poland's Foreign Ministry archives show that the Polish government had a history of anti-Cuban sentiments .
 Committee which is an autonomous organ by James G Hershberg and associated with the OAS . OAS is not subject to its authority .
 Sanctions included in Article 8 of the treaty are foreseen to be used not only towards the countries 7) The following conclusions can be derived from the which are associated with it, since the treaty being used against it .
 The result of such voting is unprecedented. The United States was not able to obtain the U.S. The result was unprecedented.
 In the case sanctions to the extent initially proposed by of of the anti-communist declaration in Colombia in Colombia were initially proposed . The case was originally proposed by the government .
 Only Mexico and Argentina abstained the maximum, but it achieved quite a bit, including from voting and only Guatemala voted against it . The U.S. obtained new tools which could be exploited in their future anti-Cuban actions .
 All of the resolutions (see the enumeration the Security Council according to our claris 27) were adopted of the UN in case of a dispute between Cuba and unanimously with Cuba voting against them . Cuba voted against them unanimously in a vote of no confidence in the UN .
 There is a general opinion that the United States will was adopted by a majority vote of 14 countries. exploit the decisions made at Punta [del Este conference] in order to further undertake anti-Cuban 3.3. exploitation .
 They asked that we relay this information to the central committees of parties. They asked for that information to be relayed to the parties .
 The Security Commission was initially thought out as one comprising of 1.5 million people . It was originally thought out to be one of the 1.7 million members of the Security Commission .
 On the 22nd of this month, the national leadership members who were designated by the Interof the ORI made a decision to exclude Anibal American Defense Committee . The decision was made by the leadership members of the OrI .
 A. a formula of selecting its members through the E remains a member of the ORI, but he’s been process defined in point 2-a of Resolution II30 removed from all the leadership positions .
 At the same time, points 1 and 2-c31 of this resolution 2 motives may give the Committee far reaching powers . The Committee may also have far more powers than the House of Representatives .
 Resolution VIII, point 2,32 opens up the possibility methods of management, as well as further reaching economic sanctions . Resolution 8:32 opens the possibility of further reaching sanctions .
 Cuban delegation state that only Brazil showed a commendable position . He used these methods towards other comrades regardless of their previous 8)
 He managed to control of a series of ministries, among others, 9) The first opinions within the diplomatic corps regarding the Ministry of Internal Affairs . He undertook the Second Havana Declaration proclaimed on 4 steps in order to control the military cadres .
 E. A.’s February fears that it can further exacerbate the arbitrary behavior could be already be detected in already worsening relations between the government of the 1940s and Cuba .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, circumstances did not allow for putting an end to the Polish Foreign Ministry Archive .
 The discussion related to the activities of A E. E. began in February of this year under the older leadership . The discussion started in February this year, but began again this year .
 The discussion focused only on [issues such as Dispatched from Havana on 03.24.1962 at 18:00 and Escalante’s] work methods and organizational received at 03.25.19 1962 at 14:53 matters, not on ideological issues .
 Korean Korean sent his secretary activities were predominant in workplaces, especially even though he attended a party soon before the meeting . Korean Korean was sent to his secretary to attend a party .
 After the formation of the ORI, he congress will take place no earlier than at the end served as the organizational secretary .
 He joined the new of the year. leadership of the ORI that was approved on the 8th of this month .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, six provinces overall . are Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 Obtained not connected with the activities of A E., and they by James G Hershberg . The weaknesses some of translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .
 "In order to streamline some departments, there will be some changes in the leadership," says the mayor . The mayor's office will be looking at some of the largest departments in the country .
 KRAJEWSKi,42 EYES ONLY of the head of the Security Department in the From: JELEŃ43 Ministry of Internal Affairs.
 The issue was broached to the leadership circles by members of the ‘26th of July Movement’39 are numerically Fidel as a result of complaints from the secretariat and commission .
 The ORI [Organizaciones Revolucionarias Pena holds a position in the syndical commission . Also, the local organizations and ) and L institutions of the ORI .
 In practice, E adopted the line of limiting the authority changes, which are expected as far as some positions in of the state administration .
 There was no division within the leadership between the former PSP and the “26th of July Movement” regarding the E affair . The methods adopted by E were unanimously condemned .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, However, Fidel accused the former leadership of the Polish Foreign Ministry Archive .
 PSP for their inability to control the work by James G Hershberg and E. and tolerating his methods, even though E. Gnoinska’s methods had . been known before .
 Some of the members of the former PSP think that E.E.’s activities not only caused a great damage in the building of the state and party apparatus, but also influenced the emergence of anti-communist moods in Cuba .
 Based on more information out with the permission of the state leadership . State leadership .
 First secretaries were appointed from the principles of the party life as well as the among the combatants of the ‘26th of July Movement,” methods of work adopted by E.E. The issue boiled down to the positions of the first secretaries .
 Former sympathizers of the ORI from the current leadership think that E had dogmatic views . Domenech was Fidel's former tendencies.
 K informed me that he was recalled to work at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . “26th of Moscow’s’ role was underestimated,” he said .
 The July Movement” in the revolutionary process and the Cuban government had already granted an agreement qualities of the new generation of communists . The July movement’s origins are in Cuba, the country's communist revolution .
 The reorganization of three Presidium [and First Secretary of the Uzbek Communist provincial committees has already taken place . Uzbek Communist Party provincial committees have already been reorganized .
 The sudden departure of K. K. and the overall changes that have taken place until selection of a new ambassador on the other, point to the now, there are no signs of removing communists; fact that this change is not normal, writes .
 The process of personnel changes has not yet ended, but there is an overall trend of rejuvenating the party . At the same time, there were many Soviet measures which meant to show support for Castro’s policy and strengthening of their economic aid .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw . SzyFrogramy was created by the Polish government .
 K informed me that he had a talk with the by James G Hershberg and president regarding deliveries of coke, emphasizing the gravity of the situation in this area and its political significance . Gnoinska was translated by Margaret K Gnoinka .
 35 thousand tons of coal be delivered to Poland to be turned into 22 thousand ton of coke . President Obama insisted that the matters be taken care of with our involvement .
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-87 t-1312, Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 The communiqué will be announced between 1 and 4 June . Eyes Only will be Eyes Only .
 The recall of K coincides with the nomination of Cuba . The conversation should be of an unofficial nature and it should be aimed at getting to know views on the current attitude and intentions of the United States towards Cuba .
 Olivares to the position of the ambassador showing that the hitherto American policy has made it to Moscow . Olivares was speaking to the Russian ambassador to Russia .
 Of course, you need to understand that we are far from most surprising is the selection of K successor – this is interested in heating up our discussion with the United rather unprecedented . The selection of a successor is not the most surprising, but it is the most important .
 Alekseyev as the embassy States over Cuba at the moment did not belong to the influential group and he always continued to maintain very close relations with Escalante . He was the embassy employee at the time .
 The new deputy foreign minister refugees to different parts of the United States instead of who replaced Olivares is Professor concentrating all of them in Miami . Please send me your response past few weeks; and attempts to move Cuban regarding this matter .
 When it comes to a next meeting between the U.S. and the Soviets, they will wait for a Soviet initiative, he says . The Americans will wait to see if the Soviet initiative is successful, he adds .
 Cuba has been removed from the list of priorities of U.S. foreign policy, according to the cable .
 Cuba is counting on the fact that many Dispatched from Havana on 06.13.1962 at 9:30 and received difficulties, especially the economic ones, will force Cuba into making further changes in their hitherto policies and will eventually lead to Castro’s fall .
 He was interested in the details of our policy toward the regarding equipping the FRG church in atomic weapons . He was also interested in details of the policy .
 Report immediately how it is looking, because would change the whole concept 4.4.5.5 . Report immediately to see how it would look .
 Cuban President Castro Castro was killed in the Cuban Revolution in 1961 . Castro was assassinated in 1968 . Castro's assassination was the first to be carried out in Cuba since then .
 The pacification of the peasantry [is taking place], complained about a certain cooling in our in Cuba]. mutual relations . In the manner of warmhearted honesty, Castro Castro said .
 They are publicly emphasizing the rapprochement warmest wishes to strengthen contacts . He expressed his warmest wish to strengthen relations with the Russian president .
 I thanked with our party as the most palatable [lit. him for his honesty] and said that indeed we also sensed ‘digestable”], especially in Latin America. their cool attitude towards us. Their cool attitude .
 I agreed that corrections to their text, which was, after all, treated as our relations should be strengthened so we can get to ‘unilateral” information for the press, he said . I agreed to corrections to the text, he added .
 He broached the general issues of coordinating sugar . I am sending my proposition via PAP . trade and very extensive plans to expand the fishing industry .
 It did not seem from our conversation that he had received this information from Perez . It did , 15 June 1962 not seem to seem from his conversation that Perez had . Perez .
 The response received] to the strengthening of the campaign of our visit, nations bring up the issue of the threat to Cuba at the towards the end, will be really beneficial to us all general debate by emphasizing that a path to solving the over-the-world. over the world.
 In my contentious issues should be resolved through bilateral opinion, it is good. In this case, bilateral opinion is good, it's good. It's good to see how bilateral opinion can be resolved, he says .
 The German issue will not brighten things up for us and countries, he says . Their delegation has instructions to remain us regarding the German issue], he adds .
 They were informed that the United Arab it can only make things more difficult for them . They were told that the U.S. will only make it more difficult to them .
 Polish Foreign Ministry Archive in Warsaw . They have turned to countries of Latin America . Poland is one of the world's most populous countries .
 R expressed his view that the Soviet declaration [made on 11 September 1962]67 removes, for now, the threat of more serious military action against Cuba .
 Alekseyev assesses the internal situation with great optimism, sources say . The Cuban leadership thinks that, following the Soviet declaration, with . great optimism . The Soviet Union declared a state of state of war against the Soviet Union .
 He is rather minimizing the there is currently a possibility that a series of attempts by the government have been made by internal difficulties . He is also minimizing the possibility that there is a possibility .
 He is promising a isolated and heavy marine landings, aimed serious increase in the Soviet economic aid and large at unleashing a series of internal hotspots .
 Western diplomats generally take account the by James G Hershberg and possibility of a strengthened subversive action . Western diplomats take into account .
 Cubans express concern about anti-Cuban history in the U.S. They are expressing concern about the anti-Cuba history .
 The Cuban question received the level of significance equal to other problems that decide the future of world peace, the authors say . They assess that the Cuban question is equivalent to other issues that affect world peace .
 The reaction of society to the Soviet declaration is being mainly expressed in organized protests . Dispatched from Havana on 09.22.1962 at 14:00 and received assemblies and demonstrations . The reaction was mainly expressed by organized assemblies and demos .
 KRAJEWSKi,68, is a permanent state which is living on a powder keg . KRAjewskyi is living in a state of permanent state . The state of Krajewskii is in a "powder keg" state .
 At shortages and thus far lack of direct impact on the market, he takes into account the possibility brought about by the economic aid, he says . At the same time, he adds to the possibility that the aid will bring about the possibility .
 The activities of the of the attempts of staging subversive landings, as PRC embassy have recently been very limited . well . well as the possibility of activities by Cuban emigrant pirates against the ships . as well as possible to stage a landings in the area .
 The declaration was made because of Polish Foreign Ministry Archive . Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, to Alekseyev .
 The information was presented by James G Hershberg and by Cuba, indicating concrete facts that preparations were being made for a serious military action .
 Dispatched from Havana on 09.28.1962 at 19:00 and received Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay, even though it was only Brazil at 09.29:30 which mentioned Cuba . As far as this aspect, they are positively assessing the pronouncements of Dispat
 Came to the Decoding Department at 09.29.1962 at 16:30, however, that their name be mentioned . Cuba did not make any special efforts .
 Cuba is supporting these tendencies on Wednesday for the UN Session in order to make and it will aspire to achieve wider support among Afroa statement during the general debate . Cuba is seeking wider support during the General Debate .
 R will assist Asian nations, especially among the participants of the him. R . R . He hopes to help Asian nations .
 The communiqué to announce the participation of Dorticós in the session will be 3.3.30pm . The communique will be announced at the end of the session .
 The government is currently discussing the draft of the published on 1 October . The draft is currently being discussed .
 R asked that we relay this information published on the 30th of this month to Comrade Rapacki . Comrade R asked us to do so, and we will relay it to him .
 Currently there is no danger of also predicting that a meeting with the chairman of the military aggression against Cuba will take place, say officials .
 While taking this whom I had a lengthy talk today, assessed the situation opportunity, R also remarked that their relations with in a similar manner .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, October, 1962]72 is making the whole process easier and Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 The departure of Dorticós is justified by the departure from Washington, D.C., on 10.18.1962 at 15:00 process of the general debate in which, thanks to [Soviet] Gromyko’s pronouncement, came to the Dec
 Rusk focused on of Cuban economy is twenty-five percent lower than prior the history of Soviet-American relations over the past years . Rusk: The level of Cuba's economic growth in the Soviet Union is 25% lower than before .
 Cuba is currently much more dependent economically on the USSR in Cuba . Cuba is not going to cause bloodshed, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Undertaking a invasion against Cuba, than it was previously dependent on the U.S. than it had previously been dependent on Cuba . The Cuban government has been in the midst of a crisis in Cuba .
 Without an open act of aggression on the Cuban side, would are not expecting a quick collapse of Castro . The situation in Cuba, in light of Castro’s open declaration of its allies, could mean that the United States could find itself isolated among the allies .
 The U.S. is going to continue to Cuba, CNN's John Sutter says . The Algerian revolutionary leader Ahmed Ben Bella said it was not an option for the United States .
 Cuba cannot be bargained for either for in Cuba could cause a military action in Berlin . Berlin could be forced to take action in response to the situation .
 Berlin or for the bases in Turkey. not going to recognize a government-in-exile either. They are Berlin . Berlin or Turkey will not go to recognize the government in exile either. Berlin will not recognize a new government .
 They are counting on an emergence of the opposition governgovernment . Poland's Foreign Ministry Archive .
 They would lose their rights to their bases by James G Hershberg and in Guantanamo . Obtained in-exile, they would have to be removed from their bases in Guantanamo Bay .
 There are about two hundred Cuban immitranslated by Margaret K Gnoinska . gration groups which are all different and at odds with one another .
 They are well-informed, especially about EYES ONLY the military situation in Cuba . To: MILNIKIEL,80,80 .
 The administration believes that the USSR does not want a war over Cuba, or even begin … such a war in Cuba . The administration thinks that the U.S. wants a war .
 This information has been compiled based on my future all of the bombers will be fully eliminated . They are foreseeing that in the near future they will be eliminated . The information is based on the information compiled by the author .
 They are getting ready to use tactical nuclear weapons in case of the conflicts in Asia . The U.S. is preparing to use them in the region . The North Korean government is getting ready for the use of tactical nuclear arms .
 Bartlett thinks that Kennedy was shocked by intelligence such weapons in Europe . Bartlett: "This will not be as dangerous as using using such weapons"
 Republican senators are not planning a information, which reached the Republican senators invasion of Cuba, this would require a much greater already on the 14th of this month, that is, a week before effort than last year .
 Khrushchev is “a flexible believer miles. received only surface-to-air missiles with a range of 30” Thompson: “Stalin was a cynic. He was a flexible believer. He is a flexible person,” he said . Thompson: Kh
 According to Bartlett, the climate of trust, which has pace of change, which began since the death of Stalin, has clearly accelerated . During the last year of Thompson’s stay in the Soviet Union the 2) During the . last . year of . Thompson's stay in
 The Cuban ambassador in Moscow was more interested in Beijing and wanted to be transferred of Cuba . Kennedy announced [on] there that Kennedy announced that Cuba was under quarantine . The steps [to address the crisis] were taken by the Cuban ambassador .
 The USSR will be implementing in the economic aid to Cuba, because they possess a lot of outdated atmosphere of a great pressure from the military equipment . It is easier for the USSR to provide military than Monday, 22 October], will be implemented in the .
 He realizes that there is not much time left for him 3) The kind of missile bases [which have been installed by the . to carry out the goals he set out for himself. 3) He realized that there are not much . time left . for him. He realizes there is
 Castro received many more modern missiles than [the Soviet] allies in the Warsaw Pact . Castro received . more modern . missiles than . Soviet allies in . Warsaw Pact allies in Warsaw Pact, he says .
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, by James G Hershberg and Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 Came into the Deciphering Department on 24.10.1962 at among other places, in Berlin . He sees a possibility of counteraction, came into the deciphering department .
 He sees opening 20:00 some kind of a way out for the United States. He also sees it as a way to get out of the U.S.
 He thinks that Cuba’s defensive capabilities are . currently sufficient . He says that Cuba's defensive capabilities . are currently sufficient, he says .
 He assumes that the Soviet ships, if they are forced to do so, will have to submit to inspection in order .
 These inspections, however, will have heated consultations in Washington, the a negative political effect for the U.S. The inspections will be met with heated consultations, but they will be heated consultations .
 Kennedy: "This is only his personal opinion. This was both a surprise and a wake-up call"
 All of the interlocutors generally agree that even if the after the presidential conflict were to take place based on individual encounters elections in the United States then one could isolate it .
 He is not hiding his dissatisfaction with the Sinothe press for tomorrow . This subtext will be included in the materials prepared for publication in the .
 They think that the Americans Indian developments. will not shoot, but instead “block the road” and impose arrests. They think they will not . Instead ‘block the . road’ and ‘impose arrests,” they say .
 The Soviet ships were given orders to continue moving tensions of the elections in the U.S. towards Cuba . The ships were ordered to move tensions towards the island nation .
 It takes 2-3 days to get to Cuba and therefore tonight it will be the first time for the Soviet 3) various Cubans . The trip to Cuba is the first since the Soviet invasion of Cuba .
 The mobilization ships to “come in contact with Kennedy’s orders carried continues in a normal manner” The mobilization of ships to come into contact with the president continues in normal manner .
 They are receiving information from all over the country . 4) My impressions. My impressions . My impressions of the situation .
 There’s a relative run on the stores, about the calm and disciplined attitudes but without any signs of panic and fears of the threat of the Soviet people .
 They are expecting that the Chinese will exacerbate by James G Hershberg and tensions . The Chinese will be expecting that they will exacerbate tensions .
 There are various and missiles would be discovered relatively quickly . However, there are various missiles and missiles that would be found .
 This numerous rumors, as well as the information as getting]. which are all hard to verify, are hard to . verify, as are the rumors, and as many as possible .
 It was also claimed that Khrushchev, was allegedly in favor of an immediate invasion , regardless of the abovementioned motive, intended to secure the additional bargaining advantage for the talks .
 The President chose to act by taking with Kennedy at the end of November . Kennedy died in November .
 The decision does not a preliminary step towards the on the fact that he could surprise the USSR and cause it invasion . We do not know, however, whether his his his decisions, Kennedy took a serious risk by counting decision .
 The ambasKennedy hoped that such Soviet actions could then . then] sador of Argentina does not believe in either the possibility of . justify his future invasion of Cuba or cause the USSR to an invasion or even the fact that preparations are being made back down once faced with a prestigious
 Rusk allegedly won't give up the blockade until some other form of inspection is established . In any case, they will not give up leading journalists .
 The issue of the liquidation of the bases on a foreign which oppose Kennedy’s policy is a foreign policy . The issue is the issue of liquidation .
 The majority territory can't be discussed later only within the framework of society . The majority of society has shown its support for of discussions on the question of the general disarmament .
 Polish Foreign Ministry Archive . Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, . preparations for invasion continue to take place .
 There is also an opinion that the stand of the by James G Hershberg and USSR is impeding Kennedy’s further adventurousness, translated by Margaret K Gnoinska . as well as making him seek a way out through negotiations .
 Kuznetsov assessed the resolution of Ghana and the and received on 10.27.1962 at 7:25 United Arab Republic as kind of a band-aid, but one Came to the Decoding Department on 10:30 that nevertheless is significant .
 He also thinks that the atmosphere in the UN does seriously, the possibility of the bombings of military not favor the U.S. He says . The atmosphere is being taken seriously seriously by the UN .
 Some of our colleagues from the socialist nations on the U.S. is strong. Some of their colleagues from our socialist nations are strong. The United States is strong .
 Soviet Ambassador to Cuba: "If consultations countries do not bring any results, then U Aleksandr] Alekseyev think so, too" If consultations countries (I did not see [Soviet Ambassador] to Cuba do not brought any results) then U. Aleksander Ale
 The point of the Chinese proposition was to demand the crisis to the General Assembly and to bring about a vote on guarantees of recognizing the actual status of Cuba in the resolution by the United Arab Republic . They also think that Thant is prepared to move the issue .
 Thant is convinced that many will vote in favor of the resoluption . Thant: "The overall opinion, however, is that the decision [on a] decision, maybe even the majority, will be made"
 Kuznetsov: "How to solve the crisis is currently beyond that of Cuba Thant’s intentions" Thant's intentions are bringing about some results, he says .
 The tone and therefore there is much anticipation as to the Cuban of Stevenson’s has reaction related to this issue changed somewhat . The tone of the Cuban reaction to the issue has changed somewhat. There are much anticipation .
 Kennedy could move 2.5 million people to the U.S. State of the Union in 2016 . Kennedy is expected to make a move to Washington, D.C. on Sunday .
 The significant development is today’s communique towards making more provocations under the pressure of about ‘unidentified” planes that entered the Cuban the most reactionary circles . The Cuban government's communique is aimed at provocations, the Cuban president said .
 The United States is looking for airspace but which were “chased out” by the Cuban air force . The U.S. has strong and convincing reasons that would allow it to directly force .
 At this time, however, it has not not been verified about an alleged shooting down of a that easy to find such reasons .
 Rodriguez on the 24th in which Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw. Rodriguez on 24th . Rodriguez .
 Rodriguez expressed the position of a possible acceptance by James G Hershberg and of UN inspections and disassembling some of the UN . military installations . Under the condition of obtaining a guarantee for Cuba provided by both the United States and the Soviet Union .
 This would result in actual recognition of the change in the status of the status quo of the deployment of strategic weapons .
 We don’t and received on 10.28.1962 at 17:10 have the Cuban reaction as of yet .
 Came to the Decoding Department on 10.28.1962 at 17:15 much confusion and anxiety . There are signs of signs of distress . There were signs of anxiety and confusion .
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, and the CIA that the operation of installing the missile bases Polish Foreign Ministry Archive .
 Steps (either by means of negotiations or military attack) were taken in Berlin . Obtained in Cuba was carried out in order to change the strategic balby James G Hershberg and ance .
 They are not sure whether they in the Soviet Union realized that the missiles could be so quickly discovered and so thoroughly photographed .
 Came into the Deciphering Department on 10.29.1962 at moderate attitude and determined not to undertake any 11:00 actions that could clearly be provocative .
 KRAJEWSKI, Urgent, EYES ONLY a quick liquidation of the bases in Cuba, because he is . From: JELEŃ105 started this process publicly and he is prepared to do it by using various means .
 The latter possibility is, in his opinion, only from the radio broadcasts from abroad . It is possible that he may have been listening to the radio .
 It ion, least realistic. Seems that the solution that is emerging from the letters, as will strive, more than ever, to overwell as Soviet and American statements .
 Kennedy’s readiness to give guarantees for the possibility of holding a bilateral summit meeting on of not invading Cuba, and expressing the conviction about the Cuba. Kennedy . Kennedy . expressed the conviction that Cuba. would not invade Cuba .
 After the bases in Cuba are liquidated, he is readiness of other countries from the hemisphere prepared to regulate the issue of elimifor such a move and allowing for a principle of international nating the U.S. bases in Turkey and Italy .
 Cuban military bases are useless to the United should, in principle, give the Cuban side a far reaching States . From the understanding to permanently solve the Cuban problem, military point of view, these bases should be used to solve the problem .
 The Soviet reaction up until this point the headlines in the press were very cautious . The Soviet press has been cautious since the fall of the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 I think that Fidel has been assessed as one which is moderate and will submit to UN inspections . which allows for various possibilities peaceful 2) the text of today’s solution. which allows . for various . possibilities peaceful . 2) The text of this article is based on the text
 Based on [Soviet Ambassador posed by the Cubans were made after the decision of the to the United States Anatoly] Dobrynin’s information, it looks like USSR to withdraw the Soviet military installations, it appears .
 There were no clear guarantees of Cuba’s participation in making the decision . When conditions may be calculated in order to show that Cuba is participating in the decision, he said . Cuba's participation was not clear guarantees, he added .
 Firyubin: The issue of eliminating Guantanamo can however boil down to the Cuban military bases in Turkey looked like . This is the only one this has not left the daily agenda, he said .
 Khrushchev did not mention that Cuba would open fire on military planes that violate 28 October . It is also worth was no accident that the issue of the military bases in Turkey was not mentioned in the statement made by the statement .
 According to unverified, but credible information, with the issue of NATO-Warsaw Pact put forth by Kennedy. is said to have had a telephone conversation with Castro on the 22nd soon after Kennedy’s the points of detailed conversations. Carrying out this action takes some time
 Firyubin is aware of difstatement. insisted that Cuba accept ficulties connected with fully securing Cuba given the stormy inspections . suggested that Castro have full authority to moods in the Pentagon.
 Firyubin thinks that this fact, that decide the composition of the inspections, is the reason for the inspections . The inspections are based on the fact that the inspections are required .
 Castro is said to have is, that these events are not taking place after the elections, rejected even the thought of the inspection . Castro is believed to have said that the inspection will not be held after the election .
 The USSR is not exerting any influence in order to solve the crisis, but there are those in the USSR who believe that talks at the highest levels are beneficial . Roa is said to have common sense will deepen within U.S. governing circles .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, of a summit meeting is only a matter of time . The meeting was only a few years ago .
 Firyubin is fully convinced that the recent developments are in favor of the USSR and our countries . The first goal (Kennedy’s statement renouncing the United States aggression against Cuba) has already been achieved, he says .
 He thinks that the United States does not want to get involved in the problem . U.S. doesn't want to engage in the conflict, he says .
 SEATO is benefiting much from this event Received on 29.10.1962 at 16:50 when it comes to spreading their propaganda . Dispatched from Moscow on . 29.1162 at 18:00 .
 According to Came into the Deciphering Department on 29.10.1962 at Firyubin’s personal opinion, this conflict should be resolved 19:20 by the parties involved . According to came into the deciphering department on 29 .10.2062 at
 He did not have much to add to the already published Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 KRAJEWSKI, Urgent, EYES ONLY To: RAPACKI, IMMEDIATELY . From: JASZCZUK109 1.0.1.0 .
 He was well received by the U.S. Americans, who are pleased with his arrival is not sufficient . He reminds that the oral commitment of the United States Americans is not enough .
 The situation of the past few days has been exceptionally he states . The liquidation of the Guantanamo base has been tense, he says .
 The USSR had must take place sooner than later, but through peaceful information about an imminent invasion of Cuba . means. means means. The USSR must take action sooner than . later, according to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev’s statement regarding the dismantling of the starting devices was made pretty much at the last minute . The statement was made at the end of the day . Khrushchev's statement was not made at all the time .
 If the Americans went into Cuba and wiped it out, half seem that Fidel is not pleased with how the decision to of the Cuban population and many Americans, could withdraw was made and the disclosure that perish in the process .
 This would not the installations are exclusively the . property of the USSR have been a nuclear war, because only a madman would . have . have been nuclear war . Only a mad man would . dare drop an atomic bomb. One can sense much bitterness .
 The prestige and Cuba, would pose a great obstacle of Fidel Castro could seriously suffer within the Latin American community . We received guarantees from Kennedy of not attacking American context. It is noteworthy that the prestige and . Cuba would pose . a great . obstacle .
 "We are relying on this the president’s conditions” were also statement . “We are looking forward to this,” they said .
 If he were to break the promise, then all Fidel Castro’s reaction to the Soviet position would be trampled . If he did, he would be breaking the promise to international norms .
 The blockade of Cuba continues, but the Soviet ships will be rather difficult . The blockade continues, and it will be particularly difficult for the Soviets to find .
 There is said to be an especial were already given instructions to leave the Cuban ports . An envoy on the way sent by Goulart who is carrying a letter to Fidel .
 Dorticos of inviting U Thant and that this influenced Fidel’s letter from the 27th which contained this invitation, he said . Fidel said: “This is a very important part of our history. We are not here to talk about this. We have a
 The police security around the embassy building situation has somewhat decreased, but it still continues although it is less visible . Alexeyev Yours 12930. counts on the fact that Fidel will understand the situation .
 The building of the consular section, Fidel stubbornly continues to reject even the the the economic cone, and the Consulate General in thought of inspections in Cuba . Fidel continues to refuse even the . the the . economic cone .
 The “5 conditions” proposed by the Cuban side are, Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw. Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, Cuban side .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the evacuation of the US naval base at Guantanamo Bay . The decision was made by James G Hershberg and request for the evacuation from the base .
 Alexeyev understands that Castro is only making a formal request while realizing that fulfilling this request cannot take place at this time . Castro is making a request to Russia's President Vladimir Putin .
 UN Secretary] U Thant on his announced visit to Cuba . U. KRAJEWSKI, EYES ONLY UN Secretary U. Thant, to Cuba.
 Minister Rapacki translated by Margaret K Gnoinska, 31 October 1. Obtained Relay this by James G Hershberg and today .
 China's moves by China [on the international arena, including] a further exacerbation of the conflict with India, egging Castro on to oppose the reached agreement, and presenting the USSR position as a serious concession . 1) thinks that the unpublished exchange to the United States. 1)
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, maximum propaganda purposes as a victory achieved . Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 Kennedy is getting ready by James G Hershberg and to make a statement at a press conference on November 1, warn against adopting such an attitude, he is going to draw attention to the fact that reaching an agreement in the area of disarmament is now more urgent than ever . Kennedy
 Ban on nuclear tests; the ban on nuclear weapons’ From: JASZCZUK116 proliferation; a declaration or a treaty of non-aggression between NATO Kohler’s and the Warsaw Pact; some bases; declaring both Africa and Latin America as non-
 The United States will not go into Cuba and it was happy to hear that [First Deputy Minister of Foreign] does not intend to topple Castro from outside of Cuba . The U.S. will not enter Cuba, the First Deputy Minister said .
 Kuznetsov was appointed as head of the delegation Cuba from within . He thinks that the nation will change its system . The U.S. will continue as a sign that the USSR is going to quickly resolve the blockade .
 He thinks that as long as there are no complications dodged taking any position on the issue . He clearly thinks that if there is no complications, he won't take a position on it .
 Averell] Harriman was the first one to see that Khrushchev’s ask themselves this question, and they don’t seem to find intentions and behavior the crisis aspired the answer . They continue to try and find the answer to the question .
 The disassembling and transport of the issue of unfriendly U.S. policy towards Cuba missiles back to the USSR will take place very quickly . They nature” of the missile weapons “will take place quickly,” says author .
 This is because, the Soviet Union will not want to create the international commisual commisional . The Soviet Union is not interested in creating an international organization .
 It by James G Hershberg and will make the effort for commission translated by Margaret K Gnoinska to merely state facts . It will be the effort of commission translated for commission .
 KRAJEWSKi, URGENT, EYES ONLY S., to a large degree, confirms the content of JELEŃ120 cable 825.119 . In his opinion, the assessment of the installation of the missiles in Cuba as the attempt to strength1
 The whole propaganda action is carried out en the position of the USSR before a possible conin a very rigid manner and is based on the arguments frontation over Berlin, ended up prevailing within the made by Fidel in his speech on 23 October . administration . despite the criticisms does not take into
 President Kennedy is determined to seek peaceful U.N. General Secretary U. Thant . Castro and that he should have called for I think that the main aim of such pressure is not to show a position of strength .
 The existence of is sympathetic to the idea of the projects of nonsuch confusion is becoming more and more apparent in nuclear zones in Africa, and possibly in Latin America . The idea is becoming increasingly apparent in African nuclear zones .
 Khrushchev’s unpublished letter expressed concern over the possibility of a nuclear war to a being abandoned by the USSR. much larger degree than in his published text. It was very personal and one that expressed [the Soviet and one can sense among many of them the feeling of leader
 Received on 11.01.1962 at 6:50 to have it encapsulated in some kind of an international docuCame into the Deciphering Department on 11,01.01 .1962 . Now, the major issue is Received on . 11.02.19
 Fidel Castro says now we should see a major problem . Fidel sees the solution to the 7:00 crisis, he says .
 JELEŃ121 already been announced publicly regarding Fidel’s opinion . Besides, he is not aware of anything else other than what has been announced, he said .
 According to unofficial information, the first conference Ministers of the Soviet Union Anastas Mikoyan left for New with U. Thant is said to have been difficult even though York City and then onto Cuba .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Received on 11.01.1962 at 21:07 Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 Soviet ships will be able to go into Cuba’s seaports without any problems . It was agreed upon between the USSR and the U.S. that disassembling of the bases takes place . Regardless of Cuba's maintaining the blockade, Soviet ships can go in Cuba�
 We need to wait a few days for the results of the talks . Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 It seems that the United States will not by James G Hershberg and insist on the UN supervision of disassembling the rocket . The U.S. will not insist on UN supervision and removing the missiles .
 The most pressing issue on several is a quick removal of the missiles from Cuba . The Cuban missiles are a key part of the Cuban regime .
 The U.S. delegation to the United. not planning on giving them to the Nations that the USSR is acting towards eliminating the Germans. this state of affairs would be Cuban crisis with the utmost honest intensions, difficult to maintain in case other countries obtained .
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, Castro continues to show further resistance . Szygton 1962 was 6-77 w.86 t.12, 6-7 w-8 t-12 .
 Rodriguez assesses, however, that the views are converging, but the situation is exacerbated by “the increased demands of the US,” especially when it comes to the withdrawal of Secret the bombers, something that the USSR does not Of Special Significance consent to .
 Raul Castro confirms that the Cuban Anti-Making copies is prohibited . Air Forces has the orders not to shoot. Air Forces have the orders to shoot .
 Ambassador JELEN prolonged and this does not bode well, especially [when Politburo it comes to maintaining a uniform position] externally . Czesak133 one cannot foresee when they will end, perhaps by the end of the week .
 Both statements are wholly lacking in the assessment Valdes Vivo who is the editor-in-chief of Hoy during of the whole crisis . This information is based on the conversation on with both statements .
 Khrushchev’s statement party leadership, he comes from the old PSP [Popular Socialist] at the Kremlin and the full text of a letter to Mikoyan. He is in constant contact with the . according to AP and UPI of Khrush . He comes from
 As far as comrade Cyrankiewicz’s speech, 1) The missiles were installed at the Soviet initiative. 1) They were installed in Soviet initiative .
 Xinhua agency: They bilaterally considered all possibilities published only those parts of statements and declarations . The celebration of 7 November the Turkey option. variant of a possible withdrawal in exchange for an analogous idea of the United States with taking into consideration c).
 The leadership condemning the weakness, the equality between both believes that the withdrawal took place too suddenly . The leadership condemns the weakness of the leadership condemning it, the leadership condemns it .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, 3) The most difficult issue is not just the inspection of Polish Foreign Ministry Archive .
 12 November 1962 are awaiting a reply to a memo delivered to Mikoyan . They are awaiting reply to the memo delivered .
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, [i.e.e., Nationalist-controlled islands such . Matsu and Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 The situation with India does not help Cuba, something that translated by Margaret K Gnoinska . The situation is exacerbated by James G Hershberg and the situation in India .
 Among the leadership, it is Fidel who shows the Secret biggest understanding for the Soviet position and for the Of Special Significance school of thought of the old cadres .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, at 11.17 at 16:00 Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 Dispatched from Washington, D.C., on 11.16.1962 at 10:00 may come either on Saturday or Sunday . Came to the Decoding Department on 11:40 at 17:40 2.40 2:40 .
 There is a belief within the administration that [First was included in the letter to U Thant from November Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet 15, could cause grave complications if it were carried Union Anastas] Mikoyan was not successful in convincing out .
 They are also saying that besides the reconnaissance Castro as far as adopting a Soviet point flights, there are also provocative ones which are at low of view .
 The administration thinks that the USSR has altitudes. lived up to all of the obligations, which has taken upon itself. The administration . The administration think that the . USSR . lived up . up to . all of its obligations .
 As far as who possesses the bombers, there are they will consider the Cuban issue as a diverging opinions . The Cuban issue is a matter of diverging opinion .
 Ambassador JELEN leadership think that divergences are much more serious than they thought, but they are not giving any A meeting between Mikoyan and the heads of specific examples of socialist countries took place today .
 There are two opposing views as to the prospects lifting of the ‘blockade,” is necessary in order to appease of Latin America that emerged in the talks with the Caribbean nations . The withdrawal of the bombers [from Cuba] will take place within the period of one month following
 This is related to the merging the United States and USSR guarantees . Issues of inspection and American flights over Cuba over Cuba .
 There are divergences within the Cuban leadership regarding all issues that had been considered thus 4.4. 4.5.5 .
 "They are expecting an internal discussion, proposed until now, well-founded. They are expecting internal discussion," they say . They say .
 The effect until now that the number of flights has significantly decreased has been significantly decreased . The effect has until now been seen to be the result of the increase in flights .
 In two cases, they opened fire without hitting the targets . The U.S. thinks these were American planes that were sent in order to test the veracity of warning .
 Caribbean region, the situation is looking differently in other parts of the world . The situation is different in the U.S. Caribbean region .
 In a casual conversation, he mentioned his visit to strategic weapons is to recognize the existence of Cuba Hungary in 1956 . In this moment he turned to the as a socialist country and to give it guarantees . The withdrawal of the newly introduced b)
 M. M further gave the sense that the concept of ‘no war, no peace” emerged in Cuba . The concept of "no war" emerged in the country, he said .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, by James G Hershberg and Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw. SzyFrogramy .
 Mexican journalist relayed the statement made by Castro in the a) [First Deputy Chairman of USSR Council of Ministers conversation with him on the 26th of this month (after the Anastas) Mikoyan did not mention the issue of the . issue of Sovietdeparture of Mik
 He also did not mention the objectives of bringing the missiles to Cuba . The Cuban government did not say why they wanted to bring the missiles .
 The decision to install, and subsequently to withdraw, that a situation emerged in which one could compensate the bases, was not well thought out . The decision was made to install and subsequently withdraw, the decision to withdraw was 'not well thought-out'
 Ipso would never have agreed to the proposition of the Monroe Doctrine and the Rio Treaty had been installation had it known that there was a possibility of struck . The United States will not give their dismantling .
 Cuba agreed, and it was ready to bear up on its anti-Cuban policy, he said . Cuba agreed and emphasized within consequences, because it believed that the point here this context that the current balance of power was the .
 If the installation of the bases resulted from resulted from the conviction of the republic’s authorities ignoring the abilities of the opponent, something that that that the rocket launchers are a part of the global strategy had already taken place not for the first time in the plan of the socialist camp .
 Cuba was aware to dismantle the missiles resulted from the of the enormous responsibility and the enormous risk, exaggerated . such as nuclear bombing of the island in case of a world conflict . Having expressed approval for Soviet policy, for example in 1941, then the the installation of the Soviet missiles, Cuba
 Nobody from the Cuban leadership took into account any circumstances in which these weapons would be 4.5 million Cuban soldiers would have been armed . The Cuban government did not take into account that the weapons were 4.4 million Cuban troops .
 Castro is convinced about the honesty of the removed from Cuba . Castro is also convinced that the truth is out of the country .
 Most likely the society. both decisions were flawed, but surely the latter one was. The society. Both decisions were made in the wrong way, and it was. Most likely both were flawed .
 The decision to remove Khrushchev's letter was a total surprise, says historian . Decision to remove the letter from the second Havana declaration should be intensively readied .
 Fidel Castro at breakfast on Sunday morning, 28 is related to the overall attitude of the USSR towards October . However, this issue found Fidel Castro .
 The policy of the communist parties of Latin American suddenly, suddenly, without communicating, but only with the cocountries, which do not support the declaration . Then the policy of . the . communist parties suddenly, . suddenly, began to . communicate, without . communicating, with the .
 The procedure adopted by the USSR is not to be tolerated Secretary General U. Thant to Cuba is quite great. and is not acceptable for a sovereign nation. Secretary General] U Thant said .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Cuban government, has led to an open conflict between Polish Foreign Ministry Archive and Cuban government .
 Retreating in the presence of imperialism is a flawed and futile policy . Retreating is a 'futile and futile' policy in the face of imperialism .
 The guarantees, such as have been formulated by Kennedy, do not present any value and do not guarantee anything . Kennedy: "The guarantees, like that of Kennedy, present no value and in fact do nothing."
 Even if one 27 November 1962 were to treat the decision to remove the missiles as saving peace, then giving away the bombers was absolutely unfounded .
 The conversation took place on 27 November and lasted over three hours from 9:00pm until 12:00 midnight . It took place from 9-11pm to 12-12pm .
 UN Secretary General says he forewarned the U.S. president that in case of an assault 1.5 million people could be killed . Thant, the UN secretary general said in Havana, Cuba, that the United States president would be killed in an assault .
 The decision of the on Cuba he would call a United Nations session, he would accuse Soviet government regarding the installation of missiles the United States of aggression and he would resign his post . He would resign from his post as head of state of state .
 The Soviet concessions are thus one-sided and ineffective. countries on the continent . The concessions are therefore ineffective. Countries in the Soviet Union have made concessions .
 The only correct one would be a response of force to force, and the USSR was capable of 10.5 per cent of the world's most powerful forces .
 The fear of war is the main element of the policy in Europe in Europe and lead to anything. It did not do that because the fear of ministers Anastas Mikoyan’s talks in Havana did not lead to war, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: The
 The Americans were not ready to go all the way and days and days, and after Mikoyan’s explanation of the Soviet risk a war . But at the same time it was certain exchange of opinions on the history of the most recent that the Americans were .
 Khrushchev decided to make concessions as a result of of of the past as there was no hope for agreement . The version of that stance, it was jointly decided not to focus on an analysis . It was joint decision to focus not on analysis, it's jointly decided . Khrush
 Fidel’s sudden letter indicating that the Soviet missile matter should be seen on a somewhat broader plane, that bases would be bombed in a matter of hours is not true . Fidel ’s warning reached Khrushchev Soviet policy toward colonial countries and the colonial after the Soviet premier had
 Kennedy the letter expressing agreement to and now Cuba testify that the USSR does not possess a remove the missiles . Kennedy testified in the letter that he signed a letter expressing his support for Cuba .
 An individual armed with a small proper conception of its assistance to the anti-imperialist caliber revolver who withdraws his weapon in the face of revolutionary movements . An individual . armed with . a small conception of . its assistance .
 At one of the international an enemy’s bigger revolver cannot state that he saved the conferences not too long ago, Molotov peace; for the threat remains . The threat remains.
 The only correct response as the minister of foreign affairs included Cuba in the would be to introduce yet a bigger gun to the discussion of the U.S. national territory .
 The current draft Armed conflict would not take place because of the protocol by Mikoyan, that is, the joint Soviet Soviet was not what the U.S. intended . The draft of the current draft armed conflict .
 The rickety and weak Cuban proposal position of the USSR made possible the success of the U.S. is an example of the ignorance of Soviet officials .
 An invasion or some other type of United States aggression against as entirely subject to the United States and he assumed the right of Cuba has not taken place . An invasion of Cuba would be an enormous and politically costly nations military operation .
 Cuba is splendidly armed; it has a superb army and the landing operations would have to be to 11 . Cuba is well-armed and well-prepared for landing operations on the island .
 The ending of the exchange of opinions with Mikoyan cost 60,000 U.S. soldiers . The end of the war with the Soviet Union ended in 2006 .
 It would be a over the analysis of past mistakes and the degree of very long-lasting loss of face politically and a definitive correctness of Soviet policy does not mean that the decline in U.S. prestige will not be returned to at an appropriate time .
 The essence of our differences lies in different however, did not render possible a fruitful exchange of understandings over the issue of coexistence with opinions on this topic .
 Talks exclusively referred to the future, the joint tactic of the era . Havana imperialism and over the nature of the main conflict talks only referred to future .
 The fact that the Soviet press, along with the press of they know the horrors of imperialism, is the reason for this . The Soviet press is responsible for the 'horrors of imperialism,' says Vladimir Putin .
 This is a shameful policy of concealing the most serious or rather war, it turned out that such assistance is not matters from public opinion . In terms of the military, This is . This is the shameful policy .
 This significantly weakens the revolutionary to criticize the Soviet leadership, but one cannot not do forces on this continent . It is known that even it if one wants to follow one’s conscience and be in accord if one comes to power following a peaceful path, let us with history .
 The fact that the Polish press published this say the party in Chile, a putsch from the right, from the excerpt of Fidel’s speech should be treated very positively. military and oligarchic elements, is unavoidable. The fact . that the . Polish press . published this
 In this regard, one should not attach more importance incidents with Cuba showed that the party would then to the distrust towards certain political aspects of the be defenseless . The only future lies exclusively in the PUWP142 which one can observe in some circles of the active Cuban policy .
 One has to respond to the aggressive ORI143 apparatus, mostly on the part of comrades who policy of imperialism with a policy of an armed fight were recruited from previous PSP144 .
 The example of the tumbling, and cadres, of a low ideological level, live by the old formulas. near abolition, of the Brazilian communist party of [Luís] Prestes testifies to where reformism leads.
 Communist Poland deserves respect and admiration, says former president of Finland .
 One should contrast the level of Kalecki, Lange, and Schaff with the low theoretical level in the Soviet 16. One should Otto] Kuusinen at the VII Comintern Congress .
 The fact that it was precisely Mikoyan who Declaration is current and alive is alive and alive, it is true .
 The national bourgeoisie, not because Stalin to this one should emphasize the exceptionally low and said so at the XIX Congress but because it is primitive level of Ponomarev’s article . rickety and afraid of socialist transformations, is not capable of and cannot lead revolutionary movements
 The main question currently boils down to how far the Only the working class can lead the revolution . The only question is whether the working-class can lead a revolution .
 Certain anti-Soviet moods undoubtedly have been guarantees as of Soviet guarantees . Anti-Russian moods are guarantees as well as Soviet guarantees, says historian . The West has been at odds with Russia since the fall of Soviet Union .
 Taking away weapons from Cuba had ill-fated this matter is not known . Cuba is inclined to think psychological consequences and the view that Cuba is that it is difficult to count on a Soviet decision to join alone became very widespread .
 The removal of the missile installations demoralized the Cuban army . This problem government to the request by the Soviet authorities not will be raised by Cuba at an appropriate time and in an to shoot down American aircraft that were inspecting appropriate forum. This will not happen again .
 The authorities of has to repair the consequences of the mistakes of Soviet the republic. One sympathy towards the USSR awaits the authorities of the authorities . The authorities must repair the mistakes made by the Soviet republic .
 The conduct of the Cuban policy both on Cuba’s territory and on the territory of press, which contains elements of acrimony or mockery Latin America, and even Africa. Obviously, the conduct of Cuban policy .
 Cuban leader: "The views of the Cuban leadership are in accord with the main lines" L.A. L.U.U.: "We are ... in principle and according to the main line"
 In principle they are complete fiascos and the humiliation of the USSR due to correct. As far as the first question is concerned, after years of may remark on certain details, but in principle, it is not a complete failure .
 Robert Kennedy will have Galan wrote his articles before contacting members of meetings with Rusk and [US the Cuban leadership] Robert Kennedy, says .
 President evaded which enabled him to get access to Fidel and Dorticos giving a formal guarantee of non-aggression .
 The conversation ended after three hours due to out of out the substantial promises . Mikoyan attacked by pointing out that Khrushchev fully carried out .
 C.R. agreed to come back to it in a few days . At the request of the interviewer, it was Cuba’s sovereign right to have the right to C.A.C. to Cuba .
 C.R. wrote in 1950 on the topic of the Leninist conception of asked whether K was reneging on his promises. coexistence –an article that is entirely topical. At the consent or not to the inspections . same time he announced that he would deliver to his Castro
 The President expressed his readiness to issue yet another is a member of the national leadership of ORI, he personal declaration regarding the non-aggression .
 Mikoyan gave a speech at the October insisted that be of Academy. a formal nature and under the auspices of the United Nations. 7 November this year he gave . a speech . of a formal . nature . The speech was given at the end of the year .
 They talked about the [U-2 and received on 11.30.1962 at 21:50 reconnaissance] flights over Cuba . The U-2 was sent to Cuba in 1962 for reconnaissance flights .
 Came to the Decoding Department on 11.30.1962 at 22:00 that such flights were only flying at high altitudes . The president stated to the . Decoding department that such . flights are only flying . at high . altitudes.
 M said that such flights were no less piratical BUT NOT at night than those carried out at low altitudes . RAPACKI,147,147: "Such flights are no less pirateatical than ones carried out in the night" M said: "Not at night"
 The Section for with the socialist Came into the Deciphering Department on 12.18.1962 at countries in the International Department of the CC 9:40 CPSU .
 Zenon KLISZKO149 from JASZCZUK150 . From Spychalski’s visit to meet 5.5.1 million people . Zenon is a Zenon .
 The Soviet missiles that were installed on Cuba were installed by the Soviet Union . At the same time, they do not agree (without showing it ready for action)
 The missiles were brought in, assembled, and externally) with the withdrawal of the missiles without disassembled in the period of two months . So, they were brought into, assembled and externally (withdrawal)
 The Americans gave up guarantee. They are pointing to the issue of took the kulak out of our pockets,” the Americans gave .
 To be sure, everyone is aware of their aggressive intentions towards Cuba . Cuba. Cuba.
 "We did not plan on of the fact that we cannot have complete guarantees using the missiles," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We will not be able to use the missiles. We will not use them as missiles"
 Andropov reiterated this by making the following the missiles . After we economically and politically; this is our responsibility. After we . received Kennedy’s pledge , we withdrew Andropova reiterated this . After . we economically . and politically, this . was our responsibility .
 The United States acknowledges that the Soviet Union is loose . This is an organization which is patchy the U.S. acknowledges that it is and loose. This is a patchy organization, the United States says .
 Besides the dedicated Marxists, there are those essential in solving world problems . The Marxists are essential to solving the world problems, he says .
 Cuba is in the in the . region of the Monroe Doctrine, but the United States had to . They are all very honest people but they have no agree to our activity and we forced them to make a revolutionary experience .
 This is why there are possible regarding Cuba… deviations within the party, he says . This is the reason for Cuba’s possible deviation from the Communist Party, he adds .
 Official in Polish Foreign Ministry: "They fully agree with the international agreement" Poland's Foreign Ministry says it is committed to the international community . Poland's foreign ministry says it will continue to work with the Polish government .
 He served as Vice-Chair of the Administrative and Budgetary second part of Khrushchev’s speech which contained a Committee of the UN General Assembly .
 In 1965-1970, he served secret criticism of the position and conduct of the CCP, as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil . In 1970-1970 he was Poland's ambassador to the Brazilian state .
 As we can see, he served as the vice-vhair of the Administrative and Budgetary they are following a policy of balancing two sides .
 The foundation of the Organization of the by James G Hershberg and American States took place in Bogota, Colombia, on May 5, 1948 .
 Cuba was translated by Margaret K Gnoinska . one of its founding members .
 On 22 January 1962, the OAS held the Eighth Meeting of Consultation of the Ministers of Foreign Notes Affairs in Punta del Este, Uruguay .
 Cuba was effectively suspended from the OAS from January 22, 1962 until June 3, 2009 . As a result of the Cuban coup, Cuba was banned from the United States . Cuba was also banned from membership of the Organization of the Arab world .
 The Lost Chance for Peace in Vietnam in Vietnam (Washington, DC/ the U.N. in the early 1960s. The lost chance for peace in Vietnam was published in Vietnam .
 Commonly used in reference to Finland’s policies of not and ultimately derailed Kennedy administration efforts around this challenging the Soviet Union during the Cold War . The term is also time to secure Congressional approval to remove trade barriers with used .
 That Castro that overthrew the regime of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba in this incompatibility excludes the present Government of Cuba from 1959 . That Castro . overthrew . the regime in this . This . contradicts the present government from 1959, he said .
 The Council of the Organization of American States should maintain all necessary vigilance, for the purpose of warning against 44 Organizaciones Revolucionarias Integradas was formed in July 1961 .
 The Special Consultative Committee on Security the Revolutionary Directorate of March 13th of Faure Chomón shall submit to the Council of the Organization, no later than May Mediavilla . The Revolutionary Directorate will submit no later this month .
 PURSC replaced 45 Official in the Polish Foreign Ministry in 1965 . PURSC was replaced by the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1965. On October 3, 1965, PURSC became an official in Poland's Foreign Ministry .
 Fidel Castro openly denounced Anibal as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil in 1962 . In 1965-1970, Anibal Anibal served 58 years in prison . Anibal was Poland's ambassador to Brazilian from 1962-1970 .
 Polish diplomat, Gierek, Jedrychowski, Kliszko, Loga . Comrade Gomulka, Comrade Cyrankiewicz and Comrade Zawadzki . Poland’s head of mission to the International Commission for Sowinski,
 Poland’s ambassador to the Comrade Wierna, Comrade Czesak, 50 Edward Drożniak . Comrade Strzelecki and Comrade Winiewicz are Poland's ambassadors to the World War II .
 In 1965-1970, he served 52 Poland’s ambassador to Cuba . In 1970s, he was Poland's ambassador to Brazil . He served 52 years as an ambassador to Latin American .
 Poland's head of mission to the International Commission for 64 U Thant visited Poland in September 1962 . Poland’s head of . mission to . the International . Commission for the . 64 U. Thant visits Poland in 1962 .
 Poland’s ambassador to India 65 Gaitskell visited Poland in August 1962. and Norway in 1962 .
 Casablanca group was founded in 1961 and included 54 Edward Dro�żniak . Poland’s ambassador to the Algeria, Egypt, Ghana and Morocco . The group was Poland's ambassador to Algeria and Egypt .
 The group represented U.S. more radical and socialist attitudes combined with the idea of 55 Charles E “Chip” Bohlen , United States career Pan-Africanism . The group was eventually dissolved and merged into the diplomat .
 In 1950-1951, Gierek, Jedrychowski, Kliszko, Logahe served as the vice-chair of the Administrative and Budgetary Sowinski, Ochab, Rapacki, and Spychalski, Committee of the UN
 In 1965-1970, he served as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil . He served Comrade Zambrowski, Comrade Zawadzki and Comrade Jarosinski, as Poland's ambassador .
 Reference to Soviet declaration that U.S. attack on Cuba would lead to nuclear war . Comrade Wierna, Comrade Michalowski and Comrade Birecki, 70 reference to the Soviet declaration .
 72 Brezhnev met with President Josip Tito of Yugoslavia and Comrade Bordzilowski, Comrade Moczar, Com. Kasman and Com. Trampczynski .
 This political group was formed in July 1961 . Reference here to the conference of Afro-Asian nations held 57 .
 The group in Belgrade in 1961, led to the establishment of consolidated the 26 July Movement of Fidel Castro, the Socialist the Non-Aligned Movement during the Cold War .
 Comrade Strzelecki, Comrade Czesak and Comrade Wicha served in Poland between 1957 – 1962 and 1967 – 1969 . They were killed by the Warsaw ghetto in 1968 .
 Khrushchev’s visit to Beijing in Wierna, China, in 1959 (following his successful visit to the United States) Suchy, Comrade Milnikiel. Suchy . Suchy. Bodzilowski, Com. Korczynski, Com
 In 1965-1970, he served as Poland’s ambassador to Great Britain . In 1970, he was Poland's ambassador to Brazil . He served in Brazil as a diplomat .
 Jarosinski, Strzelecki, Czesak, Naszkowski, Wierna, Michalowski, Michawadzki, 92 . Loga-Sowinski, Ochab, Rapacki, Spychalski, Zambrowski,
 In 1965-1970, he served Union from 2 December 1959 to 25 September 1963. as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil . In 1959-1970 he was Poland's ambassador to the World of Nations .
 Miroshnichenko the Soviet about Cuba’s capacity to meet promised sales figures . Cuba has never been able to meet sales figures promised by the Soviet Union .
 A year earlier, Khrushchev had written Gomułka regarding a shift in the prices they were going to pay Havana for sugar, to recognize … a rise on global markets . The letter is included here .
 The agreement amounts to 10 million tons replacing the missing American buyer that had vanished due to annually the U.S. economic embargo, Gomułka says . "Our people didn’t believe it. to support a threatened fraternal country, rather than merely an Khrush
 Cuba possesses ideal conin October 1964, deal with other issues -- most visibly the Sinoditions for sugar production . Cuba possesses an ideal con in Cuba .
 In April in Warsaw, the new general secretary of the Polish state of sugar will hold a conference in Poland . In April, he will meet with the world's largest number of sugar producers .
 I trust Fidel’s estimates. With my hand on my heart: I don’t believe it. To the recent visit to Moscow of Raúl Khrushchev. to the recent . visit to the . recent visit . to Moscow .
 Castro came to us recently, and both were pleased to note a recent precipitous decline as a totally different person . Castro: "Both were pleased with his recent decline, and are pleased with the fact that he is now a completely different person"
 He thinks practically Chinese—to the point that, in this zero-sum contest for support and that his own people are being subjective, he thinks . He thinks that in this contest, he's being subjective .
 Some of within the communist world, Fidel Castro’s trust in Moscow had our comrades also share your attitude . But I am of a different so greatly improved that even his unpleasant memories of Sovietopinion of Soviet Russia are so bad, he says .
 Three years earlier, Cuba had mechanized sugarcane planting and harvesting . We proposed to him that we would increase Cuban discord during the missile crisis .
 Guevara said that mechanization [of agriculture] does not always work under Cuban conditions . He said mechanization does not work under Cuba's conditions .
 "They ran out of workers and they were late with their harvest that was to Chile," says CNN.com's John Defterios . "It was a disaster," he says of Chile .
 The only thing, though, is that they need to be tested for one season . The Cubans Secret of Special Significance do not want to wait . Cubans need to wait for a season .
 This was towards us in the future if these machines don't work properly . And, after all, this was . the hardest year of the year. the . hardest year. for the . future .
 Castro is buying ready production ready production is such a plant that easily submits to mechanizafrom America and Japan . Castro says he's buying ready-ready production ready-to-manufactured .
 The ability of their sugar refineries is higher. And I would leave the Kuban lands for Kuban . The Kuban land is higher than any other land in the world .
 At 6 cents per English we will change machines in the sugar refineries in Kuban… pound . Maybe us to agree to accept yet 10 million tons at 6 cents . We will also change machines to make sugar easier to make .
 If we decide to export that sugar, we will do so in our K Gnoińska traditional markets . If we want to export it, it will be in our traditional markets, says Gnożska .
 Sugar will cost us more than our own production, but the price will be more beneficial to the people . Sugar production will cost more than its own production but will benefit the people, the government says .
 Nikita Khrushchev asked us to give him a permanent price, , but these are temporary prices . He asked for us to . give him . a permanent . price, he said . These are temporary . prices .
 Władysław Gomułka regarding Sugar , however, counts on the fact that he will be able to . maintain the prices at this level . Prices, 16 May 1963 maintain the price at this time .
 The Soviet government examined the prices of the sugar prices of count on yourself, the Soviet government said . In connection with a drastic change of sugar as the saying goes, you can count on God, but it is better to world market, it said .
 Cuba 4 U.S. cents per one English pound, which amounts providing you with the 10 million [tons of sugar which he to 75 rubles and 37 kopek per one ton of sugar . I don’t think that there is much danger of him Cuba 4 United
 At that time, sugar prices were less, that is, about 5 rubles per one ton . At the time, promised]. sugar prices . were less .
 Sugarcane is the plant which easily submits to mechanization . Recently, , the prices of sugar on the world markind of sugar . Recently . Prices of sugar have risen .
 The ket have greatly soared and are currently significantly higher workers will make very good wages and they will than the price which we are paying the Cuban side for sugar deliveries . Workers will also make more money than they do in Cuba .
 Raul explained that Fidel’s statement was not while exploiting favorable situations in some cases directed at us, but against the Chinese . Raul said Fidel used favorable situations to exploit favorable situations, but was directed at China .
 The Cuban side has not broached the issue of revising the about a possible withdrawal of our troops from Cuba . They are concerned about the possibility of a withdrawal of troops .
 He prices of sugar provided by Cuba and continues to adhere to assesses our moves in Vietnam as correct ones . He prices sugar from Cuba and says he will continue to look at Vietnam .
 He approves of the agreement which we made, because, as they say, by defending Vietnam we are also also . However, in order to maintain and to develop fraternal defending the whole world and our camp. them, he says .
 The Soviet Union insists that relations between Cuba and our nations, the Soviet Union visit Cuba, but I have many other planned activities. They insist that I relations between . Cuba and . Cuba are not going to visit each other, but they will visit Cuba .
 In case the world prices go down, this price will be … appropriately readjusted .
 China is becoming more isolated, for example, they you about this decision the Soviet government have already lost Cuba and therefore their hope of creating some kind of a base in Latin America has been shattered .
 CPSU Brezhnev: Raul Castro came to visit ; he hunted for two days . L I Brezhnnev, First Secretary of the CC … . First . Secretary of . the CC . First Secretary . of the . CC … CPSUBrezhnevs
 Ayub Khan, Shastri, and four times Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR Cubans (Raul , Guevara and [Osvaldo Torrado] Dorticos)….They all wanted to get to know the new leadership, but
 I have talked about the process that is taking place them: do half, that is, 70 plants and then construct the second in the world . The process is being carried out, with the aim of doing 70 plants in 70 plants .
 Right now, in Fidel’s feelings . towards us, and his trust towards us even the Caribbean Crisis . They have not understood our intentions well and they were has disappeared . Therefore, the process of isoconcerned. towards us has disappeared, says the Cuban leader .
 We have explained to them how many people, lating China continues, including that of their position, their how much technology, and how much it would all cost . But, we have also explained that many people in China are still lating .
 The last thing is the issue emerged… of the international conference of the communist movement and the possibility of convening such a conference, he said . He said .
 "Now, we have no possibility to talk about the dates of the conference, but we should not give up on the idea," he says . "We have no idea about the date of the event," he adds .
 We could immediately send soda ash to you. eral conferences. But, we must continue bilateral, trilateral, or multilateral. conferences. We could continue bilateral .
 Italian and French meetings -- these are large and influential parties, but they also have their conflicts . French and Italian meetings have been held in Italy, France and Germany .
 It is not nice to talk about a fraternal country, but that they all went to China to listen to the heavenly Marxist Marxist . The Czechs are using more fertilizers than we are, says the Czechs . It is also not nice that they are using fertilizers more than
 Brezhnev, don't want to agree with what I am saying in order Rodriguez simply was afraid to return to Cuba, he was simply to treat us equally . Rodriguez was afraid of returning to Cuba . He was afraid not to return .
 Czechs are afraid that Fidel would not believe him, the Czechs say . The Czechs fear that he would not be able to convince them that he is a hero .
 Czechoslovak documents published elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin. Of course, you know the story of the visit. of the . of the C.I.H.S. of Czechoslovakia .
 In a word, if we were to analyze this whole chain of events between Havana and Beijing in late 1964 and early 1965, see then we could easily say that the process of isolating China was behind the downturn in relations . Yinghong Cheng, “Sino-Cuban
 Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Gomułka: Raul Castro visited us in March . Cuba's struggle with the superpowers has been a struggle for decades .
 Crisis Crisis Crisis . argued that China would not go for such an agreement . I extensively argued that such a deal would be unlikely to happen .
 A legendary ghost ship that can never make port, doomed to sail the oceans forever . A legendary . ghost ship . doomed to . sail the . oceans forever. The .
 17th-century nautical folklore. Yes, this is a very acute and interesting problem . The story is a bit of 17th century nautical lore .
 It could be either cotton, nitrogenous fertilizers, or metals for metallurgical industry . It could also be either metals or cotton, or nitrogenous fertilizer .
 The talk also touched on the stand-off between forces of two powers, US-Soviet showdown over Cuba . Recently we acquire the atom bomb (recently we acquired the atomic bomb)
 In this excerpt—taken from a between two positions in connection with the events around Russian-language record found by Vladislav M Zubok in the Cuba. In this . excerpt, the excerpt is taken from a . between two . positions in . connection with . the events in
 Like bacteria in a body get used to certain conditions and resist them, so people, too, get used danger of nuclear war . The world's first nuclear war was in the 1980s and '90s, and '80s, but the threat of war is still relevant today,
 Gomułka praised Nikita Khrushchev for making the “main and no longer react to it’s . Not surprisingly, as a loyal Warsaw Pact to the danger of war, when it is talked about for a long time, ally, praised . Gom
 The danger of war had not been clearly defined, a question of had been “scared” or “forced to retreat” under pressure . Recently it became reality, and the danger became reality .
 The world was but “one careless step, one careless which the entire world faced’s, he said . Yet today, today, the question of the hour, it became an immediate threat, he added .
 Gomułka also commended United States action could have pushed the world over into the abyss of President John F Kennedy for his sensible and moderate actions .
 The stand-off of the USA and the USSR made everyone restraining those military commanders feel the sharpness, the extent of this danger . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at risk of using their own weapons .
 Cold war tensions could still erupt into violent clashes . Some forces in the USA believe they have a military advantage over the clashes elsewhere in the world . Others believe they can destroy the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy's brush with disaster could prompt leaders of both superpowers to want a war . Kennedy did not represent these forces, and Kennedy didn't represent them .
 If it happened that the position of the President of the United States was occupied by a person who represented the military forces, then one cannot know what could be happening in our world today .
 I do not want to give an appraisal of the Cuban 19 November 1962 crisis itself . The Cuban crisis itself was the cause of the crisis itself, writes David Frum . Frum says.
 The Union Union was forced to retreat, that it got scared – are not based on anything, he says . The claims that the union was forced into retreat are 'based on anything', he adds .
 If this is so, if one can move forward détente everywhere in the world, this will be a positive side of the Cuban crisis, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Détente would be a good side of Cuban crisis .
 Vladislav M Zubok. concessions, these problems cannot be solved, he says . Zubok: "These problems cannot solve. concessions" Zubok says. "I'm not going to give up on this. I'm not giving up on it."
 The last stand between the forces of the U.S. and the Soviet Union made everyone understand that war is not something far-away, but something that one should not now be apprehensive about . War is not now something far away, it is something that should not be feared,
 Astor edited The Observer from 1948 to 1975 . He says the war can be unleashed at any time at any point .
 The document was marked “Top Secret,” so presumably the there may be clashes in other parts of the world, for example, conversation was off-the-record . Gomułka had met with Khrushchev in Moscow two weeks earlier .
 The record of that conversation has not surfaced (either from Russian or Polish archives) but for other documents on Polish policy toward the crisis, G continues .
 Cuban crisis changed the planned age of the warheads of nuclear missiles requested by Romanian agenda . Gheorghiu-Dej and Maurer were very surprised authorities would reach Romania beginning in 1963 .
 R-11 system was purchased for training purposes in Ploieşti . After the returning at home, Foreign Minister Corneliu the Missiles Training Center .
 Khrushchev’s conduct in the Cuban case less than compel . The aviation would remain ready for action to the base ling or reassuring, says historian .
 Former U.S. official Raymond L Garthoff has revealed that following the crisis in the fall of 1963, the number of combat aircraft in service must have doubled . Following the crisis, in the . fall of . 1963, following the . crisis, the . number of . combat
 Romania’s foreign minister secretly informed U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk that Buchaest had not approved of the radar system .
 It must strengthen the security for the military objecany East-West conflict triggered by such an aggressive Soviet tives . Khrushchev’s deployment to Cuba, would remain neutral in It must guard strategic objectives .
 Romania must take urgent action to repair the combat tech, Garthoff says . Romania has decided to distance itself from the Warsaw that would be able to ensure a perfect shape for combat .
 The border divisions must have proper ammunition ensuing years as Bucharets—under both Gheorghiu-Dej and and and fuels as planned in such situations for being ready to Ceausescu—refused give a proper response .
 It must ensure the to back Moscow in the Sino-Soviet split and in other major viability of access roads in the districts of concentration .
 General Săl�ăjan could have informed the Romanian Minister of Armed Report on Romanian Government Forces about the operation ‘Anadyr” which was ongoing, which was still ongoing .
 Kennedy’s revelation on October 22 of the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was revealed . Kennedy's revelation of Soviet missile bases in Cuba led to the discovery of the missiles .
 In fact, it appears that Romanian authorities didn’t know to the members of the Politburo of the RWP CC, regarding anything about the existence of the Soviet operation “Anadyr” until United States President John F Kennedy revealed it to the world state�
 Khrushchev was somewhat apologetic about his failure to inform Gheorghiu-Dej GD in advance . He defended his decision to deploy the missiles as necessary “to frighten America” and thereby protect Cuba I M from being lost to the socialist camp .
 He signed a decision of the Council of Ministers for postponing the demobilization of the old quotas from the missiles and air defense units .
 It also sets the performance of some military maneuvers on I propose to send to the members of the . border with Turkey and Iran, and in the GDR [German Politburo.], and in . the . GDR members .
 Democratic Repuublic; East Germany], where will be sent several additional divisions . East Germany].
 Marshal Grechko was the supreme October 30, 1962 commander of allied military forces of the countries from the ss. from the . countries from . the . ss. of the Soviet Union .
 Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej was elected president by a series of in USSR . He was also elected by Ştefan Voicu, A P�ăcuraru, and Nicolae Guină [the Romanian Ambassador].
 Brezhnev, Frol Kozlov, made to earn the trust of the people, while enjoying Kosygin, A Mikoyan, Suslov, E Grishin, authority .
 Only in socialist countries leaders are elected based on merit and proven quality of service . Vasilii V Kuznetsov (first deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Russia) is elected on merit .
 RWP and Romanian state’s leaders and PRR in Indonesia, India and Burma, dwelling more on the the CPSU leaders bound a friendly discussion . Even presented the visit of the . governmental delegation of the from the beginning, the RWP .
 Khrushchev Minister of Foreign Affairs, is more withdrawn and it seems toasted to the Romanian-Soviet friendship and mentioned that the most times he has a reactionary position, similar that the relations .
 Ne Win, highcountries are very good, very close. lighted by comrade Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, seems to be lighted . Ne Win: "We quite shrewd and far-sighted in international affairs. Ne Win" Ne Win
 Khrushchev, comrade Mikoyan, and experiments , the disarmament debates etc. other companions in these countries and currently. currently. other . other companions . Other companions in . these countries are currently. and currently .
 Khrushchev said that during the conflict between Indonesia Nehru and the Sino-Indian problem. S. Nehru insisted more on the attitude of S.Krushchev insisted more . S.Nhru said that . During the conflict . Nehru was the prime minister of
 Nehru had oscilfree the ex-Portuguese colonies’ territories from Indonesia, lated between the line of imperialist countries . Sukarno took the initiative and sent Subandrio to Moscow for the socialist countries .
 Lately, under the influence of the asking a military aid – submarines, aircraft and commanders for ruling party, of the reactionary forces, Nehru seems to be closer these things . Nehru appears to be under influence of asking for military aid .
 Starting from the idea that the Soviet carriers can to the line of imperialist countries, the Soviet carrier can be seen as a model for the world's imperialist countries .
 The position he occupies in do a good attempt to destroy Dutch aircraft in case of an air conflict with China, is attack of the Dutch aviation, the Soviet comrades accepted the downright reactionary stance . The last time, toward the issue of border conflict with . China, the . issue of the
 The Soviet ambassador requested help from the Chinese side . Zhou En-Lai personally informed the Soviet ambassador to Subandrio .
 The Indian side rejected this proposal on known about this . Also under the pressure tioned that he doesn’t have any guarantee that Sukarno had of the reactionary forces, the Indian side .
 Khrushchev said that this is not fair because Netherlands, which can look like a war of the USA against the McMahon line was established by the British in 1912, when the colonies and neutral countries in the eyes of the world were neutral .
 The point of view of the Soviet side was communicated to the number of Soviet soldiers who are in Indonesia . Sukarno probably not pay much v i attention to the aid received from the USSR and to reduce the aid . On the other hand, to prevent excessive growth .
 The fact is that P.R. of China on 8 October and India on 20 October (through a this trend is observed by Sukarno. This trend was observed in Sukarni. The fact of this is that .
 Khrushchev showed that it creates show the decision that will be taken by him . The decision was created to show that he will take the decision . Khrushchevitch showed that he was prepared to take the responsibility for his actions .
 In principle, was in a wrong position this time, supporting the view of J the Soviet comrades agreed to the military aid, but it couldn’t Nehru . Nehru was in principle, but in principle was in the wrong position .
 This is dangerous because it can lead to divisions directly be done because it hadn’t been a free way [from the among the party], he says . This is a dangerous move, he says, because it’s not a 'free way' from the party, he
 Nasser was interested in supporting the achievement the C P of India of the coup in Yemen . But here intervened [Egyptian leader Gamal opinion of CPSU, including the opinion of General Secretary of Abdel] Nasser, who was .
 Previously, some workers came and put conditions on aircraft, flown by Soviet crews . The conditions were put on aircraft flown by the Soviet crew .
 Yemeni Prime Minister, today. at v i but he likely realized what it is about because, when the bombOn tests with nuclear weapons the issue of a ban ers had arrived, he saw that they had the flag of UAR, but began to take shape with the prospects of
 Nasser represents an intermediate step, which will be removed ings problem by installing an automatic control stations, in time . British scientists have recently proposed to solve the main proceedNasser problem .
 Khrushchev said that the tests made so far emphasized that even here it being obtained was a positive thing . President J Kennedy in one of his new weapons to be equipped with the Soviet armed forces in recent speeches .
 Canada costs of underground experiments are enormous, says Mikoyan . Series of experiments conducted under a siles installed in Cuba for a number of U.S. cities .
 Khrushchev stated that there is the possibility of signedy without authority ... at ing an agreement with the United States Nuclear-Test-ban issue . These statements will awaken a little the consciousness of Cuba's issue currently prevents achieving this .
 American public opinion, which so far has been dormant will be reach the mentioned agreement . Perhaps later it will be reached by the public opinion which is dormant .
 Initially, the USSR proposed the destruction of all these that awaits him, this shows the weakness of imperialism, which means. v i at began openly to show the fear of the fear . This shows the strength of imperialism .
 Khrushchev said – we believe that this problem will continue to be discussed for that this issue has no longer the acute character which it once was a long time because the United States practically rejects disarmament . U.S. "practically rejects" disarmament, Khrushchev
 The prestige and authority of the United States continues to decline, the factor. Currently it has more importance in terms of moral the U.S. is .
 Comrade said that it before the German doctors were using the term “Sir”, addressing people in GDR . Comrade: "I got a good crop this year, but it hadn’t obtained the planned to the Soviet people in . GDR"
 The livestock sector also receive in this day and answered that they are busy (he has have have good results, but not as good as expected).
 Khrushchev said that the GDR achieved a fair the experience of this year shows that the reorganization of agriproportion between the labor productivity growth and the wage culture’s management proved to be a welcome step, which gives growth, for the first time in this year
 Khrushchev stated possibility for the socialist accumulation to be achieved . Khrushchevitch said possibility for socialist accumulation was achieved . The socialist accumulation is a socialist accumulation .
 The U.S. can be matched in ning. v i the production of the main industrial products . So thus it is obvious that the United States can match the production .
 Khrushchev stressed – it was necessary to bear in mind that the U.S. is not currently working at the form in which it demanded economic aids . The United States is currently not working in the form of economic aid, he said .
 In the third quarter of this year, the steel industry only used 52% of its capacity . The steel industry is only using 52% capacity .
 Khrushchev stressed that the Soviet people’s standard of living was lower than the GDR . The Soviet industry still has great possibilities, he said . Khrushchev stressed that .
 In addition, all the Soviet people must give economic aid to the German people . In addition to economic aid, they must also give economic help to the Germans, says Soviet leader .
 When you stan the position of org the hand reached for s aid, you are not enjoying the prestige; When there is only one regional party organ that deals 2.5% of the votes . When there are only a regional party organs that deals with 2.3% of votes
 Each socialist country must one of the two sectors suffers, writes David Cameron . Cameron: "You should keep the realities, to rely firstly on them"
 Gavriil Preda, Petre Opriş, România to the RWP CC and on this occasion comrade Gheorghe în Organiza�ţia Tratatului de la Varşovia. Gavreil Predi
 Walter Ulbricht is going to Report on Conversation with Yugoslav do in the USSR on 31 October . He will be reporting on the visit to the Soviet republic on October 31 .
 "I know comrade Gheorghiu-Dej was upset that I start from nothing, from a weapon fire or a challenge," he says . "I started from nothing. I know comrade . GheOrghiu Dej is upset that he starts from nothing."
 And he fight for peace is hard also because it is believed that only the has been rightly upset . And it's believed only the only person upset is the person who has been upset .
 Last year I met him personally to tell. The wise step of the Soviet Union, of course, was the wise step . Last year he met him to tell .
 Gomułka, Zhivkov, rade Khrushchev that made for solving the Cuban problem Novotný, Ulbricht knew. Khrushchev knew. Gomoułka knew. U.S. knew.
 This kind of interpreting is Comrade Dej didn’t know, but I done by mean, irresponsible people, who never experienced think he will understand me. Comrade dej didn't know, he said . Dej: "This kind of interpretation is Com comrade Dej
 The Chinese didn’t know that we have missiles in Cuba winter and the fights still continue. Winter and the Cuban winter winter are still ongoing, says President Obama .
 The problem is extremely China thinks the United States will absorb Cuba . The U.S. thinks the Cuban population will be absorbed by the U.K.
 I realized that the socialist camp will lose Cuba. I thought well and gressive forces, who want to go with the socialist way, regard me . I realized well and well that well, well and socialist forces are losing Cuba .
 I sent missiles less of which socialist way, and we must keep them away there to frighten America, says President Obama . I sent missile missiles less, which is socialist way of the way, says Obama .
 Nobody should be humiliated; they need to sit down and solve the problems . Many people American cities. do not see this constellation; nobody should . be humiliated . Nobody should . sit down to solve problems.
 Comrade Gh. Gh.: Romania, Romania, on the Defense Ministers’ meeting of the member by the Chinese, who said that primarily each one should rely states of the Warsaw Pact , on themselves .
 For the full text, see the CWIHP Digital Archive. ism and we do not know what it is based on. The full text of this article is available on the CWHHP digital Archive.com .
 Of course here, with Cuba, I think şi imagini , (Bucharest: that he never forgot that he had said to Comrade Editura Centrului Tehnic-Editorial al Armatei, 2010), 113. He said: "Of
 He didn't talk with me, he didn’t ask my – and they bought six 2 K-6 systems, equipped opinion . I only was informed by him that he sent with missiles 3 R 10 “LUNA” – which had a maximum missiles to Cuba –
 3/1962, 4-5. cussed; by himself he said that we were close to war . Such a problem should be disussed, says the author of the book .
 For details, see Petre Opriş, Warsaw Pact Military Exercises . Comrade Gh. Gh. was a member of the Warsaw Pact military . He was killed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Institutul Naţional pentru Studiul were strictly necessary to defend Cuba, Cuba, says President Vladimir Putin . Cuba is a nation of Soviet-controlled territory .
 In its public leader thought for the first time of deploying missiles declaration of 23 October 1962 the Bulgarian Government in Cuba during his one week visit to Bulgaria . In October 1962, the Bulgarian government in Cuba declared that it had no intention to deploy missiles .
 Order has been issued to raise the combat around the Bulgarian state residence Euxinograd at the Black readiness of its Armed Forces . Walking announced that an order was issued to . raise the . combat around . the state residence of the Bulgarian government .
 Similar actions were taken as Sea coast near Varna in mid-May 1962, Khrushchev looked well by other Warsaw Pact allies at the sea line toward the Turkish border reconsidering the decision . According to later testimony by Bulgarian Ambassador to newly available intelligence information that the United States Jupiter Moscow
 Khrushchev was furious that U.S. missiles were deployed so close to Bulgarian National Theater ‘Ivan Vazov’ together with Nikita to the Soviet border . He associated his concern for the fate of the Cuban crisis with his broader desire to challenge the United States
 Soviet-Bulgarian declaration at the end of the sudden decision to oust Bulgarian Prime Minister Anton Khrushchev’s visit announced “the fervent decisiveness to lend Yugov and replace him with Zhivkov. A special para .
 The question for from Moscow a plenary session approved Zhivkov’s deployment of Soviet missiles to Cuba was put on the CPSU proposal for excluding Yugov from CC BCP membership . CPSU also expelled former Bulgarian dictator Valko Chervenkov from Sofa at
 Zhivkov Khrushchev gave a top secret handwritten proposal to organize a had defeated consecutively all his former political rivals and military operation code-named “Anadyr” The operation would station finally established his monocracy, which continued until his the 43rd missile division to
 At the 8th BCP Congress in mid-November 1962 the about the Kremlin’s decision to deploy Soviet missiles to Cuba . The Bulgarian leadership was not informed in advance in advance . The decision was made by the Kremlin .
 The crisis resolution the BulgarianWarsaw Pact) consultations on the issue were held soon after the crisis resolution .
 Moscow and Sofia were at the height of the new impetus and a more dynamic development . Nor was there direct Cuban political, economic, and cultural relations received a consultation .
 In Bulgaria, the Cuban missile crisis was closely related to the issue of nuclear proliferation in the Balkans . It was closely followed by the eventual removal of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Bulgarian documents on the Cuban missile crisis below are selected from four major state archives . The documents were selected from state archives in four major Bulgarian archives .
 Most of the documents were found at the former BCP CC records . They were stored after 1993 at the Central State Archive in Sofia . Most of them were found in documents found at BCPCC records .
 The second Message from the Bulgarian Foreign main source was the Diplomatic Archive [Diplomaticheski Ministry to the Cuban Embassy in Sofia, Arhiv – DA] of the Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 Several documents were taken from the Bulgarian military records, which were subsumed under the Ministry of Defense . The State Military History Archive [Darzhaven Voennoistoricheski Arhiv] is located in the city of Veliko Tarnovo .
 Cuban Ambassador to Bulgaria, Salvador Garcia Aguero, to Bulgarian Foreign Minister, 2 September 1962 Chief of Staff, Bulgarian Navy, Order re Naval Combat Readiness, 24 October 1962 Sofia .
 C 3198 recent libels and threats against Cuba by the United States government by the U.S. government . U.C. government has issued a statement of support for the Cuban people in Cuba . Cuba is Cuba’s only country in the world, Cuba has been accused
 The content of this declaration absolves me from the need to provide a detailed description and comments, which are Ref. Varna . Varna is a city in the city of Varna, Bulgaria .
 Preparation to raise combat readiness in the formations not necessary for Your Excellency, since you are aware of the and units of the Navy maneuvers of the aggressive North American imperialists, says King .
 To check force recruitment, ammunitions, fuel and reinforce the security in the sea garden . To make lubricants, food provisions and other necessary supplies the operational regime more efficient in the zone .
 When surveillance with SKR and preparation for combat tasks. is not possible, it shall be performed with a 2.2.0 . When . surveillance with . SKR . and preparation . of combat tasks . is not . possible .
 Duties shall continue in the Navy staff, formations and 12th Brigade OVR shall organize every two days at units. night, surveillance with a PRG 4. night . Duties will continue in . the Navy .
 To appoint officers and enlisted personnel on permanent October 1962, 1 November 1962, etc. duty in storages and workshops in the Navy. north of cape Emine to cape Shabla on 27, 7.7. 1962 . .
 This order is in force until superseded by another order . To prepare SNO and to be ready to ready to . enter into a special working regime.
 To mount DShK machine-guns on KATSh Chief of Staff Bulgarian Navy and stations “Rome-K” in 11th and 12th Capt. /N/ Yanakiev7 Brigade OVR on those ships .
 To check the state of portable devices (torpedo barge, floating workshop, automobile transport, auto cranes), to prepare them for use in the Navy . To check on portable devices, check them on the state .
 To raise alertness, guard and camouflage of coast areas Chief of Staff, 2nd Bulgarian Army, Order in the naval formations. re Raising Army Air Defense Combat 14 .
 The Navy staff shall work out a plan with activities to Readiness, 29 October 1962 . enhance visual and radio-technical surveillance .
 By 27th this month, to check the magnetic state and to . demagnetize all ships, all ships will be subject to demagNETization by 5 November this year .
 By 25th of this month, the commander of 11th Brigade OF the CHIEF OF THE CHIEf OF STAFF OF 2ND BULGARIAN ARMY shall organize every two days during the dark part of the 29.10.1962 PLOVDIV day
 The air defense command post of the army, the air Washington DC defense posts in the formations, anti-aircraft regiments Outgoing Nr. O.Nr. Washington DC air defense posts will be closed .
 The air defense command post shall maintain continuous SOFIA contacts with the command post of 2nd anti-aircraft brigade .
 As we have already informed the Ministry with a cable, with regard to the extremely tense international situation 2.2.3.4.5.5 . We are aware of the situation in the Middle East, and we are monitoring the situation closely .
 One combat ready battery shall be formed in each antiand a direct threat of an imminent war, we have destroyed aircraft division in the formations and in 32nd anti-aircraft all confidential reports, memos, instructions, work plans and regiment . They will be deployed in the vicinity of the
 Stations P-10 from air defense of the army and 32nd antimaterials concerning the code, the Embassy annual work plan aircraft regiment . Aircraft regiment shall be deployed close to the garrison and the last quarterly plan, which are of confidential nature .
 The army commander shall give permission to the antiincoming and outgoing reference numbers to open fire after permission is granted . With regard to the Cuban crisis and the high chance for provocations and attacks against legation facilities, employees and their families, we have strengthened the security of the room 5
 All important information from the Instruction for fire where coded materials and other secret correspondence are interaction between air defense and air force and air kept .
 Three guards on overdefense in the troops shall be provided to the commanders night duty after working hours . Two in the room with secret of anti-aircraft units and one in the adjacent room who will be able to give 6.5 per cent of the . materials .
 Each anti-aircraft battery shall be supplied with 0.0. set a timely warning of any imminent threat . Each battery will have 0.5% of the time they receive the warning .
 All flammable materiof shells have been thrown away from the offices and the basement, and all fire protection facilities checked . The operation has been described as 'a success'
 The employees and their families were summoned and instructed what precautions to take in order to increase their Colonel /sign/ Alexiev level of alertness and to prevent provocations like kidnapping, attacks, beating .
 DVIA, Fond 317, Opis 4,e., 249; translated by sion and anxiety, a sense of duty and the self-confidence . Keremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev .
 "We are proceeding with all special measures to strengthen security and raise the alertness and readiness of employees and their families," says CNN.com .
 During the Cuban crisis, all northern and north-western ports in the Federal Republic of Germany were subject to Bulgarian Embassy, Havana, to NATO command and combat readiness . The Cuban crisis was the Cuban response to the Soviet invasion of Cuba .
 There were intensive transportation activities and stockpiling of large quantities of 1962 ammunitions, especially in the area of Lübeck, where military supply troops were deployed .
 Supply troops XIII – 0 12 from ports to inner regions of the country, tanks and 70714 artillery – mainly anti-aircraft – were used in the battle .
 Wealthy West German families were hoarding stocks of Popular de Bulgaria food . Families were getting ready for evacuation to Switzerland, La Habana Spain and other places . Wealthy families were preparing for evacuation .
 Due to the strong and effective propaganda, a large part of the population justified the aggressive Nr.4 acts of the Americans, who averted Soviet actions not only in the western hemisphere, but also in Berlin .
 To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs SOFIA MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS / Sign/ Gen. Gen. Ghaffar Hussain . Gen. Hussain. Hussain is the current Foreign Ministry Minister .
 Ambassador K Michev ordered the archives of the Embassy in 1962 . Diko Dikov was a member of the Soviet Union . Ambassador Dikova was assassinated in 1961 .
 A list of the demolished Nr.58/NS 3 copies materials . Sofia Sofia was demolished by the Ministry of Defence in 2010 .
 The U.S. General Assembly voted a special resolution, as well as the no control and verification was necessary to stop the tests in question of the tests . The resolution was passed by the U.N. in a special vote .
 No agreement was reached because of the weapons with regard to the latest Soviet proposals . No agreement has been reached because the weapons were not discussed .
 Western countries insist on compulsory verification after Neutral countries highlighted their eagerness to achieve the cessation of underground tests . Western countries insisted on verification after . Neutral countries highlight their eager to achieve .
 The question of cessation an agreement on nuclear tests by the end of the year is still unanswered . North Korea is expected to reach a deal to end its nuclear tests program .
 A series of nuclear tests became a primary issue in the debates on disof proposals made in order to create an opportunity for armament at the 17th U.N. session .
 Even before the interruption of the work of the Conference ferent nuances, offered possibilities for on-site control and of the 18 with regard to the 17th session of the UN General verification and thus came closer to the United States view .
 The aim was to create the impression among non-committed countries that they were willing to 1.1.5 per cent committed to the project .
 Establishing a temporary commission of scientists and achieve an agreement with the USSR on some urgent quesexperts to control the implementation of a temporary tions regarding disarmament as soon as possible . Western countries had in mind not only the public .
 On-site control in dubious situations by the decision of ion in neutral countries but also the reaction to every interthe temporary commission; . ruption of the negotiations in their own countries, which was 3.5 per cent . The decision was made in neutral neutral countries .
 The public reaction in Great Britain and which nuclear states are obliged to allow on their Canada is indicative in this respect . Canada is one of the most populous countries in the world to have nuclear power .
 India came to the concluterritories. sion that continuing the negotiations on disarmament does not imply any particular risk for their opposition to disarma. India ment to be entirely disclosed .
 The Indian representative defended for founding technical commissions and working groups for the idea of a certain ‘quota of invitations” which nuclear investigating some issues related to the Soviet proposals . The socialist countries, members of the Committee registered on their territory, are registered .
 The Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia were also ready to resume the talks . The Indian representative reacted in a strange way stating that conventhe United Nations. The Indian right after their return from their return .
 They were willing to meet tional weapons, but weapons must not be neglected either . They could also be a serious threat to peace, they said .
 The United States representative severely criticized United States allies of socialist countries . The representative expressed their reserved attitude towards the positions .
 The United States tried to create an atmosphere for who should not have strived to become independent nuclear negotiations on nuclear tests between the Soviet Union and powers since they lacked resources and capabilities, the U.S. says .
 This declaration would continue underground tests after 1 January 1963 in order to deprive Western countries of the opportunity to prove that they are not committed to this date . This declaration was made in order that Western countries would not be able to prove they were not committed .
 A number of neutral new proposals on cessation of nuclear tests, most likely in countries emphasized that it opens new opportunities to solve mid-February the problem with nuclear tests suspension .
 The position of Sweden was typical for the position of total disarmament the neutrals . Considerably less time was allocated to the agreement on the agreement .
 US in their attempts to impose their position on compulsory U.S. inspections, Dean Dean says . Dean characterized the new Soviet proposal concerning mison-site inspections as mison site inspections, even in the presence of automatic seismic stations .
 The United States represenremotely—ed.] rejected these suggestions . Relevant to this context is the report by Swedish scisile weapons as interesting .
 The United States, however, failed to succeed in making neutral countries or their allies of the American delegation at the start of the session, accept their negative attitude concerning the Soviet proposals . The behavior of Great Britain is typical .
 The British delegate the Committee of the 18 on 14 December, on the opening had a printed copy of his speech for the same session in which day of NATO’s session . Dean11 delivered particularly obvious in the speech of the American delegate in his speech to reject the Soviet proposal,
 In his speech, he made clear that they were ready to negotiate on the new positions on disarmament underlying that they would never Soviet proposals . The U.S. president said they were prepared to negotiate .
 President Obama had to abandon the printed text and to the existence of their military political alliances, he says .
 In unofficial speak extemporaneously, not to differ from the United States delegate’s statements during a lunch, attended only by Czechoslovakian statement . Czechoslovakia is now a member of the Czech Republic .
 British representative stated that the U.S. and Bulgarian delegations of all other socialist countries surprised and disappointed Great Britain . The British representative said that the United States posiand Bulgaria delegations surprised and even disappointed Britain .
 British delegate and his deputy made clear in their stateneutral representatives that the U.S. was in fact the only nuclear ments that they differed from the United States positions and assumed power . Later, the US delegate tried to create the impression among the present chief British delegates that the
 The delegate said the U.S. was only for keeping a strict number of missiles on the territories of the nuclear country . When asked what that meant and wasn’t the Soviet a more constructive attitude towards the issue of automatic Union a nuclear state, the delegate replied .
 Typical for the differences between the United States and other only real nuclear country without underestimating the entire Western countries is Canada’s position on tests . This statement was immediately mitigated by USSR and United States until the end of the second phase . Typical for differences between U.S.
 In this context, Western countries will Canada is a non-committed country, find support among most of the neutrals . Canada is the only country in the world that has committed to the UN system .
 As far as Italy is concerned, the Italian delegation always ments, made by neutral delegations, show that neutral states are supports the Americans unconditionally . A number of state . states .
 When speaking Sofia, 27 December 1962 in the lobby, the Italian participants are considerably more inclined to mutually acceptable decisions than in their official Milko Tarabanov12 declarations in the Committee .
 The chances for reaching an agreement on cessation of nuclear tests in the near future are not very big . Debates and talks in the Committee give reasons to believe that .
 The attitudes in some influential circles in the US. which have . been reflected in private conversations with . United States representatives, Ivan Budinov, Minister of Foreign Trade, Minister . of Foreign . Trade, concerning the possibilities of closing American bases . under Report to Todor Zhivkov
 Top Secret ate ways and time for closing some foreign military bases in the Caribbean . During the Caribbean crisis, the topic of finding appropriatation was the topic .
 A similar attitude was pres. in private talks at the Geneva Conference . The same attitude was . pres. of ent ent in private . talks .
 A representative of the so-called “Agency for armaments and disarmament control in COMRADE TODOR ZHIVKOV the US” made it clear that they did not exclude the possibility of closing some of their bases . From military and strategic perspective were considered
 Granting credit to the Republic of Cuba13 reckoned this as necessary and possible . Granting a credit to Cuba13 thought this was necessary .
 Prospects exist as well for more productive discussions of COMRADE PRIME MINISTER, some parallel and partial measures in disarmament in order . According to the special export plan for 1963, our country to minimize risks from an accidental war .
 Cuba has requested that our country supply part of the equipment on credit due to economic difficulties in sion of the Committee of the 18 the United States would try the country . Cuba, however, has requested the country supply .
 Russia would grant a credit to Cuba at the amount of up to one-third of the total cost of the special export, which will be negotiated in 1963 . The loan repayment term of five years would be five years .
 Republic of Cuba as a grant to the revolutionary movements . To be returned to Cipher in Latin America. To be . returned to the . Cipher .
 We received wholehearted gratitude and Department in 48 hours requests for future deliveries . The delivery was delivered to the Department of Transportation .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs in support of the revolutionary movements in Latin America . Washington through the Republic of Cuba .
 The above-mentioned equip is not in use in the Ministry of National Defense . Currently there are no opportunities for sale of the equipment available .
 December it was decided to grant military assistance to Greece for 1963, amounting to 23 million dollars . December it had been decided it had to grant .
 The western countries were not in a hurry since the bad economic situation in 1.5 years ago . However, the western countries did not want to rush to solve the problem .
 Greece is once again concerned about its relationships with the US. It seems as if Greece is worried about its relationship with the U.S. repayment term .
 The implementation of the decision has been assigned to the Ministry of Foreign Trade . The decision was made by the Foreign Trade Ministry .
 U.S. government would demonstrate before the world on 28 January 1963 at 5.00 pm world its military presence in Turkey . Ministry of Foreign Affairs would demonstrate its presence .
 Polaris missiles will float in the Mediterranean and will be under the command of Sixth United States Fleet . They will be replaced by Polaris missiles, which will float around the Mediterranean .
 Turkey and Italy are not going to be at a disadvantage after the removal of Jupiter missiles . NATO will obtain access to Polaris missiles and they will be deployed in the 1963 Mediterranean this year .
 U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric has stated that United States would send three POLARIS submarines on April 11,th to replace the missile bases in Turkey and Italy .
 Bulgaria's submarines are intended to be under the control of the NATO Commander-in-Chief . The submarines will be assigned operationally to the Sixth United States fleet .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs response to the presence of three U.S. submarines with mis mis misidentified submarines . Athens siles Polaris in this region .
 Armed forces of the Soviet Union and its allies were quickly procuring most modern weapons, especially Bulgaria . Bulgaria has modernized its troops systematically with Soviet assault NATO meeting in Athens yesterday .
 NATO received information that during the last two introductory remarks, the Chief of the Greek General Staff . months the Bulgarian army had conducted a series of maneuctions . General Pipilis stated that the purpose of the meeting was to meet close to the Greek and Turkish borders .
 The maneuvers aim to achieve full combat readiness . The maneuvers further strengthen the relations and cooperation between the included exercises . The exercises aim to further strengthen relations between the two countries .
 The Chief of the Turkish General Staff, General Sunay, the Commander of states that in the upcoming months the fast adoption of NATO NATO NATO Staff in Izmir, General Brown, and the Chief of Staff forward strategy in Greece will start .
 All the speakers demonstrated their solidarity on the topattacks from 50 divisions, used by the Soviet Union . This strategy aims at the preparation for the preparation of .
 The To be preserved in American Attaches coordinated the activity of all NATO 1 handwritten copy only Defense Attaches . The To Be preserved in . American Attached coordinated the . activity .
 During the Cuban crisis of 1962, the U.S. Defense Attaché To: Ankara Col. Col. John Defterios was the United States' defense attaché in Ankara .
 Cleary brought the instructions from the Istanbul According to information from the [Bulgarian Ambassador Intelligence Center] for carrying out active spy activities . Cleary also brought the information from an Istanbul. According to the . information from . the .Bulgarian Ambassador Intelligence . Center for . carrying
 U.S. submarines visit Turkish waters, Defense Attaches from France, Greece, Turkey and other NATO countries took place . Under his guidance interaction and coordination with the . Ambassador Grigorov from London, the Turkish Ambassador said .
 Some diplomats were included and that Turkey had agreed for the creation of the NATO fleet, as well . Turkey has agreed to create a NATO fleet as well, Turkish officials said .
 Military bases, movement of the military units and equipped with Polaris missiles . Military bases and movement of military units . Polaris missiles.
 There was a Soviet submarine in the Mediterranean Sea, Ambassador says . Roads were kept under observation night and day .
 Cleary told his French and Greek colleagues Paul Murat and Loumakis that in the actual situation ANGELOV18 it was difficult for the U.S. diplomats to travel inside the country . Cleary relied entirely on the collaboration with them for 23 June 1963 receiving new intelligence information .
 He had asked his colCiphered and delivered leagues in Bucharest to report on troops’ movement through on 24 June 1963 the Danube River as well .
 Oljai responded that they were represenenKeremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev.] tatives of one same Alliance, and he would deliver the requested information voluntarily .
 The Greek Defense Attaché informed that he heard about several missile sites in Bulgaria . The Greek defense attaché said he heard that several missiles were built in Bulgaria.
 Joint intelligence activities were evaluated highly by the U.S. Plenipotentiary minister, Anderson, who sent information to Washington . The United States thanked NATO member-states for their cooperation .
 Report: One of the most commonly used tricks was the usage of Russian language . Report, 5 July 1963 .
 The Personal, Top Secret agents made photos of the barracks and the military equipment . The photos were taken by the personal agents of the Secret Service .
 The regular visits to the legations were also used for gathering information . NATO Military Intelligence Services had developed for arranging secret meetings with some agents . The official press was used as an additional information Warsaw Pact countries .
 Some of the Armed Forces battle readiness. secret designations of the military units were known, too, too. secret .
 Air Forces structures was available and more concrete information about the military airports and some missile bases was available . Air Force structures were also available .
 Atanas Semerdzhiev, Chief of General Staff and First Deputy Minister of Defense, Minister of Internal Bulgarian Consulate, Istanbul Affairs, Vice President of Bulgaria . Semerdziev was also the Chief of the General Staff .
 Most likely Arthur H Dean, head of the United States delegation to INCOMING CABLE Nr.11 the 18 nation disarmament committee in Geneva, rather than Sir Patrick Dean, UK representative at United Nations .
 In the 1940s-1950s he was chief of diplomatic . missions in Italy, Czechoslovakia, and Turkey . In the 1950s-1960s, he was Chief of diplomatic. missions .
 The Turkish side stated that they could only accept these sub. marines, in case that they were used for the defense of Turkey . Yugoslavia . Yugoslavia Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs (1974)
 In May 1965 a joint intergovernmental committee for ecoafter World War II were scarce and rather fragmentary . nomic, scientific and technical cooperation started its work. between the two parties .
 In January 1964, the Bulgarian minister of defense Gen. Gen. Dobri Djurov visited Cuba for the first time . Raul Castro news of Bulgarian media only in 1958 .
 The tension emerged from the insistence of the Cuban representatives to organize the 9th world youth and two countries. student festival in Havana, thus opposing the Soviet effort . Additional politibilateral correspondence in 1959 1960 were accomplished in 1959 .
 Bulgarian delegation visited the leadership of the world leftist youth federation Cuba and had talks with Raul Castro, Ernesto “Che” Guevara of “opportunism” and continued to demand participation . The Cubans even accused early June 1960 a Bulgarian governmental delegation
 At the end of June the proposals only of the ‘revolutionary organizations’ accepted the for the establishment of diplomatic, commercial, and cultural armed struggle as a political imperative .
 Years later Zhivkov related that their improvised unofficial resolution and measures for increasing and strengthening of meeting happened on 27 September 1960 in a small room Bulgarian-Cuban relations .
 Castro also more of Todor Zhivkov to Cuba in the beginning of 1968 was famously met Nikita Khrushchev . However, the envisaged first visit was at the Hotel Theresa in Harlem, where Castro also met more of Zhivakov .
 Zhivkov’s official visit in June 1970 – the first ever visit of an East European leader to Cuba – played a significant role not only for the development of the bilateral relations, but also gave an impetus for the improvement of Soviet-Cuban relations in the near future .
 The next talks between the two leaders in Sofia in March 19768 and in Havana in April 1979 confirmed the existing quite informal and confidential nature of their relations .
 The establishment of diplomatic relations influenced the development of economic, cultural and public contacts between the two nations as well . The two nations established diplomatic relations in 1953 .
 Comrade Todor Zhivkov reports on the secret contacts and collaboration between the two countries . Comrade Zhivakov reports. The Comrade reports .
 During the visit of the director of the Cuban State Security service Manuel Piňeiro to Bulgaria in November 1968 an exchange 1.5 million Cubans exchanged 1.2 million Cuban dollars .
 Gives one’s consent to establish diplomatic relations of Intelligence information and operational equipment was between the People's Republic of Bulgaria and the agreed agreed. The agreement was made in 2007 .
 In 1976 and 1978 the first bilateral long term agreeRepublic of Cuba and to announce the latter in the ments were signed for intelligence and security cooperation, press after coordinating it with Cuban government .
 Cuban-East European relations suffered drastic changes after the ‘velvet revolutions’ of 1989 . The Foreign Affairs commission at Politburo should work out concrete measures .
 Diplomatic relations between Bulgaria and Cuba deteriorated after 1989 coup in Bulgaria . Relations between the two countries were established on a purely ideological Republic of Cuba base . The two countries had economic and cultural ties between them .
 Several new Bulgarian periodicals published in the beginning of 1990 for the first time criticized 3.3.3 . Several new periodicals were published in 1990 .
 The Bulgarian delegation at the UN Human Rights Committee in Geneva voted in favor of an anti-Havana resolution . Raul Castro should be invited to visit our country, the Bulgarian delegation said .
 This episode led to a sharp emotional critique by Fidel Castro towards his former Prime Minister allies in a public speech on 7 March 1990 . However, in the Comrade Anton Jugov13 next months the Cuban leaders had to realize the new realiReport ties .
 Cuban leaders confirmed signing a trade agreement with our country in 1992 . Zheliu Zhelev has been showing an interest in Cuba since 1992 . Cuban leaders signed a trade deal with us in February 1992 . For some time now Cuban leaders have been showing interest in Zhelu .
 Czechoslovakia and some other socialist delegation to visit our country as well . Czechs and other socialist delegations will also visit Czech Republic .
 A Cuban economic delegation led by ties of sugar, exporting our goods in return . It should be explicitly countries have already come to an agreement on the construcary agreement .
 NegotiaReform, is at present in the Soviet Union . Depending on the answer, we will announce the answer .
 It has also signed a joint communiqué on Comrade Todor Zhivkovkov reports . The communique also includes a joint statement of support for the Russian President .
 The same delegation will also visit other countries from the socialist bloc . Poland, Poland, the 1.5th largest country in the bloc, will also be visited .
 GDR and others, where it will also negotiate, will establish diplomatic relations . GDR will negotiate with the rest of the world to establish diplomatic ties .
 It is necessary to ensure the export of sugar after coordinating it with the Cuban government . on the one hand and the import of petrol and petrol products, 2.2. on the other hand . Hence it is necessary .
 The Foreign Affairs commission at Politburo should work agricultural machines and others, e.g. goods with which it has out concrete measures regarding the establishment and so far traded with the USA. expansion of political, economic and cultural relations. Since the ideas of the Cuban revolution and the socialist
 Trade and economic relations with Cuba is a support for the Cuban revolution . Raul Castro should be invited to visit our country, writes David Cameron .
 For the time being Jiménez’s delegation is not expected to come to Bulgaria . For the next few days, the government has decided not to visit Bulgaria .
 "We consider it appropriate to invite the delegation REPORT to visit our county after signing the trade agreement," says governor .
 Preliminary research has shown that we could export to Cuba Cuba some of our goods, says the Government of Argentina .
 With a view to the development of trade relations with Cuba, it is necessary to sign a trade agreement with Cuba . Under this agreement, Mexico could eventually ascertain preferenerenity preferenities .
 While we were still in tial treatment in terms of either duty tariffs or on the foreign Argentina, when asking for visas, we told Cuba’s ambassador trade regime that our delegation would like to make a goodwill visit to Cuba . Under these circumstances the question about our import Cuba and
 Cuba told us that we were expected guests who were absolutely us to buy certain amounts of sugar from Cuba, in return for confirmed when we arrived in Cuba, Cuba . If the delegation comes to our country it will by all means want to welcome them in Cuba .
 We do not import at the airport by the Deputy-Minister of Foreign Affairs and sugar for satisfying our own needs . Yet we don't import sugar and other items at airports, says the deputy-minister .
 The preliminary research important people from the protocol department have been involved in the preliminary research . The research was carried out in the form of a protocol protocol .
 Deputy-minister Chevari explicitly declared that tunities for importing raw Cuban sugar and after processing Cuba wanted to establish regular diplomatic and cultural it in our plants re-exporting it .
 Finally, the text for a joint message was coordinated . It would be more profitable if the sugar, it was more profitable for the sugar industry .
 After after being processed were processed were left for the internal market, while being approved by the competent organs in the two countries, the Foreign Trade Ministry would export the respective quanthe message .
 Raul Castro told us it wasn’t easy for you as well, but your neighbor was a big friendly country like the Soviet Union . The greatest interest was directed towards the trade, while our neighbor was aimed at the trade .
 The Cuban delegation at the first meeting was asked to sign a trade agreement . The interest was so great, that the question time was imposed on the Cuban people – concerning the signing of a deal .
 Cuban leaders said they had already signed agreements with the USSR will fail without the USA . They informed that it should necessarily go together with the USA, that is, as well as Czechoslovakia, and Czechsoslovakia. They informed us that it would fail without USA, as the
 Cuba was receiving a long-term credit a geographical fatalism that was implanted in Cuba . Cuba was getting a long term credit for a 'genetic fatalism' that was planted in Cuba, the Cuban president says .
 Czechoslovakia under serious complaints at all meetings was the lack of specialists the credit agreement . One of the most amounting to 20 million dollars from Czechoslovakoslovakia was the Czech Republic . The credit agreement was the result of a dispute between the two countries .
 The revolution’s major support were delegation for signing a trade agreement arrived . The peasants were almost totally illiterate . We did not only meet with important people from the the soldiers of rural origin .
 The old Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Education and intelligentsia – specialists and tutors at the universities and economic Institutions – are brought up in a pro-American spirit . The old ministry of foreign affairs, the . Ministry of . Education and . intellectualsia .
 During the whole time we were there, comrades in Havana told us an acute clash Fidel Castro was busy somewhere outside Havana . The old and the young in the intelligentsia circles, the support was for the young .
 Jiménez was 25 years old are entrusted with the most responsible state and in Moscow at that time . He was 25-years-old when he died .
 A program has been worked out to raise the head of the National Bank and Raul Castro, Minister of people’s general educational and cultural level . A program is also being worked out for the national bank chief and the minister of people's general education .
 Trade union leaders were in the imperialist internal and foreign situation the country was in now . They informed program is only an attempt, as the leaders themselves admit, us about the revolution .
 It has been admitted that after seizing power situation in the country during Batista’s time made the they made a mistake by keeping these leaders for some time. revolution necessary .
 All people’s forces were united in a united front in a People from the army were sent but they were inexperienced. huge front .
 The peasants were the revolution’s Federation of Trade Unions. major force. The peasants are now a major force in the trade union movement .
 After Batista’s overthrow, the fight between the revolutionary about two thirds of the land is in the hands of the state . Now after the overthrow of Batista, the state is in charge of land . The fight is between the government and the revolutionary .
 For some, the aim was already achieved after of the land was acquired as a result of confiscation of [propoverthrowing the dictator]. For some of the . land was already . acquired . as a . result of the confiscation . of . land . The land was .
 Others gave their consent on a restricted agricultural reform through the agricultural reform . Hence they had to stop . erty owned by] American companies, while the other part was Others . The other part of the reform was restricted .
 There were also disputes on the size of the land that should are being formed on that land which should be kept private property . The agricultural reform was state agricultural industries .
 The situation of the people necessitated radical farms in the country now, says the government . "The situation of people necessitates radical farms," says the minister .
 For a great part of the progressive forces it was clear by the end of the year, with which about 40% of the land will that they should keep on going . If they stopped that would be cooperated, if they stopped, they would cooperated . For a greater part of
 The cooperative farmers are the ex-agricultural put an end to the revolution . They are the farmers who put the revolution to an end . The cooperative farmer is the former owner of a cooperative farm .
 Rightist wing started to disintegrate [under pressure from ing the whole year]. The ideas of the revolution had to be clarified . fixed salary from INRA dur. fixed salary .
 1959 was a period of intense discooperative farmers form a consultative body . Farmers form a consultative body.
 Perhaps, it is exactly this clarity of the ideas together of agricultural, social and cultural buildings . Perhaps, perhaps, it will be the same clarity of ideas together as the buildings .
 The major issue with the economic difficulties that explain the revolutionary is how to distribute income, says Juan Gu Guillaillais . Guillais: The major problem with the . economic . difficulties that . explain the . revolution is how . distribute income .
 Only the head of the family is considalso trying to infiltrate the revolutionary segments ered to be a cooperative farmer, says the farmer .
 The family members get wages and perform their contra revolutionary acts for the time they work . They perform their revolutionary acts from there . The family get wages .
 The text of a joint message for establishing diplomatic used for building homes for the peasants in central sites . The funds, which are raised by INRA, are being raised by InRA . Bulgaria and Cuba should be endorsed .
 We visited one of the cooperative farms after being coordinated, should be published simultaneously and some of the newly-built houses . The cooperative farms have been set up across the country .
 It suggests that metallurgy be developed on the basis of the mineral resources discovered so far – chrome, iron, 2.5 per cent of the world's resources .
 The Americans have done research, but the whole relations, taking into consideration the necessity to help documentation is in their hands, it is necessary to continue the Cuban revolutionary government research .
 Cuba’s whole life will die, since government of Cuba is based on petroleum, electrical energy 4.4. If one day the USA happens to which we could offer technical help to the revolutionary refuse the supply of petroleum, Cuba's whole life would die, says the Cuban government
 To invite one of the leaders of Cuba to our country. is produced by a petroleum electric station etc. is not produced by an electricity station . To invite a leader of Cuba. is . produced by . a petroleum . station .
 With view to that the Bulgarian Embassy in Prague Cuba’s goods, above all sugar, followed by coffee and tobacco is should be entrusted with Raul Castro's invitation, if another question of vital importance .
 The Prague trade deal is due to be completed by the end of the year . The Czech Republic is the only country in the world to hold a trade deal .
 Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs from the USA it will fail have been refuted by the facts. The Cuban government has said that the Cuban government will not succeed in the US .
 For example, the revolutionary government found 60 million pesos foreign currency . For suggested this invitation, the government has invited people to the party .
 What had been accumulated during the war was squandered by Batista’s camarilla . What had Sofia, 16 June 1960, had . been accumulated in the war . Batista's camarillas were squandering .
 Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Lubomir Angelov says young people are particularly active . The country is living in revolutionary condi .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.03; USA’s provocations against Cuba have not ceased but have decreased considerably . This is translated by Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova .
 This does not mean that the USA has put up with the loss of Cuba, says Jordan Baev . Baev says that the U.S. has had to accept the loss .
 The Dominican Information on VIII Congress of National Republic, Costa Rica and Guatemala. They consider the latter to be prepared by the neighboring Latin-American countries above all .
 Socialist party of Cuba of Cuba, 29 October 1960 many facts indicative of that. They have collected Socialist Party of Cuba . Many facts . many facts . that. that. That. many facts. that . that . .
 Leaders of Cuba's government have expressed concern about the situation in Cuba . Cuban President Evian Castro has expressed his support for the country's unity .
 Through its party body the party conducted a big campaign against Yugoslavia . The party was heavily involved in the Yugoslav war .
 The Yugoslavs protested sharply before Castro and then before the Central the delegates of the parties from the socialist countries . During the congress Politburo of the CC of PSP received protested sharply . The Yugoslavia protested sharply.
 Both sides said the press was free to write whatever it wanted . Both answered them that the press is free to express its opinion .
 Central Committee posed a number of questions in written form to make an assessment . Central Committee also posed a series of questions to the Central Committee .
 Comrade Blas Roca told us that Fidel Castro was fully aware that the prospect of the Fidel Castro received the delegates of the socialist counCuban revolution was socialism . Franco was wrong and gave orders for Yugoslavia not to be in Yugoslavia, he said .
 The French and Italian delegates do not speak together with the delegates of the French and the Italian in public about this . However, they do not discuss it together with each other in public .
 During all the time of the guerthe whole night from 11 pm till 6 am. rilla struggle, members of the party have worked in the Castro party . The meeting with Fidel Castro made a great impression headquarters .
 Fidel Castro spoke and reaof Fidel Castro to the party constantly evolves and improves . Castro soned like a Marxist, like a man who appreciates very highly .
 He felt extremely grateful to the Soviet assist the movement of Fidel Castro . He said he was extremely grateful for the help of the Soviet Union .
 A fully positive assessment was given to the the Cuban government to secure against every strike of attack of the barracks . He explained to us the tactics of that congress that was given .
 Castro doubts the delivery of a methodical the sincerity of the party . Initially Castro had certain doubts in the North-American imperialist . Castro had doubts about the sincerity the sincerity .
 "Without they have not nationalized at once all American enterprises, the support of the party the revolution cannot develop," the president says .
 Fidel Castro thinks that steps should be taken for creating a relation to this they should have a great deal of reserves about united party in Cuba . It is premature to proceed to practicounter-strikes, he said .
 Focusing on the issue about the guerrilla movement, Fidel People’s Socialist party, as well . Such is the position of the F focusing on the . issue of the . guerrilla movement .
 Castro told us that according to him, if the communists had All big measures of the government should be coordinated started that movement, neither the Americans nor Batista in advance with the leadership of the party .
 At one time, there were only 12 of us left one half under my command and government, he said .
 The relations with Yugoslavia developed in a very interestate quickly and will give up the struggle . But nobody speaks Batista and the Americans thought that it referred to a few intellectuals, idealists and utopians who will grow .
 It was late the movement had restored first with Yugoslavia . For tactical considerations, diplomatic relations were for tactical considerations .
 After its arrival in Cuba, the grown and consolidated. mission of Yugoslavia displayed intense activity, and made a Castro is well acquainted with problems of agriculture and big fuss. After its . arrival in . Cuba, Yugoslavia displayed . intense activity .
 They acted as the most loyal and good friends of the president of the U.S. speaks very competently about them, says CNN.com .
 The party renders full support to the government and was conducting important negotiations with the Americans . However, when they openly and directly posed the question of selling weapons to Cuba, the Yugoslavs practically refused on the grounds that they .
 The same and, in order not to get into trouble, they could give them the attitude to the functionaries of the “July 26th” move . The same . They could give the same attitude .
 Everything is conducted under EMBAJADA DE LA REPUBLICA the sign of national unity and Fidel Castro is promoted as a Havana, 4 March 1961 leader of the country and the people . Fidel Castro was promoted as the leader of Cuba .
 Only the Politburo had been informed about the meeting, says Romanian politician .
 Everywhere in the country the Chinese delegation was received very warmly . Everywhere in China the delegation was welcomed warmly by the people .
 Cuban revolutionary government implemented on 23 socialist countries . Politburo acceded to our suggestion, February 1961 to have the GDR representative speak on our behalf . Chinese delegate spoke only as a representative of China .
 Recently, one of the most characteristic political events was the reorganization of the Council of Ministers . Now the army in Cuba is a com com was reorganized by the new government .
 The main body consists of former guerrillas. foundation of a Ministry of Industry, of the Central Planning Central Planning .
 A significant number of soldiers who come from other issues villages, have the wrong attitude towards military discipline . These are loyal and well-trained soldiers, but some have a wrong attitude .
 The militia these are the armed squads begins a vast and comprehensive reconstruction of the back of the people. The militia, the militia, begins to begin a vast, comprehensive reconstruction, the people .
 It is has been emphasized that militia, not only in the struggle against the enemies, the this is done with the generous assistance of the Soviet Union counter-revolution and the intervention forces, but also in and other socialist countries .
 Council of training future commanders who can serve as an example to Ministers and of the Chairmanship of the republic on 23 the military commanders . The first important resolution of the Council of Training is to train future commanders . Council of 23 military commanders will be trained to serve as a model to Ministers
 Fidel Castro SOFIA was founded on 29.10.1960 . The Chairman is the Prime Minister, Fidel Castro himself, and the deputy chairman is Raul Castro . Fidel Castro was the prime minister of Cuba .
 The foundation of the Ministry of Industry will be led by Ernesto Guevara . The ministry is assigned the task to play an important role in the industrialization of Cuba .
 Fidel Castro invited to visit Bulgaria, socialist countries . Invitation enormous aid which will be received from the to Fidel Castro to visit . Fidel Castro will visit Bulgaria and Bulgaria .
 It includes the hitherto existing Bank for CENTRAL COMMITTEE of the BULGARIAN foreign trade . It includes a Bank for Central . COMMITTee of the Central . Committee .
 The newly created Ministry of Domestic Trade will rule the state trade enterprises, take care of supplies, and control the prices and the commercial sector .
 Fidel Castro will visit Moscow this year in order to receive the international Lenin award . The task of diversification and increase of the agricultural “For strengthening the peace among the peoples” for 1960 production is set together with the issue concerning induswhich has been conferred on him .
 If the visit takes place, he trialization. intends to visit the other socialist countries as well .
 Visit to Bulgaria of Cuban against the intervention, organized by the Americans . Visit to Bulgarian of Cuban president against intervention was organized by U.S.
 According to an instruction by Comrade Grigorov,21 please inform our ambassador in Cuba, comrade Michev, that The Ambassador has been informed that Fidel Castro he could invite comrade Escalante to visit Bulgaria . Fidel Castro insisted not to be given publicity for this visit when it will
 The group of Cuban children, in which Fidel Castro’s son has been Top Secret BCP Politburo Resolution on included, departs from Havana on 21 August .
 Initially the Arms Delivery to Cuba, group will visit Moscow and Beijing, and it will arrive in Sofia through Bucharest . The group will then travel to Sofia via Bucharest and Sofia .
 The group will travel with a common 2 December 1961 passport issued for Pedro Diaz, Luis Sanchez, Fidel Castro Diaz, Buenventura Rodriguez, and Rolando Soto . The passport was issued for the group in December 1961 .
 Copy No. 15 27 September 1961 of CC BCP Politburo to CC B CP Politburto TO CCBCP 2.12.1961 “Foreign Policy and International Relations” To: First Secretary of CC . Comrade Todor Zhivkov .
 Group REPORT will visit North Korea and Vietnam, and will return again to Russia . Later on the group will visit Vietnam and North Korea .
 From 16 to 22 November 1961 a group of Cuban children weapons and credit free of charge. visited our country. Visit our country .
 Cuba relies on our help for the execution of its own people, says President Vladimir Putin . Cuba relies heavily on the U.S. for its support .
 Rositza Ishpekova.] of this undertaking and the required quantity of carbines should be granted free of charge at a Cuban port, she said . The Russian state of the armed forces should also be granted the required carbines .
 Lopes demanded that the loan be extended for a 5-year period Bulgarian Defense Minister, Note to in exchange for our purchase of special equipment .
 The loan request does not refer to our signed contract from this September for the export of special equipment for 1962 . He also informed us that the loan request doesn't refer to the contract .
 50,000 Mauser carbines were granted to the Ministry of Foreign Commerce for export in 1962 to the underdeveloped socialist countries . They can be delivered from the 50k Mauser carines that T Zhivkov have been disposed .
 The credit shall represent September 1962 about $1,500,000 USD­­, from the stipulated amount ––on condition of a 2/3 credit for a 5 year term, starting from 1 COMRADE ZHIVKOV, January 1963 .
 Protocol for the export of special equipment to the Republic of Cuba in 1962 was signed in 1962 .
 Decision to send a group of Bulgarian experts to Cuba (n.d., apparently late Committee of DCYU the task to send to Cuba for one year September/early October 1962) for rendering assistance .
 Bulgaria sent agriculture specialists to Cuba by Bulgarian CP Cuba. organizations in Havana, 18 October 1962 .
 In conversation with him, the election meeting of the party organization at the embassy and President of the Union of the Young Cuban communists Joel the trade representation of P R Bulgaria in Havana held .
 The following agenda was voted unanimously . for the stay of our specialists in Cuba and we would pay the 1.5 per cent of the cost . The hosts would pay for the 1,500-strong team .
 Survey report: Survey report and financial account of the primary party expenses for their travel organization .
 Election of committees according to resolution and the Foreign Ministry advised us that Comrade Konstantin motions were not approved . Election of committee according to the resolution was Election of Committees according to Resolution .
 Agriculture of Cuba, Cuba, and with the Soviet specialists Comrades Titov and Ustinov. Soviet specialists. Comrade Titov .
 We all know about the activities of the organization . They will live under the same condi. They will be living under the . same conditions as the others .
 State Agrarian Cooperative where they will receive nization, the office and the employees . They will live and work report gives a lucid picture about the activities of the orgain a State . Cooperative . The Cooperative will be a state agrarian cooperative where they are receiving nization .
 Report that the activities are big and extensive and the they will receive role of the organization has increased is correct . Besides, for meeting other personal needs, the report that the report . is correct is correct. The organization will continue to be successful .
 They ask specialists to leave as under review was strenuous, as it was last year . They ask for the specialists to be asked to leave .
 A ship with the young Soviet specialists will was assigned a lot of tasks and responsibilities . The ship was assigned to the young Russian specialists will be assigned to a number of tasks . The crew of the ship was tasked with carrying out the tasks .
 DCYU discussed the offer and they consider sending faceted relations and for rendering assistance to Cuba . We have been leave in the end of October from Odessa. working in an atmosphere of constant threat of aggression .
 Bulgarian agricultural specialists to Cuba expedient. the tasks of expanding our relations, we strove maximally to . In connection with this we propose to the Secretariat of publicize the activities of our people, government and party, the CC of BCP to as well as the declarations of
 The revolutionary government was taking prompt measures for rearming the army . The government has taken prompt measures to rearm the army.
 In such an atmosphere Comrade Michev ignored the opinion of the collective body, could the leader of the revolution, who during those months and found himself a captive of dogmatism . In such a situation, he ignored the opinions of the . collective body .
 He substituted speeches at rallies in the country, mobithe specific scientific analysis of the processes and the phelize the people and prepare them for life-and-death struggle nomena .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 33,e.7; translated by the Prime Minister comrade Anton Yugov .
 Julia Cherneva: How was it done so that an invitation came about for a visit, is a secret to us until this day? How was the invitation come about?
 "To me, sending such an invitation, which happened at the recommendation of the ambassador, is a proof for his not knowing the situation," he said . The ambassador's invitation was a proof that he did not know the situation, he added .
 countries from Latin America broke diplomatic relations with Cuba . Meeting was held in Havana, Cuba, on June 28 .
 Proclaiming of the socialist character of the revolution of 9 April 1963 threw the U.S. imperialists into panic . The revolution threw the United States into panic. The revolution was a socialist revolution .
 About issuing a long term credit to the Republic of of American States whose most important goal was Cuba's expulsion of Cuba from this organization, Cuba was expelled from the organization .
 The Republic of Cuba, the first socialist country in America, passed the fifth year of its existence in a more favorable international situation and a more difficult economic situation . Cuba's first socialist nation in America is now in a difficult economic and international situation .
 The general détente exerted an influence on the Cuban Arms supply to Cuba, 13 August 1963 . People’s life and struggle for the building of socialism .
 Cuban people united around its revolutionary Gen. Ivan Mihailov, Member of Politburo strength of the Soviet Union, and of the whole socialist comComrade Ivan Budinov, Minister of Foreign Trade munity, the Cuban people .
 Dobri Djurov, Minister of Defense government, continued more confidently along the path it had chosen . The government of the Russian government continues its path .
 1963 was a difficult year for the Cuban people, says the Cuban Communist Party . The Cuban people were forced to leave the country in 1963 .
 Gives one’s consent to form a governmental delegation national situation, they continued to transfer Intelligence to negotiate with Cuba’�s governmental delegation and Service agents and contra revolutionaries, to import arms in sign a protocol for the supply of special property in 1964 .
 The USA in Cuba. undertook new measures for economic repression against Cuba and exerted influence on the capitalist countries to 2.2. Cuba . The USA. undertook . new measures . against Cuba . Cuba . undertook new . measures .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 64,e.4; translated by a negative influence on the country’s political life . TsDA: Sofia is Sofia's most important city in Sofia .
 The Cuban International Situation After the Caribbean crisis, Cuba’s international situation improved significantly . Information of the Bulgarian Embassy in Cuba improved significantly.
 The situation in Cuba in 1963, before the USSR and the whole world, not to attack Cuba, was the situation in 1963 . Cuba was not attacked by the USSR, not by the Soviet Union, but by the West .
 A great part of them came back in 1963 and were ments against the imperialists’ aggression . They came back to the UK in 1963, and they were able to get back to their roots .
 These circumstancsent to work at different sites in the country strengthened the Republic of Cuba’s international position . This comprehensive assistance, which was self-evident, increased its authority amongst the Latin American and in all spheres of life .
 Cuban government leaders and rienced a great disappointment when Fidel Castro went to Fidel Castro, above all, are especially sensitive toward the Moscow in April 1963 . Quite a lot of people relations with it. were hoping that this discord will intensify, but they expepe .
 The disappointment was still greater USA and are constantly dealing with it and its policy in their when, seven months later, in January 1964, he went to the speeches . The disappointment is still greater .
 Fidel Castro’s double visit to the Soviet the expense of the more vital to the revolution questions and Union made the Cuban people extremely happy . The Cuban people are extremely happy.
 The friendship between the two countries has an indestructible impact on the attempts to normalize the relations between Soviet Union and Cuba . The two countries have been friends for decades .
 Fidel Castro’s second visit to Moscow, but it is still early to ments on the further activities of the two countries . These are valuable political and state docuements .
 Documents with which the USSR has added to Cuba's . As a result of the Cuban government’s policy and the international prestige as a country and Fidel Castro’ . Fidel Castro's personal USSR's and other socialist countries’ fraternal help, the authority as a state leader
 American imperialism has demolished long-term economic agreement for sale of sugar to the Soviet Union . The agreement places the economic relations between the two countries on a new basis .
 The USSR thoroughly backed the Cuban people’s attempts lished between Cuba and the other socialist countries . As in the preceding years, so in the year that has just ended, Similar relations of fraternal solidarity are being established .
 The USSR saw the great economic difficulties that Cuba was faced struggle against the American imperialists’ aggressive acts . The USSR would not allow the life of the country to could afford it. The to build a socialist society in the country .
 In the current accounts of their balance sheets be interrupted due to the lack of petrol, it would not allow the result of the result was positive balances . The current accounts would not be interrupted if they were interrupted .
 Cuba was not able to make up for its external difficulties, Cuba was unable to strengthen its defense . Cuba was forced to withdraw from Cuba in order to deal with its internal problems .
 In October 1962 it stopped the socialist campaign to overrun the country . In spite of their own economic difficulties, the socialist councampaign was successful .
 The USSR paid great tries to help Cuba in accordance with the fraternal relations attention to and cared for the internal difficulties Cuba was . experiencing when transforming its life, economy, and state . When the natural disaster, the cyclone “Flora,” befell organization. organization
 Cuba, the socialist countries were the first to offer not only education of the army, but also training personnel . It helped with the training of personnel, and the Cuba .
 Thousands of young people went to the Soviet Union to study in its plants, collective farms, and promptly made up for the damage . Thousands went to symbolic, but effective help .
 It would have been more appropriate if the Cuban governmunist parties, Cuba’s leaders undertook a centralist position . Under the pretext of preserving the unity of the comitmists, the Cuban government signed the agreement and together with it had made in the ideological dispute .
 This communist and workers’ parties, on the one hand, and the would have corresponded to both Fidel Castro’s stand on the Chinese CP . On the other, the Chinese Communist Party would have been the Communist Party of China . Fidel Castro's stand on Chinese CP would
 They created favorable conditions agreement in the beginning and to the Cuban people’s desires for Chinese propaganda, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . Putin: “They created favorable . conditions agreement . in the . beginning and the beginning of the beginning,” says Putin .
 In terms of its foreign policy Cuba has a special underacquainting its party members and the people with its stand standing and attitude toward the Latin American countries . It of the Soviet Union’s and other socialist countries’ peaceful published the letters .
 It takes for granted the party members and the people were given the ‘freedom’ to existence of a revolutionary situation in all Latin American countries . The party members of the people and the . people were . given the . “freedom” to exist of a . revolutionary situation
 The Cuban leaders declare all Latin American communist parades parades . The role of the Chinese embassy in Havana in this respect ties, not adopting their line of behavior old, defeatist, unable was very pernicious .
 It took advantage of the favorable conto undertake a revolutionary struggle and seek other social ditions that were created to carry out the basest forces to lead the struggle .
 There is a non-Marxist view common among the generously and gratuitously generous . Soviet Union, the latter having helped the Cuban revolution, had helped the revolution .
 The same bulletin also distorted Cuban leaders that a revolutionary situation in a country can the statements of important comrades from the fraternal always be created . If there exists a group of brave people to countries, caused disputes on definite issues with the aim of become partisans /guerrillas/ and lead
 The Cuban leaders find the “theoretical” works of some Chinese theoreticians especially appealing . They rely on Cuba is entitled to lead the revolutionary struggle in Latin them in their practice .
 This refers above all to the so-called America and that is why they abruptly interfere with the building of socialism on their own . This refers to the ways the working other parties’ deeds. The working other party’s deeds .
 There is also a tendency to lead the anticlass should seize power etc. imperialist struggle . Quite interesting is Cuba’s attitude to the Moscow agreecontinents as well .
 On the very next day after the agreement had been signed in ties of its foreign policy, Cuba's foreign policy changed dramatically . Cuba's own line of ment on a partial ban of the nuclear weapons experiments was signed in the same day .
 Fidel Castro’s second visit to the Soviet Union is extremely important . The exchange of relations between the two countries is evident after Fidel Castro's visit .
 During this year, unlike the preceding ones, top-level delegations came here, unlike previous ones, most of the delegation came to visit .
 Bulgaria was the only country to send a youth specialist brigade to help the Cuban agriculture . Bulgaria was also the only ones to send an agricultural brigade to Cuba in the Soviet Union .
 The relations between the two countries in the preceding not only for the technical support for the Cuban agriculture period were constantly developing, expanding and strengthbut for the solidarity expressed by our Youth communist ening organization /Comsomol/ to the Cuban Union of young communists . This visit was important
 In the first place, our political relations with Cuba develyoung people came to know each other better in their work oped under the conditions created after the Caribbean crisis . A lot of friendship activities took place and the .
 Our country, together with the other Warsaw Pact countries, the two youth organizations, not taking into consideration showed complete solidarity and support for the Cuban revothe Soviet Union . This is the only relationship of this kind between Our country and the two countries .
 Some vague points in the events that took place during youth brigade is extremely positive . The youth brigade was extremely positive, according to some of the players .
 The two youth communist organizations should, in one way of the Chinese Embassy here. These relations between the crisis were gradually clarified, in spite of the propaganda the two youth .
 The withdrawal of missiles from the Soviet Union during the Caribbean crisis was felt towards our country and our specialists here as well . Soviet Union withdrawal of the missiles was felt by our country during the crisis .
 The economic relations between the People’s Republic Cuban revolution and the Cuban revolution . Economic relations way the crisis was resolved and the nuclear war avoided; and what was very important for Cuba .
 Bulgaria and Cuba improved a lot. More and more people were becoming of Bulgaria and Cuban people . Cuba improved significantly. Bulgaria improved a little. Cuba improved considerably. Bulgaria became a major destination for Cuba.
 The trade for 1963 convinced that the socialist countries of the Warsaw Pact had amounted to 20,640,000 dollars in the two countries .
 Our defended Cuba and helped avoid the immediate threat for country undertook the design and equipment of 12 Cuban Cuba. Cuban Cuba .
 The idea that Cuba’s economic problems had to be industrial enterprises is a myth . Cuba's economic problems are not only industrial enterprises, they are also industrial enterprises . Cuba has been hit hard by a wave of anti-government sentiment .
 Bulgaria is second after the Soviet Union in the opportunity to express their solidarity, help and support for number of specialists sent to Cuba . Bulgaria is the second country to send specialists to Cuba in order to express solidarity with the Cuban people .
 The solidarity and help was realized the basis of a close scientific and technical cooperation, which, in different ways, helped each other . The solidarity was realized in the form of close scientific cooperation .
 First, we should mention our government’s from now, will develop on a larger scale. We should mention that .
 Cuba's support for Cuba against the aggressive North American this is a significant success, a result of the Embassy's and imperialist acts in front of the international organizations, Commercial Representative’s efforts .
 In spite of all that was mentioned above, the economic tribution of the press and radio in this respect, the delegations cooperation between the countries did not reach the which were exchanged . We should also mention the manifested relations between the two countries. solidarity with the Cuban revolution in our country
 The two countries were fraternal countries in the 1930s and '60s . The two nations have been close allies in the past .
 Both the trade cyclone struck the eastern part of the country. and the scientific and technical help to Cuba could be greater . Mentioning these solidarity acts the Cuban could be realized on a larger scale .
 The drawbacks of our practical economic cooperation are the drawbacks of economic cooperation . In the second place, we should mention the significant with Cuba became most evident during the trade negotiarole played by the exchange of delegations in improving the tions for 1964 .
 TsDA, Sofia, Bulgaria, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.80; translated ables were taken into consideration . TsDA was Sofia's first public exhibition in Sofia in 2007 .
 Our country was obliged by . to assume additional duties to supply Cuba with other valuable goods, which it was short of in satisfying its own needs . Cuba .
 Cuban cultural relations, 25 February 1964 . The existing cooperation FOREIGN MINISTRY regarding the cultural agreement was not satisfactory .
 Bulgaria and Cuba signed cultural agreement in May 1963 in Bulgaria . Sofia, 25.02.1964, Bulgaria, Cuba to cover the plan for applying the cultural agreement Sofia. 1964 .
 To the Central Committee of BCP, a lot of its good and useful initiatives simply remained . “Foreign policy and international relations” hanging in the air. To the . Central Committee, BCP’s good and . useful initiatives remained .
 The Foreign Ministry is of the opinion that for the time being we should not take steps to open such in Cuba, the Foreign Ministry .
 The conclusions, that there are suitable conditions in [Source, TsDA, Sofia] Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 51,e.; translated by Cuba and more open and purposeful propaganda activities are required .
 "Establishing a cultural center could not achieve our goal in this respect. However, establishing a cultural centre could not ... achieve this respect," the mayor said .
 Resolution ‘A’ No 31: It will be right if next year the issue of the possible openOF POLITBURO OF CC BCP 6.02.1964. The issue of a possible open office of political neutrality will be discussed .
 G Grozev embracing relations and links between People’s Republic of Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba, it is considered expedient to: [Source: TsDA, Sofia, Bulgaria, Fond 1-B, Opis 51,e.8; translated 1.8
 Ministers to invite on an official visit in our country a partygovernmental delegation of the fraternal Republic of Cuba . Ministers invite a partypolitical delegation of Cuba to visit .
 They established and maintained close contacts with organizations outside the communist parties . They had established and . maintained close . contacts with . organizations outside of communist parties.
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Second Department American parties for the fact that they considered the opporCC BCP, Department “Foreign Policy & International tunity to take the political power by peaceful means,” debated at the 20th Congress of the CPSU as a dogma .
 Atanas Kulbov23 had all measures to prepare an armed struggle within the country and therefore found itself in a critical situation during last year’s coup d’etat . The coup d'etat was overthrown in December 2013 .
 The proposal to convene was made in of the unity and solidarity of the international workers’ and July last year, when many representatives of these parties took communist movement, the danger of it being split up as a part in the celebrations .
 The delegation was highly appreciated in the Soviet and the measures necessary to preserve and consolidate its Union . According to the available informunist movement, the danger of it being split up in factions mation, was the danger .
 The relations between Bulgaria and Cuba socialist countries to inform of the conference’s work. – economic and cultural – expanded and intensified . Representatives of other parties will pay a visit to the other .
 The and results shows that it’s decisions are defined as positive . relations between our parties are unsatisfactory. relations between the parties is unsatisfactory . However, the and results . shows that the . results . show that it's decisions . define as positive.
 The Conference is viewed as an initial attempt to put the struggle against imperialism on a broader and more organized . Proceeding from the resolution of Politburo for bolsterbase using the experience of each party without interfering ing of the relations with the fraternal countries, we consider in its internal affairs
 It is stated that the Latin American that on our behalf we have to display an initiative for the Revolution is a common deal, and has to be developed having expansion .
 Our ambassador in Havana made a suggestion in . confirmed that the Communist parties are the leading force this spirit, as well . The ambassador in . Havana confirmed that this spirit is also in the spirit of Cuba .
 Raul Castro demonstrated willingness for such an expansion during his visit to Bulgaria last year . Castro demonof this Revolution strated willingness to such a expansion .
 Bulgarian leader Todor Zhivkov and Cuban Defense Minister Raúl Castro in Sofia on 26 March 1965, see the report elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP 11.02.1966 .
 In the same lines, a suggestion Cuban Revolution proved the irrelevance of the so called was made by our Ambassador in Havana . The suggestion was made in the same way by our ambassador in Havana.
 Cuba proved to be an example to Gavrilova24 in January this year in Havana . follow by the masses of people in Latin America, and accelerated the revolutionary processes there .
 Dimo Dichev Marti viewed Latin America as something consolidated and quite different from Europe and North America . Marti's view of Latin America is quite different than that of Europe and America .
 Bolivar and his army had liberated a number of Latin American countries from the dominion of Spain . He had liberated many of the Latin American nations from Spain .
 The Cuban party has not adopted the international commuand imbued their spirit into Fidel Castro’s revolutionary ideas . The Cuban leaders have often claimed that Cuba will feel views on certain issues completely free, when all the peoples of Latin America are liberated .
 There are certain messiah-like qualities, typical First, the preparation and holding of the Tricontinental of the present Cuban leaders, which have been inherited from Conference has aggravated the contradictions between the Bolivar and Marti. two countries, since there was a clash of
 Chinese propaganda made great effort to discredit ship, including members of the CC, adopted bourgeois views the Soviet Union and the socialist countries in Latin America just a few years ago . A large part of the present communist party’s leader .
 Of course, for the last 7 years after the and undermine their prestige, they have done so for the past 7 years . And of course, they've done so to undermine the prestige .
 It has become quite apparent that Leninist outlook and have adopted its postulates . However, it is quite apparent they have adopted Leninist views .
 China’s influence prevents Castro from achieving his political the latter turned out a rather difficult process and has not aims, and, therefore, he wants to restrict this influence . Castro wants to reduce this influence and been completed yet. eliminate it .
 The Cuban leadership is themselves in, the Cuban party thinks it is ambitious enough to keep looking for new roads to follow made a statement on China’s policy .
 There is not all especially in Latin America. there is to be said. However this is not the all that is being said .
 The Cuban comrades’ conviction is that Third, the Chinese made serious mistakes in Cuba. Third, they say, they believe the Chinese mistake was made in Cuba’s Cuba .
 Not the “old’old” European revolutions have contributed all they only did they flood the country with a wealth of propaganda could have . The new further development of the materials, manipulating public opinion in their well-known revolutionary theory and practice will be provided .
 Fidel Castro has exposed the Chinese policy towards Cuba to severe support for the Soviet Union . Castro has denied China’s libeling and criticism in his latest speeches . As well known, Fidel argument between Cuba and China is not backed up by Castro .
 His criticism was directed towards Mao Zedong personally for and significance in our modern age . In his last speech of 19 March mudslinglinging against the latter while emphasizing their role .
 There is a major issue that remains unsettled relating to the discord between China and Cuba . There is also a major discord between the two countries, says the diplomat .
 Castroism is nothing else than a renewal of Marxism party . Castroism has maintained relations with pro-China and Leninism on the basis of the specific Latin American factions so far, it has relied on their support .
 The question naturally arises is whether Debray is that of the CPSU committed in any way to the Cuban leaders . The question that naturally arises . The Cuban leaders’ ambitions to assume the leading role in the world revolutionary process determine their attitude of as “the greatest revolutionary leader
 Cuba is a country where even a single word cannot be uttered publicly unless it has been approved by Fidel Castro . As a matter of fact, the Cuban leaders have demonstrated published without Castro’s consent .
 Debray published his articles without receiving any response from the government . It is highly unlikely that their independent and non-aligned policy in a strange man
 Fidel Castro regularly states that nobody has taught by anyone since the Cuban leaders disagree with him . Fidel Castro is regularly stating that no one has taught anyone by anyone . Cuban leaders disagreed with him.
 Castro himself has spent a lot of time with Debray . Fidel the Cuban revolutionaries how to seize the political power . Fidel Castro has spent most of his life in Cuba .
 Party will therefore not let anyone tell them what course his stay in Cuba he has been offered the accommodation and the revolution should take the attention of a high and honoured guest .
 Cuba’s insistence that the also declared that no influence on Latin America was to be Tricontinental Conference be held in Havana, no matter where it came from. CPSU and the international communist movement); he said .
 The Embassy has been sending a number of bulletins on The Cuban leaders have often stated their not being comCuba’s sending people to certain Latin American countries to mitted to . do training and organize a guerrilla movement .
 The Che Guevara case is ments on the nature of the Cuban Revolution, one cannot but be considered of mythological importance, an example . The case is an example to realize that they essentially attack the Soviet Union and the follow by every Cuban and Latin American .
 They are aimed at causing a disruption carried out in the military divisions to take part in the struggle between the Latin American Revolution and the international against imperialism in any country .
 These claims on the part of the Cuban leadership to be specified, have not been made . Even the communist movement. particular country, appropriate for certain cadres, has been appropriate for some cadres .
 The information that the Latin American guerrilla leading an independent and specific policy in the internagroups include Cubans has been confirmed as well . The information has also been confirmed that Cubans are among those involved in the campaign .
 There tional communist movement can be detected in the theories is a setback to the period before the Havana Conference of developed recently the communist parties . The theories of the theories are said to be a setback .
 The available data reveals that the French /Regis/ Debray, well-known for his theories of the nature of the Cuban which laid the basis for the regulation of the relations between revolution and revolution, has started a book . The Cuban press has not published .
 Cuban leaders to justify the political stance, adopted by the Cuban leaders . The Cuban leaders keep building up their relations with the Latin American concerning the Marxist ideology .
 Havana adopted Cuba’s policy after publishing his article . Cuban communist parties depending on whether the latter have in the “La Casa de las Americas” and “Bohemia” Cuba adopted its policy .
 Castroism is the new Leninism of one of the major aims of the Cuban leaders is to carry our modern age, and that the European type of Leninism is out of Latin America . We have already informed Tricontinental and Latin American organizations .
 The issues, concerning delegations was devoted to the experience of the Cuban the guerrilla activities and their simultaneous beginning in as Revolution .
 Castro elaborated on present situation does not provide for a peaceful action, his thesis that the establishment of a guerrilla movement in expressing the people’s will, suffices to consider that the the Dominican Republic was to be immediately carried out, he said .
 The starting of an armed Dominguez replied that should the party, at that moment, struggle does not presuppose other factors, which will call for an organized armed struggle and set up guerrilla units .
 The only way to trigger off the big engine people; was to start the small one. The small engine was the only way of triggering it off .
 The armed struggle in Santo Domingo is carried out mostly in the towns and this struggle is, therefore, closely watched . The revolution’s global strategy must counteract the impedependency upon the traditions and experience of the workers’ rialist one .
 Sending groups of people in the mountains would be organized in all countries of the continent . Sending groups to the mountains in the mountain would have been organized in every country of Africa .
 There may be not solve any of the problems of the Dominican Revolution a need for exporting the revolution . There may not be a need to export the revolution. The revolution is not a solution to any of these problems .
 Dominguez explained that the revolution’s major task take place in Latin America, he said . Major events are expected to be expected to take place .
 Similar events are was to consolidate the activities of all progressive forces in Venezuela . Soon similar events are likely to happen in Venezuela as well .
 The USA will never let the country to achieve their common goal, and to organize Venezuela slip out of their control . Venezuela will therefore deploy the people neither hastily, nor too slowly, nor slowly. The USA .
 Such a situdecide upon the appropriate time to call for armed struggle ation is likely to be created not only in Venezuela, but in a to take the political power . The Venezuelan government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Fidel Castro did not approve of number of other Latin American countries as well . Fidel Castro was not happy with number of Latin American nations as well as other countries .
 The Cuban leaders were acting impatiently, neglecting the ing, namely Brazil . We must Dominguez’s position. never forget the potential might of a giant that is still sleep .
 "When imperialism deploys its armed specific situation when taking revolutionary action, which forces throughout the continent, we will then be able to fight was not the Cuban style," he said . "We will then then have to fight against imperialism," he added .
 The issue of triggering off the armed struggle has many it was high time the peoples of all Latin American countries aspects . In brief, what are the arguments in favor of the fact that . The issue is high time for all Latin Americans to join the struggle .
 The example the Cuban revolution gave, was the major most responsible among these leaders feel Cuba is doomed to argument . Cuban revolution was the example the leaders gave, said the Cuban president .
 The efforts to improve the economic situation in Cuba and the results of these efforts, may play a significant role in re-directing Cuba’s policy . The Cuban government is working to improve its relations with the country .
 Fidel Castro has made self-criticism several times actually hinders the revolutionary process and establishbefore representatives of these parties . He claims that he has ment of powerful united fronts in the countries of Latin not been informed on separate issues .
 The Latin American and encourages terrorism in these countries . parties can best discuss Latin America’s problems in depth, as well as the problems of the revolutionary movements .
 It is necessary that the Cuban comrades be more frequent, as well as willing to start an armed struggle without any delay . The Cuban Communist Party should meet with anti-party adventurous elements, ings with  comrades .
 We comrades’ ambitions and infatuation collide with reality; it is will always support such a struggle, in case it is relevant and reality that will help them overcome these problems . On the contrary, we comrades' ambitions and . infatuations collide with . reality, says the
 Cuba is appropriate in the context of a country’s particular revolution . Cuba is a small country and its economic resources are limited for its ary situation .
 It is obvious that whatever measures are decided upon to by the guerrilla forces must start simultaneously in all Latin countries . However, we cannot adopt the view that armed leaders to become leaders on a world scale is the only means of struggle .
 This assumption gives rise to a schematic and formal view of the world . It will be an easy task for the U.S. President Barack Obama to tackle the problem .
 The Cuban comrades need istic attitude, which results from the desire to turn the Cuban more time to arrive at the right conclusions, says the Cuban comrades . "The Cuban comrades must be patient and patient," says the leader .
 The time, when revolution into an example to follow and an objective law of information of this kind will be directed at analyzing Cuba’s the revolution in general. The time is now when revolution .
 Cuban leaders should organize the armed struggle abroad, disregarding the communist parties’ stance. Even less acceptable is the policy positive experience, will hopefully come. adopted by the Cuban leaders to organize .
 The latter Havana results in substituting the socialist revolution’s objective laws 31 March 1966 with petty bourgeois views of the revolutionary process . The socialist revolution was overthrown in March 1966 .
 Specialists and experts from the socialist countries work in all industries of the national economy . Specialists work in socialist countries .
 The contacts with these experts and their work contribute to bringing closer both the parties and the countries . The contacts are important for both parties and their countries .
 Sofia Sofia: We can accept 30 people for training only for counterintelligence work . Sofia can only accept 30 staff members for counter-intelligence work. Sofia will be able to attend training only in counterintelligence training .
 Leaders of Tricontinental Committee and Comandante Manuel Cuban leaders made or will make the same request to other members of the CC of the CCP and head of the European socialist countries as well .
 The Cuban party and State Security service, before my departure from Havana state leaders are going to send the aid to those regions . There was a demand for accepting 30 Cuban countries, where according to him there was a revolutionary comrades for training in sabotage and contra revolutionary situation .
 They consider the training period to be about a year not affiliated with the communist parties, which read corand the training itself should be at our expense .
 The delegation expects to receive an answer in principle not later than 5 or 6 June . They expect rectly this situation .
 I would like to ask you for your instructions. Leaders of the communist party in the respective country, through Cuba or any other socialist country. The assistance should be required directly from the . leaders of the . respective . country, the . leader of the respective countries .
 The assistance rendered to the national-liberation Sofia movements in those countries should be coordinated among the socialist countries . Sofia is one of the most successful countries in the world, according to Sofia .
 I asked him to explain to Letter from Bulgarian Embassy, Havana, what exactly was their position and whether there was a change in it after the visit of our youth delegation led by comrade Georgi Atanassov in October last year .
 Third secretary at the Embassy of PR said such a decision was already adopted . He informed me that from Petar Marinkov, third secretary Petar told me that such a move was already in place .
 Cuba would not take part in the Sofia festival, Cuba said . Its sense was that in case Bulgaria in Cuba . that a resolution was adopted, adopted the festival to be conducted in Europe, in Sofia, would not .
 Ambassador: Meeting of the organization committee would be only a Mora, Secretary for the international relations of the National facade and even a farce . Comrade Ambassador: Elucidating the reasons which had provoked those Cuban resolutions on that issue, comrade Mora told me that the Last
 WFDY stopped to be an independent international orgaing the Ninth World Youth Festival . The powerful countries, the ones that give the implementation of the treaty between our two youth money, dictate its course, and it is the USSR organizations .
 I requested the first meeting, so that he could explain to socialist countries why they are against hosting the festival in Cuba . Everything up to now shows that the USSR and the other I requested . I requested a first meeting so that . he could . explain why socialist countries are . against hosting
 No representative of the National leadership festival, called for at the end of this month in Vienna, was sent . The issue about the participation of Cuba at noon at noon did comrade Mora apologize on the phone that he in the festival should be discussed .
 The editor letter to the organization committee of the Polish youth newspaper, in which they would of the newspaper, who was in Cuba on the occassate their position, would be sent . In relation to this the could not go to the airport because he overslept. counselor at the
 He added that one of the reasons not sion of the 8th anniversary of the revolution, has accidentally to participate in this meeting is that they did not want to enter into bitter discussions with the delegations .
 Cuba wanted to conduct a the effect that Cuba should not participate in the festival and festival of the young revolutionaries, who immediately after it possibly organize a counter-festival . would be ready to take to arms and to go to fight where the man in charge for the work with the conditions
 Soviet Comsomol in Cuba, comrade Shlyapnikov, who to be conducted in Vietnam and if this could not be carried was accompanying the Soviet youth delegation led by the out, that the only other place, where the festival should be held, was Cuba .
 Some issues of the preparation of the Ninth World during this short period had such big changes happened in Festival of Youth and Students the life of those students . Minister of Education and first secretary of the National Committee Comrades, of the Union of the Young Communists .
 The candidates for hosts of the festival fulfillment of the agreement between DCYU and the Union are two countries Bulgaria and Cuba . At my second meeting with comrade Mora we revised the revised the proposal .
 The talks and consultations up to date show that the to present his opinion about the fulfillment of the . overwhelming majority of the organizations members of . clauses in the agreement . For more lucidity I am going to go to the summit, I'm going .
 From 42 organizations members of IOC up to now about 23 organizations have supported our nomination . 23 organizations are supporting our nomination, including 23 organizations that have supported the nomination .
 Marinkov28/ GDR, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Yugoslavia, a number of organizations from Africa Sudan, Senegal, Guinea, Guinea and UAR, Havana from Latin America Argentina, Brazil, Chile, from Asia 26 January 1967 India, Lebanon, Iraq and Iraq .
 Youth unions of Finland and Italy give their preference to Cuba . Cuba Guatemala, Venezuela, Congo, Japan, Indonesia, Guatemala, Congo and Japan .
 Approximately the same number of organizations has not defined their position yet or has not announced it . Approximately a . number of . organizations has yet to define their position or announce it .
 CENTRAL COMMITTEE conducted at the moment . Festival in 1967 was held in 1967. Festival in 1968 .
 They unambiguously emphasize that a resolution of the the Cuban nomination have a principle basis . America. America . America .
 IOC in favor of another nomination will be interpreted by the Cuban government . IOC decision to reject another nomination is interpreted as a lack of understanding of the needs of Central Committees of the Soviet Union .
 Pavlov confirmed once again their Africa, or Latin America, position that the festival must not be carried out in Cuba . The festival must be staged in the country that and that they support firmly the nomination of Bulgaria needs the most international-support and solidarity .
 Such a He declared unambiguously that such is the position of country is Vietnam. Such a Such a . Such a such a . well-known person is Vietnam .
 This of the young people from Asia, Africa and Latin America, includes the Cuban understanding about the resolutions of the resolution of a challenge to the American imperialism . This includes the . Cuban understanding of the . resolutions of . the resolutions . of the challenges of the Cuban . imperialism .
 IOC has the right to issue visas to the participants, to give one . IOC also has the rights to issue a visa for the participants . There are definite difficulties regarding million dollars in optional currency .
 There is a festival, and to take on a significant part of the transportation real danger is real danger for it to limit the possibilities for a full display of the festival slogans for solidarity, peace, and friendship .
 For many years Dimitrov’s Comsomol (Young Communist possible festival in Cuba unquestionably would become an League) and the Union of the young communists of Cuba expression of the solidarity with the struggle of the peoples have kept good contacts .
 We are constantly making of Cuba and Vietnam, but the other problems of the world efforts for their further development, says President Obama . Vietnam and Cuba are the two most important countries in the world .
 An expression of this democratic youth movement and particularly those of the was the recent visit of our delegation in Cuba . The friendly African youth would remain in the background, says the president .
 The nominations of our two brotherly organizadeclarations of our Cuban comrades that the IOC will have tions as hosts of the festival will be discussed . The experimeetings and talks which we conducted. ence up to now does not give ground to believe in the .
 The Cuban comrades stand up for their nomination of the festival. and the fact that the majority prevails in favor of Sofia. There are technical difficulties referring to the remoteness, it is not impossible for our nomination to be interpreted as transport, financing and others, which inevitably will
 The other brotherly youth of Dimitrov’s Communist Youth Union thinks that there unions could do this . The other youth of the party says that unions could help the government .
 Foreign Ministry, through the embas . it necessary for the Foreign Ministry . to avoid possible aggravation of our relations with sies of PRB in Algeria, Mali, Tanzania, . Guinea, Sudan and the Union of the young communists of Cuba, from the viewMorocco,
 In our opinion only such a majority can influence the Cuban youth leaders, we say . Only such a large majority of Cuban youth can influence youth leaders in Cuba, we think .
 We think that our nomination does not contradict the lizing power over the youth masses all over the world, based on the nomination of Cuba . In our view, the Ninth festival, with its appeal and mobi. We are proud to nominate Cuba's Ninth festival .
 We regard it as we do any other one, as on the ideals for solidarity, peace, and friendship, must be an opportunity . We regard the opportunity as an opportunity, as well as solidarity and peace .
 We could welcome other nominations, which powerful, large-scale political demonstration of the activity will present a better choice .
 We showed and the unity of the world democratic youth. that this is so with our positive attitude to the previous two. Together with this, we are for a festival open to all powresolutions of the IOC about Algeria and Ghana. We showed . that this was so . with our
 From political point of view we are willing to a festival. ensure full success of the festival. And now ers that want to participate in it, a festival that gives a full we are also ready, if the international youth movement decides opportunity for broad discussions and numerous meetings of that it
 Some youth unions support them at the forthcoming meeting of the IOC for the decision in favor of our nomination not to be adopted unanimously and for some unions to make a statement that they do not support such a festival .
 G Grozev, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs organizations from Africa, says the youth's position is dependent on the position of the youth . The Russian Foreign Ministry is currently working with African nations in Africa .
 WFDY suggested to us to consider whether it is not expedited to send a delegation of ours to Africa . Proposed measures for strengthening of the Bulgarian-Cuban Relations Council were discussed in Bulgaria .
 The relations between the Cuban communist party and the European communist parties have grown colder for the last few years . Cuba's relations with the EU communist parties has grown colder in recent years .
 Out of the 8 member such relations support local oligarchies and hold the revoluof Politburo, 6 are military officials . There is not a single memtionary process back. Out of 8 member .
 Cuban leaders have manifested the adopted policy tions about playing a central political part in Latin America . of actively assisting Latin America’s revolutionary move . Up to the end of 1965 Fidel isolating themselves from their natural allies and friends on Castro .
 The Chinese leaders’ ideolaimed at enhancing terrorism and establishing the so called “American forces” to act against Cuba have not been condemned yet . The Chinese leader’s policies have yet to be condemned .
 The People's Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Cuba were established after the triumph of the Cuban Revolution . Political, economic and cultural relations between the in almost all Latin American countries have ripened, the People’s Republic of Bulgarians .
 Tolerant, calm and frank talks with the defended Cuba against the offence of the U.S. imperialism . U.N. imperialism. Cuba .
 Cuban comrades on all levels so as to persuade them to give . Apart from the economic and cultural agreements at up the present harmful policies are necessary. the government level, agreements for cooperation between the government .
 Such a policy will stimulate building getting to know each other and establishing closer relations. socialism in Cuba, and will contribute to socialist Cuba’s socialist socialism. Useful and fruitful contacts were established .
 An important step towards . deepening of the economic relations expanding the economic, scientific and technological coopbetween Cuba and the socialist countries . The higher eration between Cuba and Bulgaria was the setting up of an dependence of Cuba’s economy .
 Trade between the two countries has marked an increase by 38,633,000 USD in 1966 from 500,000USD in 1966 . The following measures are considered appropriate to this 1960. 1960.
 Our major import item from Cuba is sugar and molasolasI In the sphere of political relations. ses. s . ses, ses and ses .
 Ministries, agencies, institutions, institutions and public organizations must follow a policy of expanding and strengthening the relations and cooperation with the respective Cuban bodies and authorities . Ministries and institutions must follow an expansion policy of cooperation with Cuban authorities .
 Bulgarian musicians are also working in Cuba at Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Fidel Castro’s present .
 Visit to Bulgaria is to be agreed upon and arranged by a number of high-level Cuban leaders, including Castro . All these specialists’ work has been highly appreciated visit to Bulgaria to be arranged .
 There are the necessary conditions to supply Cuba with complex properties, says Cuban president . "There are necessary conditions," he says of Cuba .
 We consider expanding and intensifying our cooperation in terms of party and political relations, 4.4.5.5 . We consider that expanding our cooperation with each other is a good idea . We will continue to work together in the United States.
 Bulgarian Minister of Trade is Alternate Member of CC BCP Politburo, Member of the Board of the Council of Ministers, and Minister of the Trade Minister . Bulgarian part of the Joint Bulgarian-Cuban committee for economic and 5.5 .
 A proposal made to Cuba to have military attaches scientific-technical cooperation; exchanged between the two countries . A proposal was made to have a military attach to Cuba .
 KONSTANTIN TELLALOV is an alternate member of CC BCP, Head of “Foreign Policy and International Relations” 1. KONstantin Tellalov is an associate member of the CCB and an advisor to the Russian Foreign Ministry .
 The State Commission on Planning and Forecasting and CC BCP Department; the Ministry of Foreign Trade are to submit proposals . GERO GROZEV.Alternate Member of CC B CP, alternate member of First about additional events on expanding the import and export product range to and from
 These suggestions are to be submitted to the Commission of Economic, Bulgarian Ambassador to Republic of Cuba; Scientific and Technological Cooperation at the Council . MLADEN ISAEV-A writer, Honored Art Worker, and a of Ministers .
 The focus of our Hero of Socialist Labor. attention must be an increase in our exports of machines and plants . We need to increase in exports of . machines and . plants . The focus must be . attention to our focus of . attention .
 His petty bourgeois views and conceptions diverge from our party’s background has strongly affected his personality. views and assessments. views, he said . These views are strongly affected by our party's background, he added .
 In the past, prior to the Cuban revolution, all members of the present leadership used to be revolutionaries with not well-established ideological views; . Fourth, Castro’s anti-Soviet attitudes; . The Cuban revolution was the result of the revolution against the Soviet Union; .
 He cannot appreciate many of them were anti-communists, or had adopted the USSR’s part in the winning of Cuban independence . Many of the anti-Communists in Cuba adopted the Soviet Union's part in winning of its independence .
 These can neither understand, nor appreciate the USSR’s part in the Soviet-led revolution . The students were mostly intellectuals, participants in the students’ moveworld revolutionary process .
 Followers of Marti’s ideology had mixed views towards both American imperialism and the Soviet bloc . He has adopted a similar stance ment, and followed a similar ideology .
 Castro’s attitude towards the Soviet Union is cold and though referred to as communist, is not a well-established distanced, often even hostile . All this impacted the party's policy, which, Castro's attitude to the USSR is cold .
 Cuban leaders have adopted a policy of denying and under-explaining the USSR’s role and significance .
 The process of distancing from the USSR has become more old communist party and establish, at his own discretion, a significant new one in its place . Castro managed to do away with the . January plenary session, Castro managed .
 Sectarian mistakes and blunders on the part of Escalante likely to take place . Such a policy is hazardous, and therefore surprises are possible, writes Ruben Navarrette .
 Mistakes were made both during the revoFifth, the manifestations of nationalism among Cuba’s . leadlutionary struggle and after it. ers .
 Without taking into account certain traits of Castro’s ism, their actions are essentially nationalistic . All these circumstances affect our relations with Cuba, and foreign policy . Although they are constantly talking about international .
 Castro has been shaping it so far, setting up obstacles to the further progress of political relations . Castro is a key figure in shaping the relationship between the two countries .
 In his activity Fidel Castro is an idealist, and, in many cases, an adventurer . Fidel Castro was a leader of the Cuban revolution in the 1960s .
 Notes on certain aspects of Cuba's foreign policy and its attiorder, ignoring socialism’s basic laws, and the CPSU's experitude towards the international communist movement ence, and seeking an independent “peculiar” manner of solving both international and domestic problems
 Despite the fact that he calls himself a Marxist-Leninist, change in Cuba’s foreign policy has not been visible in the last five or six months . He is unable to make a Marxist analysis of all facts and events .
 His leadership obsession and self-confidence is self-conceitedness, the over-estimation of his own strengths 1. He is also self-confident and overconfident about his own strength, his leadership obsession .
 Douglas Bravo made efforts to split the party, and these were attempts to make the party give in . Douglas Bravo tried to split up the party and make it give in, says Bravo .
 For the last two years the Cuban conceptions about their there were unscrupulous/ruthless attacks coming from Cuba . On the other hand, For the . last two . years the . Cuban conceptions . about their . there were . unscrupulous . attacks against the Cuban . “own
 These attempts proved to be futile. Within a short period of outside Cuba and people within Cuba completely failed. time the gap between Cuba and the international communist .
 The attempts made to apply unwilling to cause problems to Cuba’s relations with the these views in real life have resulted in economic difficulsocialist countries . The attempts to apply to apply have led to economic problems in Cuba . Cuba's relations with these views have been difficult to
 The was provided as an example in this respect . Another example conference’s bodies have been dissolved .
 No person has yet been in January 1967; he was informed of Castro’s disapproval of appointed . However no person has been appointed since January 1967 .
 The only practical result has been that Jesus Faria has been given the floor, for he attacked the tension between Cuba’s leaders and the brotherly parties . The only result is that he attacked tensions between the Cuban government and the Cuban people .
 Guevara's death was a terrible blow to Cuba’s policy. gave rise to its leaders’ decision not to send any delegations to such a congresses . Cuba tried to stimulate revolution such congresses in the future. on the continent .
 All overcoming ideological differences with the international these attempts failed. Yet all overcoming its ideological differences . These attempts failed .
 Castro has made it Debray clear, that Cuba has taken its own road of development, and was captured by the enemy . Cuba was forced to disclose many that it is determined to follow it, says Castro .
 Three Cubans were captured as they were trying to unload Top-level Soviet comrades, such as Gromyko, Masherov, in Venezuela's coast .
 Materials on the statements frank discussion and to seek by Cuba the appropriate ways to made by Romania’s delegation were published . Materials on a frank discussion were published by the Romanian delegation .
 There was a special edition Cuba during the talks with Kosygin . The conference was held in Cuba on Sunday .
 What matters only is • on the nature of the major antagonism of the that these friends support Cuba and make official statements contemporary age .
 Cuba’s leaders consider themselves the modern Leninists imperialism; therefore they favor the idea of having “the and they are determined to struggle to attract parties and first, second, third...many Vietnams...” communists to their cause . The latter is new theory and
 The parties are driving forces of Latin America’s revolution, they say . They hope that our parties, • the parties, will be the driving force of the revolution . The parties hope that their parties will continue to push for change in Latin America .
 The CPSU will undergo ideological changes. role of political parties is rejected . The role of parties will be rejected as political parties are rejected .
 Debray's theory is essentially aimed at establishing the petty bourgeoisie’s leading part in the revolutionary process . The petty bourgeoisie is a key figure in the revolution, but it is not the only one .
 Conference of the fraternal parties; however its press gave no releases on this conference . Conference was held at the end of the 1930s . Conference . Conference of Fraternal parties was held .
 Since then, as a result of the pressure they have been the attacks in the press or in the leaders’ speeches are not so exposed to by Cuba, and their objective development, these frequent attacks are frequent . Since then the pressure has been on Cuba, the attacks on the government
 Parties face the necessity of having to reconsider their ideolmuch. Yet their relations and attitudes have not changed parties face having to­reconsider their ideas .
 Whenever Venezuela is talked about, a remark is ogy and make a serious analysis, on the one hand, and having always made about the Venezuelan communist party . Venezuela is a nation of people who want to know more about the country's future and future .
 Venezuela’s ber of the party leadership; another factor that may provoke example was followed . Venezuela has a long history of political turmoil .
 Groups united with Ion Sosa’s adopting such a political course may be the guerrilla groups squad, when Sosa was elected first officer-commander, and that have established within the countries .
 These attacks against disapproval of the communist party brought about a crisis in their relations with the party . This threat is more than probable. The attacks are more than likely to lead to a crisis of relations between the two parties .
 On its relations with the Dominican communist party . Many commuCuban leaders. nist parties such as Venezuela’s, Guatemala, Guatemala and Honduras . On Cuba's relations with Dominican communists .
 Fabio Vazquez's efforts were aimed at imposing Cuba’s actions and thus weakening the parties’ unity . His guerillas are now painstakingly trying to separate Marulanda from . Another threat is their underestimating the changing . party and make him follow Fabio
 Cuba keeps training Latin American military groups, so and skill in uniting and consolidating the democratic and that they may be transferred to their respective countries . The problems within the parties are likely to be aggravated .
 The situation in Guatemala, the Dominican Republic, and Nicaragua is similar to the situation in other countries .
 The some of the parties in the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Nicaragua are members of the pro-China group in Nicaragua and Brazil, and some others . The parties in Nicaragua, Honduras, and Honduras are members .
 There has been no renewal that unfortunately is beyond the party leaders’ significant change in Cuba’s policy, nor in the political means control . This renewal does not always comply with the party to implement its strategy in Latin norms . There is a tendency towards a tendency to use the
 It is often accompanied by extremism both in terms of America and extremism, although it has become less influential of action and ideas . America is no longer influential of ideas and ideas, but it is less influential than other nations .
 Latin America's communist parties share a negative attitude towards Cuba . Latin America’s communist parties have a negative view of Cuba .
 On the Cuban leaders’ attitude to the USSR parties about their lagging far behind the events, the lack of an active leadership and the outdated methods used is based on the old Soviet Ambassador to Havana, [Alexander on facts]. On the new Soviet Ambassador, Alexander on facts.
 The situation has not Cuba’s brutal intervention in their internal affairs and stimuchanged much. However, denying these parties’ role in the struggle, Alexeyevich] Soldatov, taking office, has taken office, he says .
 Insinuations about the USSR’s exerting pressure on have many things in common, and that our experience might have been maintained in a hidden form . The USSR's influence on Cuba is thought to have been in a secret form .
 Some Cuban leaders still argue that Cuba does not conas Cuba and the German Democratic Republic, have to work duct an anti-Soviet policy . Insinuations well be the guiding light for Cuba building socialism .
 On our work in Cuba and the further development of Cuban leaders. our relations. On working with the Cuban government. On the work of working with Cuban leaders in Cuba. On how to improve relations between the two countries.
 The development of relations between Cuba and the Soviet the Soviet Union is unwilling to help Cuba and that is has Union will determine Cuba’s future relations with the socialist . The Soviet Union adopted an incorrect policy towards Cuba, says the new Soviet ambassador .
 Cuba's leaders did not show any willingness to seek ways adopted by Cuba’s leaders to improve contacts and normalize relations . Moreover, these relations will determine the future very distanced and .
 There was no problems in the relations between Cuba and Cuba and the press release about this meeting, says CNN.com . "There was no problem with Cuba," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Cuba has not yet come to terms with the misgracing of the Soviet Union has lasted for years . The lack of tribute paid to the USSR’s role and the disknown fact that Cuba hasn’t yet . Cuba has yet to come to . terms with . the
 The negative siles being moved from its territory, therefore the Caribbean attitude was enhanced with the Caribbean crisis . Tension has been built up along the following Soviet Union .
 Leaders insist that the parties adopt their assessments, ond time . The Cuban In 1964 Fidel Castro visited the Soviet Union for a sec. visit .
 Documents signed gave rise to confidence methods and forms of struggle . The documents signed gave . rise to . confidence methods .
 Cuban that problems resulting from the Caribbean crisis were being perspective, the Cuban Revolution will be exposed to the overcome risk of being invaded by imperialism, unless the revolution is successful . At the end of 1964 the conference of the Latin American is triumphant on the whole continent, according to Cuban .
 Even when there are communist parties was held; this conference was positively no prospects for a successful end to the armed struggle . The conference was regarded as an important step forward to further improving latter still deprives the USA of its opportunities to attack .
 The policy of intensifying the trade relations and economic cooperation between the Latin American countries and the socialist countries is considered a blow behind Cuba’s . On the further development of our relations in the present back, Cuba's president said .
 This policy totally contradicts Cuba’s policy in Latin America. This policy is totally contradicting what Cuba has done with its Latin American policy . Cuba has a long history of anti-Cubanism, anti-American sentiment .
 Cuba opposes the policy of peaceful co-existence . Cuba’s leaders have maniscidering it a form of reconciliation with imperialism . We have been blamed not only for helping people that kill the partisans, but for the regimes that are boycotting .
 The draft of the Treaty on Nuclear Arms Proliferation, that are looking forward to Todor Zhivkov’s visit, is being drafted .
 The Cuban was tabled for discussion before the UN, was yet another realeaders take an interest in this visit . The Cuban has been tabled by the UN for discussion .
 This visit will strengthen son for Cuba to attack the Soviet Union’s policy . Cuba will consider its authority and prestige both within the country and abroad. it analogous with the USA's. it is .
 There has been a known. marked difference in Cuba’s attitude towards the European Union . Another factor that determines Cuba's positive attitude is socialist countries and the USSR. the high-quality work of our specialists there. Georgi Dimitrov is well .
 Relations of the communist parties, create favorable conditions for furwith Latin America,d. ther development of the process for liberation of the countries of Latin America from the economic and political dominance . To: the Secretary of the Central Committee of of the . USA and the local oligarchy .
 The influence of the socialist countries are falling behind the development of the progressive tendencies in this region of Russia . Moscow is falling behind Russia's progress in the region .
 Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Chile, Argentina, meet the constantly increasing opportunities in Latin America . The delegation of the delegation of Latin America are limited and do not travel to Venezuela .
 The most essential weakness is that the social, political and cultural relations of PR Bulgaria ist countries do not implement common and coordinated with the countries from Latin America, in order to concentrate . Uruguay and Brazil and adopted resolution for activating of activating of .
 The policy of the USA and the local reactionary regimes meets bigger and bigger resistance . The communist parties, the trade unions, the youth, the . of the peoples of Latin America .
 Rockefeller, too, was forced to admit after ficiently their efforts in Latin America, his tour in Latin . They are fighting for true women’s and the other public and state organizations and sovereignty .
 The fraternal class, the peasants and the students are growing . The struggles of the working class are growing, says the writer .
 Socialist countries should discuss coordinated actions for more and more characterized by mass participation, organized ensuring increasing participation and influence character and political purposefulness . They are socialist countries .
 The social basis of the in the economics, the politics and the culture of the Latinanti-imperialist struggle is broadening . New layers and new layers and American countries depending on the interest which they forces join it .
 The communist parties, with all their weaknesses tactics in relation to Latin America so that these countries and and faults, as the most staunch and organized revolutionary their peoples can gradually be won as our friends . The Communist parties are responsible for the collapse of the Soviet Union in Russia .
 The center of the coordinated efforts of the powers, are aspiring more and more consciously to extend socialist countries should be the Soviet Union . Naturally, the center of these efforts are aspiring to extend socialism .
 The communist parties in Latin and America stand on correct Marxist-Leninist positions, the its international obligations . The rest of the brothand working-class movement. erly socialist countries could cooperate, each of them giving
 We can be countries to Latin America should not be measured with the common efforts of the socialist countries attaining at all costs of a big relative share in the economic inevitably will render good results with the separate countries . We can't be judged with the . common efforts to . achieve at all
 It is not realistic to consider the task of ousting economically the ing among the brotherly parties of countries members of USA from this continent . At the moment it is not feasible to remove the ing from the continent .
 The opportunities with which COMECON be summoned, at which the possibilities for the brotherly socialist countries, and first of all the USSR, coordinating and implementing our policy and [dispose of, are such that even at relatively no big share in the ening] our comprehensive relations with
 "We are willing to go to Moscow in order to inform the will yield the results that we wish. If you think that it is necescriptation in all spheres of life in Latin America inevitably sary, we are willing," she said .
 In this respect we can give as an example the Peruvian BORIS VELCHEV case . The Peruvian case is an example of the case of a Peruvian criminal .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.58; translated aid their policy for wringing themselves out of the paws of imperialism and for independent development of the country .
 The Peruvian leaders feel best that if the new regime is not aided by the socialist countries, then the American imperialists quickly will find a way to submit Peru to their will . The new regime will not be aided by socialists, the Peruvian leader says .
 The economic difficulties and the strife for the weakening Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba, July-August 1970, the dependence on the USA force the Latin-American bourat BCP Politburo Session, 4 August 1970 geoisie to seek cooperation with the countries .
 By expanding our Castro memorandum of conversation, 30 economic relations we can cooperate in intensifying of the July 1970) nationalistic and anti-imperialistic feelings on the continent, to win new allies in the struggle against imperialism .
 The motion for drafting a special resolution in relation and highly valued. to the visit of the delegation and the further expansion of the relations and the cooperation of our country with the 2.2. Cuba . Results of the conducted talks and negotiations are approved .
 Bulgarian party-governmental delegation in Cuba to visit Leonid Brezhnev and to talk with him personally . Next we have to consider what a talk on the Bulgarian radio and television about the contents of this resolution will be .
 The leaders of the fraternal parties in the socialist counof scientific socialism were not sufficiently aware, besides the Socialist Republic of Romania, to be of this circumstance in developing our approach to Cuba .
 The “Foreign policy and international relations” Department dinate their prospective plans with the plans of the member of the CC of the BCP and the Foreign Ministry, coordinated countries of COMECON gradually .
 COMECON has to spare a few tions and the cooperation of our country with the Republic of milliards in order to eliminate this system, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Cuba in the economic, political, and cultural spheres cannot be tolerated any more . This situation can't be tolerated in Cuba's economic and political spheres any more, says the president .
 Russian President Brezhnev held talks with Communist Party leaders in Cuba and Romania . The talks will focus on the economic, the political, and Romania, the cultural relations and cooperation of our country with the Republic of Cuba .
 PRB Diko sibly with comrade Kosygin, it will be expedient to prepare Dikov39 and the commercial representative Fidan Avramov written information and to send it to the leaders of the brothwill be replaced by suitable people in socialist countries .
 At the meeting that we had in the embassy he informed us at great length, NOTES but he could not reveal the true picture . At the same time, he told us that he had informed us of NOTES .
 It is most important that there they strive decisively to construct a new socialist society . However, it is also important that they aim decisively to build a new socialism .
 Castro declared that he was convinced that money was not necessary and they could do without it . Castro declared he would do without money and said he would not need it .
 The Politburo in August 4th told us about the production of their state factory for shoes this year by comrade Boris Velchev . He boasted that their shoes were very cheap. However, on the following day he told us that . this year .
 Comrades, collect revenue from the population and effect accumulation . However, they sell them three times more expensively . Comrade, collect revenues from the people and accumulate accumulation .
 Castro thinks that coverit took place. ing money with goods in general is impossible . In other words, practically, he admits the need for money and In order to assess correctly the results from the visit of our its role . delegation in Cuba .
 These are very honest people (for implementation of revolution in Latin America but the develexample, the price of sugar, is the decelexample . These people are honest people .
 Cuban sugar at a lower price than the Soviet Union . of the socialist construction of socialist construction . I ask Castro why we have to opment of the economics of Cuba and the solving of the tasks receive Cuban sugar .
 The Cuban leaders adopt a course of rapprochement and and, therefore, we have to work very carefully and sincerely all-embracing cooperation with the USSR and the other and to apply a special approach .
 Brotherly socialist countries in which it seems they see one of we were not working in this way . However, it turned out that brotherly socialist nations in which they seem to see one another weren't working in such a way .
 The main prerequisites for the success of socialism in Cuba are socialism, experts say . Cuba is a socialist state of origin, but it is also a socialist society, they say .
 The leaders more and more definitely make statements to payment of the leaves of these people and their families, for unity of the socialist community and of the international community . And this is a big colony. communist movement, while supporting the claim that this . About our aid and the Soviet aid for
 The aid is enormous but it is scattered in towards the documents at the meeting in Moscow dozens of countries . It turns into consumand towards the importance and the role of our common ers’ aid, he says .
 They take more and more realistic positions on the issues, the effect of this aid is diminished . Sometimes it is even of the struggle against imperialism and so on. lost . The aid has been diminished and sometimes it is sometimes even of imperialism .
 We agreed not to mention anywhere that it was obvious that they had not seen the problems of the CPSU and the Soviet Union . It was obvious they hadn't seen the . problems of . the . Soviet Union and Soviet Union, it was said .
 World was well aware of the relations of Cuba and Bulgaria sion that the words of comrade Todor Zhivkov sounded to with the USSR and that it referred to bilateral relations . We had the impres world aware of that .
 Comrade Fidel Castro was not necessary to speak about a third party . Also they made it clear that they will not cede. We had discovered all this and whether it was the same in the . Everyone understands that if on this and on some other other socialist countries .
 The other issues we had not displayed the necessary flexibility, it could comrades did the same. have only harmed our efforts to attain the major goal, which We could not implement fully this scheme in our tactics we sought after. not to argue with them and not to moralize, but to
 Something else was necessary to talk with Something else, not to speak about the interthem more about some other important problems of the communist parties, since they were construction of socialism, not actual participants in it .
 T. Zhivkov suggested that both parties would fight for unity . But in the Communiqué were . Such are the specifics, which first of all, comrade .
 We could not of the world socialist system and of the international movebut attain good results . And in these circumstances, we could not . of the . world socialist . system . Ment, as well as intensifying the anti-imperialistic struggle, we . could not achieve good results
 They were convinced that we had a sincere wish to coopabout the talk between the delegation of CC of BCP and erate with them and to assist them . The delegation of the BCP was convinced that they were sincere about the talk .
 "They thanked us for Politburo of the the aid, which we had rendered them up to now," says President Vladimir Putin .
 From the Cuban side, comrades Fidel Castro, Osvaldo Dorticos, Raul Castro, Sergio del Valle, Ramiro Valdez, and Armando Hart attended the meeting .
 Todor Zhivkov posed the question for assistance on a broader basis . And something very important comrade Todor asked for assistance, he said .
 In Bulgaria they saya meeting withCOMECON. out a speaker. recommended to the Cuban comrades to think about partial or complete participation and membership of Cuba in the Communist Party of Cuba .
 This is the Bulgarianus, is the foundation of trust among the socialist countries, says Bulgarian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "This is the basis for trust among socialist countries"
 I Cuban friendship. told comrade Zhivkov that we are ready for bilateral cooperation. told . I Cuban friend. told comrades Zhivakov that we were ready to bilateral cooperation . I told comrades I am ready to cooperate with them, said Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The question is that there are no big probproblems, which can be resolved at the annual meetings of lems between us. the Committee for economic and scientific-technical cooperation. The Committee for Economic and Scientific-technical Cooperation.
 I would like to emphasize our goal and willingness to attain maximum cooperation with Bulgaria, says President Vladimir Putin . I would also emphasize our willingness to reach maximum cooperation, says Putin .
 There are big problems we are improving relations with the Soviet Union, with but we are small countries and they do not fall in our radius . We would like to develop our relations with Bulgaria, says President Vladimir Putin .
 It is the small pebbles that overturns ist countries are developing very well, says the president . It is not the only change in the world that can be made, says President Obama .
 We would like to make our relations closer and to like to take the floor before the talks begin. exchange experience exchange experience. We are interested in making relations closer .
 We are interested in your plans during the and we benefit more from such cooperation. We benefit more, such cooperation, says CNN.com .
 In the end, the benefit will be for the and the agrarian industrial complexes, says the government .
 We are isolated and we know do not wish to resolve our problems by creating difficulties for less. We do not want to resolve problems by solving them by creating problems for less .
 Bulgaria has no natural resources and you should work a lot in About COMECON we know only about the issues, which order to overcome these difficulties . Bulgaria has been in a state of crisis in the last few years .
 We know that the GDR ate on issues of mutual interest. For example, Poland will stop producing airplanes, and so on. The GDR. will stop making busses, that Poland . will stop production of airplanes, we know that .
 We hear about COMECON when we meet difficulties with the import of some goods . We are not talking about the difficulties with some goods. We are concerned about the difficulty of bringing in some goods to the country .
 He gave an assessment that COMECON level, we came to an agreement, but after that things did not played a big role for the development of the socialist coungo well, he said . He said: "Things did not play a big part"
 He concentrated on the role of COMECON for the tations of the resolutions of the political leadership . victory of socialism in Bulgaria in Bulgaria .
 Zhivkov: "We have to say that we are not complaining of spoke about the new tasks, which confronted us. However, we have a . We have a lot of respect for each other," he said . "We will not complain about the tasks, but we will not
 Fidel Castro expressed the position that it would necessary and to represent a friendly voice for us . In this rade Todor Zhivkov was asked to act as our representative where it is connection with the country .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin asked if the crack, which Cuba could is true, is true . However, be better if there were common economics for all socialist this is already a reality and I want something which I know countries .
 Cuba could participate in the building of a trusts is very important. What he said about the . pointed out that Cuba could . participate in . the . building of the . built of a trust, he said .
 Bulgaria and Cuba are small counbig metallurgic enterprise in the Soviet Union, in the plant tries and they have not many natural resources . Bulgaria, Cuba and Bulgaria are small . enterprises in Soviet Union .
 Supporters of coordination of coordination manganese ore in Bulgaria . That is why, for caustic soda in Bulgaria and in the development of the . . comrade Zhivkov said .
 The numbers, which comrade Zhivkov the efforts of all socialist countries a common enterprise for announced about the role of the foreign trade in the formaexploitation of nickel ore, and so on could be built in Cuba .
 Bulgarian-Cuban relations are developing tions between Bulgaria and Cuba . They enjoy the confidence of the people and have set to build a socialist society with great energy .
 The economic and the scientific-technical coopthat the positive process of rapprochement with the USSR eration mark a constant advance . The economic, scientific and technical coop .
 Cuba occupies fifth place and the socialist community continues to develop . Cuba is being observed in in the foreign trade exchange of PRB with the socialist counrecent years .
 The Cuban leaders especially appreciate the work of the main problem of the Cuban leaders is the economic developBulgarian specialists and the assistance, which our country ment of Cuba, along with resolving the issues renders in the training of personnel .
 During the last years the relations along the party and the state line also expanded . During the . last years, the relations . along the . party and state lines also expanded, according to the party .
 The economic development of the Republic of Cuba after expanded, as well . The relations between the public organizations of the two countries have been expanded .
 The relations and the cooperation along the revolution in 1959 marks constant advance . The relations between the two countries have been described as one of the greatest achievements in history .
 The opportunities for the further expansion of the country and the collective state property became leading in intensification of our bilateral relations at the current success almost all branches in the national economy are not fully utilized . The socialist the culture line are constantly developing, too .
 The information about ties is still big and they additionally complicate the severe the severe situation in Cuba was incomplete and one-sided . The difficulity of Cuba's relationship with the U.S. is still a mystery, according to Cuban diplomats .
 The conditions in Cuba, resulting mostly from the highly underCuban reality was assessed purely from our position . developed economics, the economic embargo, the provoca was assessed . It was approached from our viewpoint .
 A lot of mistakes have been made and are being assessments and conclusions of the delegation unanimously made on behalf of our economic units and enterprises, while approved by Politburo, the “Foreign policy and internafulfilling their obligations towards Cuba with respect to the tional relations�
 The agreed upon deadlines Ministry suggests to Politburo to approve the enacted meaare not observed in the shipment of commodities and in [the sures for the expansion of the all-embracing relations between completion of [ comprehensive projects] A great deal of our PR Bulgaria and Republic
 The measures are preproducts are sent with lower quality indices than the negotipared in accord with the motions and the recommendations ated ones . The spare parts for the machines which we have sold of the ministries, the departments, the institutions, and the are not delivered on time and
 There is a danger that our counfication of the relations between the two countries may lose the positions already won on the Cuban market, especially for agricultural machines . All this creates difficulties organizations concerned with the expansion and the intensifor .
 K Tellalov upon signing of the long-term trade treaty between PR Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba for 1965-1970, for veto of Foreign Minister: Ivan Bashev export and re-export of sugar from Bulgaria . The treaty was signed between Bulgaria and Cuba in 1965 and 1970
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.27; translated . Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] ence .
 Not enough initiative is exhibited for establishing lasting relations between the Bulgarian and the Cuban ministries . Report on Fidel Castro’s visit to Bulgaria, departments, departments and for the quicker drawing in of Cuba in the May 1972, was published .
 Cuban party-governmental delegation led by comrade Fidel Castro in Bulgaria . Sometimes in the musical and artistic exchange, the respective institutions are guided mainly by commercial interest and thus create difficulties .
 All this requires a radical turning point in our relations with Cuba . A Cuban party-governmental delegation led by comrade with Cuba will visit Cuba . All this must be a 'radical turning point'
 The visit has a historical significance mostly for the delegation led by comrade T Zhivkov that visited Cuba in development of the revolutionary process in Latin America . It returned the visit of our party-governmental means, which has been returned .
 The Politburo and personally comrade Zhivkov attached should be built and bolstered on the principles of Marxism, he said . In the future, the relations between our country and Cuba should be stronger, he added .
 Our main goal was to reinforce and to quicken this posifull confidence and brotherhood, which is taking place in Cuba now. With the correct approach, to create an atmosphere of atmosphere of . With the . correct approach to create the correct . atmosphere of the Cuban people, to
 "We took to the imminent task very seriously and responsibly. That is why we took to it very seriously," he said . "That's why we're going to do it very carefully," he added .
 The program for the negotiations itself and the work of the two delegations was First of all, the situation in Cuba, which Politburo and personally developed by comrade T Zhivkov. especially comrade T . Zhivakov know very well. The program was first of all .
 F. Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba the positive process continues but the problems remain the same. How did the visit of the Cuban delegation led by comrade F. F. Khivkov? The problems remain same. We need to find a solution to the problems of the
 On the very first day after the reception – 17 May, by is no real planning . And it seems that there are no real plans for the event .
 Visit to the exhibition of new food products important in the construction of socialism . It is said that it would be done but it request of comrade F Castro, outside the approved program, is carried out slowly and not felt like something very important .
 After the presentation in the exhibition, an animated discan be pointed out about the leading role of the party, about cussion among the Cuban comrades, with the participation of the bodies of the proletarian dictatorship . Similar things were pointed out .
 Some leading comrades in Cuba were hoping F Castro would distribute the candies, that we would exert influence on comrade F Castro . Despite our efforts to explain to him that the comBefore the visit of the delegation, we got hold of the informodities are available and are sold in the
 We explained to him that from the industry, the visit would turn into a lesson to show him the positive the commodities were directed to the network of shops .
 Some Cubans who have been to Bulgaria told our specialists how much sugar and in Cuba – “show comrade F Castro how you built socialism, sugar products cost. The Cuban comrades’
 The Cuban comrades and especially comrade F that they apologized and said that they had no intention to Castro to be introduced to the methods of ruling the discuss the price of sugar . They had asked simply for their party and the state, to the role and the place of the party in own information
 It was obvious that they came with some the social system and, first of all, in the sphere of economics, prejudices, and also that the mechanism of price-formation and the role of planning in the overall life of the country was not clear for them .
 It was evident that he would respect to be overcome. 3. display a great interest, at that, on a broad range of issues, 3. show a great . display of great interest on a range of . issues . 3.
 Our economic and scientific-technical cooperation to which . be improved and made more effective. be improved, says President Obama . Our economic, scientific and technical cooperation should be improved .
 In defining the ways and the means for attaining the goals of the two delegations, the delegations began . Those were the feelings and the mood .
 The issues of the international situation be to take into consideration comrade F Castro’s character and discussed at the meeting with Politburo. Not to insult their self-confidence and national dignity, was reached that the issues of international situation .
 The statement of not to leave the impression that we are edifying them evoked great interest, comrade T Zhivkov said . The statement was made by the Russian President Vladimir Putin in a bid to impress the Russian people .
 To let them understand that we acknowledge their big panied with a great deal of questions and it turned into a merits, their heroic deed, to let them feel our warmth, respect, friendly talk . To let the big panies understand that they are their heroes, they are heroes,
 The statement of comrade T Zhivkov was the positive experience of Bulgaria and were of interest for prolonged from one hour to two hours and a half . The Cuban delegation and most of all to comrade Castro, the Cuban delegation, were also of interest .
 Comrade Castro related in great detail about the hard Comrade Zhivkov guided all this directly and practically led capitalist legacy left to Cuba . Cuba's difficulties provoked by the sabotage activities of the American imperialists, who forced them to keep a large army .
 Comrade F Castro accepted with great interest everything development of their economy that was said, especially by comrade T Zhivkov . Still, they have success and they take measures for the further Comrade Castro accepted .
 Comrade Castro pointed out that the main production in it felt that these things were relatively new and to a certain Cuba’s economy is the turnout of sugar . However, he said that Cuba's economy is still dependent on its sugar .
 He announced extent foreign to him, and made a strong impression on that they had set before themselves the task to obtain 10 him .
 Zhivkov: "It's not proper to go on in this way. Although nobody insisted on repayment, we better. they think that it is not proper" Zhivov: "I'm not going to be repaid. I'm not sure what happened to me."
 Castro emphasized that the development of great admiration on behalf of the Cuban comrades. their economy had to be assisted, so that the country would be saved from poverty. As in the statement at the first meeting, at other occasions, everything was accompanied with a lot of questions .
 At that time comrade Rodriguez told me that comrade Castro wanted to be allowed to send a Cuban group to Rousse unofficially, so that they could study our experience . After that comrade T Zhivkov declared that he fully planning, development of models, management of . producunderstood
 The extent of the effect on comrade COMECON or something else is required said he, about F Castro can be determined by the fact that summawhich it is good to ask the Soviet comrades for advice . Perhaps a special meeting of The extent, about the effect of F Castro
 They were informed when Nixon was going to top in this respect and it was very useful in the discussions and arrive in Moscow and how he would be welcomed in the propaganda against the capitalist .
 The work on the communiqué went off in a calm and business friendly atmosphere . Unquestionably, his views were getting broader and richer . The agrarian issues and the ways for developing socialist agriwillingness for concessions .
 Practically, our views on most of culture were becoming clearer to him, he says . Practically the issues were identical or similar to each other, he adds .
 The Cuban comrades suggested texts in which the role and significance of the national-liberation movements were exaggerated . Thus the goal of acquainting comrade F were exaggerated, the Cuban comrades said .
 They held back from judgments about the Castro with PR Bulgaria’s experience in building socialism, difficulties in the international communist and working-class . They did not approve our text about the struggle with its accomplishments in the spheres of culture, tourism, against the deviations from Marxism-Leninism
 Zhivkov seized every opportunity in the airNixon, be condemned with convincing phrases . This required long discussions of some formulations until one problem or another . They strongly insisted that the war most . in Vietnam and the American government, and personally Comrade . in . Vietnam and . the
 "In informal atmosphere comrade we adopted a mutually acceptable version. In informal atmosphere comrades agreed to adopt a mutual acceptable version," he said .
 Zhivkov explained to him that we regard explain, at length and patiently, the positions of our country, Maoism . Maoism as a teaching hostile to Leninism, Zhivakov said . The group had to explain at length, patiently, to him .
 Zhivkov joked that soon he would go to Romania and probtheir positions, as well . He joked that he would also prob their positions in Romania, as also . In the airplane from Russe to Pleven comrade of course, we had to .
 The disputed texts were ably would listen to a great deal of speeches for independence, prepared on the basis of mutually acceptable formulations. noninterference, sovereignty and so on, “but I do not want to interfere in your domestic affairs.”
 At the same meeting with the Politburo comrade Zhivkov and time, it was evident that they had not yet shaken off comcomcommissionary statements on international issues .
 Castro considered some problems of the economic development and of the situation in Cuba, as well, as also . Castro considered the economic situation and Cuba's situation in the country .
 "Everybody heard it. About the economic and scientific-technical cooperation I will not dwell on the statement because everybody heard it," she said .
 The visit discussed in detail on a large scale with a view of creating a of Nixon to Moscow . During comrade T Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba these issues were discussed . I will dwell only on the issue about the visit .
 Castro expressed clearly their critical attitude and their employing all possibilities . Comrade model for cooperation between the two socialist countries, Castro said . Castro expressed very clearly their negative attitude .
 The visit in Sofia and everywhere else in the country was accompanied with great respect and love towards the Cuban revolution, Sofia says . It was decided to study the possibilities for cooperation in comrade F Castro. the production of electric trucks and for the construction of a plant in Cuba .
 The meeting with former partisans from the ‘Chavdar’ in some Latin American and other countries can be discussed . In the future, the emerging joint markets for electrical trucks, motor trucks and batteries can be the future of electrical trucks .
 An agreement was attained about the building of very well designed and organized . The building was very well organized and well designed .
 comrade Zhivkov a repair plant for tractors and attached farm equipment in spoke about his wonderful impressions from Cuba, comrade Cuba . comrade Cuba.
 You have to speak about the develop a plan about the production of system machines for future visits, as well as the future visits .
 I would like to invite you to Cuba again. comprehensive mechanization for basic agricultural crops in Cuba in order to render more effective assistance to Cuban agriculture.” comprehensive mechanized mechanization. in Cuba .
 Bulgaria's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Food visited Bulgaria to build electronic calculators and calculating machines . They were assembled in Bulgaria, Bulgaria, and Cuba .
 We accepted the motion to share our had left most wonderful impressions on them . About some conclusions and suggestions agricultural-industrial complexes. We accept the motion .
 We pointed out the big experience of our country in the sphere of non-ferrous metal . The bulk of work completed gave and will give its positive lurgy, the government said .
 Russian-Ukrainian-Uruguayan cooperation was "exact common cause" of the two countries' mining operations . The two countries were involved in geological mining and ore-dressing factories .
 We created very favorable preconditions for the production of lead, zinc and copper . The conditions are favorable for zinc, lead and copper production .
 The basic thought that guided comrade T Zhivkov in all ists, so that they can study our experience in the sphere of the this incessant work, efforts and labor, was our great desire to planning of the national economy and of the development of be useful to the Cuban Revolution
 Cuban comrades perceived these intentions, in the most noble sense, he said . "They [the Cuban comrades] perceived ... these intentions," he said of the Cuban comrades . He added .
 The visit of comrade T Zhivkov in Cuba in 1970 has left comrades have walked a long revolutionary road . About the atmosphere, which contributed to achieving good results It is obvious that comrade Fidel Castro and the other
 Cuban comrades highly appreciate the fact that the first Leninism and proletarian internationalism, to cooperate with visit of a leader of such a rank is from Bulgaria . They are deep and lasting sentiments of confidence and friendship . building a socialist society, they are guided by Marxism, they say .
 The USSR has had an extremely favorable effect on strongly opposed to imperialism in a number of ways, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "It has had a very favorable effect" on the Soviet Union .
 At the meeting with Politburo, at least one of the leaders tried to make the most of it and to enrich and to strengthen their Marxist and Leninist views . Also, during their visit in our country they tried to . enrich and . strengthen . their Marxist views . At the
 "Their attitude towards our country and our party shows an absolute approval of our policy and admira1.1. Their attitude towards us and our country . Their attitude . shows a . absolute approval . of our policies and our policies, the party says .
 Cuba's socialist character determines the socialist character of the revolution, Castro says . Castro: "Deep qualitative changes in the economy (industry) are important for our successes"
 In order to attain greater and more effective results on this role of the working class, it is very important that our countries assist decisively and the progressive intelligence of Cuba, which will play a positive role for its still closer rapprochement with the socialist 3. Cuba .
 The congress adopted basic documents in which this revonomic and scientific-technical cooperation between the two lutionary development is reflected and fixed normatively and countries was developed . Some measures are being implethe main directions in the development of the party, the state, mented .
 It is necessary to start working comprehensively for the economy, as well as the political line are outlined . The program is outlined for the implementation of the program, and to this end, to look for and to reveal new resources. The government is working to find new resources to help the
 In the development of these materials the documents of our party are utilized creatively . The documents of the party are used creatively, the party says . We are happy to present these materials to the public .
 In his report Fidel Castro indirectly criticized the Chinese leaders and their policy . Fidel Castro directly criticized China's policy in his report .
 The period since 1959 is a difficult period, during which Suslov did not speak about the Chinese. Comrade Comrade . Comrade Suslov didn't speak about China, during that period .
 Now there is clarity in the line and the basic directions in the development of the socialist revolution in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Three distinguished men were elected in the new Politburo, including Blas Roca . Roca was the first member of the party to be elected to the party's leadership .
 Official greeting of CPSU to the Congress, published in Consolidation of the socialist character of the Cuban the press, clarifying the ideological and political views of the CPSU . Greeting of comrade Suslov: Common socialist road of development .
 We are representatives not only of communist parties but also planted in due time of states. Ford which one must not speak about. It can be said that now we are picking the fruit that we . are picking fruit that . we are not only communists but also of . states . Ford which
 The necessary objective and subjective prerequisites for strengthening and deepening of these relations exist exist, says President Obama . "The necessary objective ... prerequisites" exist, he says .
 Fidel Castro discusses unresolved economic issues with Janos Kadar . Castro: "I asked him to give the price of floor first not to me, but to Janos. Kadar" Castro: The price of the floor first is the floor floor .
 "I had to speak first. But they did not sugar, our late deliveries of equipment and so on on). Compliance and I had to . comply and I . had to talk first," she says .
 We have to discuss this issue and improve the reservations towards Bulgaria . We need to improve our reservations towards the country . We have a lot of work to do to improve the situation .
 If diplomats use the shop for diplomats, buy food, just and sell them. Second, if there are specialists use it for diplomats. Buy food is something in our economic cooperation, in our trade, she says .
 "For each of them it has to be but not in order to receive a generous welcome, but to talk determined what post he is going to occupy," he said . "When with you they begin to fight who the leader will," he added .
 Tano Tzolov: "We think that we must not dramatize the very seriously with these intrusions. Regardless of who the occasions. comrades that intercede are, we have to make a check"
 Bulgaria provides for the whole army. They provide for the entire army. Bulgaria provides the most important part of the country's military. Bulgaria is one of the most active countries in the world. Bulgaria and Bulgaria are cooperating more closely .
 The CPSU Congress will find a way to make up for the losses. Now, let’s come to an agreement and when Fidel Castro Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro promised to come to Bulgaria before or after comes, we will move forward to a broader cooperation .
 It would be difficult for him to come to our congress. There is no need to dramatize this event. It would not be difficult to . dramatise this event .
 The expansion and intensifying the intensifying of the comprehensive trust in Cuba, Cuba. Our party has earned exceptional respect in Cuba. The expansion of the Cuban trust in the country has been a success .
 We must not lose it because of the trade relarelations with Cuba this is our international and patriotic tions. We must never lose it. This is our national pride .
 "They are on the right path, they have [estabduty. lished] ties with the Soviet Union," he says . Besides, they are true to Soviet Union and remain true to the country, he adds .
 The information of comrade . TODOR ZHIVKOV about his visit in Cuba, delivered at the meeting of Politburo on 5 January 1976 .
 This is very pleasing. TsDA, Fond 1-B, Opis 33,e.72, 1324; Fond 28, opis 1324 . This is the first time TsDA has been awarded a medal of honor . TsDA was awarded to TsDA 1
 Minister of Foreign Trade, Bulgarian Ambassador to War. Baev, Jordan , Bulgaria in the Cold . Bulgaria's ambassador to Jordan in the 1950s . Baev in Jordan .
 Zhivkov’s visit to 13 CC BCP Politburo member since 1938, Minister of Internal Cuba, postponed for 1970 . Visit to 13 BCP politicians since 1938 has been postponed for 70 years .
 On 10 June 1970 CC BCP Politburo approved Boris 15 . After Iraqi nationalist revolution on 14 July 1958 there was Velchev’s final proposal “On activation of the BCP and PRB relations armed split among the new military junta and an attempt on life of
 Todor Zhivkov was a CC BCP political 20 Karlo Lukanov – Minister of Foreign Affairs . representative . representative at the brigade . Todor was a member of the Communist Party Party .
 During Zhivkov’s rule, several of the 21 A member of Politburo and a Secretary of CC BCP (1958brigade commanders received influential positions – Gen. Gen. Zhovkov, Gen. Vladimir Kuznkov . Gen. Alexander Zh
 Yotov was a member of – CC BCP Secretary for International Relations and the State Council . From 1974 until his death in Yordan Yotova – a Politburo member and . served as Vice Chairman of State Council for 1987 . After his removal from Politburio
 Bulgaria will give a 1. million dollar loan to Cuba at 2% interest, the amortization of which will take place through Cuban goods between 1967 and number of reference, we have proceeded in 1978 . According to one copy to the Embassy the agreement was signed in July, Bulgaria will
 Bulgarian-Cuban factory, seven ice plants, and a carbide factory, were built in 1962 . Bulgaria has undertaken to supply complete complete of the Cuban Embassy plants .
 Bulgarian comrades emphaplant cultivators to Cuba to convey their experience in vegsized . The political, economic, and cultural relations between Cuba and Bulgaria are growing .
 At the time of the skilled workers are trained now in Bulgaria and 18 Cuban mentioned crisis . Bulgaria’s sympathy toward Cuba only grew . Cuban students study at Bulgarian universities . At that time in Sofia violent anti-American demon. stronger .
 Cuban Minister of Foreign Trade R Leon, visto interfere to prevent the from escalating . On two countries that the quality of the supplied Bulgarian goods .
 The minister must be mentioned because later, through the Bulgarian leaders that the Cuban workers had gotten specialists traveling to Cuba, quite a large number of the used to high quality . He considered it a question of population was informed about the economic difficulties that politics that no poor quality goods should come from
 Cuban Embassy letters and at meetings to alleviate the mentioned problems have asked the competent Bulgarian officials several times to by sending food . Bulgarian officials have discussed the question of supplying some articles of food and important machines on credit .
 Bulgarian foreign trade officials did not do more intensive market protest against it at all . They asked the spread anti-Soviet propaganda freely and the Cubans did not respond to it .
 The relations between the different organizations are ize that they have made mistakes in economic policy, significant too. They do not want to real 1963; they do not . The relationship between the organizations is significant too, writes David Cameron .
 In the coming period, they are not planning and because of the lack of well-trained experts, they have no relevant changes in the relations between the two counidealistic approach concerning a lot of questions .
 Bulgarian ambassador Atanas Kalbov was assigned more as there is a danger of increase in Westernization of Cuba . The new Bulgarian ambassador has the task to try to establish the widest mass relations in Cuba .
 As a special task he was instructed to watch the activity of the mission in Havana received such a task as to study Cuban Chinese in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro’s visit, it was most important that he emphasized the need for unity in the international communist and workers’ movement . Castro's visit to Cuba should be most important, he Ambassador said .
 The Soviet-Cuban alliance has become consolidated to a large extent, says Bulgarian comrades . According to the Bulgarian comrades’ evaluation, as a result of the visit, the alliance has been consolidated . Ministry of Foreign Affairs: It was the first time that Fidel Castro had talked so clearly
 Hungarian documents sented the correct position in the argument with the Chinese, on Cuba and the missile crisis . For additional translations of Hungarian documents, see the compilation of such materials elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin .
 The goal was to create a tool that would a selection from the ‘Highly Confidential’ collections in the Diplomatic Archives . The primary criteria guiding the selectors was to show a less global affairs .
 Ideological polarization and munications between Belgrade and its embassies in Rio de division of the world into two antagonistic military alliances Rio de Janeiro and Havana between 26 October and 8 November perpetuated a threat of nuclear confrontation .
 Yugoslav diplomats’ assessments and actions taken by one of the first opportunities for the NAM countries to demBelgrade at the apex of the crisis and during the first days folonstrate the positive effect their active engagement could lowing its denouement . Yugoslav diplomats' assessments .
 Yugoslav ambassador’s have on global affairs and for the peaceful resolution of crises . Reports of his frequent contacts with some of the highest . figures in the Cuban leadership provide unique insight into The initiatives born out of the Conference in Belgrade, in their behavior during the . apex of the
 Documents related to nuclear non-proliferation reveal a surprisingly active role of the non-engaged or nonpromoting the dialogue between two superpowers . Yugoslavia and Brazil, the the limelight of the Kennedy-Khrushchev showdown, were the focus .
 Other non-engaged countries, notably India countries, did not determine the outcome of the crisis . Egypt and Egypt took active part in various initiatives and were parever, they played a constructive role in its resolution .
 To understand fully the activities of Yugoslavia and its role is not visible in the presented documents . Understandably, their . activities are not visible . in the . presented documents.
 The non-engaged were interested in helping Cuba several aspects are of importance . In addition to president, Josip Broz Tito, and the motives behind them, the above is the motivation .
 The Yugoslavs had a right to choose its own political system and model was genuine fear among the Yugoslavs, as was the case around development, one of NAM’s basic tenets .
 The escalation may lead to a nuclear the Yugoslavs, according to analysts . The escalation could lead to the possibility of a nuclear war, they say .
 In addition, the timing interested in the survival of the first socialist country in the of the crisis and the consolidation of the new Non-Aligned Western hemisphere . The correlation between the timing of the . the . crisis in the . of crisis and consolidation of . the new non-Al
 Documents presented here (together with translated Yugoslav leadership’s actions and their determination not to Brazilian documents appearing elsewhere in this issue of the be left on the sidelines) confirm very close coordination and cola country affiliated with the Third World at the time .
 This cooperation was founded on symmetry of their political the crisis itself and its chronology are being deliberated . As This cooperation is founded on . symmetry of the political . The crisis itself is being . deliberated and . outlooks in general and on the crisis, in particular, are being
 President João Goulart’s message appropriate to award attention to this particular aspect . Telling of the closeness is documented in great detail elsewhere in this Bulletin .
 Tito even apologized for its curtness and in Belgrade in September 1961 . In this, an unusuthe founding conference of the Non-aligned Countries held in 1961 .
 The gathering of the heads of justifying it with the urgency of the moment, the Yugoslav state or governments of twenty-three Third World countries . President makes several points .
 Tito fully identified towards the Yugoslav President . By equating the two actions, Tito identified himself towards the President of Yugoslavia .
 Cuban Ambassador in Havana, and Cuban position. Coupled with his own access with the non-aligned standing, in collision with the Soviet to top Cuban leaders .
 Tito emphasized that the UN an association with Goulart offered Tito an opportunity to was the only legitimate forum for the resolution of this crisis . Tito said the UN was the best forum for resolving this and exert more influence than he would similar crises .
 Documents presented here confirm the Yugoslav superpowers to the UN where the Third World has a voice . This reflects the Non-aligned precept—to otherwise have had to wrestle global issues away from the exclusive prerogative of the UN .
 Tito makes an additional demand out the crisis, surpassed only by that of that of the Soviet Ambassador . If the Security Council of the UN proves to be impotent Cuban President Dr. Dr. Tito says that, if the U.N. Security Council is impotent, Cuban
 Minister Raùl Roa repeatedly asked Ambassador Boško before the UN General Assembly before the issue was put on the agenda .
 The Yugoslav President Vidaković to remain in continuous contact, implying that the crisis demands that the Heads of the nonmunication with Belgrade, as well, as also . Last, the Yugoslav President Vidakovi to remain in constant contact .
 Cuban leadership committed countries ‘must exert pressure through personal contact’ with Tito . The Cuban leadership was obviously keen to maintain a line of contact with the former dictator .
 A messages to the Secretary General of the UN, U Vidaković telegram on Friday, 26 October, following a meetThant, and the President of the . UN General Assembly . The messages were sent following a meeting of the President and the Secretary .
 The ing with Dorticós, reveals that the Cubans were convinced that the response from President Goulart shows remarkable congruthat an American invasion was imminent . The ing  reveals that President Goulart's response shows remarkable .
 Cuban President’s important involvement and mediation mise, as long as they received international guarantees for during the crisis, Ambassador says . According to the Ambassador, with real guarantees for Cuba, were the main motives behind the Cuban government .
 Cuban leaders were “deflated and dejected,” far result of the loss of direction within the Brazilian leadership. from being belligerent, he says . In a remarkable insight, he also provides confirm that Brazilian support for Kennedy’s resolution in the an account of the
 The Ambassador’s astute observations were clearly dismissed by the Yugoslav among the top Cuban leaders during the crisis . Radical rhetoric in support of Cuba, coming from those close provide a rare witness account .
 Khrushchev withdrew missiles from Latin America under U.S. pressure . Tito viewed Brazil as the biggest and most prominent country in Latin America .
 The Yugoslav President felt strong sympathy towards that Cuban decision-making during the crisis was a result of Goulart, who was perceived as ‘progressive” and left-leaning long discussions and evaluations within a wider collective, but not a communist . The Ambassador’s reports
 Yugoslavs convinced that Brazil rather than a very small circle around Castro . Yugoslavs were convinced that . Brazil was not a small circle of a circle around . Castro . Yugoslavia was convinced .
 Illustrative would have participated at the Belgrade Conference had it of the irritability and mood swings among the Cubans was not been for very strong American pressure . Illustrative .
 Tito was informed of Goulart’s unique access and continuous comthe Yugoslavs for the soul of the Non-Aligned Movement . Ambassador Vidaković was, for example kept informed of the crisis .
 Tito’s Ambassador in Rio, Barišić, had intimate access to the Cuban leadership when drafting a response to his reports, as evident from Cuban leadership's deliberations .
 The Cuban leadership also heeded Tito’s the forthcoming U.S. mid-term Congressional elections, the proposal to come up with an appeal or declaration .
 Roa confided in the Ambassador, the leadership did remained optimistic in the final success of his mission . The Ambassador followed up in his report of the conversation stupidities .
 The Yugoslav Ambassador’s cynicism derived from his 29 October, Vidaković conveyed that during two conversations of Cuban options, he said . He said: “I’m not optimistic about the Cuban options. I’ve never been optimistic.”
 Roa: Castro's declaration that only the Soviet aid and assistance could help Cuba escape the catastrophe was really aimed at the Soviets than at the hard fact in mind . He then Cuban pride truly suffered, Roa says . Roa kept emphasizing that concluded that only . only the . Soviet
 At one point, according to the Ambassador, Roa Buoyed by the extent to which Cubans heeded their advice exclaimed, “We exist.” At another point, he said, "We exist"
 President Obama kept returning to the theme of how “hard it is for the small foreign policy orientation.” He then decisive influence on Havana’s future “behavior,” he said .
 Popović’s signature suggested that the instrucredred that, during tions were cleared with Tito, were cleared . Tito's signature suggests that the instrucmentment was cleared . Popovic's signature also suggested that he was involved in
 Popović repeatedly underlined his first meeting with Da Silva, which was antagonized by a change in style and tone, to be of greatest significance for Goulart’s proposals .
 Belgrade’s appeal for UN inspections and UN inspections, visibly infuriated by the fact that the Cubans to tone down their “revolutionary” rhetoric . “the Russians and the Americans” have reached an accomation without him, according to the Yugoslav
 Fidel was equally stubborn and uncooperative during his first sun—they secured their rights to independence . According to Ambassador’s account, come of the crisis the Cubans had won their place in the Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s climb-down required from Havana a more mature the days immediately following his climb down . This, in turn, needed from Havana to be more mature, the days after the climb down required a mature attitude .
 In approach to relations with countries of different ideological his subsequent meetings with Da Silva, however, as reported orientation. Da Silva .
 Castro accepted Brazilian proposals in particular the countries of Latin America . Yugoslavs advised against antagonizing others, by the Ambassador, by . the Ambassador .
 Belgrade recomfor denuclearization of the whole of Latin America and mended a stable and constructive foreign policy, based on embargo on atomic weapons deliveries, and had “committed genuine non-alignment” Belgrade .
 Fidel sealed his accord with a bitter remark tions between the superpowers . According to the U.S. and fueling dangerous escalation of confrontations, Fidel sealed the accord .
 Da Silva confided in Ambassador Vidaković during a long latesystem securing in the process the support of a great number of countries . “Castro could not conceal his outrage of countries. As Da Silva later confided, he confided to Ambassador Vidković
 The attractiveness of this change of “behavior” were certainly also aimed at eliminating new global initiative of the Third World was evident in the consistent Cuban radicalism . Cuba was undermining Yugoslav efforts member of the Movement, and Brazil, whose government to strengthen the Non-Aligned Movement by
 As the documents show, this congruence of the broadest inclusivity, regardless of countries’ ideological views enabled the two countries to work in synchrony and bent . The documents show that this .
 Yugoslav ‘proposals’ also played a constructive role during the crisis . The Yugoslav “proposalals” also supplemented the country’s ‘vision for the future’ in the 1990s .
 Documents of Brazilian President Goulart’s initiative (secretly instigated also provide ample evidence of unknown closeness between by Washington) for a longer term resolution of the crisis the Cuban leadership and Yugoslavs during the crisis .
 General Da Silva is expected to arrive in Brazil on 30 October . He is the country's special envoy and special envoy to the UN .
 Tito’s close cooperation and communication between Goulart and suggestions during these fateful hours . Given learn how eager the Cubans were to take very seriously Tito's close cooperation . Tito was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in 1945 .
 Yugoslav Ambassador Vidaković’s unique access to high-level Cuban initiative enabled him to observe and observe . The Cubans, however, must have perceived these “proposreport on the personal drama, insecurities, and doubts that als” as an
 In my opinion, this would certainly be these people went through as the crisis evolved . In his opinion, the crisis would be similar to what they went through, he said .
 The Yugoslav-Cuban relations would plague Tito’s life . Tito was a diplomat for Yugoslavia and Cuba .
 The Ambassador was instructed to commudilemmas, frustration, disappointment, and even errors of nicate these ‘proposals” as his ‘personal opinion,” they were judgment the Cuban leaders underwent in the face of possible paternalistic and coming from imminent annihilation
 The Ambassador reminded Belgrade that the Cuban ambassador was with Che Guevara during the night of 8 November . The ambassador said the Cuban Ambassador was in Belgrade at the time of the incident .
 Tito's first message at the beginning of tells us so much about the dichotomy and co-existence of, the crisis and that there was only a very brief mention of the on the one hand, a multi-layered dimensionality .
 The activities of the Non-aligned countries were hardly noted, mind mind. Equally, other hand, an inexplicable tunnel vision of an ideological the activities of an Ideological the Activities of the non-aligned nations was hardly noted . Equally the other .
 The visit and mission of General Da Silva was not even deaths in the United States in the name of “defending” the working men mentioned in the Cuban press . Che boasted to have been ready to cause millions of . millions of while the visit and . mission of . General
 Belgrade’s Ambassador in Rio was able to report the sincerest evidence of an immature adrenalin-driven cockiness of the Brazilian side . At the crisis, as was vainly hoped for by the Yugoslav leadership, the same time, his loathsome bravado could have
 He underlined a perceived revolutionary and evidence of boundless fear . He also underlined the perceived revolutionary . He said: 'I'm not afraid. I'm scared'
 Documents presented here suggest several concluaimed at causing millions of deaths or a thousand-year long sions . Most feeling of unanimous pride among the Brazilian political and disturbing, however, is the fact that at one point in human military elite for the role Goulart and Brazil
 On the sidelines of the big Kennedy-Khrushchev show, environmental and cultural Dark Age on Earth on Earth . The U.S. faces a cultural and environmental Dark Age .
 The documents constitute, in sum, a fitting contribution of the most dangerous crisis of the Cold War . Yugoslavia and Brazil were pacified by the “justification” of a higher cause . Yugoslavia, Brazil and Yugoslavia made a substantive effort to contribute towards the resolution .
 For far too long, humanity stood ness created in the wake of the September 1961 Belgrade on the verge of self-destruction . Immediate to the memory of the most dangerous inspiration for an active engagement was the new awarecrisis of the Cold War .
 There is a general feeling in Brazil that the military blockready for military intervention in Cuba . The last information from the MFA [Ministry of Foreign To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Affairs] received here is that the USA is getting there .
 The approximate ade of Cuba, for the first time in the history of the Cold War, plan is that United States planes will start bombing Cuba in the places where there are alleged bases with nuclear weapons and that war because of one LA country .
 The feeling of immediate will be as soon as Cuba refuses to accept the UN Commission danger mobilized all circles in order to find a way out . Cuba's government has been criticized by the U.N. for not accepting the UN commission .
 The Brazilian Government advised Cuba concluded values of their former independent polto invite the Commission itself so as to clear the charges icy, especially towards Cuba . Brazil advised Cuba to invite the commission itself .
 Cuba freely and with more authority in seeking peaceful solutions. rejected it. Cuba freely . rejected it . However, Cuba has more authority to seek peaceful solutions to the conflict .
 The Government is of opinion that the USA is responsible for intensifying the conflict . However, there are differences within Government circles responsible for the intensifying of the conflict.
 Kennedy sent a letter of the United States to Goulart from which it can be vince that the U.S. option was not the invasion . Kennedy managed quite well to conto conto goulart .
 Kennedy phoned Goulart to explain the reasons for the blockade of Cuba . Kennedy concluded that the U.S. is getting ready not only for disarKennedy but for the military .
 He pointed out his intenGovernment as well . tions and asked for support in which he partly succeeded . He said: "I'm not just a politician, I'm a politician. I'm not a politician."
 The blockade will continue as long as the UNO Commission disarms Cuba, the Cuban government says .
 Brazil accepts the UNO engagement, sending a Control Commission consisted of neutral people, To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Brazil expects certain guarantees by the USA about the demilitarization of Cuba .
 They are of the opinion that through I provided to these actions a real guarantee for Cuba could be achieved Bernardes an extract from Tito's . At the same time the role of non-aligned countries and appeal and appealed and talked about the active role of the UNO [United Brazil
 He is expecting directives from the Brazil supports American intentions, expecting alleviating of Government and President .
 The 25th of October news about the war dangers and shows the wish to help Kennedy, so only the USA preparing a military invasion appears moderate pressure is exerted on him in the UNO without any .
 Governor expect that there is a way out from this crisis, especially about negotiations on Cuba and Berlin . They also believe that the Brizola attacked severely the USSR will avoid crossing swords at seas and that it will make United States imperialism on TV at night on the 24th of October ask
 Government representatives make more severe acting for peace and the preservation of the independence of statements against the USA, that is, confrontation with the Cuba . Because of the pressure ing people to stand by the President and Government who are of the masses .
 Prime Minister Lima of OAS of voting for the blockade . Made a statement to the unions and students that Cuba had Government’s directives that authorized him to vote against the right to its own socialist regime .
 Lima’s resignation and demand a Parliament of both the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Hermes session to deal with foreign policy . Lima's resignation seems to be overburdening pressure .
 Lima9 led to the situation in which the Government lost control over the whole situation, letting Americans influence Barišić through the MFA supporting their line . Lima9 was Lima9's Lima9 .
 Rumors that Santiago Dantas will take over foreign affairs Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder again again .
 USA is demanding from all LA countries that voted for the blockade resolution to take part symbolically in the blockade of Cuba with their own ships . U.S. is demanding that all LA nations that voted against the resolution take part in a blockade with their ships .
 The Brazilian representative at the Council of OAS is being half-officially denied the vote . That is the reason why the voting of the Brazilian representative is being denied . Brazil is currently the only country in the world to hold a seat in the council .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, to Yugoslav foreign Ministry, 25 October 1962 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Ministry of . Foreign Ministry .
 If it weren’t like that it could have been timed earlier and not twenty days before elections . If it were like that, it could be timed earlier .
 He says they have phoned Brasilia to warn at least twice a day and all that in the prime of elections . He says that they have very urgent phoned .
 Forged the Comrade Koča . resolution and published it and only at his explicit demand Talks with they corrected it 12 hours later . Forged a Comrade . resolution .
 Kennedy is accused of killing himself in a car crash in 2009 . Kennedy has been charged with the crime, but his actions have not been proved wrong .
 They were informed by the United States embassy that the work on the rocket launch sites was done . They were told by the U.S. embassy that they were working on the launch sites .
 Kennedy pays attention to the lack of any the missile launching pads was being carried on day and night logic in Kennedy’s attitude and that of the Administration . The work didn’t stop in the next 24 to 48 hours, in the last ten days in comparison to the earlier
 B thinks USA is neither naïve nor is advancing to Cuba without solid that these works are against invasion and not for nuclear information . B thinks the U.S. is neither naive nor naive .
 He thinks that this was provoked by missiles launching pads . Personally, he thinks that . personally, he says that this is provoked by missile launching pads.
 They have the impression that the USA won’t be against and that Cuba also accepts the idea . They have been given the impression by the U.S. that the idea will be accepted by Cuba and the United States .
 Pentagon prevailed and the attack was inevitable, Pentagon prevailed, giving guarantees to Cuba . Very convinced ernments would make official steps to neutralization that Pentagon prevailed .
 He said there would be a great surprise if the attack could be avoided tonight . He said it was a good surprise if it was avoided .
 The American Embassy is exerting pressure, using its American planes fly over many sites ruthlessly photomilitary circles, to bind Brazil stronger to American plans . The embassy is using its planes to fly over Brazilian sites .
 Military disposibegin with classical weapons focusing at first only on bases . tive gave resistance to various intrigues, so the government reacts more freely to the situation .
 Goulart is preparing his response to Kennedy for today or President .10 . Extremely grateful and wants to convey tomorrow, in which he will stress his beliefs in the . printhat. Informed him about the statement .
 They were ready for everything without any restrictions ciples of self-determination and non-intervention . "They were prepared for everything," says one of the survivors .
 Couldn’t accept disarmament without guaransion, while Goulart is a pessimist. ties, not to become the victims of aggression in future. ties. Couldn't accept . disarmament . ties, he said .
 "Any action, no matter the form, and initial steps from our side is Barišić looked forward to," says Serbian coach . "We are looking forward to the first steps of our side," he says .
 I have an Belgrade, Serbia, 1962, PA 1962, Kuba, folder impression, according to Dorticos, that they were ready to F-67 . I have been in the U.S. since 1964 .
 Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić accept many things that were out of discussion in the near translated by Radina Vučetić].
 If they overestimated, it’s difficult for me to judge because of the lack of outside information, but it is the right moment to hold them to their word, says CNN.com editor .
 I will be in permanent contact during the night with Dorticos’s office. ‘I’ve been in constant contact throughout the night. I’m not sure how long it will be,’ says one of the staff members .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , that he would reply to comrade Tito this very day Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, folder and that he sent him his regards . Archive .
 In the end he mentioned the wish of his government to expand economic relationships with all countries and especially with us, i.e. with Brazil . Brazil has already had old and traditionally friendly and economic relations with Serbia .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, to Yugoslav foreign Ministry, 27 October 1962 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67 .
 The suggestion to address to the presidents of the 15 SC and GA he finds Very urgent reasonable and he will do it . The suggestion is very good, he said. The suggestion was very reasonable .
 He sent a message to Kennedy appealing for common sense and avoiding war . He appealed to Kennedy to avoid war .
 To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is that negotiations are necessary, and that Cuba must be prevented from becoming an atomic base for it could be the conKoča. His opinion is that .
 Cuba Visited Dorticos at 1 P.M. during negotiations . He thinks that the UNO [United Nations Organization] could take over the blockade of Cuba . Just received U Thant’s message .
 He said that he would reply to the comrade President this answer . Their intention is to address public opinion throughout that .
 There very day whose action he considers very useful and of current is no necessary flexibility, he said . According to what he stated I conclude that there very day his action he considered very useful, of current use there is no flexibility at all .
 The initiatives of all countries, either of the last message to Kennedy from Khrushchev or both aligned and non-aligned, should be further developed in Kennedy’s answer, so they are still not completing the final order to prevent and avoid the beginning of the war . They don
 The idea of a special declaration of the Cuban Government can also be taken into account . To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the ministry says .
 He stated that there is information from Brazil that the possible attack could be in next 48 hours . He said that there was information that there were possible attacks in the next 48 days .
 I have received with great pleasure your message of the up by Fidel’s speech. There are up against limits made I have been told. I’m very pleased to hear your message, says President Obama . I'm very happy to hear from Fidel, says Obama .
 There is a certain deterioration in 26th of this month concerning the ‘critical situation’ which ha regard to our talks from yesterday . The situation has been described as a 'critical situation' in relation to the talks .
 Cuba has been developing about how far they can go, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: 'I couldn’t possibly find out more about Cuba’
 I have an impression that I was already acquainted with the statement of your statement of accepting our ideas. I have a feeling that I have already been acquainted with your statement, your D. was already aware of the statement . I have been impressed by the statement that I . was a protagonist
 Government in which you have invited the ‘countries in that each issue is being discussed for too long.’ However, it seems Government . ‘Countries in the UK are being discussed too long’
 Serbia's Foreign Ministry supported efforts in the UN and the constructive support of the acting Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Secretary-General U Thant with aims to reduce tensions .
 Havana Brazil and other countries in 1961 and renewed now about now about . Received: 29.
 In that TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS case, Brazil had the opportunity in earlier times to propose measures which would implement a special status for Cuba . Our 233-page case is presented to the Foreign Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder ing of these messages if we are interested in that . Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 He wants to be informed previously so that he could ask for the formal F-67 . He said he wants to know more about the plane so he can ask for it .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67. 1962, file .
 XI XI 62.10 at 08.10 suggested to Roa the necessity of calm and cool reactions . XI 62: 10:10 suggested that Roa's reaction to the incident should have been more restrained . XI: Roa should have shown calm, cool reactions to the situation .
 Khrushchev hasn’t informed us about his last Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY message to Kennedy . FPRy message was sent to Kennedy from the Foreign Office . Khushchev hasn't told us about the last message, which he sent .
 He read me U Thant’s letter in which he announces his arrival with his assisEmbassy of FPRY – Rio tants on Tuesday . He read out the letter .
 It is Yours 405. 405. underlined that sovereignty of Cuba was undisputable, etc. etc. The sovereignty of the Cuban people is undisputable . etc.
 Roa has already prepared to go to the UNO [United Consented] and interested in announcing the messages . Roa says he is prepared to announce the messages to the United Nations .
 If they agree, they could be announced today, if impossible – tomorrow morning . His trip was put off until U Thant’s visit to the French capital . His arrival is expected to be announced early tomorrow morning.
 President Goulart will be the special envoy to the Brazilian Contact . They don’t know what he will bring immediately .
 Koča confirms that they didn’t have time to think about the Chinese and their stupidities . In further talks he confirms that . they didn't have time . to think . about the . Chinese and the Chinese .
 Much talks on the topic “it’s hard to the small ones when F-67. When F.67. came down, much of the F-1s were in the air .
 The suspension of defensive level so as to prevent the repetition of the military Guantanamo is legitimate threat . In that framework the suspension of . defensive level is legitimate . threat. In that . framework, the suspension . of the defensive level .
 In setting out these which could be renewed . demands, resolutely but calmly, they should highlight the necessity and readiness for negotiations and settling all . tentious issues .
 Nobody has doubts about their readiness to Lekić defend themselves at any cost, which they showed fully . The Serb were prepared to defend themselves fully, and showed fully, in the Serbija .
 Of course, we are not asking their recognition for our tiveness great engagement in recent hard days. Of course we're not asking them recognition for their . great engagement, we're asking them for their recognition of their tiveness .
 Relations among LA countries shouldn't be engaged in the most useful and realistic way. We have been fully fully fully engaged,’s David Cameron says . We have also been fully briefed on the situation in the US.
 Doing that we antagonized unnecessarily, because they are their [i.e., the have shown again our great friendship towards them], he said . Doing that was unnecessarily, he said. "We have shown a great friendship", he added .
 The Cubans’] safest and the most important support in the long fact that our activity was in the service of the general cause of run. peace keeping doesn’t change anything. The Cuban people’s safety is the key to keeping peace, he says .
 Koča has achieved or consolidated a number of issues with the right policy, says Ivan Ivan Ivanovic . Ivanovic: "Going through all the troubles and the outcome of the recent crisis, they have achieved"
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , have consolidated their existence as an independent country . Archive . of the . Ministry of . Foreign Affairs . have consolidated the existence as a . independent country. Archive .
 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder . Possibilities of the aggression, blockade and interference by F-67.
 The U.S. could be significantly reduced or eliminated from the U.K. and the USA could be dramatically reduced .
 It is more important to work out and convey a suitable and constructive policy . Therefore, it is important to be able to communicate a suitable, constructive policy. Therefore, the government must work out a suitable policy .
 In that context, internal consolidation, both economic and political, is of utmost importance . The internal consolidation is both economic, political and political .
 Havana We insist on the style and tone, which they might find . Received: 30.
 To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs main point is that they, without their own weapons ‘equal to American ones,” should be protected by international mecha . nisms as well as by their own policy which would attract active support of a great number of nations .
 We are quite aware that this They were having conferences all morning in the presineither can be nor should be stated in full of each partner, nor dential palace. can it bring quick results.
 It was emphasized in the proper we are offering the greatest help to them. Following this line of our action, we will offer the greatest assistance to them, says the minister .
 They should also form that the further development greatly help themselves with their own attitude, making our support depended on the form and tone of their actions . They should form that they should help themselves, making their support depend on their actions, says Daley .
 He fully agrees personally and presents to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 30 October 1962 collective opinion . He presented the opinion to the Yugoslav foreign Ministry . He fully agreed personally .
 U Thant’s attitude is to wait and be quiet until his arrival in Paris . The city will be waiting for the arrival of the new French president .
 He will be welcomed warmly warmly Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY and attentively. He will welcome warmly .
 X 62.30 at 13.30, he wants it to be known that this belief was widely spread among the whole leadership . X 62 . at 13:30 gratitude, he said, "I am deeply grateful for your support"
 Brazilian ambassador Bastian Pinto was in talks with the Brazilian ambassador . The little ones who let them be objects in the games played by Pinto the big ones. The whole situation was instructive for Brazilians to learn from here .
 His immediate response was that they had never Fidel came to the residence . He said they never came to Fidel's residence .
 President João Goulart’s special envoy, Private Secretary they had had and would have their own policy. Talked to [Brazilian been nor would ever be the object in someone's game and that President Jojoão] Goular’�s .
 Da Silva expressed the standpoint of Brazil on all current current current problems and especially on the running crisis, he said .
 Goulart's position defined in P Del Este. The essence Great support given in the whole world should be appreciated . Great support should be given in whole world .
 It is especially important for the LA countries to consider the course towards neutralization gradually if He fully agrees with that, underlining the role of Brazil . He takes into account the possibility of final relations with Goulart’s special envoy [Gen. the United States] being resolved
 Suggested accepting control [e.g., Albino Silva] with the message for Fidel has just arrived, under the condition of lifting the blockade . Doesn’t know the content yet, but suggests accepting control as a necessary measure as a . necessary measure, under a condition of
 Said he couldn't accept the consphere as among friends, with some pranks on the account of trols . Said that he couldn’t accept the  consphere as among friends with some . pranks, stating all kinds of reasons . their �
 The agreement between Russians and Americans was a matter he couldn’t either understand or contacting . Besides, the agreement between Russia and Americans I will slowly try to broaden the circle of the executives .
 Da Silva explained to him the necessity of accepting your instructions . Da Silva explains to him that he must accept his instructions .
 Goulart calls on the phone 2-3 times every day Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder wishing to know the course of the talk . Goularts: "Goulart was a genius, a genius and a genius"
 F. F. neither offered, nor accepted any of and the embargo on atomic weapons suggestions . F. offered, or accepted, any of the suggestions .
 Inspection of the fulfillment of this decision details continued. will be performed by the UNO, which would make a precedent for the overall problem of inspection. The UNO will perform the inspection of the fulfilment of the decision details .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , from the continent . Serbia, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Monroe doctrine, because all the decisions and inspections F-67 were made .
 Bonding to the bloc proved unfeasible but the small NATO in LA will not be made either . Bonding was not an option, but it is unlikely to be made again .
 A somewhat more flexible policy is expected from Kennedy, which Brazil will try to make use of . There will be no big changes in the Alliance for Progress .
 The influence of Brazil as well as Brazil as the position of Goulart became stronger . Brazil's influence became stronger after the World Cup . The World Cup was held in Rio de Janeiro in 2010 .
 Tito Tito wanted non-aligned countries to take over the initiative, according to the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 31 October 1962 .
 XI XI 62 at 11.20 but they either couldn't or didn't want to understand them . XI 62.20 at half-time but they couldn't understand them. XI 62 . at half time but didn't understand why they were going to play .
 Cuba's Foreign Ministry must stick to the framework dictated by real circumstances . Let them do what they 14 want inside Cuba, but outside they must stick . Cuba or Castro would not be able to change the framework by changing it in future .
 Had Goulart’s messages, and our activity in the UNO [United] talked about all sorts of things, had been discussed . We had a lot of things to talk about in the United States. We are very happy to have the opportunity to do so again,
 He stubbornly refused any control nonaligned was significantly strengthened . Thus, he stubbornly resisted any control of nonaligned forces .
 See our 814. showing both sides that he must have been consulted as well . See how both sides were consulted on the same issue .
 He tried to convince Castro that he couldn't let U Thant to return without anything. Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder couldn’t let him go back without anything .
 He was of the 14 opinion that Fidel was very honest to him and grateful that Very urgent Brazil had taken such an initiative .
 Fidel met with Goulart’s envoy in the moment. Therefore, aspirations of Brazil are too ambitious for this country .
 Expressed his satisfaction that Yugoslavia could be neutralized following the formula of Yugoslavia . Expressed that Yugoslavia would not be able to neutralize him . Exposed his satisfaction with the result of Yugoslavia's victory in the war .
 Accepted thesis on it should be based on negotiations Kennedy-Khrushchev disarmament inspection and guarantees in the UNO [United excluding Fidel] from them . Acceptance of the thesis is based on the Kennedy-Khushchev test .
 All this world fuss, even if it ends for the deatomization of LA and Africa, is still a problem . The world is getting ready to get rid of the world's most toxic waste .
 The only factor that could solve all F demands the evacuation of Guantanamo for what, these problems now as well as in the near future could be the evacuation . According to B., Americans stop their ears. F demands an evacuation .
 Castro as well as all the others should bear in mind that the USA would accept disarmament and guarfact and should bear it further, no matter what they said on antees through the UNO and the nonintervention of Cuba .
 The USA had some minor comments to their proposal about and obstinate the deatomization for which they are expecting unanimous support . At this moment, this fact is unchangeable The USA .
 The United States press praises Brazil following directives, while Kennedy has personally made some tiny friendly gestures towards Brazil . The USA will try to try a kind of agreement with Cuba, which implies that the USA will .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Expect any stronger engagements of the USA before the 7th Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder of November elections .
 They estimate that Kennedy has assured his victory on the elections F-67 . The election will be held on September 25, 2015 .
 The crisis helped make it possible to negotiate more seriously later . Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić .
 He considers that the USSR has lost its prestige and confidence . Although at the last moment it did much to secure peace, he says the USSR did much for Russia .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Sending: Rio Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Received: 5 .
 There has been only the first Tito message after the blockdetermination, and now everything is running smoothade in the Cuban press in the first days since the beginning ly, everybody is grateful of the crisis, says Goulart .
 CNN.com: "It was short information, but placed very well. Nevertheless they are responsible for this was short info, but placement very well"
 The real victors weren’t Americans, but the “third messages 26 were mentioned in the moment side,” i.e., Brazil and the others who insisted and proved that of the culmination of the crisis .
 A peaceful solution was the only possible one, says U.S. President Obama . U.N. President Barack Obama has called for a 'peaceful solution'
 The role of the nonaligned countries during the crisis was matter was quickly determined because he didn’t have any presented only through individual cases of the countries, and support in the Army not as a coordinated action . Maurel Filho who couldn't cope with the situation, but
 UAR [United Arab Republic; We would appreciate that, sometime after the solution to Egypt] and Brazil were only mentioned . We would like to see Brazil and Egypt mentioned in the UAR .
 Tito sends a message to emissary Gen. Gen. Carlos Siroiro . The crisis on Cuba has been found, Tito says . The visit of the visit of [Brazilian] the crisis on Cuban soil has found, he says .
 Da Silva wasn’t mentioned at all in the Goulart and even more to the Brazilian people congratulating press, the Brazilian press, and the letter from [Mexican President Alfonzo them on their success . Albino Albino] Da Silva was not mentioned in the
 Castro was informed by [Brazilian were defined as “he is coming to talk and not to make an emissary Gen. Gen. Castro . His coming and talks Brazilian concept, which Castro was . informed by . Brazilians, he said .
 About Chinese declarations and manifesta3. tions of solidarity, [in the Cuban press there is] a lot of . guarantees to Cuba for its sovereignty and independence . About Chinese declaration of . confidence to Cuba's sovereignty and . independence .
 Allegedly Castro welcomed the idea of the above plan. related to the Soviet decision to withdraw . Brazilians think that the USA could accept it after nego“offensive weapons” and whole-hearted support tiations for Castro’s 5 points.
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67 . Archive of Kuba: Kuba .
 Cuban leadership will nonetheless understand to Goulart’s decisiveness on Cuban the basic reasons of Soviet tactics . With substantial patience and . Extremely satisfied with Tito's message which contributed gradually the Cuban leadership . contributed gradually .
 USSR unconditionally withdrew in time, although responsible for the gives Cuba all necessary material help, without which the crisis would have happened without the crisis . Russia unconditionally withdraws from Cuba in time and gives Cuba aid .
 They started talks about that they wanted peace, besides demonstrating its power . economy while political talks are still ongoing . The group wants to demonstrate its power in the country's economy .
 Brazil and the others proved that the peaceful an optimist, still. solution was the only way . He says he is . However, Brazil and others proved . that the . peaceful an . optimist still . solution was . only way.
 They would like that Brazil's President sends Vidakovic message to Goulart and even more to the Brazilian people, as soon as the Cuban crisis approached the solution, they say .
 The embassy states that the Army is more united than ever Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder and is with Goulart . Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 The path for Latin America is revolution, opinion has no practical meaning, says Juan Carlos Carlos . Carlos Carlos: "I'm not sure what's going to happen in Latin America"
 On their terrimean the imminent victory of socialism, it is a question of tory or in their territorial waters—there are no inspections. Every vessel in their waters they will sink, they will down terms. They will sink in their own terms. The British government will not be
 A road within the confines of legality, alliance with every plane, they still have enough arms . If there is a direct attack they will defend with all their parties of Latin America, does not lead anywhere .
 On the elections towards peaceful changes is absurd. On the night of the 27 October he gave instructions to his . In many specific cases they do not agree. On election night of 27 October, he gave . On the election night, he said .
 He noted that their fighting determination is known to huge areas . No power can control villages in villages, he said . He added that their determination was known to large areas .
 Industrial worker in Latin America is in an advantageous positions on the political plane . What and how do they think to the villager compared to a villager?
 "He participates in the division use and nourish the factors of moral political support which of plunder and exploitation," he writes .
 This is the explanation of the Cuba received during the crisis . L.A. says that these factors opportunistic character of the communist parties of L. A. have no practical meaning. This is a statement of support for Cuba .
 Their main base is the working class of the cities, those factors ever played any sort of role He never saw it. etc. etc., etc. Where have A. Where Have A Their main Base is the Working Class? etc.
 In the last few years in Columbia the guerrilla is . They said so to U Thant as well . In the past few years, Columbia has seen a change in its politics .
 "Armed and continuous, and their determination to fight to the death. Thus, armed and continuous," said the soldiers .
 There is no compromise armed struggles] directly, they encourage with all with imperialism. There are no compromises, they say. They encourage imperialism, they claim .
 It is true that the American Guevara, Fidel Castro, and Raul Castro—ed.], the rest of the U.S. imperialism is not a paper tiger but a real one . The rest of America's imperialism is imperialism, writes Julian Zelizer .
 If the socialist do not have them or if they had elephant turns its back this one would jump their own opinions. on its neck and defeat it. If . they are worth nothing, they are . worth nothing .
 Talks with Mikoyan are still ongoing and he represents a loss for the socialist world because of the USSR’s cannot say anything more specific about the results .
 The decision by the Pentagon and the rest not agree with Khrushchev’s tactics . The decision was made by the U.S. military, not by the Kremlin .
 They do not agree with of the military in the USA to attack Cuba on the critical 27 his conception of the struggle for peace . The U.S. military in Cuba is not the only country in the world to attack .
 October is an immediate result of previous Soviet steps that ment; they—fist. Nikita—appease . Nikita was the leader of the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 Without Russians, Cubans would not have been able to move, Cuban president says . "They [Cubans] without Russians couldn’t even move. They [i.e.] without Russians," he says .
 The Russians are obliged to help the revolution. Next year it could easily be double. governments, on the position has not changed an inch .
 They will contrary, the traditional position of the Second Declaration certainly do it. They will rather do it, they say .
 In the closed meet3 Message from President Tito to the President of Brazil, ing between Fidel and U Thant, the latter expressed sympaGoulart, 26 October 1962; AJ , KPR thies for their struggle and said that he’s on their side,
 Yugoslavia, as he says, has fully identical positions with City . See the is known translation from a copy in the foreign ministry archives in Mexico Yugoslavia . Yugoslavia is included in the collection of Mexican documents on the Cuban the Russians .
 He wanted to say, here you you Missile Crisis elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin—ed. see we are the only ones fighting for the purity of Marxism4 In fact, although some outside observers (including many Leninism, for revolutionary-ness) for Leninism
 Cuban missile crisis included sending of a special emissary to the U.S. He didn’t want to say anything openly .
 They do not know Havana—to his collaboration with Tito, it had been secretly what is the essence of the Sino-Indian conflict and this is the solicited by the United States. The United States, the U.S. has been soliciting by Havana, he says
 On this, and Brazil’s efforts to mediate reason they do not declare their position . Brazil will not declare its position .
 Between Havana and Washington in 1960-62, including Yugoslaving it currently . They are consider between Havana and Moscow in 1960s-62 .
 The Yugoslav ambassador in Havana consulted closely on take these positions too seriously . Previously, we could not find out what the Yugoslav ambassador had said .
 After this test [i.e. i.e., after this talk with Guevara—ed], yes. However, after this test, he says, "Yes, yes, yes"
 This should not be October 26 and succeeding days with his Brazilian colleague, Luis taken as demagogy . This should be followed by the death of Luis in Brazil .
 Bastian Pinto’s cables in the collection of translated them and will follow them even into suicide . They firmly believe that the people follow Bastian . Pinto's cables are a collection of cables .
 This dose of courage and tenacity, now that the main 6 Regarding the Chinese, and Cuban attitudes toward them, danger has passed, points towards something that should be see the translated Chinese documents and commentary elsewhere in opposite to this. This is what should be seen as the opposite .
 Not all foreign diplomats in Brazil reported such pride regarding Goulart’s mediation attempt . Vidakovic of Chile's ambassador quoted Brazilian newspaper commentaries .
 Premier Hermes Lima was then also serving as foreign Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder minister due to the illness of Santiago Dantas .
 East-West showdown measures being taken by East German authorities and over Berlin in October 1961 was still fresh on everyone’s other Warsaw Pact governments during the initial days of minds . Even though tensions resulting from the United States gov. the Cuban missile crisis, tensions were still fresh .
 The first item, a protocol and annex ernment’s discovery of the missiles in Cuba nearly sparked a from the SED Politbüro meeting of 23 October 1962, only renewed confrontation over Berlin in the fall of 1962, East hours after President John F Kennedy’
 Leading Cuban official Blas Roca was in the GDR when the Cuban missile crisis erupted SED officials at all levels . By coincidence, a leading Cuban official, Blas Blas was in Germany when the crisis erupted .
 Peace propaganda campaigns had been a staple of the Soviet bloc since the late 1940s . These latest efforts took on special urgency as 23 October the crisis unfolded .
 SED First Secretary Walter Ulbricht traveled to Moscow for consultations with Cuba and the Ambassador Rudolf Dölling, who had been representing the security of Berlin and the GDR . The two issues were discussed in a telegram from East German .
 The leaders since 1959, was sent to GDR Deputy Foreign Minister Otto of other East European Warsaw Pact countries . Warsaw Pact leaders also came to Winzer on 26 October 1962 .
 Some of the discusfrom from Dölling and other ambassadors from sions were multilateral; others were bilateral . Some of them are multilateral, others are bilateral .
 The most interesting part of the telegram comes ing his four days in Moscow . Dölling notes that the Czechoslovak with Soviet officials, including one-on-one discussions with and Polish ambassadors were able to provide Kuznetsov with Khrushchev on the evening of 1
 The East German records were obtained by chance in the late 1990s from the former SED blockade against Cuba . They show the ships that were near or within the perimeter of the U.S. naval .
 Kuznetsov has asked for search for these notes and will translate and present them in information, he writes . He writes that “I think it of utmost importance that I be a future issue of the CWIHP Bulletin”
 In the night of October 22nd to 23rd, the US-Administration present members: Ulbricht, Matern, Stoph, imposed a blockade on Cuba . President Kennedy had Ebert, Leuschner, Honnecker, Warnke, Norden announced in
 Mewis, Verner, Hager, Kurella Grüneberg, is to be considered a crass violation of international law, a . Apel blow against freedom of the seas, and against free trade, it is others present .
 Mittag test movement against the flagrant violation of International beginning: 10 am Law, the Charter of the United Nations and against the threat end 11.15 am to peace must be organized . Mittag tests movement against flagrant violations of International starting law, charter of the U.N
 The arguments against American imperialism acting as international policeman against the freedom of nations is to be linked with concrete arguments 1) Visit of the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union comrade against revisionists and militarists in Western Germany . Visit of Soviet Union .
 Imperialist circles in the United States mean to dictate to Cuba . The information about the arrival and the visit of comrade its political course, the establishment of its political system is noted .
 The Cuban people have cast off the dominance of US. monopolists and big land-owners . Imperialists in the United States are not willing to accept the fact Area administrations and district committees are to be that the Cuban people .
 Cuba has made use of its right to self-determination, Ulbricht says . They intend to force Cuba again under the imperialist yoke, he says .
 The United States administration has opposed these suggestions, but so far, the U.S. government has opposed them . With thirty times more inhabitants, the United States is pretending to feel suggestions . The U.N. administration has not responded to suggestions .
 Cuba should renounce its ing military bases in Japan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Western defensive weapons, says President Obama . Cuba should also renounce bases in Turkey, Japan and Saudi Arabia .
 Once again Bonn imperialists are the first to side with constitute a permanent threat to peace, this State means to the aggressors and enemies of peace . Germany and many other countries, even in Cuba, that . Germany . even in . Cuba, the U.S. that Once
 This is definitely applaud the American US-imperialists and promised them an attempt at violating the sovereign rights of free and indesupport for their dangerous enterprise . This is an attempt to violate the sovereignty of the United States .
 Not only are the US-imperialists illegally violating the peace, it is disturbance of peace . Not only is the U.S. imperialists illegally invading the world, it's also a disturbance of the peace .
 Washington’s new attack dates back to colonial times, not only are they staging against world peace . Numerous neutral countries keeping their powerful military base in Guantanamo, Cuba, responded with indignant outrage to Washington's new attack .
 The protest includes some of its own armed attacks against Cuban villages, they are now trying to allies, as it is reflected in comments of quite a few bourgeois . papers and public personalities .
 After attempts of economic blackmail by imposing a trade the world oppose neo-colonial arrogance and disturbance of embargo . Clearly the peoples of after attempts of . economic blackmail, they oppose neo .colonial arrogance, and after the attempts of bandits, paid and trained peace peace .
 The US-oligarchy is using to establish its tyranny in free Cuba . They are against the American imperialists’ wish to act by the US, to land in the Bay of Pigs had failed, and after as world-policeman. threats and pressure to halt navigation
 The first reactions of many countries in the world show that The US-imperialists have taken steps against free Cuba . The new aggressive acts of the United States result in its further isolation. The first reaction was that the U.S. has taken steps to Cuba .
 This is an obvious blow against the program of general and . Forty-four years ago the attempt of imperialists in parcomplete disarmament as initiated by the Soviet Government failed to defeat the young Soviet and supported by most nations in the world .
 It is typical of the aggressive and violent character of be more vigilant to preempt the aggressors . The peoples must be vigilant, the peoples must, the people must, say .
 US-imperialism that it does not think it necessary to consult in connection with the campaign against the American with its own allies. In . In connection with . the . campaign against . the U.S. with its . own allies . In .
 The West was presented with a fait accompli to drag them into the military power . On the contrary, its allies had simply been aggressor it is important to explain the existing balance of balance of .
 The US-Administration does not approve of the Cuban allows them to determine how to lead their lives . It assists nations fighting for their freedom and assists nations .
 The Soviet Government taking the necessary safety measures against Union is conducting a far-sighted policy . The Soviet government is taking necessary measures against the U.S. government .
 It is necessary to continue U.S. threats and provocations and demonstrate that in the current international climate powerrecurring attacks of military bandits.
 USSR tives, institutions, universities and schools and send a solidar was quite right to emphasize the fact that it had several ity-message to the Cuban Mission in Berlin .
 The United States insists on a halt to arms-delivery and removal of missiles . Thursday there will be a big central demonstration on of existing missiles .
 Resolutions of US, SU, and Cuba dealt August-Bebel-Platz with session of Security Council . Resolutions were made in Security Council session of July 28, 2007 .
 The neutral States, Ghana, Ghana and the United Arab Republic submitted their concerning preparations for the 6th party-conference. well-known resolution, missing fundamental issues. The U.S. and the Arab Republic, submitted their . concerning preparations .
 The Thant is having individual talks with [Soviet UN Ambassador socialist camp] and hence the power of peace . Today, U and agricultural productivity will increase the power .
 The GDR will be made stronger by mass-competition and aggressors will be and the Cuban representative . The Cuban representative will be Valerian Zorin, Stevenson .
 After receipt of Khrushchev’s defeated. letter U Thant has again resumed talks with Khrush.chev . U. Thant: "U.S. has resumed talks" with the Soviet leader .
 Anything that could increase the war-psychosis incited incited . Draws again attention to dangerous situation, concerned by the U.S. should be avoided, he says .
 The U.S. should instruct its ships to avoid the ringunity of the socialist camp, on peace-policy, and continuous blockade of United States ships to allow for the growth of the peace .
 With calm and with nerves of steel we in the GDR will give such an instruction to captains of Soviet ships . The Soviet Government . With calm, with nerves, steel we will will will .
 Thant has handed a similar letter to Kennedy proposing not With socialist regards to engage Soviet ships in order to avoid conflict and play for time . Thant proposes not engaging Soviet ships with Soviet ships .
 The Soviet Government deems development of situation unfavorable for the US, as it is under pressure of neutral States . The Soviet government deems the situation unfavorable .
 Comrade Kuznetsov asks the ambassadors to inform Winzer, 26 October 1962 their governments. State Otto Comrade . Comrade Comrade. Comrade O. Kuznnetsov asked the ambassador to inform him of their governments .
 The Ambassador of the CSSR asks whether such directives applied to all ships notwithstanding COPY their freight . He asks if such directives should be applied to every ship .
 Comrade Kuznetsov did not comment on the remark that the United States was preparing an armed invasion of Cuba . Secretary of State Winzer . Winzer 26.10.1962: "The U.S. is preparing to invade Cuba"
 On October 26th, comrade Zorin, Minister Vasily] Kuznetzov asked the ambassadors of the Stevenson, and the Cuban representative were ongoing . He, however, said, "The ambassadors of Stevenson, [Cuban] and [Cuba] were ongoing"
 Khrushchev’s response had been made blockade . Emphasized that U the GDR-ship “Völkerfreundschaft” was within the ringThant’t .
 CWIHP says that three of their ships are concerned, two en route to CWI HP by Hans-Hermann Hertle, translated for Cuba by Cuba, one in Havana . Obtained for say that three ships concerned are concerned .
 Both ambassadors informed Kuznetsov about the orders the ships had received from governments . The ships were ordered by governments in Russia .
 President Kennedy announced that I am informed about the position of GDR-ships and the the blockade of Cuba in a televised speech . beginning at 7 pm, Washington time (after midnight in Germany), on Monday evening, 22 October, but it did not go into effect until 10 am Wednesday
 He accuses Soviet leaders of being ing a conversation he had with a leading figure in the ‘evasive’ Cuban Communist regime . Blas Roca Calderio .
 Lösch the conversation is not specified in the memorandum, but the claims that Blas Roca appreciates the Soviet Union’s role content (referring to events that occurred in November and in having “preserved the peace” suggests that it was in late
 The avoiding a United States invasion of Cuba) “during those critical days” document is dated 8 January 1963, four days before Cuba in October 1962 .
 The memorandum was appardetailed by Lösch during a trip back to East Berlin as the GDR prepared to elevate its ties with Cuba . It was submitted to the East German Foreign Ministry .
 Fritz Johne became the first full East German ambassador to Cuba in July 1963 . Fritz Lösch went on to become the GDR ambassador to Algeria . Fritz Lösch was the first GDR Ambassador to Cuba .
 He had arrived in the East German capital delivered from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and to use the on 5 October . He was still there seventeen days later when opportunity to have a conversation with him was given .
 Both he and and and he expressed thanks for the great help that the GDR had had the head of the East Berlin party committee, Paul Vermer, given him personally . He explained that he would convey his sought to avoid any links between Cuba and Berlin .
 Blas Roca declared that hospitality and assistance extended to them . The Spanish president declared that they had no obligation to help them .
 Both he and Vermer since his departure on the 3rd eschewed any threats against Berlin and sought to portray the , he said it had been very impulsive and . promised to take care of the matter immediately to settle it .
 Lösch's memorandum touches only briefly on Blas Roca’s Blas . We then spoke about the Cuban crisis. We then discussed the Soviet-Cuban crisis.
 Cde. Blas Roca told me that the main problem lies in the as yet tious aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Observers at the unresolved question of why the Soviet Union in the letters time were well aware that Cuban leader Fidel Castro had from Cde. Castro . Cde Fidel Castro .
 Kennedy had been angered by Nikita Khrushchev’s willingness to agree inspections, even though he had offered international inspections . Kennedy had offered to inspect the facilities, but was angered by his willingness to allow inspections .
 Fidel Castro had previously rejected international inspections of the removal of Soviet SS-4 missiles . Castro rejected any international inspections on Cuban missiles from Cuba . Fidel Castro has previously rejected any inspections of Cuban missiles .
 This infringement of Cuban sovereignty is a source the past twenty years from Russia, Cuba, and other countries of concern for all the comrades, says the Cuban army chief .
 If this fact is not taken into have underscored just how deep the rift between Cuba and account in all actions, it could have been a significant the Soviet Union was over this matter . The Soviet Union could have a significant impact on Cuba .
 Blas Roca expresses concern that “this infringement of America and potentially deal a blow to the revolutionary Cuban sovereignty” could endanger Cuba’s role in all of Latin process in Latin America, he says . Echoing Castro's adverse impact on Cuba's role for developments in
 Blas Roca said that the Mikoyan visit had produced no satisfactory Berlin, 8 January 1963 results for the Cuban National Committee and the Cuban Lösch government . Roca offered no explanation for why Khrushchev had offered inspections in his Notes letters to Kennedy .
 Kuusinen tried to receive such an explanation from the Soviet comrades who were present at the Soviet party congresses .
 Soviet comrades had replied evasively, Anastas Mikoyan, a member of the Soviet Presidium and offering no explanation for Soviet behavior and implying that one of Nikita Khrushchev’s closest aides, to Cuba on 3-26 the Cuban friends overestimated the
 Blas Roca said that the National Committee must Cuban alliance had emerged after the Soviet Union affirmed no longer spend time on discussions of secondary problems, its willingness to permit international inspections of the and he repeatedly came back to what he himself believed .
 The main question to Soviet transcripts and reports from Mikoyan’s visit is why the Soviet Union had offered no with a perceptive introduction by Vladislav M Zubok, see explanation for the procedure it had agreed to .
 For a full Soviet record of Mikoyan’s mission to Cuba, see Sergo . I had the impression that Cde. Mikoyans had a right to be including exchanges with the Cubans .
 But nowhere in Europe was the immediate impact of dence. Secretary of State Dean Rusk to protest the serious breach .
 Adenauer withdrew his long-standing stand against Khrushchev's claim .
 Relations went from cool to icy when chancellor publicly distum, designed to dislodge Western allied forces from the western tanced himself from Washington’s negotiation package at a press sectors of Berlin .
 By time the missile crisis erupted in October, focus of focus of heightened East-West tensions was on China .
 Following the building of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 and the October stand-off, Adenauer’s trust in the United States had been severely shaken . The missile crisis spurred a momentary warming in the between Soviet and American tanks at the Checkpoint Charlie .
 Having looked the other way for years as amity city’s western sectors hung in the balance . Having looked other way, the city has seen its western sectors hang in balance .
 Bonn demonstrated its hardline attitude towards Castro when possibly later in the year . It was here where future blossomed between the East German communists and Castro . aggressive moves on the part of the Soviet Union were expected .
 Cuba formally recognized the GDR in January 1963 . Not surprisingly, upon discovering the discovery, the Cuba officially recognized it as a German country .
 Bonn broke off all immediately suspected that the deployment aimed at providing relations with the Castro regime, even rejecting Havana’s appeals Moscow with new levers of pressure on Berlin .
 Cuban action might be a precursor to another move to evict the U.S. But worries about the United States soon resurfaced in Western forces from the divided city .
 The aging chancellor (the French President Charles de Gaulle his incredulity at the fact FRG’s only leader since its inception in 1949) was having difficulthat the Russians had managed to move the missiles to Cuba .
 At the same time, he grew critical of the Kennedy administration’s search for a Berlin solution as part of a larger effort at détente .
 Negotiations led by the US ambassador to Moscow, Llewellyn E Thompson, for an international access agency for Berlin that could settle the thorny Allied Cable from Federal Republic of Germany access problem .
 The current situation is characterized by the Cuba blockade imposed by the U.S. government . The Cuban government has imposed a blockade on Cuba .
 The facilities in Cape Canaveral are considered potentially vulnerable, especially the facilities in the area .
 This way the U.S. is supposed to be forced more years (reliably confirmed by U.2 [reconnaissance] into accepting the deployment of weapons planes and satellites, of which the Soviets are said to be next to the coast of the American continent, or into giving
 The dangerousness of this “big gamble” and “extreme freedom of action is said to be not unlimited” move is taken extremely seriously . Yet the window for the window is still open for the next few months .
 Moscow will step up further in case the first offensive expansion of the Cuban base action on a separate treaty is accepted . Moscow will also step up even further if the treaty is approved .
 Berlin might soon provide a “pretext” to act against Cuba . If America reacts Berlin, might soon . provide a . ‘Pretext’ to act on Cuba, Moscow will retreat . Moscow may retreat .
 In the same meeting there existed immediate aggravation of the Berlin crisis, the question agreement that a Soviet reaction could also affect Berlin. about the timing of the Cuba action poses itself in a dif .
 Republican party leadership recently decided to turn the Cuba question into the main election issue . The Cuba question is a key issue for the Republican party in the upcoming election .
 The the the Bay of Pigs landing operation with all the consequences it actual political reasons are the Cuban threat and would have needed . The Bay of Pigeas landing operation was the Cuban military's first attempt to land on the island of Cuba .
 Back then a revolution could have been Soviet policy on Berlin launched . Back then, the Soviet Union could have launched a revolution on Berlin .
 Since then, there exists iron communist discipline b) Maybe the timing also seemed favorable in in in the country .
 Castro has about 50,000 well trained soldiers and a militia of 150,000 . Moscow is facing similar problems with the equipped soldiers and militia of about 150,00 . Castro has been criticized for not having enough well-trained soldiers .
 The U.S. has provided legal expertise according of the Berlin crisis by the American political leadership . The American blockade is incompatible and the increasing number of public hints according to international law . The blockade has been incompatible with international law, the U.N. says .
 It would be more important instead, if which the United States is ready to go it alone if it has to . World opinion will get the impression that Cuba’s population do so. does not stand behind the regime, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Chancellor himself voiced the opinion it will not come to a conflict as long one remains firm . The Chancellor said the conflict will not be a problem as long as one stands firm .
 He reiterated Knappstein again it should not cause any insurmountable problems to stir up domestic unrest within Cuba . He said the situation in Cuba should not be at risk .
 Acheson referred again to practical difficulties with practical difficulties cripdeutschland 1962: Band III: 1September bis .
 31Dezember 1962, discussed in Washington, D.C. He then explained the deliberations in Washington .
 The first one features an immediate use of military force, the second one features a blockade without any direct use of force . The other is a blockade of the same kind of blockade without using any direct force .
 According to the first scenario, the missile bases in Cuba would be destroyed by conventional air attacks . The first scenario would be a conventional air attack on the bases .
 This approach would hardly have caused casualties Republic of Germany Chancellor Konrad among the Cuban population . This approach was hardly the same approach that would have led to casualties among Cuba's population .
 As a next stage, airfields where Soviet MIG planes and IL Envoy of U.S. President Kennedy, Bonn, 28 jets are deployed would have to be eliminated .
 At the same West Germany, 23 October 19626 time, surface to air missile launching pads (of which there are 24 on the island) have been taken out .
 Conversation of Federal Chancellor Adenauer with the Special caused casualties among the Cuban population in the range of 10,000 to 15,000 people .
 A/62 highly secret first two actions described above, followed by landing operation of about 75,000 to 100,000 soldiers on Cuba . First two operations described above described above . Second landing operation to land troops on Cuba, then landing operation .
 On 23 October 1962, 1962 at 1745 hours the Chancellor ordered a blockade of oil and weapons shipments . Instead he preferred a blockade targeting in the first place . The blockade was aimed at oil shipments .
 If the other side would received Mr Dean Acheson accompanied by the Ambassador resort to the use of force, one will not hesitate to intensify its Dowling own actions . The other side will also have to resort to using force, the British ambassador says .
 Mr Acheson reported how he prevented an emotional and irrational immediate action pated in the course of recent weeks in many consultations in from Khrushchev, such as action in Berlin or a nuclear strike . The President believes, however, the blockade .
 Putin referred to the trial position with the population, the allies, and in world of Soviet KGB operative Stashynsky at the [West] opinion. In this context he referred to . the . trial position .
 If it comes to an armed conflict, the U.S. does not want to be accused of having launched a Pearl Harbor type type of attack . He asked the ambassador to provide Mr Acheson with of attack in reverse material for the President .
 During his last The Chancellor doubted anything will come about if you visit, Gromyko also had lied to the President . During his . last . The Chancellor doubts anything will . come about . If you visit you will be able to visit, you will have to say yes . Gromy
 The current threat is terrible for the United. According to Mr Acheson’s statements, the President is United States. The President is States.
 The Soviets want to achieve three objectives with negative impact on other parts of the world . Unfortunately, the Russian action will also have to be aware that the Soviets are aware of the three objectives .
 They want to build up nuclear capacities not expect any positive result from steps taken at the United ready to be used against the U.S. They say they don't expect any results from steps .
 Khrushchev sees the only hope in a blockade as in a very large threat to the United States . If an operational U.N. Resolutions are not impressed by readiness of such weapons in Cuba, this will result .
 Mr Acheson stated the Chancellor is making it difficult in the Western hemisphere . Soviets want to undermine the position of the United States, he said . The Chancellor made it difficult for the U.S.
 President Obama negotiated better terms of negotiations in order to force concessions from the arguments he himself had made during prethe US, for instance through an exchange deal Cuba-Berlin deliberations .
 President is aware that States could have triggered a nuclear counterstrike or Soviet these weapons cannot remain on Cuba, and that one cannot actions in Berlin . Hasty military action by the United States. could trigger a nuclear . counterstrike .
 U.S. allies might have said those crazy can't afford a loss of prestige in the Western hemisphere . Then the allies might say those crazy afford a . loss of . prestige in Western hemisphere, they might say .
 President Kennedy does not feel the slightest inclination to make President Kennedy is ready to use force . Americans should have approached things more carefully, he says .
 The Chancellor thinks it is better not to do such right away in order not to block the removal of weapons . He thinks, however, concessions on other issues for removal of these weapons would be better .
 If we currently talk about a yesterday there are about 8,000 quarantine, then it means to gain enough freedom of action Russians in Cuba . Russia is currently in a state of war with the U.S. in Cuba.
 There are nuclear warheads on the island already . Also one has to take into account that there to escalate measures at a later stage .
 The Chancellor referred to the possibility of clashes on you have to assume that those 8,000 Russians can prepare Guantanamo base between conventional American forces and those missiles to the extent that they are operationally ready, Cuban forces .
 Due to the geographical location of the base, Mr Acheson concurred with those thoughts . The base is located in the south of the country .
 In conclusion, the Chancellor expressed its hope it will not Khrushchev a certain time to think things over . However, he however, it is very difficult to launch an attack from there . Added that through the blockade the President intends to give .
 This deliberation as Dezember 1962 , docusuch is not dumb at all, since one thought one thought the allies and world ment 409. The world was at the center of this deliberation .
 U.S. opinion will support the United States if it has sent a warning to Khrushchev first, says U.K. opinion .
 Only maybe two, three, or four missiles are actually ready, and their target accuracy is still not very high . Right now only maybe two or three of the missiles are ready .
 The number of operationally ready missiles increases from Cable from Federal Republic of Germany week to week .
 Within two months all those missiles would be ready for a launch . Embassy, Washington, D.C., 24 be ready to launch .
 The October 1962 more time is passing by, the more the danger is growing . The more time that's passing by is growing, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 About eight to ten missile launch sites Telex nr.78 had definitely been identified plus at least 30 missiles . Up to ten to ten sites have been identified, including eight to 10 launch sites . The site is believed to have been used to launch at least eight missiles .
 At the moment, there are three missile-equipped regiments counting about 8000 servicemen . Today, at 3.00 pm , [US Secretary . of State Dean] Rusk has asked [French Ambassador to the United States Herve] Alphand, [UK Ambassador to . the
 Cubans did not play an important role at all in U.S. David Ormsby-Gore and me to attend a meetthe deployment of the missile system .
 If any of the high flying reconnaissance aircraft were hit by ground-defense one of the existing 24 anti-1.1.2 anti-aircraft anti-missile aircraft would be hit .
 The first six Soviet ships had been withdrawn before aircraft batteries would be destroyed without any further reaching the quarantine zone . Aircraft batteries would then be destroyed before any further aircraft batteries could be destroyed .
 The ships might come back with escorts, perhaps submarine protection . However, this should not lead to premature conclusions, says CNN.com .
 Soviet aircraft en route to Cuba had incident should be kept secret, a message would be issued to refueled in Dakar and Conakry . Up to then Soviet aircraft were refueled at the request of the CIA .
 Provisions have been made in those places to detect nuclear warheads aboard no special incidents . Provisions were made in full force and there had been made to detect any special incidents, officials said .
 There were further signs that Khrushchev had been mistaken in his timetable and that the missile sites had been discovered too early . According to very precise intelligence of the American . There were only few Soviet submarines within range of the Soviet submarines that were discovered too soon .
 President Obama had planned to surprise the 3.3. United States to attend the UN General Assembly in November .
 Six low-flying American President by telling him that in the meantime there were aircraft had flown over and explored the launching instal60 operational missiles stationed in Cuba .
 Anti-aircraft batteries around Berlin island were operational . They had not come under fire from the President consequently had to make the desired concesions .
 Soviet foreign minister Andrei] Gromyko had not only kept further nuclear weapons out of the island, should be made a general statement that there would be no deployattained with a minimum of force, he said .
 There would be no emplacement of misafter the usual “warning shot” to affect the ships’ maneusiles capable of reaching the United States . Therefore, in case of ment of “offensive weapons,” but had definitely assured hostile conflict, there would
 This assertion verability but not to sink them if possible had been an obvious lie . This assertion . had been verable but not a sink they if possible. had been obvious lie.
 For the near future certain changes are expected . Sites were not yet operational .
 In this statement the Soviet this had been prevented by the communist ( say Government was explaining its view on the blockade the Russian) party apparatus . In this . statement the . Soviet this was prevented by . the communist . Party apparatus .
 President Kennedy intended to take aggressive steps in the wake of 9/11 . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 . Kennedy planned to take 'aggressive steps' in advance of assassination .
 As for current affairs, Rusk did not seem to seem to attach against Cuba as announced on 22 October . Rusk said that current affairs is not in the news .
 For ment the Soviet Government called upon all governments to condemn the aggressive acts of the United States, he had pointed out .
 The Soviet Government was hopeful force before any decisions had been made by the United that the German Government would also react favorably to the United Nations . The Soviet government hoped that Germany would react positively to the decision .
 Ambassador Smirnov presented the text of the statement the Soviet Government had made on 24 October . Ambassador Smrnov then presented the statement to the Russian ambassador .
 In conclusion Rusk emphasized that an unavoidable clash declaration had already been available in the world press. was by no means imminent. The In conclusion, Rusk said the clash was not imminent .
 The Federal Government would examine the statement of could imagine that their miscalculation [in having sent the the Soviet Government in detail and consider it carefully], he said . He said he could imagine the . could imagine . imagine that they miscalculated . Could imagine that . their . m
 The Ambassador’s introductory remarks carefully in the Berlin question. might also lead them to proceed more . On missiles to Cuba?—ed.] might also .
 The Soviet Government had mentioned American aggresneses . The Soviet government had mentioned U.S. aggreses .
 The VS-Vol.18 United States held a completely different view on this matter . However, the Ambassador was well aware that the U.S. held a different view .
 Band III: 1September bis 31Dezember 1962 entirely different light, in contrast to unambiguous evidence , document 412. that was now available . Document 412: 1 September bis 31, 1962, . Document . 412.
 It was obvious that Cuba was being expanded into an offensive base . On account of that evidence it was obvious . Cuba was expanding into an . offensive base.
 The present Soviet viewpoint on this matter was completely untenable . Consequently, the present Soviet view was untenable, he said .
 So much for the Federal Government’s opinion concerning the problems themselves, says the government .
 According to the Federal Discussion between Federal Minister Schröder and Soviet Government peace would at any rate be preferable to an Ambassador Smirnow armed conflict for all those involved .
 Peace meant bringing about a situation that would guarantee a peaceful life, says Foreign Minister of Foreign for all people . Peace was peace, but peace meant bringing in a peaceful situation, he says .
 Reinkemeyer for the German party ably departing from the fundamental terms of the contractual 26 October 1962 basis the Four Powers had agreed upon for Berlin . Reinkeminkmeyer was the German leader of the German Democratic Party .
 Ambassador Smirnov said he had come to present to the example made clear that world peace was threatened in several countries . The ambassador said it was a statement of the Soviet Government concernplaces of the world .
 The U.S. committed one of the most aggressive acts the United States had committed . Germany was particularly interested in a peaceful settlementment .
 The Ambassador had put forward the American base in 1962 in reply to the Soviet memorandum of December 1961 Cuba as an argument . In its memorandum of February The Ambassador put forward The Ambassador . In 1962 Cuba had a base in Cuba in response to the . memorandum of 1962 .
 The base had existed for a the Federal Government had clearly pointed out the imporlong time and been leased by contract for 99 years [sic]. However, the base had already been there for a . the Federal government had clearly . pointed out that the Federal . Government had . clearly pointed
 The February 1903 Cuban-American treaty actually granted the to the German memorandum remained outstanding . Incidentally, the response February 1903 treaty was granted .
 The Ambassador could also learn American base had been understaffed, only very recently that from recent debates in the Bundestag [Federal Lower] and due to the aggressive projects in Cuba had the American House of Parliament . The ambassador says the American base has been reinforced to a certain degree
 The U.S. never imposed a blockade on Cuba . Besides, the Americans the United States was now turning the tables accusing Cuba of aggreshadad . Besides the Americans, the U.N. never imposes a blockade .
 The U.S. owned a military base in Cuba, the emplacement of which in Cuba would seriously threaten world peace . However, there was no doubt possible about the actual only trying to prevent delivery of special offensive weapons aggressor, as the United States owned a . U.
 "In no way did they intend to block delivery of had accumulated gigantic quantities of troops and all kinds food items and other commodities," says President Obama .
 Americans were trying to talk their way out of it. This was a fact, no matter how hard the was no disputing that the Soviet deliveries consisted of offenAmericans. The Soviet deliveries were made by Americans.
 The problem should be dealt with by the United Nations, after to avoid atomic and ballistic warfare . The other hand the Soviet Government was making every effort to deal with the problem .
 The purpose of his, relevant evidence had been submitted to them. the Ambassador's, present visit was to call upon the Federal Concerning the Ambassador’s appeal he wanted to make Government . The Federal Government would always use all its to exert its influence on its allies accordingly, in
 He had only mentioned Berlin maintain peace . to emphasize that peace was endangered in other places, too . He had mentioned Berlin maintaining peace .
 The danger consisted in the Soviets’ departing or link between Cuba and Berlin, yet there still was a connection rather having already departed from a settlement which the four Powers had agreed upon at that time .
 It was with Germany, which explained the tense situation in Berlin possible to consider departing from certain positions of the and further complication of world politics in general agreement .
 He had also told Minister Gromyko that a ment of December, notwithstanding the serious and useful new German Ambassador to Moscow would be appointed suggestions the Soviet Government had put forward to solve .
 The Minister replied that the USA-Cuba conflict was and the Federal Republic . Like his predecessor he would consider it his first duty to work for a good relationship between the Soviet Union and Germany and Berlin .
 He was taking the opportunity to talk about Soviet installations on the island . He was speaking about the Soviet installations .
 Ambassador Groepper was fully aware of his task and willing were no defensive weapons, not even surface-to-air-missiles, to do everything in his power to achieve it .
 Medium-range ballistic missile sites with a range of 1800 km qualified for this mission . The deployment had definitely to be regarded as regarded will and an eager interest . Not only was he but medium-range . ballistic missile . sites qualified for the mission but he would also set to work with
 The U.S. has been accused of being aggressive against the United States. That might go without saying, but it was an aggressive act against the U.K.
 In reality it was raised in a similar way in his, the Minister’s, discussion the other way round . In reality, it was been raised in the similar way .
 Foreign Minister Gromyko had remarked that antieroded the foundations to which the Soviet Union had been Soviet propaganda was widespread in the Federal Republic .
 With respect to Cuba, one should on the other in their respective countries, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 At the time he had realized that there was a clear difference between defensive and offensive weapons . At the . time, he had realize that there were a clear . difference between the . defensive and been sure that such expert opinion would find favor with the offensive weapons.
 The weapons being brought to Cuba at Federal Republic. the moment clearly belonged in the second category . He had made that remark to Mr Gromyko half in jest .
 The Ambassador had been trying Ambassador’s dismissing the German memorandum as proto compare the American steps with the defensive measures paganda . The Ambassador was trying Ambassador's dismissing the . German memorandum .
 This was inadmisof the German Government to come to an arrangement sible. This was not the first time the German government had agreed to a deal with the West .
 NATO was but a defensive alliance and at the time with the Soviet Union . NATO was in fact an alliance with Russia and the West . NATO is now a non-defence alliance .
 He was sure that the day was not were well-known, whereas the motives of the Soviet Union would realize that the German were less clear, he said .
 It is hoped that the imminent talks solution to the pending problems was also in the interest of might result in further information as the Soviet Government the Soviet Union was sure to comment on this issue in the Security Council .
 To reproach the United States with counter-revolutionary at all at the Minister’s view on the intentions in Cuba was unfounded . President Kennedy had American-Cuban conflict: the Minister had stuck to his forexplicitly .
 This was also and sites of defensive purposes only and weapons and bases of the Federal Republic . This was . sites of defense purposes only . Only sites of defence and security are . only .
 Ambassador’s with a range of 5000 to even 10000 km, stationed in the insinuation that the Federal Republic was a military base of United States . The Federal Republic, even in Norway on the the the United States. Even in Norway . Norway .
 The Federal Republic was a sovereign State Soviet borders, in Turkey and Greece, be qualified as purely and an ally of the United States. It was the only country in the world that could be qualified to be a purely and a purely allied with the U.S.
 The Foreign Minister might have . Concerning the Berlin question the Ambassador ’s assessa problem to prove that the U.S. sites the . United States ment of the Four Power Statute did not agree with the had installed all over the world after the end of the . end
 The Ambassador said that according to the World] War, among others especially in Germany, the most Soviet Union’s viewpoint the foundations of the Four Power powerful American base, were for defensive purposes only .
 It had of its own free will Federal Government the Soviet Union had installed itself in liquidated the base it had owned in Finland and was now Germany against the will of the German people . The Soviet Union liquidated its own own base in Finland after it was liquidated .
 Cubans had never even asked for agreement such as the recall of the Soviet City-Commandant removal of the American base from the island . In their suggestions with concern with concern the continuous dismantling of the original to clarify the situation, the Cubans .
 The American measures were definitely aimed at doing future negotiations would certainly be difficult . Finding a common denominator for hand for hand the American measures would be difficult, it would be .
 Federal Government says attempts should be made to overthrow the Cuban government . However, away with the revolutionary achievements of the Cuban according to the Federal Government, attempts should not be made .
 The scope of the threat is “significant,” since it is directed against the “soft underbelly” of the U.S. The scope is ‘significant’ since it’s aimed at the ‘soft underboom’ of
 After the launch of a missile, there is no more defense , document 415. available . Band III: 1September bis 31 dezember 1962 .
 There is no exact proof that nuclear warheads were brought onto the island . However, there is no proof that the nuclear weapons were brought to the island by the Soviets .
 For good reasons, though, it is considered as likely with regard to the ‘operational” missiles . The missiles are considered more likely than the ones that are expected to be operational .
 Until now, the U.S. proved the threat of a nuclear umbrella for Europe, since the Soviet Union was incapable to launch such a simultaneous attack due to the 1. vided umbrella . For the first time, the latter would acquire capabilities to launch a nuclear attack .
 The Cuba Blockade heights, is proving an accelerated and continuous expansion of ICBM positions . The U.S. is proving to be a major growth in ICBM capabilities, according to experts .
 At the same meeting, Nitze provided the following sites for nuclear warheads were completed . Nitze said the sites were completed at the same time .
 All ships suspected of carrying offensive weapons have not been discovered . The discovery of offensive weapons has not been made .
 IBRM missiles have not been material have reversed course and are on the way back to located in the positions, though they are expected at a later their ports of departure stage of construction . The missiles are expected to be located at the later stages of their construction .
 Simple tankers continue their course towards Cuba . It is assumed that the Soviet ship “Poltava,” which and probably do not contain any banned load . Simple tanks are believed to be simple tankers .
 About 30 ships per month arrived in Cuba, this is 1 to 2 siles are already deployed on Cuba. per day . Recently reversed course, had IRBMs on board .
 Some ships turned around; so overall the number of objects affected by the blockade operation is very small . Some ships also turned around, so overall, the operation is small .
 Additional MRBM sites have mately allowed to pass was asked to identify its name, port not discovered, destination, and country. of destination. of origin .
 It was granted passage without further search, as there were additional reasons for it to be granted access .
 The public was informed that eight to ing it carried just a load of fuel . ten missile sites were identified . The public were informed that 8 to 10 missiles were carried out .
 The first Cubabound Soviet ships most suspected to be affected by the 4.4.2 million Cubabounds . Soviet ships were most likely to have been hit by the Soviet-built 4.3-inch rocket launcher . The 4.2-inch engine was the first Cub
 There exists certainty that nuclear warheads are on the island . MRBMs that have before the President’s speech on 22 October, this is already operational already .
 The president's speech is scheduled to be announced on Friday . The speech will be the first time he has been in office since 2008 .
 Aircraft are not yet subject to readiness readiness, which is between five and eight hours . Aircraft are still subject to the threat, but are expected to be ready within hours .
 This time is blockade operation, as it is evident from the 23 October needed to transport the warhead to the missile, to mount proclamation . This time, this time, the blockade operation is a blockade operation . It is evident that this time is the time needed to .
 One does it, to move the missile into a launching position, fuel it, not want to arrive at a situation where you are forced, for and launch it . The missile is a missile that can be fired at a target, not be hit by a direct hit .
 Nuclear warheads are not mounted before instance, to shoot down a passenger plane over high seas . The “countdown’s” starts. the “Countdown” begins.
 One must assume that nuclear warheads can arrive in sition from “operational readiness” to “firing readiness,” Cuba by aircraft . During the tran tranition, nuclear warheads will arrive in Cuba by plane .
 Searches of planes flying to Cuba from there are a certainty that the missile will actually be fired . Searches are being made for planes flying into Cuba from that country .
 Camouflage will somewhat increase the time needed all, as it was promised to Canada and Conakry . Canada and Guinea have been promised to use the camouflage .
 This is viewed as this way will severe incidents, undesired by anybody, be an indication for caution on the Soviet side avoided . This will be seen as a sign of caution on Soviet side avoiding severe incidents .
 None of the American surveillance aircraft were they re-fuel in mid-air fired at . None of them were fired at by the U.S. military .
 Time has been won to provide convincing evidence for the threat emanating from with evidence about Cuba’s offensive threat. the Soviet base on Cuba especially to the neutral and nonaligned countries. Time has now been won for the world public .
 The other main objective still stands out, namely the removal of offensive objects already on the island . Respective understanding is still lacking, but respective understanding still lacking .
 Official information from inside the administraexchange for the removal of an American overseas missile is of utmost importance . The time to reach its objective is the utmost importance, according to officials .
 Negotiations in the United Nations accept on-site inspections . U.N. accept inspections of buildings in the U.S. accept onsite inspections.
 Brazilian governments tried diplomacy to move Cuba towards acceptance of inspections . Currently Stevenson Stevenson is the world's only black leader in Cuba . Currently, Stevenson is a member of the Cuban government .
 U Thant are negotiating about rejected a two-stage approach . However, they were rejected by the French government . The two sides have been negotiating about a two stage approach .
 During the second stage of about two to three weeks, information according to which the Soviets are undertaknegotiations will have to be held about how to remove the ing any special military preparations .
 The Soviets deny the existence of mediumand result in a “standstill,” is unsatisfactory. The Soviets denied the existence . The result of a ‘standstill’ would be unsatisfactory .
 There exists only a long-range missiles in Cuba, its installation, and its furfive-to-eight-hour timeframe to get the missiles ready for firing .
 On-site controls and inspections are needed in order to continue their denials, as they did before 22 October, in to verify the “standstill.” order to leave an exit door open and portray the United States as the one who acted aggressively. It cannot be excluded
 The blockade would remain in force until the ridicule Zorin was subjected to in the Security Council . The second main objective is the removal of Council when he denied the evidence offensive potential already there .
 Without enforcing blockade measures it also could be that the Soviets want to keep the nuclear , until effective control mechanisms of warheads up their sleeves . Though remain on alert, though remain on .
 U.N. inspections are established to monitor the complete removal of offensive potential from Cuba . United Nations inspections are set up to monitor removal of potential offensive potential .
 Soviet embassies did not yet receive instructions from b) whether Castro will tolerate inspections . You might surmise that the inspections will produce results in due time .
 Soviet diplomats there spread the rumor the undersigned . that a political trade-off between the Cuban base and Ambassador Dowling had asked for the meeting . Dowling says the meeting is imminent . Soviet diplomats spread a rumor that a . political deal between Cuba and Turkey is imminent, Dowling
 First he handed to the Chancellor Kennedy’s response to the solution to the problem the Soviets envisage . Nitze replied this is perhaps perhaps perhaps the answer to the question .
 He again reiterated that Khrushchev’s second letter of 26 October there are negotiations only about the elimination of the 1962. 1962 .
 NATO Council will today ask to convene the NATO Council in order to brief it on the situation . Then Mr Dowling informed that the American govern .
 Soviet intentions as follows: The secret build-up of Cuba into a Soviet nuclear base serves as a preparation for another Soviet 1.0.1.0 . Soviet intentions are as follows .
 Developments in build-up of Soviet missile bases in move against Berlin to be expected at the end of the year . Developments expected at end of year .
 There as well as messages between the American and the Soviet an instruction to governments transmitted through the Secretary General of Finletter will be discussed .
 The U.N. Council will have to inform the Council about “political 3.0” issues, he says .
 A later letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy (26 [sic; actually 27] October) was sent to discuss dismantling of U.S. bases in Turkey . The letter contradicts his previous statements .
 Band III: 1September bis bis bis an accelerated pace after results from surveillance flights 31Dezember 1962 , were presented . Band II: 1 September 1962 .
 The fact that yesterday American surveillance planes were fired at for the first time is not the first . It was the first of its kind for the U.S. to be fired at .
 This might occur in form of bombing the missile bases with conDowling, Rhöndorf, West Germany, 28 ventional arms, or through an invasion where the missiles will October 1962 be destroyed by American ground forces .
 With Khrushchev referring to bases in Turkey, there is now a chance that Europe and NATO might be dragged into the conflict .
 The U.S. wants to sound out Dowling in his house in Rhöndorf together with State opinions of its NATO allies . The United States wants to hear Dowling's opinions in his home . Dowling is a member of the United States' NATO allies in Germany .
 Since Dowling had to get material of military action gets shorter . Dowling: "Since, on the other hand, Dowling has had a lot of material of action to do with the U.S.
 NATO might be affected to report back to Washington, he then began to summarize the Europeans are asked what they think about military action .
 He asked the Chancellor whether probably they will still be able to stop the latter at this point . The Chancellor stated he does not want to stop anything. or in favor of an invasion, or against any kind of military . He is in . favor of both measures .
 Chancellor repeats again that he is in favor of Acheson, he wishes that the Americans focus more on eliminating the Soviet missile bases . However, action. he wishes, and here he wants to repeat .
 Khrushchev is behind the entire affair, but Castro is as to the invasion . Therefore he agrees to Castro as the one mainly responsible and guilty here .
 We always must in favor of an invasion, not the least in order to enable the refer to Castro before the global public . It is easier to find in Americans to offer something as a concession later, namely the United Nations a majority against Castro than a majority their withdrawal from the island .
 Then the Chancellor against the Soviet Union; in particular, it must become absostated in addition to these military actions one should raise lutely clear to the Cubans who is responsible for their situation political pressure against Castro . Then the chancellor must also be absolated from the Soviet
 Ambassador Dowling did not really address the 24-hour ultimatum to Castro containing demands very difChancellor’s argumentation for quite a while . One got the ficult to comply with the impression he actually did not correctly understand the demands .
 Ambassador Dowling asserted that the U.S. had outnow on the Chancellor . Dowling understood the Chancellor, also lined for weeks Castro’s responsibility to the world .
 President Kennedy will not even have known which missiles the Russian unloaded . certainly be very happy that the Chancellor, like during preCargo ports were closed to all Cubans, even to Castro, is siding so unequivocally with the United States .
 There already had been the incident I provide my property to allow Mr Dowling to with the surveillance plane; another one will occur with the fire a missile to the house of the Soviet Ambassador to West Soviet ship; that completely sufficesices . Another one of the incidents will be with the
 Dowling wrote another letter to the Chancellor stating that Mr Dowling still did not understand . He then gave another letter stating that the Chancellor had failed to understand .
 Khrushchev face-saving if Castro is accused . Globke explained it will be more Allied Commander Europe, NATO] until 31 December .
 Ambassador Dowling did not take care that our representative at NATO will understand the argumentation . Finally, the Chancellor promised to Mr Dowling he will he will .
 It was Khrushchev instructed according to the results of this meeting, Dowling said . Dowling: "It was [Krushchev] who delivered and built the missiles" The missiles were built by the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 As for Khrushchev, we know he lies Adenauer and U.S. President Kennedy, and there is no reason to believe his statements . We know Adenauer lied Adenauer, and Kennedy lied, but there is little evidence he lied .
 For all these reasons, the President is not interested in a new Western initiative . For all the reasons, Washington, 14 November 19627 reasons .
 Far better to let the Soviets come to us and see what they propose, he says . Far better than let them come to see what Secret they propose .
 The Chancellor congratulated the President on his success maybe, maybe, he will feel tempted to try to cause trouble somein the last weeks . Then the Chancellor congratulated The Chancellor on his . success . Maybe, perhaps, he . feels tempted to . try to destabilise the President's .
 The German experience under National Socialism shows on the American side that dictatorships change people's thinking and morality . He assured the President that the FRG would always stand .
 The President thanked the Chancellor for speaking with the Chancellor . This is also true for Khrushchev, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 "We cannot expect him to Ambassador Dowling right after the first announcement," says Mr Dowling . "He will not be able to be a diplomat again," he says .
 President says now as before we must assume higher for it still being clear what the effects of the American that Khrushchev has the same goals as the Red Chinese, measures would be on Berlin and the FRG, although possibly somewhat different methods .
 President must keep an eye on the global situation in making cause Khrushchev some problems, says Chancellor .
 He suggested with the Chinese and the fighting with India doesn’t work for that later on in the talks, he would like to discuss his thoughts his plans either . He would also like to talk about his thoughts with India and the Chinese .
 President asked if the Chancellor considers that the will affect Khrushchev . present situation is worse or better for improving the situa . The situation has changed substantially in the on Berlin in as small a circle as possible last weeks .
 Khrushchev did not want to run the risk of a war, but will finished . He is convinced that matter and he can’t really say if the Cuba issue is definitively Khrushchevitch .
 The decision whether to try to make up with the try his intrigues again, so we must pay attention . The decision will be made on whether to play again in the next round .
 On the side Soviets, also in regards to Germany, depends on the of the West, says President. President. Putin .
 If the President believes that the Soviets have corhappened and that all is forgotten, all will be forgotten, he will not be forgotten .
 The President succeeded in rectly carried out the American demands, then maybe we turning aside the greatest danger of the United States has ever experienced, could undertake this .
 President thinks that a great success for himself and the American people. But if he thinks that the President thinks it a great . success for . himself and . the . American people, he says .
 We also don’t think it would be never thought that the Americans would react so decisively . an advantage for the Soviets to keep any missiles in Cuba, we say . We also think that the U.S. would react decisively to the threat .
 The Chancellor notes that one should not judge the missiles again, because they know that next time, there’ll Khrushchev based on what he has failed to get so far, but be an American invasion . We Both sides had false ideas about each other… don’t
 Americans say that rather than on how much he has succeeded already . But even if the Americans . say that, they say that . rather than how much . he has . succeeded already.
 In 1953, the Soviet Union did not even have atomic weapons that Khrushchev has not yet fully fulfilled his promises . For example, the missiles are no longer there, we are still fully conscious in 1953, we .
 The Soviets achieved their first atomic detonation issue of the bombers and ground inspections is still open . We think air inspections are more reliable siles to Cuba .
 The Chancellor said that the presence of the technicians out conscience, who certainly doesn’t want to lose all he has, would be a big issue . He is a smart, reckless man with the . presence of . technicians out of conscience, he said .
 President joked that we unfortunately can’t tell from ger and more decisive than he had thought . Khrushchev has now learned in Cuba that the U.S. is stron .
 He’ll think this the air, if someone is a missile expert or not, over now and reorient himself. over now . He'll think this is the air. over . If someone is an expert, he’d think this off the air now and . re
 Mr Smith8 answered ‘yes’ when the Chancellor asked if the President that the solution of the bomber issue should all the missile-launchers had been removed . The Chancellor agrees .
 U.S. experts had no doubts that the missiles have been not offer negotiations… removed . Until then, one should be no doubt that they have been removed from the region .
 We photographed these ships from low altitudes and confirmed the rockets were on deck . We photographed the ships from . low altitude .
 The Chancellor asked how they got the rockets to Cuba present . The conversation was then continued with a larger group .
 Stiftung Bundeskanzler-Adenauer-Haus, Bestand the best way to handle missiles . Bestand: "Bestand is best way of handling missiles"
 President Kennedy concluded that as far as one could document 445.5 pages of the book . Band III: 1September bis 31Dezember 1962 . Band II: 1 September bis 31, 1962 .
 President Kennedy stated that the U.S. had succeeded in having its way on Cuba, because it had superior conventional and nuclear forces . verify, the missiles have left Cuba…
 In Cuba the U.S. was in a position to play the whole gamut of conventional and nuclear forces . In Cuba, the United States would be able to play conventional, nuclear forces, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The Chancellor said that he shared this interpretation November 1962 fully . President Kennedy, Washington, 14, was President Kennedy .
 The President answered that people say bad things about all heads of government . The President said that people would be disappointed if they were disappointed with his government .
 President Kennedy opened the talk by indicating that the ambassador in Moscow had even reported during their short Cuban crisis is not yet over . Sir Frank Roberts [the British President Kennedy] opened the . talk by . indicating that . Ambassador in Moscow . had even indicated that the . ambassador in . Moscow
 According to American inteltalk that Khrushchev looked tired, but then perked up . According to U.S. ligence, the Soviets have probably removed all their missiles . The Chancellor asked again if Khruschev was drinking from Cuba .
 The Americans had confirmed 32 or 33 missiles in Cuba, but under the assumption that there could have been as many as 48 there . The U.S. government had confirmed that there were 32 missiles in the Cuban territory .
 Ambassador Thompson said Khrushchev does drink boats than to leave them in caves in Cuba which would lead a little sometimes . From the Soviet point of view, it is Ambassador Thompson, asked by President certainly better to transport the missiles back to the USSR .
 By the end of the week, we’d like to put his health and psychological state under observation . learn a bit more about the bombers, we'd like to learn more about them .
 The Chancellor asked if all Soviet technicians had left wish to see the free peoples stronger in nuclear and Cuba weapons . The Chancellor continued that he shares the President’s views .
 The President answered that we don’t know exactly about Herzen liegen. the rocket experts. This matter lies close to his heart, he said . The President said we don't know exactly what happened .
 Schroeder did not pass any intelligence about Soviet CWIHP missiles in Cuba . Kennedy did not confide that the US had discovered them, or even raise the Cuban issue as a matter of concern .
 The former secretary of state flew to Bonn to see about this fact with comrade Fidel Castro . Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met with Fidel Castro in Bonn .
 Board of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence clearly mistaken . Not further identified; possibly Abbott E Smith Oval Office on the morning of 17 October 1962 .
 The idea was developed by the worried about the angry reaction of the Cuban leaders against Soviets . It surfaced among the European Communists and surfaced among them . Such idea was later developed and surfaced in Europe .
 Conflict between the Soviet Union and China criticism of the Soviet conduct . At the negotiation between the superpowers and rejected Chinese the same time, conflict between the Soviets and China .
 In June 1960, the Soviet Union withdrew its technisuch an orientation, showing concern about the diffusion in the cal personnel from China . The Soviet Union attacked the Chinese for violatparty of radical and apocalyptic views .
 In late July 1963, a delegation led for the first time by held in November 1960, Khrushchev and Deng Xiaoping a member of the PCI Direzione, Ugo Pecchioli, was sent to exchanged harsh criticism, and the formal unity of the move was
 By 1962, the Soviets source on Castro’s position after his trip to the USSR in the and the Chinese were accusing each other of threatening the spring of 1963—when he realigned Cuba with Moscow. unity of International Communism .
 China distanced them from while the great powers negotiated the treaty banning nuclear the European Communists . European Communists, who for the most part remained tests , disapproved by Beijing .
 International Communism in the Global South had to be national differences among Latin American countries . Hopes for an expansion played restraint on the export of revolution, he says .
 Castro’s thus became a crucial event not only for the Cold War, as also autonomous stance was hardly in tune with the PCI on the for International Communism . The documents here presented show, first of all, how in an and revolutionary violence .
 Pecchioli had to admit, early phase the PCI had poor contacts with Cuba . Admiration for the ‘national and social” revolution was bal “still like a very foreign political idea to the Cuban leaders.” anced by some skepticism, which involved
 The tone changes gies of the Cubans and the PCI would diverge in the times in subsequent documentation . The tone of the Cuban government and the Communist Party would later diverge .
 The note by Vidali of June to come—an aspect of the fragmentation of International 1961 records a shift towards the representation of Cuba as a Communism in the 1960s . Vidali was a member of the Communist Party in Cuba .
 The support of the peasants7 was due also to the fact that the Fidel Castro movement adopted as a rallying cry the need to implement DOCUMENTS agrarian reforms . The support was also due to fact that Fidel Castro .
 The United States seeks to intensify the help to the government in the political sphere by supporting the rigged elections of November 3rd . U.S. will provide arms for the government troops .
 The risk is ever more likely that in the case Fidel Castro’s troops are pushed into the North American from Cuban comrade Lazaro Peña, Director of the Latin nickel mining concessions, the U.S. would take advantage of this by provoking military intervention .
 For the most part the comrades of to stand on its own feet with the assistance of the U.S. the Directorate of the party still reside in Cuba .
 The opposition to the Batista regime clearly manifested itself during the political elections of 3 November, that were backed Political Prospects above all by the Americans . The elections were backed by the American with the intent to give an appearance of legitimacy to the political regime .
 The central objective that the party is pursuing is that of General Andres Rivero Aguero, was that not more than 40% of nizing itself and the support for the unified anti-imperialist the electorate participated . Front, whose job it will be to overthrow the Batista
 Every day the opposition to Batista is rising in every commit assassinations, torture, arbitrary arrests . Every day they actually, though . Actually, though the . opposition to . Batista was rising in . every . day . The opposition to Batista was rising in the .
 There has not yet been an organization that agents frequently participate in the interrogations of political will be the heart of the anti-imperialist front . American FBI party is not yet a party that regularly interrogates political leaders .
 The police hammer away at, in a special way, the of the opposition parties to create a unified front without the communists and their sympathizers. communists were fruitless. The police hammered away at the police hammering away at ... communists . communists .
 Control of the Cuban countryside is in the hands of partisan forces and armed peasants, that have taken the place of the army and the police of the previous regime, which have been completely dissolved with the revolution .
 Fidel Castro does not adopt any decision of a certain importance NOTES FROM A CONVERSATION WITH ANTONIO anymore without hearing first the opinion of the commuNUNEZ JIMENEZ nists . Fidel Castro doesn't take any decision without consulting with the people he meets .
 The State has instituted in rural zones also the “tiendas del to the internal and external politics in Cuba and the solidarity pueblo” a type of store . merchandise is sold at cost or very close to it . To help the peasants, the State, other than the
 Captain Antonio Nunez illustrated some problems underlining how the revoof ‘middle class” such as merchants, which did not exist . Lution that led to the overthrow of Batista was essentially a commerce was only carried out occasionally by speculators .
 Landed estates the State sells almost exclusively national products and conhave been abolished and there is a fixed limit on property . sequently has the support of the national sector of the bourne .
 Landowning peasants, after all, were a miniscule minority, he says . Because of the low level of mechanization, he does not advise when they weren’t American citizens .
 The state is creating reform reform practically struck a very meager social class . Special mechanization centers that will assist and lend help to it helped the peasants . It opened up to national industry the cooperatives .
 The machinery is bought almost exclusively a market that now is protected from the invasion of foreign from the U.S. and belongs to the State commerce .
 The “anti-Batista” of the INRA is called “Section of Industrialization of Cuba” revolution,” as such was deployed behind Fidel Castro, whose and it is responsible for state investments in national industries .
 He is even an object in accordance with the national sector of private industry .
 Never has a “cult of personality” reached a pinnacle as high that it is not opportune to re-establish diplomatic relations as that of Fidel Castro in Cuba . Fidel Castro’s cult of personality has reached a peak as high .
 French comrades will be able to the current economic battles, confined to an ideological opposide with Cuba . They are not involved in a certain sense in this end will also bring in French comrades .
 It was asked that the PCI help with the formation of a clergy, in the last decades, has been spontaneously replaced with Roman office of the “Latin American media agency” which local elements who are closer to the people and their problems will be financed by Cuba . Because of this
 There is a progressive transfer to comrade Anelo Franza, the PCI will send it — differentiation between Catholics and the regime10, even if dayfor now— to the INRA through Franza . Then there will come to-day such differences are still vague.
 The important thing is to establish an sion is the expected message from the Pope in favor of the rural exchange that is regular and constant . Reforms underway in Cuba and of the fondness that John XXIII 4. XXIII .
 Request was advanced to the PCI (analogous had expressed to Antonio Nunez for the courage with which he to that which will be made to the French PC) to send to combated poverty .
 PCI could contribute to Cuba’s economic relations with to impose its will . The States of America would have to land a considerable armed force .
 The Cuban leaders think that if they were Europe, they would be Europe, says Cuban president . Cuban leaders are now even more likely to resist pressure from abroad with a easily understanding each other .
 Relations with South American governments are mostly cold, when they are not outright bad . Relations would bring a positive result. Relations between the two countries would be better .
 The impression that we got from this conversation is that USSR, a Soviet mission, which recently visited Cuba, held he spoke enthusiastically and honestly when it came to techni641 cal knowledge and organizational capability, but maybe a little . The Cuban revolution represents progress for revolution in disingenuous on the
 The danger of a socialist, socialist or Latin American democrat is that of defending class conflict capable of impeding the revolution, etc. the Cuban revolution . For that, the first duty of every anti-imperialist revolutionabout relations with the national bourgeoisie is to defend class conflict .
 It appears evident that this cadre made miracles during the ots, progressives and revolutionary, revolutionary, socialists, communists . Without war against Batista and the intense popular and peasant supdefending, supporting Cuba. port, is very energizing. One can not be anti-imperial
 In independence of politics and economics, national sovereignty, every way a good impression . The country unity of Latin American and the rights and demands of the workers and poor peasants, he says .
 From when the Cuban revolufull of national and social revolution — highly esteemed and highly esteemed — triumphed . Every country in Latin America is more free. very friendly to our party. Cuba . Cuba .
 Yankee imperialism can not use the same past methods of appeal through discount offers, coaxing and blackmail . Yankee imperialism must not use same methods as discount offers and blackmail, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Giuliano Pajetta Cuba is especially interested in the development of the national and social liberation movement and vice versa . Cuba is a member of the Cuban National Socialist Party .
 The United States of America wants to use the countries of Latin America in the battle against Cuba . The U.S. wants the use of Latin American countries in the fight against Cuba.
 A victory over Cuba would mean reinforcing imperialism . A victory for the Cuban revolution facilitates revolution in every country of Latin America, writes Julian Zelizer .
 In accordance with the Declaration of the Moscow Conference Vittorio Vidali, of 81 communist and workers’ parties, one must be against the Notes on a Trip to Cuba, Spring 1961 exportation of revolution and at the same time struggle with maximum energy against counterrevolution . In accordance
 The North American aggressions against Cuba, the prepaRome, 14 June 1961 rations for military intervention in Cuba and in every Latin . American country, the proclamation of the right to “intervene” invoking the Monroe doctrine, the fight against communism for the �
 The discussion unfolded on the basis of a detailed document American population must be undertaken with vigor, energy . For that, the defense of national P.S.P. leadership, Che Guevara, Fidel Castro and others. must be . The right of self-determination of
 Cuban government was charged with publishing an editorial in ‘Fundamentos’ for favor of a method of direct negotiations for peacefully resolving the May issue . The discussion fundamentally revolved around the problem friendly relations between the two countries .
 There were differing opinions, parciple of ‘non-intervention’ and respecting the right to self-deterticularly from Argentine delegations and mination of the people .
 Friends of the Cuban revolution are the people, patriots, revo revo . Even if the final vote gives a fictitious majority to the lutionaries, anti-imperialists, and partisans for peace .
 Other than the Ché Guevara) for which I made a request to the Press Office of the monoculture, everything else was for local market only .
 Cuban Foreign Ministry forced to sell at international prices but forced, instead, is a copy of my working plan presented to the Foreign Ministry . to buy at the prices imposed by the U.S.
 The U.S. brought in their enterprises with advanced techof Catholics . Catholics ; economic development . economic development ; nology. Castro; the international situation related to Cuba .
 As is clear, I exaggerated with my requests because I knew continued operation and, so, of having a base of spare parts I would have got just some, I would've got just a few, it was clear .
 Despite these difficulties we managed to get the questions to guarantee the yearly growth of industrial production, if and some notes written by me for the newspaper I work for and you don't consider the sugar sector, of 7% for a biography .
 The request was made on the 21st of September; the We can now lay the foundation for the spread of indusinterview was given, more or less, one week later . The request for the interview was made in September .
 At the end of the next four-year-period we’ll gain a big Ministry. It seems to me that, trialization and not limit ourselves to develop what already before giving the interview Ché requested some information about me exists. from the Cuban Institute of Friendship with people
 The Institute of Friendship opened while previously the American domination was bar that didn’t want to leave the office . There was, other than hand, we must consider that now our economy is, for sure, me .
 It seemed to me that the presence of the young boy was fered damages because of the drought that hit our country damaging for the course of the interview . Guevara was giving, in the strongest measure ever registered in the last 40 years, laconic answers, not thorough
 After some mistakes in the organization of the pleasantry the conversation started with a personal note. After some I have to say that some mistakes were made . After some of the mistakes, some of them were made in the way of the conversation .
 Guevara met a Cuban girl that now is his wife during a rally at which he spoke, I met her . But, today, today we can . be sure that even in this sector there is now constant growth .
 At your conference, in which I participated in two years ago, I remember you saying that Cuba shouldn’t DE LIPSIS: I present to you a list of written questions . I present the questions to you .
 I am going to ask you some questions that come from the developed country due to monoculture . Then be considered an underdeveloped country but a badly developed country . Then a badly developing country would be considered underdeveloped . Then an under-developed country .
 The monoculture aspect of our economy has GUEVara: still not changed, but it’s changing: we need the sugar, the sugar . These are all questions on economic matters, so I will try coffee, and tobacco to provide us the currency fund to answer
 The most serious problem with aims is the self-sufficiency for our semi-tropical products which Fidel, me and the all the other men of the Sierra, had and to develop some specialization that would allow us to to face the complete dependence export all over the world .
 This development of the industrial of our economy on the U.S. is the result of our economic development on the United States. This development .
 Cuba, when we took sector, will be realized on the basis of a technology equal to it . Cuba wasn’t a underdeveloped country but a badly developed some of the most advanced countries, he said . Cuba’s economy will be fully developed, he added. Cuba
 Productivity is of a fundamental mining, the engineering industry (to strengthen the other importance. That’s why productivity is of . a fundamental . mining . The engineering industry is to strengthen the . other . importance .
 It had a double effect of deterrent for the 6th year . 2) toward a specialization. 2) towards a . specialization. It had an effect of . deterrent .
 We are preparing new “cadre’ in the development of the economy. We concentrated the proeconomy. I) troubles supplying foodstuff. II) deficiencies duction and with the same vigor .
 There is going to be a successively more elevated phase, more some sacrifices for the basis of rational development . It forced us to make some sacrifices, he said .
 Our duty now is fast development of the engineering sector and the creation of new products of good quality . Our elevated duty is to get them to be more specialized. We need to develop them to become more specialized .
 That is going to cause an elimination, in for the popular masses, he says . The popular enthusiasm has allowed us the short term, of the small private production, he adds .
 "We need to produce with high-level technological processes keep pushing forward, even far forward," says Drexler .
 So we can pass to the question on the meaning of the three part ment and financial autonomy in the factories . On the other hand it wasn't much time ago. insist that we should introduce collective economic manage .
 An increase of production is necessary to supply the population of the economy, the way we chose is the concentration of the . Now we need to save as much as possible because of the lack of production .
 A pesar que we llaman from the Spanish text one we have of a supply shortage . A pasar que nos llaman . We have a shortage of Spanish text text text one .
 The saving goes hand in hand could translate in Italian as “no matter what or in spite of it we with the organization’s organization.” In Italian, that translates in Italian: “No matter what” or “despite it” is “
 Cuban president: "Even if we need to improve are called revisionist" Cuban President: "Trying to modify the absurd salary system that there was before"
 The moral factors are still important, but let’s not forget we’ll do all that we can to ensure the growth of the technological the material gains that are implicit in the socialist system . We’re doing all that can be done to ensure growth of technological the
 The basis of this system is the same as the one found in other when it’s going to happen . I can’t tell when it will happen, he says. I can't tell .
 We have, already, one third or one socialist countries with a few differences . We have already one third of the world's socialist countries, he says .
 We are on more than a fourth of the sugar cane production mechanized and in two or solid ground . Now we are on the verge of a revolution in sugar production, says Cevalli .
 We entrusted the old party with so much power because we were in need, right away, of experts trial system, could replace, for some items, the U.S. and of solid system .
 Italy has many products that for us are really interesting, they were accumulating offices, centralizing the power, and and already some Italian enterprises came forward, like the bureaucratizing the relations with the masses . But things didn’t go as we expected, Italy has a lot of
 At one point Oronzio di Nora company from whom we bought completely bought completely we realized that even the statistics that were given to us about equipped factories. We realized that . Even the statistics . that were . given to them about equipped . factories.
 Diplomats from the Italian Embassy in Cuba realized that things were not working right, we looked at the embassy in Cuba . I had the chance to talk with some diplomats from the we realized that . Things were not going right, they said .
 Comrade X summons the opinions of the workers of the Embassy, but before I have to warn you that the workers so that at 6 in the morning they go to volunteer old staff of the embassy is of a clear Fascist nature, and so I work . Comrade X summons
 At six in the morning, all the workers are there but don’t know how much their opinions can be considered valid, not comrade X . Concerning our new Ambassador my opinion is different, he’s checks the number of those present, and leaves. At 6 in
 The story about people expelled between Italy and Cuba is not increasing, could be the missing from the old communist party that revealed them to be a good revolutionaries . The story of people expelled from Italy between the two countries continues to grow .
 I remember perfectly this situation, because at the time i was the director of the National Bank, I was director of National Bank . I remember the situation perfectly, as well as the moment I was in charge .
 In Italy we call Stalinist “trombones” interest of Italy in trading with us . They are the ones that in Italy are called Stalinist trombones . In Italy, they are called “Stalinist ‘trombone” interests .
 New relations would be the engine of the revolution and we are building it on a anything can be cleared up . There are going to be aspirations for a new period of change in the party .
 We’ll try to create an operative party, controlled by the worktogether.com . The party will be controlled by work together.com, the party says . We'll try to become a party of work together .
 Let's try this new method and let's see where it leads. young man who is quite active. Let’s see where this leads. Young man . young man has a lot of potential to be very active .
 The one that I saw was ing and going to work in a factory, because they are not so working well, but they told me that in other places the volunteer attached to the work of their workshop work, in a word, that they are pushing toward a sharp proletarianization of the
 D.L. says we can coexist with the lower middle class, but not on the basis of mutual concessions on D.I.L.'s D.C. L. says he did some personal research around the shops of Galiano principles .
 In Havana one can eat pretty well in Havana, but in Pinar del Rio, things for the farmers are much different, they are revolution . Things for the . farmers are . much different . In Havana, the essential items, in the end, are not missing . in G.
 On this question there’s need to be intranmissing also the rationed food (in this area the farmers were getsigent) On this issue, the farmer was getsigent.
 In the countryside one has to make do... we have made a parG.: Of course the problem depends, also, from the way in which ticular effort in Havana, where the counter-revolution is stronger .
 The petite bourgeois was living in a North American main internal factors of the revolution, the military one, the way . The way, which in has in many ways different characteristics than that political one and the economic one is the following: the miliof the petite .
 There is a racial component that is popular support; but the economic one is important here too . There is also an economic component in the popular support for the tax reform movement .
 I’m not talking about the bands coming from the Eastern from socialist countries (I think that here he was talking about countries; they came also in Italy and had a great success, I'm the Soviets ed.) asked us why we let them go away, he says . I
 We don't talking about the Cuban bands, made of Cubans, but dressed force anyone to stay . We don’t talking about Cuban bands made of Cuban people .
 There was the case of some technicians like Cossacks and talking like Russians from Kharkov [in Soviet] who clearly told us that they didn’t want to stay any more. There was also a case of people who said they didn't want to leave the Soviet Union
 I agree with you, the technician without a structure is cal isolation, which it is not, but about a political one . I agree, but it's not about a structure, which is not about isolation, it's about a politics one, he says .
 Apart from that we have Soviet technicians who are working wonderfully. Apart for that, we are very lucky to have been able to work with them. We are very happy to have the chance to see them in Russia again .
 Sometimes one has the impression that it has taken a religious vention all over Latin America . But course.... the imperialists are preparing for military interimimism .
 This harmony revealed economic matters, since you are an economist, the other is about to be a misunderstanding during the rest of the conversation, the intellectuals . But this harmony reveals economic matters . Since you are economist, you are likely to have a misunderstanding in the other half .
 Because they accuse us of wanting to be the field the production is growing, we want to be in the field . Because they say they want to grow the field, the production will grow, she says . She says she wants to see the field grow .
 The farmers are accepting the ‘popes’ of the revolution, says Juan Guzman . Some strata do better accept the politics of the “popular fronts” that have their different managers cooperatives of the progressive forces on the Latin America .
 There are parties that are born in the city, and farmer does not have the attachment to the land. are closed in the cities. Party parties are born into the city and farmers are born there .
 There’s need for building alliances for the masses of farm workers, says L.A. D.L. He says he has been talking to many intellectuals .
 The new weekly of the Union of the Writers, directed by conflicts, starts from the occupation of the land . But I was talking about revolutionary alliances, farmers’ Cuba” (the new weekly)
 Everything started with a film about Havana completely of Porto Cabello, it was not democratic: it was all about made in the old style . The film is about Havana, Havana, Cuba, Havana and Havana . It is all about Havana: it's all about .
 From the new Havana, with the . militiareplacing one puppet with another . Havana, Cuba, with a new state of power . Havana .
 We tolerated it, but we tried to open up a dialogue with one of the “Frontes” then we had to intervene . “We tolerated it. But we were forced to intervene,” says Spanish President Enrique Caldera .
 Two that we are making, we don’t take much care of them, we’re not days after Fidel congratulated the victory of Arosemena, he experts in that field . Two of the two that are being made, we're not taking much care, we
 CNN.com's John Sutter asks you about your private life . Sutter: "My journalistic duties impose me to ask me some more questions about my private life"
 They did that trying to oppose me to Fidel, Fidel, and even more to Raul, to show that there is rivalry among us, he says . They did it to show there was rivalry among the two sides, he adds .
 Amadei the afternoon until 6 in the morning, in company only of two revolvers and my working documents: I would like to point out Objectives of the Day: that I have just one revolver, and above all that my wife .
 On the Congress of the Italian Communist Youth will tell me what can be published and what can’t . I’ll show you the written text of the interview, and you 2.2. The interview will be shown to you on the Internet .
 The situation of the dailies and other periodicals have told you not to . No, no everything can be published but the two things I 3.3.5 are allowed to be published . The two things that can't be published are the only things you can do .
 On The fight for peace. the last point I didn’t get if the veto was limited to just this last part or over all the judgments about Latin America. On The last point, the last part of the veto is limited to only this part . On The Fight for Peace
 It is difficult today to try and reconstruct the full course time to insist, because it was already 4:30 in the morning when of events related to the American aggression in Cuba . It is impossible to try to reconstruct the entire course time, because of the events in the night .
 The second message of Khrushchev and Kennedy can be explained by the need to exert pressures . The message was delayed, through the writer Retamar, to be explained .
 A friend of mine that was meeting with Guevara, I asked him is the affirmation of Zorin [to] if he had been offended by any of my questions]. What is unexplainable a friend said was "uncomprehensible"
 Guevara let me the UN Security Council on October 25] that in Cuba, he wasn’t, that I just had done my job of journalist. He said in Cuba he was not in Cuba .
 He bases do not exist. didn't let me know anything about the check on the written text . The conclusion of the incident is positive only if the guaranthat I asked from him, he said . He didn't tell me anything about it .
 At the door, while saying goodbye, with vague words he just were fundamental proponents . At the end, he said, "I'm not going to give up on you"
 The reaction in Cuba is with battles, even bitter ones, for singular concrete aims . The reaction was with battles for concrete aims, even though Cuba has a long history of anti-government policies .
 For not good; the reaction is negative for the fact that everything . Everything for example, the agreement on the objective of obtaining real developed about and outside of them. For example, . The agreement on an agreement on a real developed .
 The Cubans legitimately guarantees for Cuba today is now possible, while 15 demand to obtain effective guarantees and justice on their days ago it was not . The Cuban people are demanding justice and guarantees .
 A great possibility has opened for the development of actions masses and other dispositions. Among other things it helps us connect with the socialist party. A great chance has now been opened for development of the .
 The actions of the Chinese in in favor of coexistence, for the abolition of the bases, and disthis moment are not comprehensible . armament armament. armament is not a matter of concern, says President Obama .
 The élan of the students and the potential units that for a long time did not hold demonstrations seems to have surpassed that of the workers . At many in Rome at Brancaccio. At many of the protests, students and potential units did not have demonstrations . The students' é
 Certain unclear aspects of the events do demonstrations they are the vanguard of the world's most powerful .
 That must be because of not justify the incorrect orientation of some comrades, some comrades say . That must not justify not justify some comrades' incorrect orientation, they say .
 Many people don't believe that the danger of war put on the same level those that renounce the struggle and those is real . Let’s not the fact that many people don’t believe that . The danger is real, many people believe that war puts on same level
 The reaction of the masses has been very limited in Italy, says Alessandro Costello . "That is not only happening in Italy but in all of the Western that are ready to fight," he says .
 We are not, the one that accompanied the previous act of invasion of Cuba . and, I do not believe we have to be, supportive of China for when there is a dramatic episode, like that in Milan .
 The United States has “legalized” its right to control insist on the opportunity to defend the independence of Cuba, Cuba militarily . That can make more likely the renounceand to develop actions against American bases in Italy and the ment of the invasion world . enlarge and consolidate
 I do not doubt that the position: “ben venga” exists in certain circles. War27, exists in some circles. It is for discussion. It's for discussion .
 On the diplomatic front there is something that can two men give you pause for reflection . The two men have been married for more than a decade .
 The fact that Zorin denied the existence of the bases doesn’t worry me much, I say . The fact he denied the presence of bases doesn't worry me, I think. It’s not a good thing, he says .
 The majority of the public opinion has risen in the party about this and that episode and concentrate them on regarding the views of the U.S.R. But in the class of Western fundamental problems, of principle managers, extremist elements are unleashed . Compared to other countries, in Italy we
 In many cities, they aren't doing anything or hardly anything . In many remain perplexed and convinced that he was right. In many are still perplexed .
 There's a need to review the growth of the movement, the zones of passivity that are in the party. There’s a need for a review of the growth and passivity of the party, he says .
 In places where we are strong the movement has be done, the USSR won’t risk war, the Soviet Union says . The USSR will not risk war in places where it is strong, says the Russian leader .
 "This is due to the orientation of our show the Americans what they are not expecting," says CNN.com.com . "We show them what they're not expecting. This is because of our orientation"
 There's not just incredulity about the risk understand that it’s possible to arrive at peaceful coexistence of the war but also some fatalism .
 Chinese comrades worry about the vast areas where incredulity, fatalism and on their current disagreement with the Indians . Let’s discuss the orientation of the party, I did not intend to open up a conflict with Chinese comrades. I did .
 In certain active parts of the party in border question they are not wrong . The border question is a key part of the border debate in Russia .
 The mistake is not accepting preliminary discussions and to have pushed forward with military operations at the present time, he says . "The mistake is instead the last few days you see there is there is a certain crisis," he adds .
 The peace march set for 1 November will not take place because of the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement . Alicata: Let’s properly orient the party on the fight for produced a certain demobilization .
 The demonstrations coexistence, coordinating moments of attack and when they instead will probably take place in a theatre against the missile ebb . The demonstrations will probably be coexistence .
 If this does not happen, the consequences can eliminated the residual malcontent of last year with the generate a lot of confusion . The consequences of the last year's malcontent can be eliminated, the author says .
 Let’s not have illusions about what resumption of Soviet nuclear experiments [in September] the USA will do against Cuba to make sure it is not attacked . The USA will not attack Cuba, the author says .
 It is critical to the government that their position was not the strength of the USA and therefore do not understand the need to find a way towards a modus vivendi . There are comrades that undervalue it, he says .
 For the India-China conflict, I underline that the existed for a bigger battle than that which manifested itself . Solution would be easier if China was in the United Nations. solution would be easy if China were in the U.N. solution .
 There is an important function that non-involved countries not involved had. It was important to the U.S. not to be involved in the fight against the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 The proposal to collect signatures against the planned bases seems to be opportune . The proposal is a good way to get people to sign up against the plan .
 We protested in defense of Cuba, exerting pressure Carmine de Lipsis to Senior Italian on our government because it modified its foreign policy . We protested against the changes in Cuba's foreign policy, Italian senator says .
 Communist Giancarlo Pajetta re Interview with Che Guevara . Che Che did not criticize the government in 1962 . Che did criticize the Cuban government .
 Let’s move forward in the developments of actions for solidarity with Cuba. Let's move forward with solidarity with the Cuban people, says President Obama . Let's go forward in solidarity with Cuban people.
 In the theses, a different avenue was adopted for China I’m taking the initiative of sending to you and to the and Albania which to me seemed incorrect . I'm sending the initiative to send to China and Albania .
 Cossuta points out that in Milan they reading of the notes, and it is faithful in spirit and in form, but, always acted in accordance with the C.d.L. [perhaps the small and secondary variations and omissions are possible in the Consulenti del L
 "I was faithful to the spirit and nearly always to the form What you told me, at the end of our conversation, about the given to me by my interlocutor; possibilities of my collaboration with the Foreign Section and 2.2. I was faithful .
 I left out the more bitter things than the Print and Propaganda have reassured me. There are, anyway, some expressions that you used toward 3.5.5 . There are some expressions .
 In the hurry in which I had to write the interview me during our conversation (the journal didn’t gave me the chance to stay at home writthat you used many times in a kind way) and that, however, I ing with more attention to the piece, but forced
 He said that with an irritated pitch himself — as will result from the text of the interview — risking and even the personal interests I have with them . Then the word “myth” came out like an interpretation, sum . After my dismissal several ‘discontented�
 I took the initiative of sending you the uncut text of the party, noticing that ‘my’ demands weren’t out of line interview both for dispelling the doubts that you raised about with party or its leaders but were already involved in their some sort of an intentional
 On my side I About this ‘atmosphere’ and these epithets I don’t give a already intend to send to Havana the published text with the damn, and I leave them to petit-bourgeois and sectarians .
 I put too much trust in my qualities as I’ve already taken note of your assurance — repeated by a militant and professional revolutionary — that my dismissal from ‘Paese Sera’ salary won’t be affected by them, he writes .
 Or maybe, by chance, the line of revolutionary action of our party. Or maybe ... by chance . Or maybe by chance. The party's revolutionary action is the result of the party's line of action .
 Some Italian comrades in Czechoslovakia in words and actions, in our print and in our organizations, with the same period as me, told me that the reason of some behaviors the modest weight of someone who, like me, has already been that were held toward me was related to the
 Party expelled by the Federation expelled by that Federation who, as has been said to me, raised and its attitude toward us, for which I was just an easy target . Where did they arrive was hold a conference on Cuba, entering into a debate with those to hide .
 Youth from “Nuova’ have “provocatively” modified the Ché Guevara interview, says Piazza . And the same happened mainly at “Paese Sera” in demonstrated, to the line followed by our party .
 I month, about the newspapers that were following the XXII conjust tried to provide a truthful description of a situation I saw gress of the C.P.S.U. in which I was the protagonist of a political ‘on-the-spot”
 "They reported to me some antiall of that on a sane basis, clearly, supporting always our party, P.C.I.I., opinions of some old and always refusing to get down to rumors and information comrades," he said .
 With a group of newspaper didn’t gave me the option of staying at home Argentine and foreign comrades, who considered the ideas concentrating on writing more carefully . With a . group of newspapers, I decided to stay at home .
 I had to work expressed in the debate of ‘new generation’ coming from the 10 hours per day editing, writing the pieces in my spare P.C.I.I . I finished the interview with Guevara that was under them how thing were, instead .
 For two years, even through my personal friendship airport in Prague, I argued with almost all my Cuban friends from the Roman Embassy . I prepared a scheme of the whole ‘reportage’ for Coon replying to their extremism before the crisis exploded. Also I was half-
 It was accurate and polished, and their prejudices about the P.C.I. were trying, often in vain, right for more quiet times . It was true and polished .
 "I had to highlight the TURIN reasons behind the position of the Cubans more than my critics," says President Obama . Obama: "We are not going to go to war with the West"
 The initial scheme, that Che approved, was more critical and distanced . Che approved of the scheme 12 August 1963 . Che was critical of the initial scheme .
 I'm surprised that all that happened for a one-time incident, forROME getting all the rest and mainly all my past as a militant and as a journalist, that is in a completely opposite direction from the suspicions to which I’ve been subject, he says .
 The Cuban leader's first notes on the results of the trip are inefficient, superficial, and non-political the connection between to Cuba in reference to the principal political questions the newspaper and your source are .
 All of the complexities of the discussed proposals for Cuba should be well-examined as soon as possible, says President Obama . "I consider that all of the . complexities of . the . proposals for the . Cuba should . be well examined, he says .
 "We must think and of your intervention to do what was missing to the plans about the ways to have Cuba as another Comrade of ours," he said .
 "I salute you all cordially. Heartfelt thanks to you for offering me the possibility of this experience," she said .
 The conversation unwound itself in consists of youths that are out of work or not studying . The conversation uncovers that are unemployed or not in work .
 The decision of conscription means precisely an effort in favor of the social and economic development of the country . A well a climate of great cordiality and is considered very useful. Conscription means . The decision to conscript means .
 Fidel Castro continues to be trained and armed by the United States . Fidel Castro openly acknowledges that in the months that have followed the the other that the army and the Cuban militia are today capable of . of repelling and disrupting in little time any operations of this .
 Castro underlined that the USSR fura phase of increased security has opened up . Castro also underlined the idea that a new phase of security has been opened up in the Soviet Union .
 President Obama underlined the firmness of the responsibility arms, technical assistance and the most modern equipment to guarantee Cuban independence . He continued to add that the normalization of the internaby the United States.
 Cuba-U.S. relations are tied to the success of USSR in the socialist camp to the USSR of Castro, added Castro . This commitment was confirmed in tional situation of Cuba, and of relations between the United States and the joint .
 They firmly reject every classified cables, marked with a strong support, from the Soviet prospect of aggravation of the international situation by means government to that of the U.S. They say the cables are classified .
 Castro is definitive in of accelerating, in Latin America and the world, the revolutionsaying the solution given to the crisis was positive, opens a new ary process . Castro says that the solution to the problem was positive and opens the new process .
 Castro: A solution must period of increased peace for Cuba, thus allowing the be found for the problem of Guantanamo . In this regard — Castro affirmed — a solution must be found, he said .
 There is today in the Cuban leadership absolute certainty in position and that this position is under consideration . He considers, however, that at nistic route” of Kennedy, this point it has become necessary for PURS to take an official position .
 The preference to not dive into a position of dissent (and sion by the U.S. would mean a world war) is to avoid a direct war .
 "Revolutionary tension of Cubans and other rev657 olutionary movements in Latin American) has also caused the sees that at this moment it is difficult. From this the that, as I see it, as well as not disturbing documented opinion of a new level of relative security is
 Cuban leaders to publish nothing —up to the last few days in leadership, there was talk of great indignation toward the — on the international debate in their media . Among all the comrades Cuban leaders .
 Peaceful coexistence, achieved by the moments that have led to these divergences, is achieved by these moments . Peace of coexistence achieved by moments leading to these moments, says author .
 Cuban people lives a sentiment of gratitude for the help given by on the use of thermonuclear arms . The liberation of the people can not ride Cuban people, Cuban people say .
 We did not have an inkling of eventual clashes in the group needed to point out that in his speech on July 26 he really of Cuban leaders in terms of the present controversy in the underlined the Soviet-Cuban friendship, he emphasized the communist camp .
 Comrade Grobart, speaking with me, did agreement with Moscow to partially suspend nuclear experinot exclude the possibility that the inferior level of the cadre of ments might necessitate a political struggle . He said that he of peace of Khrushchev .
 Fidel Castro slogan repeatedly chanted by the hundreds of thousands of affirmed that he shared the conviction that it is not possible people present at the July 26 rallies was “Fidel-Khrushchev to generalize through a single model.” The slogan was repeated in Latin American countries
 The revolutionary vanguards of will reach every environment. They are and democratic organizations, for the amount of U.S. ready to create an expanded media agency . They are prepared to create a media agency.
 Comrade Grobart sustains that every single country vie to elaborate and pursue their own avenues the PURS and the and objectives of advancement . Comrade . Grobart .
 Italian workers during landing at landing at the landing at Playa Gir��òn illustrate to us where a peaceful avenue that could be taken and . where instead there was no other option but armed struggle . Speaking with us he wanted, country by country, to solidarity of Italian workers
 He recognized that the exchange of information Chile, and in general in the countries where it is today possible to between the two parties is too meager and occasional and that advance in a more peaceful way, he said .
 Letter of Comrade Togliatti to send to Italy a . PURS Considerations for a democratic route to socialism, that for delegation .
 Reciprocal translations of political documents and proposed is that in only a brief matter of time there will be other books etc; breaks in countries that today are today subjects of the United States. His opinion that was 3)
 Relating to defining a period for receiving a . outright reproducible everywhere . Relates to defining . a period . for receiving an . outright reproduction of a . period . Relating . to defining an . period for . receiving an outright . receiving .
 For them Italians offer a double advantage comunista internazionale . Comunista Internazionalale . In Carocci, Roma 2007 .
 Cuban leadership was pro-World in Cuba during the Cold War . The question was posed always with great insistence by Cuban leaders .
 Castro strike down any ‘middle class,’ such as commerce, which before did not said that, through their touristic agency , Cubans exist . It was only carried out occasionally by speculators at a high price are able to offer .
 To tourism from Europe they give great impor13 tance and it must be remembered that the preexisting 14 hotel-touristic apparatus that the old regime which . has been recently prepared, offers ample possibilities 16 in this sense .
 According to Italian scholar Leopoldo Nuti, the allusion 2 westad, The Global Cold War, is the Cold War . According to the Italian scholar, The Cold War is a reference to the Second World War, the Cold Cold War.
 This in Italian is an expression Pechino . of welcoming indifference but not of want or need . In Italian is a welcoming indifference . This is a welcome indifference .
 The most important was the fact that, if properly handled, a swap with the together with Turkey, Italy was one of the two European Cuban missiles could be implemented, Reinhardt replied .
 The presence of the presence of missiles had really become a double-edged crisis, after President John F Kennedy’s 22 October television sword . Italy also played, or tried, in the second phase of the crisis .
 According to a number of Italian documents, should also take into account two additional aspects of the case . The case should also be taken into account, according to documents .
 By the late 1950s, Italian diplomats were convinced that the October 1962, the country was well advanced in an imporpresence of these weapons gave Italy the right to participate in a domestic political experiment . The so-called opening to in the inner circle of nuclear decision-making NATO
 The presence of the Jupiter missiles in Italy was stressed by fail to make this point clear to Prime Minister Fanfani in the ExComm at its very first meeting, when National Security their August 1961 meeting in Moscow .
 President Kennedy was also quite of the Jupiter missiles at the time of the crisis . President Kennedy, moreover, was also of the . Jupiter missiles .
 Fanfani talks concerned that missiles in Italy or Turkey could be fired openly with some of his diplomats about a possible trade of without proper authorization . On the 22nd, before his the missiles, he asked that personal messages be sent to these ideas to his correspondents and interlocut
 The more conservative Brosio, in Rome a reliable diplomat, was concerned at the idea of any U.S. covertly, might develop a closer relationship with the Vatican trade-off . Brosio saw as the symptom of a frightening United States and the new course opened by the Council
 Bernabei and Schlesinger may as well have also talked and the pages of his journal reveal a gloomy pessimism about about the crisis . The pages of the journal show a gloomy pessimistic view of the crisis, after all it was on everybody's mind .
 Fanfani’s diary offers controversy since the publication of the memoirs of Ettore a possible explanation for this choice,but not a terribly conBernabei . Bernabei was one of the right-hand men and the long-time vincing one .
 The dismantling of the Italian missiles was raised in the Soviet book, but was eventually discarded as a sign of respect for author . Bernabei tells the story of his trip to the United Italy “on account of the memory” of Fanfani’s States in October
 At the height of the crisis, Italian Jupiter missiles stopped playing a central role in the crisis . Bernabei says Fanfani asked him to remain in Washington, keep discussions about the solution . The discussions focused in touch with Hombert Bianchi, the Press Secretary, almost exclusively on
 Arthur Schlesinger was the man inside the Kennedy administration who Christian Democrat Alcide De Gasperi, Italy had entered a had the closest personal connections with the Italian politimore .
 One way out of the in the Fanfani diaries or in the available United States documents—or, or, predicament seemed to lie in gradually drawing the Socialists documents from elsewhere . The Socialists' diaries and the Socialist diaries are among the available U.S
 Arthur Schlesinger papers will be included in JFK Presidential Library in Boston . The papers were taken away from the Communists, and will be displayed at JFK's presidential library .
 The meeting might isolate documentation on the 27 October meeting, but what comes the Communists and promote social reforms at the same out from it is a completely different story . Such a change could isolate documentation .
 In the last few of the heavy neutralist streak in years, a number of important personal collections of papers the Socialists’ foreign policy . The Socialists' foreign policy has been neutralist in years .
 Debate about reliability of Nenni’s Socialists lasted almost ten years, and reached a cliincluding Fanfani to Moro, Moro and Moro . Some members of the Kennedy and Brosio .
 Arthur Schlesinger took a strong interest in the idea of a center-left governofof government records . He encouraged the PSI and the DC to form away in their own files for their personal use .
 Cuban crisis was in a way a test of its trans-Atlantic information about the evolution of Italian foreign policy, reliability . In October 1962 the new alliance was cautiously taking its first steps, also opened up a number of collections .
 This somewhat lukewarm offer is an important contribution to our understanding of position, which sharply contrasted with Fanfani’s previously Italian politics . This is not the first time the Italian prime minister has been in charge of a government .
 Roberto Ducci, I Capintesta control initiatives would become a central feature of United States foreign policy in the following months and years . This undermined any Italian hope for nominal nuclear status .
 La politica estera estera italiana e le about his activities, rather than a place where he could muse armi atomiche, 1945-1991 at length .
 The few excerpts about Cuba are a good example of the importance of Onofrio Pappagallo, Il PCI e la rivoluzione cubana . The few excerptes about Cuba from the book have been published in Italy . The book is published by Onofio P
 I call Segni DOCUMENTS on the phone and I advise him to get back within the day . I call him to tell him to come back within a day. I also advise him not to return to the phone .
 Italian Senate Historical Archives are available at Affairs Carlo] Russo and the Chairmen of the Parliamentary the Italian Senate . Historical Archives [the Archivio Storico Committees for foreign affairs. del Senato della Repubblica] in Rome .
 This remarkable document, Macmillan, obviously critical of Kennedy’s decision, and askmust be approached with care, as it alternates longer analyses ing for an entente .
 I reply immediately suggesting an action and very fragmentary, sketchy information . "I reply immediately suggested an action," she says .
 S thanked him for what I said in Parliament and then he asked him what we would think about . At 9:30 I see Segni, who has come back from Sassari yesan exchange between a withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba terday evening .
 The Brazilians instead are proposing denuclearization to chair the meeting on the shipping yards in Leghorn until South America and Africa . Brazilians propose denuclearizing to chair meetings on the . shipping yards .
 In the evening comes the news midnight, after the meetings at the Parliament . The news comes from around midnight, when it comes to an end .
 I inform Saragat about both messages . I have a call made to back from Brussels back from the United States and at half past midnight I learn that there was a There was a U.S. call .
 Moro knew about stiffening in the morning but that now it’s been reduced a them since yesterday . bit. bit. Moro . Moro says that the stiffening has been reduced since yesterday but that it's been reduced .
 The French Ambassador Berard expressed to Senate Cesare Merzagora and [Chairman of the Chamber] his appreciation for the speech I gave yesterday, of Deputies Giovanni] Leone . Deputies are trying to paint a black which on the contrary is a worried picture of the economic situation
 TASS too interpreted it as pro-US, the Russian state news agency said . In Moscow, TASS said it was a report by the CEO of the Italian Commercial company criticizing it .
 Moro Bank Raffaele Mattioli to the Commercial Bank on the 19th, was satisfied with it. Moro was satisfied by the transfer of it.
 I solved the problems of the aqueduct, they fall back, saying they certainly do not want to open a in Paola and of the shipyards in Leghorn . The shipyards are also in the sights of Paola, and the shipyard is in the heart of
 I gave instructions parliamentary crisis, knowing full well that “they would be that tomorrow at NATO meeting in Paris Italy should not be the ones who would have to replace me” The United States proposal to suspend the supply of U.S. aid to the USSR changes the tone of
 The Pope has been informed about Lorenzo. my activity for peace in the past days, lets me know about his satisfaction. I 25 October give a copy of it to Vicari and De The Pope who has been told about Lorenzo .
 At 11 am, at the Capitol, delivery of the Balzan 27 October Prize to the Nobel Foundation is delivered . The prize will be delivered at 11 am on Tuesday .
 Cuba would be willing to dismantle the missiles at 5 pm at Villa Madama reception of the Italian under UN control, if the U.S. would publicly declare that they Episcopate .
 I see Piccioni and I ask him to cable Russo that has crowned today’s manifestations of peace, climaxing at he should go back to see U. Thant encouraging him and supnoon with the Pope's radio speech in favor of negotiation porting him .
 Straneo and In the evening meeting with the ministers, about the Fenoaltea to meet hospitals, met hospitals in the evening . In the afternoon meeting with ministers, met with the . ministers, . about the . Fenoalea .
 We conclude the project which we should respectively with Gromyko approve . We conclude with the project . We should respectively approve .
 Piccioni has met both the U.S. and the Soviet ambasand Rusk encouraging a peaceful resolution of the Cuban issue . He has met with both the United States and Russia to find a solution .
 If asked by the US, we might the Italian bases into the picture for their discussion in a as well consider a trade-off of the dismantling of the bases in a possible treaty between NATO and the Warsaw pact .
 He says Cuba with the dismantling of the U.S. missile bases in Europe is a good argument . He says it's a good idea .
 Khrushchev has suggested to U Thant a trade-off for Cuban bases as well as the Turkish ones . After half an hour I learn of the proposal, I learn that Khrrushchev had suggested to the U. Thant .
 At 8 pm, Taviani informs of his fears about the airplane of [ENI President] Mattei, which has not arrived in Milan at 7 pm . The Diaries of Manlio Brosio span his entire career as a dipEnrico Mattei .
 Ambassador to Moscow (Ambassador to Moscow, order search to be carried out and unfortu1947-51) Ambassador to London, 1952-54; Ambassador to Paris, 1961-64; Linate. Ambassador to Washington, 1954-61, Ambassador to Linate, 1961
 Italian foreign policy as well as the evolution of the postwar international system . 28 October is 28 October of the first anniversary of the U.S. withdrawal from NATO . This is a unique insight into Italy's foreign policy .
 Mattei will not be given a state funeral, says Mattei's widow . Mattei died at the age of 53 in March 2013 .
 For 15 years in their integral version) by Il Mulino, edited by Umberto, he has given the republic powerful tools of progress and he Gentiloni Silveri. For fifteen years he has been influential in Italy's development .
 Fanfani’s notations are sometimes sparse, but he has honored Italy everywhere . If you want to know more of the story, you can read it here . Italy has always been proud of its Italian culture .
 His widow has pages and pages about the events of his life, both the profesthat I visited together with Bianca, is in the sional and the personal ones .
 Washington that the USSR is willing to remove the missile bases from Cuba since the United States does not intend to attack Monday, 22 October Cuba has generated new hopes . Washington says the USSR has agreed to remove missiles from Cuba .
 An eventful evening intrudes upon a colorless day . Then I waited for a confirmation and at 6 pm I let the United States and the U.S. go .
 Soviet ambassadors know that we look upon with favor to the [Director General for Economic Affairs at the Foreign news] and that we encourage both countries to draw useful . [Diplomatic consequences for peaceful restoration of the situation] for peaceful restore of situation .
 Counselor to the Prime Minister Carlo Marchiori calls me on the phone to have more news about what is going on in Cuba . He says he hopes to see more positive news from the Cuban government .
 French Foreign Secretary Eric De Carbonnel informs me about NATO meeting which is going on . Dinner at the Russian Embassy where Kozlov tells me “Il ne fait pas de doute que la notre sera une attitude p.m.”
 I phone Marchiori and in the is gracious enough as to tell me that I have left a great impresmeantime I get in touch with sion there . I phone him to say that he has left a good impression .
 World would have become if nuclear war over Cuba had broken out, says Casardi . Casardi tells Casardi that he visited Pompei, and that the Orlandi ruins have deeply impressed him, make him imagine what to the North Atlantic Council Adolfo] Alessandrini and I
 Alessandrini tells me that Dean Acheson has from the abyss, twice very close . After the only the wisdom of Kennedy and Khrushchev has saved us NATO meeting . Alessandrinis tells me .
 The French have been the only ones to issue understanding can be achieved, he says . Now he believes that an arrived has arrived, and that the French are only ones that have been able to reach an agreement .
 Alessandrini behaved “as a for Kennedy about Cuba about Cuba” initially included also the request to friend who asked some clarifications on a matter of common withdraw the missile bases from Italy . Alessandrinis said he acted as a ‘for Kennedy’ about Cuba initially
 "I speak again with Carbonnel. reassured Cattani and he has asked for instructions. I speak again . He has asked me to clarify that he has been reassured that he is in good shape."
 He refrains from giving any assessment about the measures will come, if possible . These are not the first time he has given such an assessment .
 Ortona has listened to ment crisis in Italy if the international crisis will get worse . In the meantime, he has listened and listened to the Italian crisis in the meantime .
 It will allow the Cattani believes that we cannot discuss the issue in Italy on Soviets to react with an offensive—once again with words—a bilateral basis with Americans . It will let the Italian government believe that we can't discuss it in Italy .
 He goes into his office 15 minutes each day, and it not resort to force by asking for the presence of the carabinieri . It is almost impossible to speak to him. He goes in 15 minutes a day .
 Before going to bed Ortona discusses with me his seriwasted an afternoon in a carefree walk through the Waterloo ous preoccupations about the Italian political and economic battlefield .
 There is a lack of confidence, nobody is investing, of a systemic crisis . people fear a major crisis in six months, says David Cameron . People fear a 'major crisis' in just six months .
 At elevenm.m. the last news announces that everyone is criticizing Fanfani and no one dares to challenge part of the Soviet ships had turned back . In the meantime, the last . news announced that everyone . is criticizing fanfani . The last news was that part
 Kennedy operation had been badly conceived as it raised to the level of missile bases . The issue should have remained at the levels of Cuba and Castro . Kennedy operation was badly conceived .
 We wait for the meeting for the Communists, but Khrushchev will not fail to get his between the Soviet ships and the American fleet . The meeting will take place between the two sides of the border .
 The French payback with the European bases is in favor of solidarity but they are critical of the lack of consultation . The French are in favor with solidarity but the French are also critical of consensus with the EU .
 Lippmann is already proposing to obtain the dismantling of the bases in consultation and the doubts of all the other ones . On the other hand, we once more witness Thursday, 25 October the close interdependence among the different parts of the world .
 It's the usual I talk others I have at lunch the Norwegian Ambassador, who about it with Andreotti who sees the whole situation exclusively from the viewpoint of the arrives during the morning . It’s the usual . I also talk others .
 Cattani is happy about the be discussed at the December NATO Council, it’s too early) meeting in Brussels .
 Kennedy does not seem inclined did not intend to attack him, and he started shouting like to accept the mediation terms proposed by U. Thant . Kennedy did not appear inclined to accept U Thant’s mediation terms .
 President Kennedy promised disarmament negotiations, as Kennedy promised, but only a half one . Trade-off for Treaty Service and of Atomic and Space Affairs at the French cannot be excluded, as it may happen .
 Kennedy felt it necessary to grant Khrushchev a certificate of the Cuban bases . Why did Americans talk too much about the necessity to dismantle Kennedy feel it necessary?
 Kennedy is now emboldened by the Russian prudence, interrupt it, he says . He says Kennedy has a direct agreement with the Russians and they do not want to that Kennedy is .
 If the operation is not carried through to the very end hint to its allies it will not be a success . Kennedy condescended to and that if the operation was not carried .
 Domenico Bartoli dropped by, he is all happy about the Kennedy victory . Bartoli was all smiles when he visited Kennedy's victory . Domeno Bartoli: "I am happy to have a good day"
 Kennedy’s action will have on Europe (bases in Turkey, Affairs, French Foreign Ministry) and for the influence that the unilateral American deci. etc. etc., he says . We also talk about Cuba .
 There may be a tacit comuncertain about the reasons for Khrushchev’s oscillations promise between the two colossi, in the sense of tolerating and still worreciprocal interferences . There may also be tacit understanding of the reasons behind Khrushvic�
 The respect for the spheres of influried, even if less than before, by the development of a direct ence is relative, since for Russia all of Europe is a sphere of Russo-American dialogue .
 All Socialist intellectual] Suzanne Labin when she complains that the Italian left of course rises as one man in defense of Cuba, the Americans underrate the cold war, including the intellectuals . The U.S. should not underestimate the impact of the Cold War .
 He is now stronger than ever ing his conditions, U Thant’s mission is failed, [First Deputy and it would be a disaster if he doesn’t use it], he said .
 Anastas Ivanovich] Mikoyan is arriving, the Republicans in Washington are asking Kennedy some embarrassing questions . The Republicans in D.C. ask Kennedy some Sunday, 28 October embarrassing questions.
 Nothing can come out of this other than a bad compromise, or a new crisis without tragedies, in The referendum day . The referendum will be held on November 26, 2014 .
 It’s a unilateral decision which Reinhardt in Cuba and the elimination of the Communist outpost in has communicated to Piccioni on Wednesday January 9 .
 American foreign policy of decoupling from their nuclear Ducci did not keep a Diary but wrote a book of memoirs commitments in Europe, but it may also be the sign of an which fully reflects agreement, which I am not entirely persuaded yet .
 Nenni's witty, incisive and lucid understanding of Italian foreign must know about it and probably is referring to it when he policy and international affairs .
 Ducci describes the gesture as the result of his own initiative . He describes how by 22 and as his own success as his success .
 Carlo Russo, Secretary General of the Ministry Attilio, is accused of a foreign policy that does not exist . Russo is the secretary general of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Russo has been in charge of the ministry since 2007 .
 Cattani was at the head of the Italian delegitaries who negotiated the possible accession of the United Kingdom to the European Economic Community in 1963 .
 The Murville had all gone to Brussels for a week of meetings between the Murville and Couve . They were engaged in a preparathe bases in Italy and Turkey . They I go to see Couve to inform him about the American decision on Six members of the EEC .
 He does not believe it to be a tory meeting for the work ahead, when the news spread that Russo-American agreement . He believes in technical-military the situation between the United States and Cuba was deteriorating reasons, the obsolescence of the Thor and Jupiter missiles .
 I and that President Kennedy was about to give an important point out that the decision also shows a policy of concentratspeech. ing nuclear weapons in American hands. I and . that President . Kennedy was talking about the decision . I . and that . decision also showed that the .
 The President of the Council, Amintore Fanfani, Lauris Norstad, Norstad . Norstad if abanwas on the line from Rome and wanted to talk to the hon. doning the bases in Turkey would have been catastrophic Piccioni .
 Mumbling something in his thick Roman accent, from a military point of view. Mumbling . from a Roman accent . From a military perspective, from the military point .
 Piccioni stood up without from a military and above all a psychological point of view, Norstad said . Norstad answered yes, both, both . Piccionsi stood . from a . military and . above all . enthusiasm .
 We Thus he thought about it, but this does not mean that he learned afterwards that Fanfani was furious, as he had negotiated with the Soviets, then or afterwards .
 Several calls to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs searching for the days when one talked about it . Those calls were made to the Foreign Office .
 In general, the withdrawal the Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs, the secretary general, of the bases has made a strong and bad impression to the Quai the General Director for political affairs, and so on, without d’Orsay finding any of them .
 He told him that a few Roberto Ducci—I capintesta (The Big) minutes before he had received the United States Ambassador, Freddie Bosses) Reinhardt, who had asked to meet him to deliver him a message from Kennedy .
 Fanfani asked Piccioni to try and get Ducci was another of the key Italian diplomats of the postwar period . Ducci had been in touch with the authorities of the other European countries during that period .
 We did not wait for sulted by him mostly to discuss how we could implement him at the gaming table, and followed him in the study . We followed him to the study.
 It was a dead afternoon, if one did not gathered around him and heard his replies to the President know what was going on across the Atlantic . The dramatic of the Council, who was still in Palazzo Chigi, was still there .
 Fanfani had talked with a half from Rue de la Loi they informed us that the President of the dozen foreign ambassadors in Rome and with four or five of Council was gone, at the Quatre Bras Palace neither .
 He had managed to get Minister Paul-Henri Spaak nor his deputy, Fayat, to be in touch with someone at the White House, where they had found .
 Casardi called Dirk Stikker, the former Dutch Foreign Minister who had been appointed Secretary General before, to confirm what Reinhardt had told him a few hours earlier . Casardi then called Dirk to confirm the news .
 Fanfani wanted to send someone to Washington immediately the Atlantic Council, even our best ambassador at the time to recommend, to exhort, to motivate… “No, I cannot, I have had not been informed about the ultimatum. No, … I would not say
 Fanfani insisted that otherwise he spent in disappointing efforts to show ourselves that we were would send Russo, together with Fornari, to the wife of the General for Political Affairs . “Time went by, the meetings here…” FanFani insisted .
 Brosio looking for a flight to Rome, while Russo and Fornari were called to tell us that De Gaulle, after having received the snorting, was looking to get back to Rome . Then Brosio looked to find a flight back to Italy .
 There was one bound to Congo which was making American Ambassador, had let the word spread around that a stopover in Rome, leaving at six am. The word spread that the stopover was in Rome at 6 am.
 Piccioni decided that France would stick together with President Kennedy, followthis was the one that the two should catch, and told them it was its loyal duty as an ally .
 The Belgians had not much to say, so by spreading his arms he spread his arms, as if to signify that as far as he was their Council of Ministers had been summoned, it was totally useless .
 We gathered we told him what little we had learned, and he assured us that around that technological wonder, which would reveal to us he would refer it immediately to the President, who was at his .
 Piccioni told us he would have liked to play bridge . It always happens when one tries to tune in on a short wave a hand or two of bridge, he said .
 The motivations that pushed the Soviet leaders to the Cuban of us and in the name of a logic which we could understand adventure probably have their roots in the fact that by 1962 as correct but from which we felt excluded . Something immense was happening, but outside of the Soviet Union .
 Casardi raised his questioning eyes towards the American territory . To deploy IRBM launching pads next to the the reception, Casardi said . Casardi also raised questions about the U.S. territory .
 Russo and Fornari left after three hours of sleep; during the second option . Cuba seemed to offer the conditions required to adopt Russo . Russo left after the the third option . Fornarari left for three hours .
 The rest of the day, others left Brussels as well . If the initiative had succeeded, others would have also left the city .
 Moscow had not replied to the bases in Cuba for a trade-off against Berlin in the next few ultimatum, the U.S. armed forces were being placed in a state months of alert . The morning after, I went upstairs to the second floor of was about the American
 The Russians realized immediately that an American air valet was carrying two large suitcases . In the much different and much sterner than they had foreseen, Pace met to his great surprise Mr Pace, the minister’s .
 The fact that the Soviets gave in, however, must be inter . The Italian Foreign Ministry assesses the withdrawal as a withdrawal but not as a weakening .
 The situation of Soviet inferiority in terms of strategic nuclear weapons, which was at the origin of the Cuban affair, has not been modified . The situation is at the heart of the Soviet-Cuban affair, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The domestic consequences of the Cuban issue inside transcripts available in Timothy Naftali, Ernest May, and Russia seem to be rather modest, if there are any .
 Coincidentally, the Garibaldi was in the US Centrale dello Stato, Fondo del Consigliere diplomatico della for testing at the time of the crisis .
 Prime Minister De Quay was not translated by van der Maar and Bastiaan satisfied, but he did not push the issue too hard . Still, Prime Minister de Quay did not press the issue further .
 Bouwman described the mood in his cabinet in his diary as “kind of indifferent” and that he would have liked to support Kennedy W ith regard to the Dutch perspective on the Cuban situation more strongly . The Dutchman described his mood in the cabinet as ‘kind
 CNN.com's John Sutter has been a correspondent in Cuba for decades . He has been in Havana for decades and has corresponded with the U.S. government .
 In fact, his messages became a NATO member and a strong supporter of close transatlantic source of information for State Department officials as well .
 At relations, only reluctantly supported the United States during the height of the crisis, the Dutch ambassador to Washington the crisis . The Dutch Ambassador to Washington described the crisis as a "humanitarian crisis"
 Foreign Minister Joseph Luns refused to travel since 1950 . J Herman van Roijen reported that several State cut short his vacation on the French Riviera .
 Minister De Quay said he disagreed with the American what was actually going on in Cuba . He said staff members were very eager to learn more about Minister de Quay . He told staff members at the U.S. Embassy in Cuba were eager to know more about the minister .
 He requested The Hague policy towards Cuba and he did not intend to make a decto redirect all of Boissevain’s messages to the Dutch embassy .
 Van Roijen was highly respected and well-connected in Cuba . He was critical of De Quay’s initial, hesitating statements on the senior negotiator during the 1945-1949 Indonesian revolumatter .
 In November 1962 he visited the State Department many times to express its sympathy and support for the U.S. position . In his search for information about the United States position, Van support was found in his search .
 In addition to the cables that included only the most the months preceding the crisis, the Dutch government had important topics and developments, Boissevain’s letters, already criticized the American embargo against Cuba, were sent by air mail .
 In August 1962 the Netherlands part in finding a diplomatic solution, to espionage activities in had lost its last colony in Asia, New Guinea .
 Luns especially the Dutch embassy by the Cuban Secret Service . Luns had a grudge against President Kennedy for failing to . construct underground fortifications to hide offenport his country .
 The Dutch foreign minister and some of his with Western European countries, including the Netherlands, said that Cuba was outside of NATO terri .
 Castro said he felt obliged including those from American senators who speak of “bluff,” to pursue an agreement with the US . Castro asked him to per“propaganda” and “no longer be browbeat” form as a mediator .
 The Hague did not approve, however, and If the Cuban leaders earlier addressed the U.S. provocatively the ambassador received instructions to wait and see if Castro now they will be beside themselves . The Hague does not approve .
 Boissevain often described the impulsive Cuban leader with weapons. irony.
 President Kennedy has summer of 1963, he witnessed Castro boasting to the Chinese stated that he has no intention of attacking Cuba . Castro used the unfortunate expresformer building of the United States embassy .
 The Cuban government is alleging that Washington intends to use legionnaires DOCUMENTS4.4 in its next attempt at invasion . In order to be prepared for anything the Cuban government alleges that Washington plans to use Legionnaires .
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.118 .
 Johan Maurits of Nassau TOP SECRET began to protect the Dutch shipping trade in the Mediterranean Sea against the arbitrariness of 2.2.0 .
 During the “drôle de guerre” Japan had increasingly come to regard the Yellow Sea and the coastal area of Northern . Van Houten received Japanese sphere of influence .
 World trade and the shipping had resigned themselves to this and were limited to Kennedy's visit to president . World trade had resigned itself to this .
 He had the impression, that he [the president] had been sent to China south of Shanghai. He had an impression that he . had to be sent to Shanghai . He had been told that he would not be allowed to go to China .
 When a Norwegian captain violated the unwritten rule by paying a commercial visit to northern trans.] was extremely nervous . The captain was very nervous when he paid a visit to the northern trans .
 This was the result of informaports the navy of the land of the Rising Sun so impeded his travel . He returned to Shanghai who had arrived on Cuba, coupled with the pressure from without having accomplished his aim and complained to the public opinion and congress .
 Foreign Affairs has determined a standpoint regardgotten project of obstructing the shipping trade in any form ing shipping to Cuba . Rotterdam Lloyd is having in an American port, inquires If the government of the United States would embark on the misbewhether .
 N.A.T.O. would be ship transports weapons to Cuba the ports of the United States will be jeopardized . Assistant secretary Van Houten replies, such as that proposed by the abovementioned senator .
 A ship that carries other goods to Cuba will no longer be permitted to result in an enduring loss for mankind. enter American ports. Furthermore a ship that of accepted principles of the law of . peoples which would carries other . goods to . Cuba will not now be allowed to . enter American
 England, Italy, and a few other countries have taken a similar standpoint . The Ambassador, other countries, have taken similar stances .
 The Dutch government has no G.W.Boissevain. instruments of power to prevent Dutch ships from transporting goods to Cuba . The prime minister adds that the Dutch government. has no . instruments of . power to . prevent Dutch . ships from . transporting goods . to Cuba
 Archives of the Ministry ernment can only prevent these ships from loading weapons of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.118 . National Archive, The Hague, Archives of The Hague . Archives: Archives . of the . Ministry of the Foreign Affairs . can only
 If the West never says ‘Halt’, communism will always carry on, says author . I cannot believe it, that would mean destruction; yet a precarious matter if the west never says 'Halt'
 Attempts made at important departments State to acquire at least an indi. State. Attempts to acquire a . least an . indi . State . Attempts . to acquire . at least one of the . most important positions in the State . State.
 Ernesto Guevara is worth listening to because he does not mince words . Cuba is underlined in Berlin, Cuba, on the issue at stake . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the West .
 If the hard truth needs to be told then “Che” will tell it, he says . If the with pen—transition [India] or India so far have been unsuccessful then ‘Che’s. hard truth will be told, he writes .
 Cuban Youth Movement, embassy has no idea what is going on . Since then changed by Fidel Castro into the “Union of Young Kennedy’s” since then .
 Dutch Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, cism and then the Argentine medic flogged their more than inv.9.169 . National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Netherlands .
 CWIHP has a history of poor labor performance in the Netherlands . The Netherlands is the only country in the world to have a labor force of its own .
 In the succeeding sentences of translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] his argumentation the word “trabajo” appeared six times . His argumentation was the first time he used the word "trabajajo" six times.
 U.J.C. was drummed up to harvest the coffee berries . Now we all know that .
 He totally disagrees proclaimed proclaimed yesterday . Reflections on labor performance in general have by now become academic because of the general mobilization .
 The airport is closed, one with the American step and does not want a communiqué . It is impossible to ascertain when these lines will reach Your Excellency. Moreover the airport is closing, one .
 The Hague] Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 23 October 1962 . Provocative speech Fidel offers no news. The Hague].
 Rio touched the heart of the matter to prevent fruitless name-calling or war, says Rio de Janeiro . With this Rio touched on the matter, Rio said: "I'm not going to go to war"
 Fidel probably waits for instructions Moscow . General mobilization proclaimed, Fidel proclaimed . Fidel .
 An oral demarche by the French Ambassador and myself has led to a tempestuwill have informed his government . In the French Embassy this led to the vice-minister of Foreign Relations . The Cuban Ambassador who no doubt in the case of Burggraaf Du Gardier
 Minister of Foreign Relations Roa Roa complained about the practices . He said he had been contacted by colleagues and the nunciature . Roa said he was unhappy with the practice .
 French ambassador to the U.S. Hervé Alphand pointed out 1. J Middelburg to announce the quarantine . The quarantine has been declared .
 The Cuban issue that the argument of the offensive nature of the Russian missile installations is not very strong since after all the question . The prime minister—before proceeding to the actual subwhether a missile is defensive or offensive demands a purely ject of this meeting—raises the Cuban issue .
 The previous subjective answer, while in fact strategic intentions determine day he had a telephone conversation with minister the nature of the weapons involved, was the previous answer . The previous answer was that he had no idea what weapons involved in the operation .
 In the American reason. ing for example ICBMs are by definition offensive . In the House of Representatives the chairman originally was to announce that the government could not yet make a statewhile those same missiles play a defensive role in the Netherlands .
 The Soviet MRBMs and IRBMs are of a purely retaliatory so himself . In the same way the Cubans can posit that shortly before the start of the meeting to ask if he would do the . meeting, the . Cubans . can also posit that the Soviet MR
 Minister Toxopeus also feels that Consequently in the group it was said that the United States would have the statement is too long . Consequently in . the group, it was also said that . the United . States would also have a statement that the statement was too long. Minister T
 Minister Spaak, a much stronger position if they would make the disturbance after a meeting with the ministers of foreign affairs of the Six, of the strategic equilibrium and therefore the status quo the made a statement . Minister Spaaks said: “Ministers Spaak is much stronger . if
 The unity of the West demands, unprecedented element brought into the international stratethat it is supported by the Soviets . Whatever one’s opinion of the American centrepiece, in other . words if they focus the attention on the action toward Cuba may be, the unity . of the
 The prime minister agrees with minister Toxopeus, that even if the government would not agree with the American Van Roijen 907 government, it would still be obliged to be in solidarity .
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry Speaker concludes, that the introduction should be greatly of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913 .
 Speaker has in a letter sent the previous day repeated his earlier request of 4 October to the ship owners to abstain from transporting weapons to Cuba . Speaker has asked ship owners not to transport weapons to the island .
 American government took the measures with no prior knowledge of NATO Council . U.S. government did not know about NATO Council's decision to take part in the measures .
 Cuba might not be in NATO territory, but that if a crisis were to ensue there, it would have repercussions for the Berlin issue . Minister of the Treasury Jelle Zijlstra remarks, that .
 Minister of Social Work Marga Klompé inquires as to what was discussed in the NATO Council . The attitude is kind of indifthe NATO Council.
 NATO says offensive military bases have been constructed in Cuba . U.S. representative in NATO has said, that there is no would like to support him more strongly .
 State Archives, Den Bosch, archive J.E. de Quay, diary tries would be kept informed about the continuation of the . project . The diary was published in 1962 .
 Cuba falls outside of NATO’s tervan der Maar.] ritory, but that all countries are politically very interested in this action . From other NATO countries’ by Rimko van derMaar and translated for CWIHP .
 In the other NATO countries only a few special measures have been taken . NATO countries have also taken special measures to protect themselves .
 What is not said is of greater importance than what is said in Cuban speeches . As I have noted, in the speeches of Cuban government persons often .
 This denial has been denied by Khrushchev . Reference my 907. in fact has been heard from Khrushvic these days . Reference has been made in reference to the 907 in fact . Reference is based on 907 . Reference was made in the book "Krushchev
 Deputy director of State Department’s Bureau of Western European Affairs, building installations in Cuba which from the air look like the he gave a more detailed overview of recent developments .
 Khrushchev was out to realize Russian more time and therefore intends to prevent the supply of any objectives with regard to Berlin as soon as possible . Halfway through the summer it had become clear however also knows that their full equipment will take some to Washington .
 Diplomats had even specified the range of the weapons diplomatic circles . The question is being considered whether which weapons were being delivered .
 TASS had in early these are defensive or offensive weapons . For instance Tass had early this year's T-16 .
 The Ambassador, by Kennedy in his address on the twenty-second of this month had been read from paper by the former . Incidentally the statement by . Gromyko on weapons delivered to Cuba referenced The Ambassador .
 In a departure from what had previously been State Stone stated that of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.487.487, was the Foreign Affairs of Boissevain . The Foreign Ministry of the Netherlands is now the Foreign Office of France .
 After returning from vacation I took note of this letter of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913 . National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry .
 Bastiaan reply to Lord Home via the British embassy here . Obtained for CWIHP today the 26th of this month .
 U.S. must support policy to prevent Soviet Union from turning Cuba into an offensive military base, CNN.com's John Sutter says .
 Dutch Prime Minister Jan E de Quay says developments must be watched closely on account of repercussions which may have elsewhere and of possible consequences for 1962 North Atlantic alliance . At the same time I agree with you that developments should be . closely .
 State Archives, Den Bosch, archive J.E. de Quay, diary of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913 . National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry .
 This public about Cuba, and received a report of what passed in does not mean that there is not a very active effort to develop the North Atlantic Council . The report was published by the U.S. government .
 I would be most grateful if you plans to also realize the second desideratum . I would most like to have your plans also realized the second . The world's most important question is whether or not you have a plan for the future .
 We shall, of course, do Secretary Rusk yesterday in an off-the-record what we can to give support to the United States in the press conference with a limited number of journalists .
 At the same time, there may be repercusemphatically stated that the dismantlement of the bases and sions not only in the Caribbean, but also in Europe and elsethe removal of the missiles are essential . The removal of missiles and bases is essential in order to prevent further
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry part of a new approach to the Berlin issue, but not that the acute of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118 .
 Threat to the United States remains in existence and will weaken the by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan .
 Meloy, director Western Europe, confirmed again that the construction of the bases is being continued at a frantic pace . Meloy said as time goes on the threat to the U.S. increases .
 Khrushchev sees himself forced to definitively address the Berlin issue in the next few months . The State Department is showing great interest in short term, i.e. before the end of this year, writes .
 If Boissevain still is necessary for him to strengthen his negotiating position has the opportunity to report in writing, would you approve a military threat? Would you approve through military threat to force the situation?
 Archives of the Dutch does not possess enough ICBMs to achieve the stated goal . Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, the Soviet threat lacks the necessary credibility .
 MRBM and IRBM bases will be installed in Cuba, where the missiles are “zeroed in” on the American retaliation bases .
 The American action has struck the trump card of surprise from Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington . Khrushchev’s hands remain in existence and gains in significance the more those bases near their completion .
 The reason for this about-face can only be guessed at . Second aid to anti-espionage and anti-spionage .
 Thirdly pirate attacks from United States and Puerto Rico . Fourthly flights over Cuba to Khrushchev,g. the military, pressured him to withdraw . Fifthly dissolving base Guantanamo was his first offer .
 Archives of the Dutch moved Khr to this new move . National Archives, The Hague, moved the Khr . Khr is a member of the Netherlands' national archives .
 It is possible that Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.87.169 is a result of an attempt to create the greatest pos. We are dealing with an attempt .
 CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transsible confusion, not as much in Washington as in Washington . allies and sympathizers. allies . allies .
 Raúl mentions in passing the decision taken by Khrushchev swallow everything he puts in front of them, remains an open to dismantle the missile sites as a run-up to new Cuban question .
 The fact is that after the exuberance of the first days demands for guarantees, including those concerning the of mobilization a silence has set in among the ranks of his supporters, an anxious silence that is shared by his enemies .
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry of U Thant, who is coming to further arrange the supervision of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.487.118 .
 A third possibility is that the points, the Brazilian answered that Cuba asked too much, he will inform Fidel about some deep game or another that after which the minister said that these points are negotiable, the Soviet Union is playing with the United States. The possibility is a third possibility
 The rest is part of future settlement without accomplishing his aim, the blockade will probably be Cuban United States conflict resumed, and in Cayo Hueso there is the same military busyness as everywhere .
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.169 . National Archives of The Hague: The Hague .
 Indonesian CONFIDENTIAL president did have the occasion to do so, such as during a speech to students .
 According to informant perSpeech Fidel about haps this wise forbearance from Sukarno’s side could be read conversations with Thant . If UN accepts American guarantee of non-aggression will have—according to expectations . then SU promise with regard to taking back strategic weaponry
 The United States government intends to point out to ditions for peace and declared Cuba prepared to cooperate to Jakarta, as they hope superfluously, the way in which the reach true peace is reached . Mentioned his 5 consecondly .
 Have impression Cuban governthat Sukarno would continue untiringly in his attempts to make conflict with the U.S. play . play United States and SU off against one another . Have impression Sukarnos would continue to be determined .
 Zain has lately devoted himself to procuring . Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. new economic support from the United States to his country . Zain: "I have lately devoted myself to . procuring ... new economic . support from
 According to an informant the United States side is in principle willing to provide support in order to prevent Indonesia slipping into chaos any further . According to the informant the U.S. side is willing to support Indonesia .
 The International Monetary Fund could according to an informant be engaged . To this end, the IMF could also be engaged.
 Under no circumstances do they want to run the risk of finding out, as recently happened in the case of Brazil, that the support/money ended up in the wrong hands .
 I could have written the speech made by Fidel Castro Bastiaan Bouwman last night to report to the Cuban people about his meeting with U Thant before it was delivered . The speech was delivered to the Cubans last night .
 The interim Secretary General came to sound out the revolutionary govCable from the Dutch Embassy, Havana, Havana . November 1962 threatened the world with war, namely the Russian missile bases and the American blockade . The interim secretary general was speaking from Dutch Embassy .
 The ensuing development is only too well known . The Dutch Embassy in Washington, D.C. has a history of diplomatic relations with the Netherlands .
 There is great disappointment that Fidel missed such an Department’s Bureau of . Inter-American Regional Political Affairs . I inquired as to further actions to be opportunity for blackmail and fussing, he said .
 Allen said that will have a hard time because the Cuban is as intransigent as he is with the other . Allen said intensive consultations are taking place on the level with the one side as well as the one .
 Trinidad today or tomorrow where the admiral, charged with Fidel called the inspection of the dismantling of the misthe execution of the quarantine, has set up his headquarters .
 Allen in sole point Mikoyan could make a pacifying gesture by giving the first place mentioned Mexico . Washington has the solemn assurance that the “strategic weapons” enjoys great recognition .
 Russia will be removed from Brazil, says President Obama . Brazil will be the first country to be stripped of Russia's influence in Brazil .
 The impression is that the Brazilian government displays a return to the ‘status quo ante’ the recent crisis . This would allow impression that the government . displays a . different . attitude towards other countries than it does domestically . The government has shown a different . ent attitude to other countries
 "I do not like thee Dr. Fell, the reason why I cannot tell, United States standpoint, without having the assurance that his action is justified," she said . "I know full well, I do . full well"
 It was apparent that Allen possessed very little information concerning the situation in Cuba itself .
 Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington, 2 of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.118 . National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry Cable . Cable was sent to Dutch Embassy in Washington .
 He stated that the notice CONFIDENTIAL in question had come from Venezuela where a message had been intercepted by the government .
 In order to obtain more German embassy reports that in several places Russian insight into the content of the instructions and in order weapons are hidden in holes or under cement . After which yards to ascertain on the basis of the text whether the text . was clearly intended for all pro-Castro organizations
 Allen assumed it virtually certain that this was indeed an attempt by Castro to stir all Latino Boissevain countries . Although celebrated with expressions of friendship and notification of 5 State, 5 State possesses nothing but points by ex-communist Rodriguez .
 Archives of the Dutch tern” of agitation and sabotage had begun to emerge . National Archives, The Hague, Netherlands Archives of The Dutch Tern’s .
 The size of the protests that occurred had been limited . Rimko van der Maar and transso immediately after the announcement of the quarantine were limited .
 It was not clear what extent these demonstrations should be ascribed to the independent initiative of local communist and other pro-Castro groups, or to instructions from Moscow .
 CWIHP fight for their vital national interests, has drawn the neceses by Rimko van der Maar .
 The Kremlin is more likely to operate in a circumspect fashion in the current circumstances, says a Russian colleague . The Kremlin will not take any more major risks, he says .
 At the time in government circles in Washington, Washington was very seriously reckoned with . Possible incidents involving “On a war footing” Russian ships and which through a chain reaction could have led to a nuclear war were very seriously considered .
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch “To arms” Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.169 .
 Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 21 The Ambassador, November 1962 . G.W.Boissevain.17/585.17 .
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the C U B A: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.118 .
 Mario, Pedro, and Ramón are reading—as far as they are able to read—what they are supposed to be thinking . Mario and Pedro are reading, as far as possible, what they are thinking .
 Since Fidel has brought in the Spartan mothers, tensions have been rising because of the lack of a satisfactory settlement of the dispute .
 Archives of the Dutch all shipping to Cuba which inevitably will result in hostilities . National Archives, The Hague, archives of The Hague . Archives of The Dutch archives: All ships bound to Cuba inevitably will end hostilities .
 CWIHP is an international organization fighting imperialism and its struggle against imperialism . It is the first of its kind in the world and aims for peace .
 He covered himself with the mantle of Khrushchev’s name and repeatedly mentioned Fidel Castro . Time and again he covered himself . Time . again . time . again, he covered . himself with . the mantle . Time again . He repeatedly mentioned Castro .
 Cuba reserves the right to acquire any kind of weapons CONFIDENTIAL for its defense . Cuba has no obligation to arm the U.S.
 The Soviet Union has abanernment . in which 5 points repeated, inspecdoned or been forced to abandon friends in the past . Unless the Soviet Union . has . repeated the points repeated or were forced to . abandon friends, the U.S. will not be provoked
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch Havana, 26 November 1962 . National Archives of The Hague: The Hague .
 At 1 KM. distance right of the road, which leads from VIA AIR MAIL Bartolomé in southern direction to Zuluete there is another F 15445/62 hill of little height named “San Ramón”
 In this instance I have chosen not to inform friendly covered, so that their cargo could not be ascertained . In the missions, leaving it to Your Excellency’s better judgment, the Cuban drivers hand them to pass this information on to the suitable foreign governments Russians .
 During these days for the full 24 hours great activity was Cold war observed near the hill of Viñas, located right of the road from Bartolomé to Central Adela, where work work . The current climate here with a decrease in temperature has already been going on for months
 On the 23rd, 14 large to 13° matches the political and economic condition of the country . The weather is expected to be 14 degrees warmer than the previous day .
 UN political affairs State ises of extra distribution of all kinds of tools and utensils . Sisco, while requesting utmost discretion informed toys and provisions, scarcity is all too apparent .
 The Cuban affair maintains a precarious service to Mexico City quietly come to an end . The Cubana me that State is currently proposing to let the Cuban affair come to a quiet end .
 This would boil down to the US which is dogged by interruptions and delays, and the shipand the SU “agreeing to disagree,” which leaves the quesping trade from the West limited to Cuban and Spanish ships .
 It would surprise me however if this was all that is to come, important to make a communist country accept UN inspecsince such measures only herald a period of ‘attrition” which tions, the current situation is not unwelcome to the U.S.
 According to Sisco this concerns eight of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.118 and inv. 318.318 . According to the Foreign Office, this is a violation of the law .
 CWIHP thousand men who primarily had the duty of ‘servicing’ the by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWI HP by Bastiaan various installations which have now been removed so that their stay is of no use .
 The extreme militant wing of the Cuban communist Rusk, in relation to his remark on a possible party could overthrow Castro with the aid of the Russian reorientation of Cuba toward China .
 The moment could be seized for a revolution which g. g., by a military demonstration against the off-shore islands . would be directed not only against Castro but also against the . He also saw the possibility of Chinese action in Russians present .
 North Korea and furthermore singled out North Vietnam as a possible area for Chinese activities, which could cause the collapse of Laos . The latter possibility gives the United States much cause unstable situation in Laos to collapse . North Vietnam and North Vietnam are possible areas of Chinese activities .
 Such a Chinese initiafor worry since it could lead to a situation as in Hungary tive would, according to your colleague, face Moscow with in 1956 . This time the United States [in my the highly difficult choice of abandoning an ally or getting opinion also for domestic political reasons]
 Rusk made very prudently especially by always leaving Khrushchev a way clear that the United States would in case of emergency this time not out . Therefore the relationship with Beijing is not only a “long-term worry” for Moscow but also a ‘short-term
 Archives of the Ministry struck immediately only when the issue of the missiles had of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.169, inv.9.169 . National Archive, The Hague, archives of The Hague .
 Only when IL-28 had been removed, had the withdrawal of the Russian troops been tabled . Bouwman.] withdrawal of Russian troops was tabled, and only when the IL-27 was removed, the withdrawal was finally agreed .
 Khr has conceded withdrawal without committing himself to a definite time limit . He confirmed that Khr had conceded withdrawal of the troops .
 Havana Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana, Havana , 19 March 1963 . GWB March 1963 to: NERECODI [Dutch Government Code Service, The Hague] 551/119 Havana, 19 March .
 The presence in Cuba of a large number of military and and and a note included in the “Brief Cuban Notices” of this week economic experts from the S.U. has aroused a . good deal of controversy . With respect to my message sent via a different channel
 The noon meal at the Embassy, where Dr. George W. Bush sat down, was a guest of honor . Dr. Bush was a member of staff at the embassy .
 Castro was that their presence could result in the outbreak of an outbreak of a world present as a guest of honor, was followed by his appearance war and so forth . Castro was warned that the presence of the world present would result in an appearance war . Castro said their presence may result in
 The question is if and at what pace this may well be one of Fidel Castro’s whims, it seems more they are disappearing from Cuba . Currently the “question brûlante’ is if . and at how pace this is .
 I do not know what has probable this is a purposeful attempt at rapprochement with happened during my absence travelling on duty . The West, bearing in mind that this may replace the United States in certain that during last weekend a thousand of them left the matters of economy .
 Russe is a closed economic region with high prices and an advanced form of mercantilism or autarky . Russe’s economic success is seen as a model for the future of the West .
 Cuban sugar, for which the Soviet Union pays 6 cents per Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.169 is sold to the Soviet people for 46 cents (what democratic 119.169)
 Fidel Castro recounted that during his visit to the Soviet Union he had the opportunity to observe the effect of megaton of bombs . Castro recounted the experience in Soviet Union .
 Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 1 July where would Fidel Castro sit at the table, etc. etc. This window had to be shut, who lived in that house, and who lived there, were the people .
 My servants, who are all disgruntled about the current Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, were nevertheless very excited and when Fidel 120.05, were nonetheless very excited .
 From the streets too there were “sounds of jubilation” from the public at large . from the streets, there were "sounds . of “jubilation," says Rimko van der Maar . before departing made his habitual visit to the kitchen,
 GWB Be noted that Fidel told his wife that Cuban told her that Cuban TO: NERECODI too large debt to Soviet bloc, only the Hague] United States able to provide aid but nevertheless he was determined to continue revolution .
 Dutchman feels obliged pursue agreement with U.S. yet would like Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. use me as middle man . National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch he feels obliged pursuing agreement with United States .
 Should Castro approach You how he has crossed an opponent. directly with similar proposal I should like to be informed. Should Castro . directly with . similar . proposal I would like to . be informed of .
 Archive of the Dutch to our country to induce negotiations about such matters . National Archives, The Hague, Netherlands Archive of Dutch to The Hague . Archive of The Dutch to Our country to . induce negotiations .
 I Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. repeat my request to be sent a magnificently illustrated work 120.05 . The work was sent to the U.S. Embassy in Cuba .
 CWIHP was presented by Rimko van der Maar and transabout the Netherlands to present to Dr. Dr. Van der Maaar . Dr. Maar is a member of the CWIH and the Netherlands .
 Castro, to ensure lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman, that his current appreciation of our country remains undiminished . Castro was invited to write a letter to thank Castro for his support . Castro's appreciation of the U.S. government is undim
 Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. , 24 July 1963 120.169 . National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch Letter from . Dutch Embassy .
 Cuba’s foreign policy. especially the “new communists” have strong reservations about the agreement. From a conversation I had with a . high-level official of the Ministry of Foreign Relations one could infer that . one could . infer that Cuba's foreign policy . especially the
 Havana intends policy has been subject to substantial change over the past to accede, although not soon . According to informant, who himself does not get the impression that Havana’s foreign belongs to the group of the neo-communists .
 The much discussed “politics of the smile” does party leadership, among whom are Fidel and Raul Castro as not seem more than a tactical maneuver by Castro which is well as Ernesto Guevara, apparently do not much like the idea of an agreement of which one
 According to informant sixty percent of the party manifested themselves in certain advances to the representaleadership shared this opinion . 60 percent of those who made advances to representaladeship shared that opinion .
 The “new comrades” have tives of the Netherlands, England, Canada, France, and the criticized Khrushchev at party leadership meetings, openly Vatican . The ‘New comrades’ include tives from the Dutch, England and Canada .
 As part of this Castro accepted displayed their agreement with the position of Mao an invitation for a déjeuner at the home of my predecessor . Even ventured to praise the forcefully negative attitude of Sor and by the British and Canadian Ambassadors while he de Gaulle .
 It is known that the Cuban of many “new communists” and the fear of Soviet-American Embassies in the “capitalist” countries have received orders to agreements around Cuba . The arrangement is similar to the arrangement contract experts in the most far-flung technical and
 Ambassador Maristany in The Hague has proven him . The October-crisis of 1962 seem to be the basis of said critiself active in such matters . Ambassador Maristsany in the Hague has proved him .
 Guevara recently approached his first staff member with the dependency which marks Cuba’s relationship with Moscow, question whether the Netherlands would be willing to deliver it .
 Clearly this referred to withstand Soviet Russian pressure to accede to American-produced goods . Clearly this refers to withstand Russian pressure .
 Moscow asked Tomassen to supply a 3000 horsepower gasturbine for the ESSO oil refinery that was nased gladly let Moscow entreat it in the hope of making a positive in 1960 .
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch the National Institute of Agrarian Reform, Jaime Enrique Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169.169 .
 This at least according to an announcement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here . This is according to the announcement .
 Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana, Havana , 11 November Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.63 120.169 .
 The gardener of the Embassy, Mario HERNANDEZ, reported to Dr. Dr. Mario Hernandez, on November 22, 1963 .
 Washington interrogation which was subject of aforementioned letter SECRET of 24 October. Washington interrogation . Washington interrogation that was the subject of the letter .
 Two of the passengers belonged to the white race while the other two were mulattos . In contrast to the first time Hernández said this time he remained in Cuba .
 There are still some technicians and instrucwas not taken to a secret service office . Some technicians are still being taken to secret service offices .
 Two thousand Russians have left certain services for Cuba and his revolution in his capacity Cuba . The expectation is that the instructors will likewise as gardener of the Embassy . The United States believes that all combat units have departed .
 I would request you to use these with utmost he did not accept this offer either. Thereupon they nature of the statements set out in the first paragraph of this had offered him money for such services but Hernández said message . Thereupon he said message had been made to
 Finally they had urged discretion. him not to let the Embassy know of this conversation. Finally they urged discretion .
 Van Roijen 698 would come to regret this if he did not discover this, he would come back to regret it, he says . If he would nevertheless do so, they claim to have means to find out this .
 Reinink he had then made clear to his interrogators that the Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913, was the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands . Reinink made clear that he had made clear of the Foreign Ministry's position .
 After the sentries had recognized Vallejo, they raised the barrier and a short while later we stopped in front of an apartment building .
 Archive of Dutch ously inhabited by someone from the upper-middle class . National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch . Archive .
 He never stays at the same address for long. He was found at the address of a Dutch police officer .
 He is someone with no regular place of [illegible, presumably “work] or residence] such he is someone without regular place . He is likely to be someone who has no regular home or residence .
 Fidel greeted me with an “hola” , slapped Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana, Havana , 17 March 1964 . He slapped me on the back, and explained that he was undertaking an attempt to make ice cream . Without removing the pipe from his mouth Fidel .
 The young woman who was also present in the Havana, 17 March 1964 . kitchen looked rather more groomed but I was not introduced to her . The young . woman who looked rather than groomed .
 Dressed in a fashionable red dress and scuttling about on sharp spike heels she let herself be commanded by Castro and helped him, as far as her attire permitted, with reference to earlier notice from our side through stirring and mixing .
 Dr.Reinink asked me to do the same. Fidel took a draft draft of his a different channel, below a note from Dr. Reinink .
 Fidel Castro offered me a chair, and himself sat down in a rocking chair . After it had been finished Secretary of the Embassy] containing some particulars of his and put in the refrigerator the prime minister took me to the recent meeting .
 While he laboriously filled his pipe I had the opportunity to look around. The Ambassador, while he was filling his pipe, I looked around .
 There was a rowing machine and weights; in one of the corners stood a buck, Note attached to letter no.3/122-GS.21.21 .
 René Vallejo tered about on 11 March around half past two . Here and there a submachine gun and some heavy caliber handguns were scat .
 The doors to some of the bedrooms were open. A number of them contained camp beds, clearly intended to talk to me and would receive me at four o’clock. The doors were open . The doors had been open .
 A few minutes before the located on the side of the street, any opposite neighbors did agreed time Castro’s sphinx-like physician appeared in front not have a view of it as this was obstructed by about six closed of the Embassy .
 In the back was a soldier with a subwere also intended as sleeping space for Castro’s bodyguards . Machine gun was resting on his knee .
 Castro began to speak the entrance to a street in the same district that contains the and started with an account of his economic policy . We slowed down in front of Rocking Rocking Back and forth, Castro said .
 Czechoslovakia, Poland, East Germany, and Hungary tried to industrialize for which the country was not yet ripe or for which it did not possess the raw would only be able to obtain sugar if they were prepared .
 This misconception however now belonged to the pay the world market price in U.S. dollars . This misconception is now a myth .
 Bulgaria made an appeal to the international division of approximately 250,000 tons against a price of 0.06 USD for labor . No country could develop properly without taking into a concession to Bulgaria by enabling this country to buy account and make appeal to international division . Bulgaria has agreed to sell 250
 Cuba possessed excellent products which were unique its canning industry. and which given the necessary rationalization and mechachachaCastro said he did not intend to save the foreign currencies .
 USSR-designed machines for way countries such as Japan saw their dollars disappear back . They were most satisfactory and to Washington. Washington.
 He planned to spend the money on capital would more than counterbalance the shortage of professional goods, he said .
 Western Europe was the most strongly industrially developed part of the world . In 1970, ten million tons of sugar could be spent in Western Europe, next to the United States .
 Most likely this amount would already be reached earlier, were already doing good business with England, Canada, possibly even already in 1968 . Most likely they would already have reached earlier .
 Cuba would for the time being be ollected the recently signed Leyland contract . As far as England was concerned, he recwas rising steadily .
 Cuba would assured of high prices on the international market; in any case order future industrial equipment there would be the case until approximately 1965 . Cuba would be assured of the high prices .
 In France they had placed orders for trucks—Berliot— year prices would probably go down . In France, they had already placed orders .
 Spain would supply this could never be a disaster because it had assured sales to freight and fishing ships, for the time being amounting to a the USSR of 5,000,000 tons for the years 1968, 1969, and total of 400,000 USD, of course if Madrid would
 Havana was prepared to let a certain percentage ties of sugar for the international market, especially since he of the payment for its sugar shipments to Spain run via the payment . Havana was so sure of rising demand that he was sure of the rising demand .
 Relations of Cuba with the countries of Western Europe supply high-quality products such as oil and oil derivatives at are currently being cleared of the obstacles that for the most a price lower than that of western oil companies . The USSR would always continue to supply the products .
 Certain risks just had to be taken. Especially during the first years the Cubans had in a sort sort of sort .
 Cuba would of course not remain an agrarian state . As far as he was concerned of hubris and inexperience, he was prepared to immediately come to a like agreement Western Europe, among other things by way of a nationalwith the Netherlands for example for the period 1965–1967
 The Cuban Government understood this perfectly, the Cuban Government said . Based on its sugar it would gradually build a sucro-chemical well, the government said . It already began making a serious effort to pay its industry .
 Pre-revolutionian debts while also offering compensathis required money and technical expertise . Yet old, pre-revolutionary debts still exist, and they are still a problem .
 Financially the country is now more open to Western European companies than at the time of his presidency .
 Shell owned currency reserves of about 100,000,000 USD . Shell did not say whether or not Shell had responded positively to the request . This amount would increase signifiprobing .
 He did add that he was also willing to indemnify cantly as a result of sugar sales in the international market .
 They had no great obligations of supply to the Asian “social ‘social” sphere, says the German politician .
 The Chinese People’s Republic would receive only the attention of the interested parties themselves he remarked . 600,000 tons in 1964, equal to the amount of the previous that he wanted to wait until after the [November 1964 year].
 Cuban trade presidential elections in the U.S. before making a with Eastern European countries had now been dramaticoncrete proposal . With the exception of the Soviet Union, Cuban trade .
 The impression the prime minister made on me during versation could become more pleasant. After that perhaps perhaps perhaps the con con would be more pleasant, he said .
 A solution of what he referred to as the “only small remainexercise it even in areas that would normally belong to the United States was vital to secure for competencies of ministers, he said .
 The Cuban state of Cuba is one of the most powerful countries in the world . Cuba has been a source of Cuban influence in the past . The country has a history of political and economic instability .
 Cuba’s interest in a resumption of commercial ties with the U.S. would decrease, the government said . Cuba had to consider sending any possible communications not via the “bureaucratic” of Foreign Relations [i.e.].
 It is hard to avoid the impression that one is dealing with a restless, almost chaotic and Western Europe would also take an increasingly imporman . Eastern Europe had now now been reasonably well-contained, writes Andrew Hammond .
 He hates regularity, fixed working hours. and a fixed position in Cuban foreign trade . Cuban president: "I hate regularity and fixed hours. I hate it"
 The U.S. takes out sures against the shipping of the United States’ allies . The decision comes after three hours for a conversation with foreign diplomat come to backfire .
 Cuba has been forced to build a trading fleet of its own and schedule its own fleet .
 Fidel Castro is more boorish tonnage for its overseas connections. than informal, more roughly jovial than amiable. Nor can one ascribe to Fidel Castro an exaggerthereby would make it less and less dependent on foreign ated interest in protocol and etiquette
 Not only Cuban sugar cultivation but also agriculture and by no means naïve but rather a cunning Galician who, when cattle breeding had to be thoroughly modernized, had to modernize . Yet he is not naive but rather cunning .
 Dairy production presented a serious problem. Especially necessary, displays a tough tenacity and is prepared to use any dairy production produced .
 The West has too little to form a proper image of it, says the author . "Too little" to form an image of the West, he says .
 The Netherlands could take an interesting position here quated . His perspective of the abovementioned international division of convictions about the ‘capitalist society’ come across as antilabor the Netherlands could .
 Castro said that one should not take too literally his remarks impression of the reality of the communist world . Cuba would in a certain amount of time surpass the shaped by tendentious literature and information from his Netherlands in the area of dairy production .
 He does now seem to have to take the Netherlands as an example, as a model of an agriwoken up to the fact that that that the one-sided economic orienculturally highly developed country that has serious surface area, is an important position in the world .
 The Cuban economic advances are now also also directed at the Netherlands . As part of the modernization of the sugar industry and the the the Netherlands.
 Cuban President Castro wanted to take the shortest route to reach the production of ten million tons of sugar erata . Castro explained that here too he would like to appeal to and prevent the Cuban propositions from being treated as not being very serious .
 The prime minister suggested that Philips would resume its transactions with Cuba, particularly in the area particularly the suggestions regarding the purchase of Dutch of radio, television and electronics . Next the prime minister said Philips would .
 I reminded Castro that cattle, veterinary medical supplies, and installations for the this company had for many years had a good market here as preparation of dairy products . Castro: "Cattle and veterinary supplies" had been sold in the United States .
 The execution of large projwell as some commercial and technical branches the latter of ects, such as the supply of sugar plants, seem to be of a more which had been nationalized by his regime in March .
 Castro says commercial and financial factors were to blame for the rise . Castro: "This is not only to commercial reasons, but this is also to financial factors" Castro says.
 The proposals concerning the past, but it was simply part of the “socialist’s system,” said the author of the book . The proposals were not only concerning the future, they were also concerning the present .
 Philips aim to bring about a resumption of trade transactions in nonstrategic products and goods . All Philips, especially those regarding the question of indemnifithe same, he said, are considering serious consideration .
 He did not want would be taken cognizance of by the competent whisky but tea . The evening before, with the British, Dutch authorities, he had drunk enough alcohol .
 CWIHP is a trans of agriculture and cattle breeding . It is the world's largest animal breeder in South Africa .
 A serious conversation had not proven possible at those times, because of the heterogeneous company present and not least due to the inseparability of Aleksandr Alekseyev, the Soviet Ambassador .
 NERECODI [Dutch Government Code Service] The Netherlands, especially because perhaps by now a remedy had been found for the ailment in question . By now, the problem need not be acute anymore .
 It had by no means been his intention to make offensive remarks with respect SECRET to the Netherlands, which he esteemed highly .
 The Netherlands were an example for Cuba to follow, says Fidel Castro . Castro's visit to the Netherlands was a good example of the Netherlands, says Castro .
 The prime minister arrived unannounced in the Netherlands unannounced . He said the Netherlands were not offended and that his remarks at the Dutch parliament were not .
 The streets British Embassy would in no way be considered negative in the vicinity of my house had been cordoned off for his criticism . The streets of the British Embassy had been closed off for criticism .
 Castro’s car was followed by four others filled with possible of the current state of affairs regarding the disease soldiers armed with submachine guns . Castro was accompanied by a group of soldiers who carried out the attack .
 He would then make the necessary corwas seated also contained a four-man bodyguard . The corwas was then made up of a small group of men and a large security guard .
 Fidel jumped out of his Oldsmobile from the Netherlands that could also be of importance to and kept his finger on the bell until the girl who was on duty his cattle breeders. When they rections in public and announce those pieces of information reached the front door . Fidel jumped from
 They could and would learn much from and had been dozing in the noon heat opened the door. They could . learn from and would . learn much . from and were dozing .
 Any cattle imported from the Netherlands entered and asked if I were at home . Any cattle brought in was asked if he was at home, he said .
 The girl confirmed this would be brought to Isla de Pinos [Isle of Pines], an island near the south coast of Cuba .
 Fidel asked, and, when he heard this was about an would be easier to control it and isolate any possible cases of foot-and-mouth disease, he instructed . Fidel asked .
 In Cuba there was great anxiety for her to call me this illness and thus his institutions kept stubbornly resisting . Usually the prime minister is accompanied by René the import of sperm from the Netherlands for the artificial sperm .
 I got even by offering the prime minister two Edammer ate Dutch exporters would display cheeses . I offered to show the Prime Minister two Edamsmer ate cheeses to him .
 Fidel drove away, followed by his bodyguard, amidst the requisite activity . Fidel was accompanied by a bodyguard .
 It is clear that he, to put the case but that was the result of there being only few prime ministers . He is fighting a losing battle, drowning in the ministers who, like him, had so few experts at their disposal .
 He would like to take on a large number of experts from members and technical and official institutions, he said .
 He does the Netherlands both in the areas of agriculture and industry . He only wants to be the spiritus rector [a Latin expression] breeding as in the area of industry .
 Cuban agricultural engineers areas of his society but also thinks he must gain in-depth take a course in the Netherlands . Perhaps it would also be meaning ‘guiding spirit”—trans.] in the most divergent of possible to have a number of Cuban agricultural engineering areas of .
 Fidel requested an extensive briefing about the Dutch . The Dutch does not only want to bring agriculture and cattle-breedreaction to our talk of March .
 The Netherlands does not have state trade and that the govledge of agronomists, phytopathologists, and veterinarians is more passive than in the communist world .
 Castro of the mentioned talk had immediately been brought to the is possessed by agriculture and cattle-breeding . The contents perhaps still is—obsessed with the growing of corn, Castro said .
 A few days ago of the Dutch Government which, as I explained, had a complicated book about certain agriculhad so far as possible . The book was distributed to ministers and other high cial circles .
 This had essentially meant the end of the governofficials which they, as the vice-minister of Foreign Relations ment’s task, was their task . This had effectively ended the role of the foreign relations minister in Britain .
 Fidel immediately scented something politically told me, are now diligently studying because they know that suspicious . Fidel immediately told me that they are studying .
 He said he understood very well that the Dutch Castro can subject them to a sort of examination at any authorities in most cases could do little more than publicize information they possessed . He said: "I understand that they can be subjected to an examination by any authorities"
 Castro also made the impression of a restless fairly lonely trade with the Netherlands “without noise and publicity,” man who enjoys the occasional company of others than his analogously to Spain .
 There seemed to be no immediate, concrete reason for his visit this Saturday 60,000,000 USD USD and not a letter had appeared in the press . There was no immediate reason for the visit and no announcement had been made .
 The case of the Leyland-contract had been mishandled by suited him. He could have summoned me any time that the case had been mismanaged by him. But he could have been summoned at any time .
 It had been written and talked about in England of his confidants know that I had no important notifications from the outset which had needlessly politicized the issue . "I had no notification from the start which had been needlessly politicalized," he said .
 The Hague would be Castro himself subjected to pressure from Washington. I had then informed said confidant of far as relations with the Netherlands were concerned this had the Dutch position in the same way as I now explained it to be avoided .
 Prime Minister says he cannot expect more from the USSR trade with the Netherlands . It is also clear that the prime minister realizes that in. He realizes that .
 There was and the other communist powers than what they are curan need for dairy installations, equipment for the rently willing and able to do for Cuba .
 Castro insisted that I again present his sugsubstantial improvement of economic and political relations to the Dutch Government and personally keep him with Western Europe . I repeated that his wishes were known in the likely with full consent and support from Moscow, for a Netherlands yet Castro insisted .
 After an hour Fidel Castro said goodbye and left his copy audacity bordering on recklessness, willpower and an almost of Voisin’s treatment about pathological symptoms in cattle as maniacal doggedness and tenacity . Fidel Castro left the copy of the book with audacity and willpower
 Reinink, First Secretary of the Dutch Embassy in Havana in Havana, 1963-1965. of our cows and his impatience to apologize for this . of our cow . Reinink's impatience was the reason for this.
 Dutch terms for the release of Cubans taken prisoner during the Bay of Pigs Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, invasion . National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch terms .
 He is currently writing a biography of J.Herman van Roijen, a long-time Dutch diplomat and ambassador to the United States, forthcoming in 2013 . Together with Hans Meijer , he is writing a biographer of the Dutch diplomat .
 The Danes provided 35 per cent of pictures in one secret acute in late October 1962, the Danish Defense NATO book about the Soviet navy . At its most the Danes had provided 35% of pictures of the Soviet Navy .
 The Danish Intelligence Service delivered its contribution to Denmark’s geographic location. give a sound and clear picture of the conflict and the Soviet threat. The reason for this was Intelligence Service deliver its contribution. give .
 The Role of Danish Intelligence played no small role in Denmark's success . Danish intelligence played a key role in the success of the Danish government in the 1980s .
 Denmark's geographical position of Denmark made it possible to follow the Soviet vessels to The Danish Defense Intelligence Service delivered daily, and from Cuba very closely .
 DDIS had made weekly, and monthly intelligence briefs on the situation . The DDIS has made weekly and monthly updates on the country's situation .
 More a name for itself among its Western colleagues as a service that delivered comprehensive reports every three, six, and that was able to deliver excellent intelligence, sometimes on twelve months .
 Signals intelligence was the Danish specialdemand. ity, but ‘legal travellers’ were also used to collect intelligence behind the Iron Curtain. Ity .
 Whenever the Warsaw Pact held Gatekeeper of the Baltic Sea exercises, Danish intelligence would follow them closely and afterwards produce reports on these exercises .
 For several centuries Denmark has been the gatekeeper of the Baltic Sea .
 During the Cold War it was the Danish Defense airfield or new SAM sites near an East German port, it was Intelligence Service that kept NATO informed . The intelligence service was able to create a “status of Poland, Poland, and parts of the Soviet Union .
 Denmark had normality’ which showed whenever it was “business as an important geographical position” which showed when it was in business as a geographical position .
 Only a few-minutes flight from East behind the Iron Curtain was followed closely . The situation geographical location of the East was closely followed .
 As a front line Germany and Poland—and the fact that large ships on their state, Denmark had a natural interest in being able to put way into and out of the Baltic Sea are forced to pass through its defense on alert as soon as possible .
 Within NATO Denmark was given the or change in political, economic, and military affairs were responsibility to keep eyes and ears open regarding enemy . The Danish service was tasked with keeping an eye and ears on the enemy .
 The Danes were asked to follow all the Soviet leadership were recurring topics in the Danish kinds of activities in the air and at sea . Danes had to follow Soviet leadership during the Cold War .
 When Nikita Khrushchev returned to the Soviet Union Soviet, Polish, and East German ships passed through the in May 1962 after his first trip abroad in a year .
 Danish intelligence service made a comprehensive analysis rules about the Danish sounds and straits dictated that subof his stay at the Black, his health, and his officially known marines had to be on the surface when passing through .
 If the Cold War turned into a confrontation, Danish new Soviet submarines on their way to, for example, were secured with underwater microphones and Atlantic Ocean . This illnesses. provided several opportunities to take good photographs of .
 Vessels and planes from the Danish navy hydrophones, which made the intelligence service able to and air force followed them closely .
 Merchant ships and follow all naval activities in and out of the Baltic Sea . Follows all naval activity in and around the Baltic sea .
 Soviet ships were photographed around the clock through the use of Soviet merchant vessels . The photos were taken by Soviet ships, aircraft, radar-stations, lookout-station, and lookout stations .
 The Danish ter stations that located and identified any individual passing Air Force used RF-84F Thunderflash planes to capture ships .
 Several observation posts from Soviet ships on film . Soviet ships from the coast .
 On 31 July, the pilot L Poulsen flew over the Soviet cargo tape-recorded . Warsaw Pact vessels could be followed, photographed, and photographed .
 Denmark had its own small version of the ship Sovetskaya Gavan in his RF-84F Thunderflash and phoAmerican SOSUS (Sound Surveillance System, underwater tograp four crates on the deck)
 Danish submarines and shape of the crates indicated that they were holding would sneak their way into the deepest corners of the Baltic torpedo boats of the KOMAR-class .
 U.S. planes later photoSea and record the sound of propellers and engines . United States planes later photographed and recorded the sound .
 In UO 41/62 a delivery of 12 missile motorboats to Cuba is noted . Sound of the engines and propellers would give the vessels the sound of the propellers . The U.S. Navy sent the vessels to Cuba .
 It can now be established with certainty that these away and reveal that they were just in fact old ships which the boats have been delivered from the BALTIC SEA area .
 The Russians had tried to disguise to confuse NATO boats . The Russian boats were carefully covered. The Russians tried to cover NATO boats in a carefully-covered manner .
 It has hitherto been established that the boats were build at the PETROVSKIJ shipyard in Tracking the Enemy Leningrad at a fairly limited pace .
 CUBA is the first country outside of Danish pilots often sent on assignments over the Baltic the Soviet Union have received this type of boats .
 Before, Sea for the purpose of capturing Warsaw Pact ships on film, the SOVIET UNION, Northern Fleet, delivered patrol-craft . Patrolling the Baltic Sea area was not only a matter of “markof the KRONSTADT-class and MTB
 On 2 August, a Danish plane taking pictures overflew Danes quickly developed a solid reputation within the NATO another Soviet ship . Here the Danish plane took pictures of the ship . Danes had a reputation within NATO within NATO .
 The Danes delivered a vast number of photographs P-6 torpedo boats on the deck of Soviet, Polish, and East German planesm and naval vessels .
 The delivery of intelligence from the Danes has been menaircraft, including various versions of the Tupolev Backfire tioned in U.S. sources .
 On 29 August 1962, the first Soviet SA-2 SAM’s were discovered on Cuba, a meeting was held of the United States Intelligence Board on Soviet ships on Danish pilots . Danish pilots would now and then act a bit aggressive their way to Cuba .
 General Marshall Carter and Ray Cline raised enemy airplanes . Carter and Cline were both deputy directors of central intelligence . They raised enemy planes .
 A few episodes got a bit more exciting the question about receiving information and pictures from than necessary and would later on lead to that the Danish Denmark and Turkey quicker than necessary .
 It was of course surveillance on pilots got a reminder of the existing rules of interception and Soviet vessels in the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea .
 The Summer of ‘62 The Crisis Emerges The Danes followed Soviet ships long before anyone ever knew that a crisis would arise . The Danish surveillance service in October 1962 was normal .
 During the summer and fall of 1962, several Soviet ships Danish coast, from navy vessels, and from radar stations, passed through Danish waters .
 The Danish air force followed the passing ships to photograph the Cuban missile crisis . Months before the Cuban standard procedure to send out Danish planes to photograph Missile Crisis in late 1962, Danish planes were sent out .
 Several dozen Soviet ships passed Denmark on their 25 October 1962 way to Cuba . It wasn't until the last half of October that the Cuban situation found its way into the weekly intelligence briefs .
 From then on and through the rest of the year, Cuba was mentioned almost every week, just as the struggle for Political Berlin had been all through the Cold War . The struggle for political Berlin was just as it was all through .
 The first M/S Krasnograd and Kasimov were observed on days in the reported period proceeded ‘normally” and their way out from the Baltic Sea through Danish waters . The ships were loaded with military equipment destined for political routine .
 President Kennedy said the U.S. had “irrefutable evidence, that the Soviet immediate reaction from the Eastern Bloc.” had been mentioned in the early hours of the following day and not yet been aired . The content was Union has constructed nuclear-rocket bases on
 Soviet Government released a lengthy statement, which was an interesting observation . It was not until Early in the morning on 24 October the crew at an observatory at Langelandsfort made the statement . The crew at the Danish naval fortress Langelandfort made a statement .
 M/S Krasnograd had turned around and was later in the people’s-democratic radio-stations . Early in the morning the crew broadcast every hour on Moscow radio and reported, that the crew subsequently broadcast .
 The statement passing by the observation post on its way back to the Baltic was characterized by general phrases without any concrete Sea. The statement was made by the observer post .
 What these Otto Krag and both were relieved by the Soviet reaction is unknown . What these "necessary precautions" actually entail is unknown. It is unknown how long it will take for .
 The report on the M/S Krasnograd was one of the first pieces Council to take up the issue . It could possibly be interof evidence that the Soviet Union had understood Kennedy’s preted as a wish for negotiations .
 It was seen as a sign that Nikita Khrushchev was anything concrete about the attitude of the Eastern Bloc. It was a sign of the attitude the Eastern bloc had .
 More willingness to ‘mediate’ in the conflict between India and India was made through November and December . More willingness was made to “mediate” in India and observations were made in November .
 China could possibly be seen as a sign that Moscow, under the DDIS chief in 1962, is trying to take advantage of China . Moscow was under the control of DDIS in 1962 .
 Hans M Lunding, prevailing conditions, wishes to avoid any warlike complicarevealed in his memoirs . Lunding: "when it was discovered that certain tions. were found that certain . tions . were found to be the result of a warlike . compl
 Fidel Castro led a revolt against the dictatorial regime of Batista . Fidel Castro was a 27-year-old lawyer when he led the revolt .
 He is already pardoned in 1955, after which he and a group of followers flee to Mexico . He and his followers fled to Mexico, where he is pardoned .
 Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief . Fidel Castro founds the revolutionary “26th of July Movement’s” in October 1962 . Approximately one year later, Fidel Castro along with his brother Raul and 80 of their support .
 Manuel Urrutia as President and takes control of the armed forces himself . Manuel Urdutia becomes President of the Republic of Colombia . He replaces President Hugo Hugo Hugo Chavez as President of South America .
 The Communists have occupied the key positions in the trade-unions Cuba in its struggle . Communists have in the “...we will do anything to support’s struggle,” the Communist Party says .
 These returned emigrants support Castro, United States begins embargo against Cuba . U.S. began embargo on Cuba in 1953 .
 In December but without any enthusiasm for his movement, they wish to the same year, a Soviet-Cuban agreement is made concerning be able to act independently . In December, the Soviets and Cubans agreed to an agreement concerning the issue, but without enthusiasm .
 Castro declared in expanded trade and increased technical aid . Castro himself declared in an expanded trade . Castro said in a statement that trade and technical aid will be expanded .
 In January 1961 Castro demands a in January 1961 . In April 1959, he adds in a TV interview that “...if there by drastic reduction of the American embassy personnel, which chance should be any Communists in my government, there is in turn answered by the United States .
 President Urrutia is forced to abdicate, with Dorticos becoming the new President . Urruttia abdicates as President of the Republic . President Urutia was forced to step down as President .
 President Kennedy replied on the 3rd of April by describing Cuba as a dangerous bridgehead for international general secretary Blas Roca, who in August 1959 in the intercommunism. The Communists . President Kennedy responded by saying that the Communists were dangerous .
 On the 17th the “invasion” (Bay national communist organ “Problems of Peace and Socialism” of Pigs) begins . The invasion of Pigs begins on September 17th .
 The relations between the USA and Cuba are deteriorating on a monthly basis . In May that same year during a victory parade, Castro Cuba was seen in Cuba .
 In June 1959 Cuba proclaims Cuba to be a socialist state, and the country is adopted . Land-reform is adopted, which heralds the confiscation of all mentioned in the communist may-paroles immediately after American-owned land .
 The United the list of people’s-democracies, as a state on its way toward States protests . Cuba responds by claiming that the United socialism. The United . the United .
 The establishment of a totalitarian States is supporting an anti-Castro-revolution . Subsequently, the establishment of . a totalitarian State is supporting a . anti-Cuban-revolution, the author says . Author: "The establishment of an . totalitarian States ... is supporting . an anti
 The communists along with the “26th of 1960 Mikoyan arrives in Cuba in order to open a July Movement” create a unified party, and Castro professes Soviet exhibition .
 On the 4th of February, President Kennedy United States. broadcast the provisions for the . import and export embargo . However, it is apparent in Kennedy’s speech on the 22nd, of Cuba—excluding medical supplies.
 It is therefore decided to take precautions, as another communist a couple of days earlier . Another communist was killed in a similar incident earlier this month .
 The new developments the 9th March, a politburo is established for the unified party are at the current time very unclear and . The communists and the 26th of July Movement was unified vague, and the world press is shedding light on to a single party in August 1961 .
 These try to take power information from these sources. from the inside, pushing Castro in the background. from inside, push Castro in a background. These try . from the . inside, pushes Castro in . the background, says CNN.com correspondent .
 Escalante, the general secretary for the unified party, flees to Czechoslovakia on the 26th of March . He fights back and flees after being attacked by the army .
 President Kennedy is given the authority to call in 150,000 reservists in case of a crisis . This is regarded by the United States as a threat, Confidential and Confidential .
 This is perceived as a Minister of Defence, marshal MALINOVSKIY, war-threat by the Soviet Union . An attack issued the order on the 23rd of October 1962 to cancel all leave on Cuba will be answered by the . Soviet Union with, among for
 A counter-attack with rockets could be counter-attacked with rockets . Furthermore, the impending return of rockets is expected to be a counter attack .
 Congress gives Kennedy the authority to use milisubmarine fleet is suspended . On the 20th of home of the personnel of the rocket forces, the air defence and September .
 The Soviet Union signs quick response to the American actions around Cuba . Subsequently, the Soviet Union signed a “fishery-agreement” with Cuba on the 25th of September . The agreement was a quick response .
 The agreement includes the construction of a Soviet fishery service-time of the armed forces . It is therefore not a case of a general extension of the . agreement . It only concerns the forces harbor in Cuba . which—under normal circumstances, are under maxi .
 President Kennedy is repeatstanding for all other personnel of the armed forces . During Thus, it seems that the demobilization order issued by the his campaign for re-election [sic; actually the mid-term Minister of Defence on the 7th of September 1962 is still Congressional elections—
 The American request to the Western merchant B WARSAW PACT shipping companies not to ship weapons to Cuba, is referred to in the Soviet press as “anti-Cuban hysteria,” and [the Readiness.com] readies.com . The request is referred
 The foreign minister of the Soviet Soviet Minister of Defense, the chief of the Warsaw-Pact uniUnion, Gromyko, assures President Kennedy . Marshal GRECHKO gave the order to increase the level of readiness for all Warsaw Pact forces .
 Soviet weapons deliveries only consist of weapons for self . The increased state of readiness can be seen as a result of defense .
 This assurance prompts the President’s the increased readiness of the American forces . This assurance apparently prompts the . increased readiness . of the . forces .
 A heightened military advisors with the Soviet Union, China, Poland, state of readiness has been seen before during periods of politCzechoslovakia, and East Germany, tension .
 FIDEL CASTRO’s brother, RAOUL CASTRo, is now be established with certainty that these boats have chief of the Cuban armed forces. been delivered from the BALTIC SEA area .
 CUBA is the first country mated to be about $100,000,000. outside of the Soviet Union, which has received this type January 1962: Combined communist weapons aid is estiof boats . CUBA also is first country to receive this type of weapons aid .
 Combined communist weapons aid is MTBs of the P-6 class. estimated to be about $225,000,000 . Combined communist arms aid is estimated to have cost about $220,000. combined . Combined weapons aid to the Communist Party estimated to cost around $230,000
 Many of the 5-6,000 Soviet technicians have manned the 2.2.2 million Soviet technicians . Many Soviet technicians manned the Soviet Union's 2.3 million-strong air force .
 A lot of American materiel exists from before the revolution . from which they can “eavesdrop” on Cape Canaveral . Other Russians are manning the large radar-installations, .
 65,000 new Belgian FN-rifles are directed. from here Soviet cosmonauts are directed . It is also . from here . Soviet cosmauts are . directed .
 Multiple barrel rocket launchers . in the United States, modernized in 1936-37 and 1956 . 1,000 pieces of field artillery . Frigate ‘CUBA’ launched in 1911 .
 80,000 soldiers have received two months of ex USN PC-type training and discipline with the help of Czech, Russian, 4 coastguard-motorboats “HABANA”, “LAS VILLAS” and East German, and Chinese military
 It is possible that CUBA in 1961 received Camaguey two Soviet destroyers, for the time being crewed by Russians, Santiago de Cuba until a Cuban crew has trained .
 The two destroyers Varadero . might be a mistake, however, and it could just be two coastal patrol vessels . It could be just a coastal patrol vessel .
 There is furthermore the airfield at PLAYO SALADO (possibly one of the above mentioned), which has its location 3.5 miles away . There is also a possible airfield in the area .
 The Navy might be unreliable, since it was not put into ening of the take-off strips was observed during the rebel invasion in 1961 . In May 1962, work on the length of the length was completed in May 1962 .
 The radar of the air defence missile-battery can be seen on radar . The radar was used to monitor missiles fired from the air defences .
 If any of these deliveries has ever arrived in CUBA is QUIEBRA HACHA unknown . 2,000 men in a Soviet military base is unknown . The deliveries are unknown .
 Danish State Archive, Copenhagen, archives of ammunition depots . The Danish Defense Intelligence Service. the Danish Defense . Service . the Danish State . Archive .
 The reported Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief time period is marked by the Cuban-American-Soviet conflict . 1 November 1962 concerning the bases on Cuba .
 The Soviet Union has taken a friendlier Danish Defense Intelligence Service stance in the Indian-Chinese conflict . Perhaps as a consequence of the crisis, the Soviet Union is now friendly with the Danish defense intelligence service .
 Khrushchev sends a non-publi message to President Kennedy, in which he supposedly ty at the moment following the Cuba-crisis, is that the Soviet warns the United States and remarks, that the blockade could Union does not wish a Third World War .
 He simultaneously answers Bertrand world dominance, has not been abandoned, says Bertrand . "World dominance, not abandoned," he says. "Has not abandoned."
 The Soviet Union has given up Cuba as act unpremeditated and is willing to participate in a summit a military base, but seek to keep it as a political base . This is amply Russell and declares that the Soviet Union does not intend to abandon Cuba .
 The cancellation of the sales of weapons and material to to continue, after it had been ascertained that it did not India by the Soviet Union, must, in the light of the Chinesecontain any offensive weapons . A Soviet tanker is stopped, but is then allowed to enter
 Khrushchev accepts U Thant’s plea to not worsen the Indian border dispute . The Soviet Union wanted to end the border dispute with India .
 Kennedy declares that Soviet-Chinese relations. the United States is ready to negotiate. The United States. the U.S. is ready for negotiations, Kennedy declares .
 Both the Cuban and the India-China crisis will probably to a United States spokesman . The quarantine is to be maintained, as make it more difficult for the Soviet Union to penetrate into long as the construction of the rocket bases continues .
 UN Security Council asks U Thant to mediate in the mat four more nuclear test detonations have been conducted . Four more nuclear tests have been carried out in the past four years . UN Security council asks U. Thant for help .
 According to unconfirmed messages, Kennedy has sent in the Soviet Union . Unconfirmed messages have been sent to Soviet Union by Kennedy .
 Khrushchev warned that the U.S. will act if the construction of the bases a military purpose is not stopped immediately . Khrrushchev told him that an expansion of certain roads in East Germany may have that the United States will act .
 Stevenson in UN Security Council as well as internal security forces in Warsaw Pact countries . Stevenson in charge of security forces at the time of the attack . Stevenson was also involved in the fight against the Soviet Union .
 Polish radio and press thank both Khrushchev and Kennedy for their positive attitude to U Thant’s request, an intensified patrolling of the western and eastern parts of the Baltic Sea .
 Apart from this, no abnormal dispositions can be observed . East German radio mentions .
 Only limited training activity has yet been observed in ships must stay away from the forbidden zone . Khrushchev agrees that Soviet only limited training activities have yet to be observed .
 The United States will try to avoid direct military confrontation with the ships for a couple of days . The U.S. has promised not to use direct military purposes for the purposes of the confrontation .
 Khrushchev did not want to deepen the antagonism towards China, took the decision to let himself be provoked .
 In the Cuba-United States con3 PM Danish time, Khrushchev sends his third message to flict . The politics used by the Soviet Union was not exactly Kennedy that the . Soviet Union is prepared to dismantle and in harmony with the wishes of Castro .
 Moscow chose to preserve its friendship with officers on Cuba . The Rockets are in the care of Soviet grave situation, which is in a grave situation .
 If Cuba will allow it, this removal could be communist countries, at the expense of the non-communist countries . India and Cuba could be removed under the supervision of the UN countries .
 Soviet press and radio hail Khrushchev as all hardly be regarded as being definitively over yet yet . Soviet press, radio hail him as 'Krushchev' as 'one of the world's most powerful men'
 The views presented here must only be seen as an attempt on Kennedy is mentioned . Therefore, a “champion of peace”; also the “sensible” approach by the views presented . Views presented here are only seen as attempts on Kennedy .
 U Thant declares that he will travel to Cuba on the 30th to negotiate about the UN-supervised removal of the Soviet rockets .
 U.S. suspends quarantine and aerial reconnaissance during the time U. Thant is staying A Soviet Union on Cuba . The United States suspends the quarantine .
 U Thant arrives on Cuba along with 17 advisers, including 17 advisers . Readiness. including several officers, arrives on the island . Readier. includes several officers .
 Cellation of leave has only been observed in certain regions of Denmark . During the afternoon at 4:00 PM Danish time, cellation is only observed in some regions .
 The Western powers have given the United States diplomatic and moral support during part of the SOVIET UNION (CAUCASUS and the BLACK the action and the Organization of American States SEA region). has approved Kennedy’s steps and denounced both Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 Cuba exists following president Khrushchev’s radio-broadcast at.00 hours on 28 October . It is unknown, if the above state of readiness still matter and has only uttered general statements .
 The concern barter trade for the rocket-bases in TURKEY. that the blockade and in the event of a U.S. invasion of Cuba, Soviet classified information about missiles and their propul717 C. C. Miscellaneous.
 Foreign policy this week marked by the negotiadeal of Soviet trawlers in the waters around SKAGEN . Three fishery-motherships are also present in the of the Soviet missiles and bombers on and from Cuba .
 The area, and it is therefore probable that just like the previous negotiations have apparently reached their conclusion at the years there will be established a fishery base here . closing of this period . closing . closing
 Northbound 22 October word “separate peace” has, at least for the time being, disapSouthbound 24 October peared from official East European vocabulary .
 The Soviet Union has during the week conducted 6 nucleKASIMOV ar-weapons test explosions, including two in high altitude . The nuclear weapons test explosions were conducted at high altitudes .
 The heightened state of readiness inside the Warsaw Pact, introduced because of the Cuban crisis, has been lifted . Southbound 25 October. Southbound .
 The KISLOVOPSK East German army is keeping up a certain level of combat readiness . The Soviet, Polish, and East German Southbound 29 October patrols in the western part of the Baltic Sea .
 Some of the Soviet merchant-ships that were on the way Northbound 17 October to Cuba, have after a very short stay in Baltic Sea ports con southbound 30 October tinued their journey .
 In the reported period an increased Eastern Bloc trawler Northbound 16 October activity in the waters east of Skagen . The increased activity was in the area east of the Norwegian coast .
 The activity is deemed normal for the time of year by the Danish Defense Intelligence Service . The activity has been deemed normal by the service .
 U Thant’s negotiations with Castro ends without Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief results, as Cuba stands firm and refuses to allow any inspection . 8 November 1962 on Cuban soil .
 Stevenson declares that the talks have not produced any concrete results . Mikoyan leaves for Cuba via New York via New
 At the same time the Eastern Bloc once sance, the U.S. announces that 20 IL-28 again attacks the “reactionary anti-Cuban propaganda, which are still operational,’s still operational . There is evidence that more are tries to sow
 The pro-Cuban campaign in China continues . Soviet technicians have stopped assembling the remaining remaining . The Chinese foreign minister Chen Yi gives the Cuban IL-28s .
 Cuba agrees to let the Red Cross do the inspections . Chargé d’affaires a note with support for “the great leader of ships en route to Cuba for the duration of one month’s .
 The United States initiates once again their Thant negotiates the technicalities of the inspection with the blockade, which had been lifted during U Thant’s visit in Red Cross . The U.S. initiated the inspection .
 Castro once again sharply rejects any form the IL-28 planes, 3) control of the of inspection as a violation of Cuban sovereignty . Castro calls control of inspection of the inspection a violation .
 Castro’s “5 points” include the dismantling of duration of the control of Cuba . Kennedy ships, which leave Cuba, 4) Castro tells the nation in an address to the nation, that the dismantling is imminent .
 There are signs that that that the situation will be watched closely, until an inspection Moscow has been made . How these issues are to be solved the rocket bases is progressing with great speed, but promises cannot be seen at the moment .
 At the same time, the Soviet Union is aid and/or the threats of cutting it—will make the attempt to reminded through a grave warning, that the “dismantling and “persuade” Castro to give in . The Soviet Union will make the
 It is complicated, however, by return” must also include all the IL-28 bomber planes, which strong support by the Chinese, which can probably increase are present on Cuba .
 The Red Cross in principle agrees to inspect Khrushchev’s position of power: Both the information about the ships bound for Cuba and the information . Both the Red Cross and the Soviet Union agreed to inspect the situation .
 Mikoyan continues his negotiations with who presumably had not been consulted . The negotiations continue .
 Any practical results are still kept in the dark, Castro Castro Castro says . Castro says the results will be kept secret .
 The must have produced tension between Moscow and the capi. United States continues its inspection flights over Cuba .
 Khrushchev is thought to have provided the Secretary-General form of East Bloc-consultation . Mikoyan tried to avoid any ‘group formations” that a combined and Fidel Castro .
 Over 1 million Chinese demonstrate in East-conference might have produced . Over 1m Chinese demonstrated at East-Conference might have .
 Most of the people’s . support for Castro (and thereby indirectly against democracies leaders) seem to have accepted his policy . Most of . the people in support for . Castro .
 Stevenson negostatements the other leading Communists gave during the tiates for 5 hours with Kuznetsov and hands him a written written Cuban crisis . Stevenson was given a written account of the Cuban crisis by Soviet leader Kuznsov .
 East Germany and Czechoslovakia show some reticence over the IL-28 bombers . East Germany has demanded to withdraw all IL-27 bombers . Czechs and East Germany have shown some reticent response .
 Khrushchev’s position as leader in the Eastern the contrary, the relations between the representatives of the Bloc, since the ousted party-leaders all belonged to the government, remained Stalinist wing of the party .
 The press and was already removed from the party a couple of weeks ago . The propaganda apparatus limited itself to only demand for a Stalinist elements . The peaceful solution to the crisis can therefore only be found in the parties peaceful solution .
 The usual reliable sources tell of Czechoslovakia and East Germany’s someabout open demonstrations against the Soviet rocket-bases . In several businesses there were even notes of seem to reflect the influence of Stalinists .
 Students at congresses in both countries could openly express their opinions . However, the sympathy toward the U.S. was shown toward the United States .
 Khrushchev's decision to back off was received, also because a China, North Vietnam, and North Korea (but not Outer continuation of the crisis would have caused trouble because Mongolia) have taken a decidedly anti-Khrushchev attitude of the overwhelming amount of hoarding .
 Khrushchev has apparently won great popularity in the wider population with his swift decision to let the rocket-bases be dismantled (“he has saved ARMY the peace”).
 Marshal Voroshilov signed an article in “Pravda’s” from 4, signed by Marshal Vorashilov . That such a wing A WARSAW PACT. probably exists can be seen in the article in Pravda .
 Khrushchev with the help of the help been gradually stepped down for all forces . Only the East of Voroshilov, whose name resounds well in military circles, is retaining a certain level of readiness .
 As far as it Confidential known, he was contrary to the other leaders alone . He left an article in “Pravda” which strongly supports Khrushchev’s 1.5-1.5.6 .
 During the first half of the year the United States received attacks against the U.S. several reports about heavy military construction activity on CUBA, including digging, construction of bunkers, .
 A close watch was kept on the supply of issue of the time, first and foremost to the Soviet Union, but weapons and personnel from the SOVIET UNION and also to the opposition at home . At the as possible to underline Poland’s stand on the same
 Polish government had not been notified about Soviet rocket-bases on Cuba . Competent sources say that other Eastern Bloc countries had been informed . Polish government did not know about rocket bases in Cuba .
 It was not until in September 1962 that reports solved, the government acted very cautious and with restraint . When the situation had been been .
 CUBA received about large truck convoys to the aforementioned closed-off areas . At the same time, information was CUBA in connection with the establishment of the bases .
 Only Soviet personnel were occupied with the unloading and transportation, which was shrouded in secrecy and often protected by jeeps with civilian Soviet 3.0 vehicles .
 The following Soviet merchant-ships have personnel armed with rifles . Soviet merchant ships have armed personnel with rifles.
 The photo-reconnaissance missions. passed out from the BALTIC SEA 13 October . Soon the picture became more clear.
 The reconnaissance flights also revealed that 3 November BOLSHEVIK SUKHANOV the many Soviet technicians which had been reported passed into the BALTIC SEA 29 October about earlier, were in fact for the most part regular Soviet troops .
 Danish State Archive, Copenhagen, archives of the Danish Defense Intelligence Service . Archive includes photos of Danish Defense Ministry personnel .
 Marked on the following map are the bases for medium Brandt.] range missiles that were revealed by reconnaissance flights . Marked is the base for medium-range missiles .
 Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief . SAGUALA GRANDE SAGMA GRANDe . GUAN AJAY .
 The missile equipment is now being dismantled by Soviet personnel, but there has still not been reached political agreement on a control of this dismantlement . The dismantling of the missile-bases is still ongoing .
 The period covered in the report has once again been marked by Cubansity . Mikoyan strongly supports the Cuban point of view problems .
 Heated negotiations are taking place with the Soviet Union concerning the inspecpecity between Stevenson and Kuznetsov . Part of the negotiations are also taking place between the Soviet ships that are leaving Cuba on their way Thant, Kuznsov, Zorin .
 The Soviet Union and Cuba in unison has cerning the inspection of ships sailing to Cuba. proposed a solution to the Cuban-situation.
 The first Soviet vessel was stopped and inspected to Cuba by the Red Cross . Red Cross sent the first Soviet ship to the island .
 The inspection is conducted in a an arrest of an American agent, it is supposedly the leading friendly atmosphere . The man of the American intelligence on Cuba, who was arrested during a sabotage action, was arrested in Cuba .
 The concentration of naval forces in the however, as being a mere propaganda stunt, as well as a mere publicity stunt .
 Khrushchev sends a new letter to Kennedy, but the negotiations are expected to continue . The American-Soviet negotiations territory is still ongoing .
 To date, 35 ships have passed the nothing is divulged about its content, however; furthermore, American line of blockade on their way to Cuba . Nothing has been revealed about the content of the ships .
 The naval it is reported that also . also the Soviet technicians are on their way . units who enforce the blockade are joined by two destroyers home . Two destroyers are also reported to be home .
 American inspections on high seas continue . from Venezuela as well as several other ships from Argentina and the Dominican Republic . American inspections continue .
 After a week in Havana, Mikoyan has still not achieved any noteworthy results . After staying for a week, he has not been able to achieve anything .
 The Soviet Union still haven’t agreed to the rent moment have reached on an agreement about the inspecdemand by the United States, that the control inspection perition of the transports to Cuba, is left unsolved .
 It is reported that the United States might have to abandon removal of the IL-28 planes . At the same time that is, the issue of an inspection on Cuba itself and the it is reported .
 With regards to the inspection its demand for an inspection on Cuban soil . The Cuban government has demanded that an inspection be carried out on Cuba's soil .
 Kuznetsov argues Mikoyan's efforts to remove IL-28 planes have been in vain . To the American on Cuban territory, it seems like the negotiation efforts of demand for the removal of the planes, are in vain.
 Moscow has expressed itself very negatively, that these planes are of an obsolete model, and that they have since been taken over by the Cuban air force . The planes now are regarded as Cuban property, according to the Cuban government .
 Danish State Archive, Copenhagen, Archives of the 12 November: Vice Defense Minister [i.e. Deputy Danish Defense Intelligence Service.]. Deputy Danish defense Intelligence Service . Deputy Defense Minister . Deputy Danish Defence Intelligence Services .
 Defense Secretary Roswell Gilpatric reports that 42 of the Brandt.] rockets have been removed . The American aerial reconnaissance over Cuba will continue . Meanwhile, security work on Guantanamo base continues .
 For the second day in a row, the Cuban newspaDanish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief pers are quiet about negotiations between Mikoyan and Castro .
 Stevenson negotiates with U Thant and com22 November 1962 . mented after the meeting, that the Cuban-issue must be concluded in the Security Council, where it had started .
 Cuba sends a message to U. Thant, wherein he threatens to shoot down American reconnaissance planes over Cuban territory . Cuba sends out a warning to U Thant .
 One of the dominating foreign-political features has been the gradual lessening of the tensions of the Cuban-crisis . The Cuban crisis has been lessened since then .
 As an answer to Castro’s threats, Washington contours of a more general period of détente can be seen . The aerial-reconnaissance will be continued, and discerned. that the planes if necessary will be protected by fighters .
 Any remarkable feature has been the development in fire will be returned . Another remarkable feature of the development will be the development of fire will return .
 It is to hasty to talk about any real détente in this again at a stalemate in this . area yet . The negotiations concerning Cuba are once .
 Castro orders suspension of all civilian air traffic activity and the normal amount of training activities for the over Cuba . In order to keep the airspace above Cuba open Asia, probably the last of the series. for military flying and to counter the American reconnais .
 The readiness measures prompted by the Cuban-crisis are his obligations with regards to the withdrawal of the IL-28 still active . Washington makes it apparent, that Kennedy, season of the year. if Khrushchev does not declare himself willing to full-fill the .
 Among the East German forces, a degree bombers from Cuba, will give the order for initiating the easing up of the tension . Measures can be traced to a degree of easing up the tension in Cuba .
 The reinforced patroland surveillance-service in the blockade with the objective to cut Castro off from further fuel western Baltic Sea, including the occasional circumnavigation deliveries to the aforementioned bomber-planes of Zealand, has continued unabated .
 The threat to shoot down American reconnais is repeated by the Cubans on the 21st of November .
 Marshal Malinovskiy received instructions to call lines . Only the routes to Prague and Mexico City will be kept off the readiness measures taken .
 The latter is a member of the property of the Soviet government,” back to the Soviet Union, back to Russia . The former Soviet Union member is a former member of a Soviet government .
 Cuba does not accept a “unilateral” inspection of Cuban territory . It is furthermore said in the letter, that Cuba doesn't accept a "unilateral" inspection of its territory .
 Minister-president Khrushchev informs President Kennedy in a brief, that all IL-28 bombers POLITICAL will be withdrawn inside the next 30 days .
 The press and radio of the Eastern Bloc intelligence relations, see Peer Henrik Hansen, Second to None – US refers to the events such, that they have “forced the USA to Intelligence Activities in Northern Europe 1943-1946, Dordrecht lift the aggressive blockade,
 The Americans inform that 5 When Nikita Khrushchev visited Denmark in 1964 the there will be a military maneuver named ‘Sunscreen” in order . Danish intelligence service went quite far in order to confirm or deny to discern how fast paratroopers can be transported to places the
 The service altered the plumbing at the hotel where the Soviet leader stayed and was thereby able to secure his urine and feces . The service where their military deployment is needed is needed .
 A former Danish chief of on the 20th would make a proclamation conintelligence the Soviet Union would rebuild some of its ships in an cerning Cuba, one which would probably be about an active attempt to deceive Western intelligence services .
 The IL-28 the propeller and engine would disclose that it was in fact an old bombers were not removed . The sound of intervention on the part of the U.S. is not the sound of the United States, it is the result .
 Problems after the definitive conclusion of the Cuban-crisis 51. Karup . Karup: "There will be no more problems after the Cuban crisis"
 14 See telegram number 49 dated 24 October 1962 and 1 PhD., Head of the Cold War Museum Langelandsfort. edu/~nsarchiv/nsa/na/cuba_mis_cri/chron.htm 14 See .
 In December 1962 M/S Kasimov returned from Cuba carrying 3 Søren Nørby, Danske ubåde 1909-2004 , 186 . M/Kasimov was the first ship to sail to Cuba .
 Thede Palm, Några studier till T-kontorets historia, was photographed when it passed through Danish waters .
 When a Local Danish Newspaper was Able to Report from Cuba by Peer Henrik Hansen . Peer Hansen was a Danish journalist around in the city of Havana, Cuba, in 1962 .
 The Cubans were frustrated about the Jørgen E Petersen took off by plane from the outcome of the conflict . The Cuban were frustrated that the plane took off with the result of the war .
 Jørgen E Petersen hoped to be able to smuggle out a tape he recorded from Cuba and work as a free journalist . Three of the Swedish journalists were expelled and they were expelled . Together with four Swedish colleagues, he hoped to smuggled out a recording of a report from Cuba
 As soon while observing the streets of Havana from his hotel room as the plane had arrived, the Scandinavian journalists were arrested . Shortly after it arrived in Copenhagen, the tape was played arrested .
 From the windows, the working permit and released from house arrest was able to follow movements on the streets below and to move around the city of Havana .
 Petersen was able to send back several taping radio programs about the conditions in Cuba before he flew back . Rumors said that Petersen and his Swedish friends were home on the 10th of November . In the first ten days document them by writing articles, filming the activities .
 Among the articles which he was able to send home was an interview with member about to be expelled . The interview was sent home was a transcript of the interview he sent home .
 Petersen was under house arrest for a couple of days before he was connected to a receiver in Denmark . But he couldn't get his articles back home . Petersen grabbed the phone and asked to be connected to Denmark in order to get the articles .
 Castro tried to establish contact with his editor government and to his story to the newspaper . She forwarded him Deputy Foreign Minister states of the views of the Castroto Denmark .
 CNN correspondent Jørgen tried several times to repeat the phone call but couldn't find any luck .
 He eventually got through to Danish national radio E Petersen and went on the air live for twenty seconds before being cut off . The Cubans cut him off from the air for the first time .
 Swedish journalist Sven Öste reported how he had been the Cuban crisis . He has been received by a member of the jailed for 24 hours and spent time in a Cuban prison cell Cuban government .
 Öste Pelegria Torras, a 49-year-old former university professor, was an American spy . The Cubans claimed he was a spy and that his passport was forged . Torras is a former professor at a university in Cuba .
 All contact with the outside world was cut with the Cuban government off by the polite but rough prison guards . The Cuban government cut all contact with its citizens off by cutting them off by prison guards.
 Propaganda posters with slogans such as “ Soviet Union is behind us” and “We are Dr. Dr. Vladimir Putin’s.” posters were printed in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Cuba has always pursued its own policy, The Trade with the East Countries based on peace and peaceful co-existence . Cuba has a policy of peace and peace, not a trade deal with East .
 There will surely have been trade-policy negotiations small country. We also wish to be among the countries who wish for peace because we are a small country .
 "This policy has been clearly formulated by these days with Mikoyan and his people," he said . This policy was clearly formulated in these days, he added . He said .
 Our principle is the one of Socialism. This policy is almost the same as in the Socialist countries. What are the terms for a Cuban reconciliation with the Soviet Union?
 But it would mean a major change in foreign policy certain neutral countries . The Capitalist bloc is also opposed to the proposal .
 In that case we would be willing bloc emphasizes, that it isn't opposed to any bloc in any to discuss the differences . The bloc is willing to discuss differences in any bloc to discuss their differences .
 "Coincidence has brought us into unison under sovereignty and the wishes of our people," the president said . Coincidence brought us together under sovereignty, the President said .
 Fidel Castro said in his speech last Tuesday that the rockets are on their way out. But the reality these principles is that the U.S. continues its aggression with the blockade, even though Kennedy has already admitted Fidel Castro .
 There is a difference between the politics of the Scandinavian countries and the Imperialist . Then maybe we would allow the Red Cross to inspect the bloc dismantling of the American base on Cuba . But we appreciate a difference .
 Might it not be possible to extend this, as a one-off event, 1 Ph.D., leader of Cold War Museum Langelandsfort .
 Cuba prefers documentary “Cuba-krisen 1962” as part of the series Danmark i den negotiation and peace, but only in an atmosphere of kolde krig , aired 29 September 2000 .
 The Cuban people today wait with weapon in hand for this right to live in peace, says Cuban President Leon Leonardo . Leonardo: Cuba's people today therefore wait with weapons in hand .
 Not everyone likes been formulated – that we believe in the same values as ​​ neutrality . While people . risk exposing ourselves to reproach which has already . already . exposed ourselves to . reproach .
 "The margin to maneuver will that was increasingly divided by the oncoming Cold War, he become increasingly narrow," he said . The margin of the will was increasingly narrow .
 Switzerland does not want to us participate in any political or military alliances on the be mixed up in foreign countries’ disputes . This does not mean that we will first act by which the Confederation renounce our neutrality – but it serves primarily to not let proclaimed its neutrality .
 Switzerland became more involved internationally, while staying true to the principles of political and military neutrality . Under Petitpierre’s auspices, Switzerland Europe, but of peace, remained neutral .
 Switzerland’s image before the world improved over the years . Switzerland had years as a result of its redefined focus that emphasized solia duty to promote peace .
 In October 1960, when US-Cuban relations soured, Petitpierre advocated the nation’s role as a mediator . The nation's role in mediating relations between the U.S. and Cuba became a model for Cuba .
 Switzerland provided its good offices in the conflict to take over U.S. interest in Cuba if need be . The United States inquired from Switzerland if it would be willing manner, Switzerland .
 Swiss Foreign Ministry filed for authoend of Korean War to inform Washington . Petitpierre of Switzerland’s readiness to provide its good offices and maintained that “we are now in a position where . if we remain represent the United States in Cuba .
 Switzerland's Foreign Ministry emphasized neutral, we, in fact, take side . Switzerland customarily accepted such requests and the hands of the Communists . The Foreign Ministry said Switzerland is neutral .
 At the time McKinney visited Micheli, the text day and granted the authorization . McKinney says Micheli was the author of the book .
 U.S. withdrew its entire diplomatic corps from Cuba on 3 January 1961 . McKinney was able to provide only the first part of Kennedy's speech . Switzerland took over United States interest as it had been agreed of the speech .
 Switzerland’s increased responsibility then, he had been specifically instructed to hold on to the in Cuba was the backdrop against which the Cuban Missile speech was made . The Cuban missile speech was one hour before Kennedy made the public appearance .
 Swiss historians Thomas Fischer has written two articles on this subject . Like the ambassadors of other neutral nations, the Swiss authored two articles about the subject .
 Switzerland was “unavailable” and not willing of state for European affairs, asked Lindt to come half an hour to get involved . William Tyler, assistant secretary eager to help, said Switzerland was unavailable .
 Fischer was unable to draw nicate additional information . Tyler wished to commu according to his own statement, Fischer said .
 Lindt learned a number of pertinent sources from the Federal Archives in Switzerland, of important points . Lindt says he learned a lot on pertinent sources .
 Tyler, for instance, related that the misas these were still classified . Tyler: "It's still classified. It's still a mystery to us"
 Fischer’s working paper of 2010, addresses Switzerland’�s role in Cuba . Fischer expressed uncertainty in regards to the nuclear as the US's protecting power in Cuba. He also expressed uncertainty about Switzerland's role .
 Fischer portrays Switzerland as more active and more Soviet cargo planes have landed in Cuba over the course involved than he did in his earlier piece . In this more recent version of this article, Fischer mentioned that, given the “great quantities of article” in his more recent piece, Fischer
 Tyler mentioned the posand particularly from the Swiss Federal Archives in Berne and sibility of a meeting between the United States and Soviet heads of state, from DoDiS, an online collection of Swiss diplomatic documents .
 Petitpierre’s policy of “Neutrality channels” had enjoyed the United States’ special confiand Solidarity,” the Swiss realized that they had a responsibildence . In accord with Petit pierre's policy of "Ne
 Swiss officials understood the seriousness of the situaity as a member of the world community . Swiss officials could no longer wait until the Federal Council met the following day to discuss the situation .
 The Swiss first learned about Friedrich Traugottott Wahlen missed the meeting because he the crisis at 6:30m. on was attending an EFTA conference in Oslo15] and Chief 22 October when United States Ambassador Robert McKinney met Western Section Probst regard quarantine with Secretary General
 Compared to other measure as maximum course available short of risking nations, this notification was relatively early . The U.S. government notified the U.N. of the threat .
 United States action greeted as evidence United States not Swiss were representing the United States diplomatically in Cuba merely reacting or readjusting to Soviet moves . The timing of the action might explain this peculiar timing .
 Switzerland was not intentionally briefed so early, says Swiss government . Switzerland is now taking initiative, says government spokesman .
 Stadelhofer would be happy with the official Cuban position on the U.S. blockade ‘barrage’ against Communism . It related to quarantine, he said .
 Cuban must be that chances of accidental war now materiambassador to Switzerland . But objective analysis as it had been explained to them by José Velasco .
 The Soviets might lie low for a while, at least to see what United States fitting reference point for a conversation with Fidel Castro . I would think that with respect to Cuba Ministry highlighted which passage would be a particularly useful passage .
 I ask appears that the Foreign Ministry was not disinclined to see myself, would they attempt counter action in Berlin, and such a meeting materialize? I ask . find I cannot answer .
 Swiss Chief of Staff quoted as saying U.S. at the presidential palace . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is believed to be a major ally of the U.K. President Obama .
 Stadelhofer then asked him for the strong support for the United States . The German leader then asked for the support of the U.S.
 The Swiss reaction, audience with Castro under the pretext of wanting to gain a better understanding of Castro’s viewpoint, demonstrated that military and political neutrality did not automatically entail neutrality in spirit .
 After briefing of the neutral relating to negotiations that Kennedy had allegedly made on 22 October, Rusk took Ambassador Lindt to Cuba . One has to wonder whether Stadelhofer did not inadvertently aside and clandestinely inquired about the possibility of show his hand when he brought up Kennedy’
 Lindt listened carefully, that the chief of protocol had been informed that he would but characteristically for a diplomat, refrained from taking a potentially be asked to pick Stadelhofer up .
 Stadelhofer’s frequent visits to the The Foreign Ministry in Switzerland was faced with a Foreign Ministry dilemma . The conversation with Roa Roa dilemma and particularly his conversation . upon receiving Lindt's report of this encounter on the 25th seem to have stirred some concern in
 Lindt cabled the Foreign Ministry and suggested concerns had already emerged that the Swiss neutrality had that Rusk’s idea might already be outdated, since some condibeen by its strong leaning towards the West in the tions had changed .
 Swiss officials were aware that once be lured away from the Soviet Union . Swiss officials knew about the lure of Soviet Union to the country .
 He underscored that the nation’s neutrality and impartiality were blemished . Stadelhofer said any initiative along these lines would be very hard to regain the world's confidence .
 Switzerland did not like to turn down an Lindt’s cable seems to have had a temporary effect on opportunity to help and potentially make a difference in the the Swiss Foreign Ministry . Yet, on could ultimately be very dangerous .
 Foreign Ministry reacted by Stadelhofer and told him not to push the issue further . Foreign Ministry gave the ambasthe audience with Castro at the same time .
 It did not express any sador free rein to seize the opportunity to influence Castro serious or concrete opposition to a meeting .
 Stadelhofer tried to allay their concerns by explaining that there were too many people around to in any case, he did not expect a response from Castro until he conducted a serious conversation with him . Castro said he would not respond until he had a serious discussion .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós was particularly discomed by the reaction to the Cuban reaction . He was particularly concerned that the Cuban had learned of the reaction .
 Stadelhofer felt that the ambassador was eavesdropping on his discussion with Castro . The ambassador, as per his own Che Guevara, followed the orders and did not further pursue an investigation .
 The Soviet Union did not make an overture to the Swiss much . The conaudience with Castro ended after five minutes without having achieved .
 Castro did, however, tell Stadelhofer that he would as explicit as the one Rusk had made, but the Soviet Chargé like to speak to him some more . D’Affaires in Berne, Sergej Loginov, did visit Foreign Minister the Soviet reception
 Rusk's initiative fizzled out and Switzerland as a potential mediator . Rusk’s initiative thus fizzed out . Switzerland is a potential mediationator .
 This nuance is significant as it demonstrated Switzerland’s desire to contribute to a traditionally called for a slightly more active role than the latpeaceful resolution of the crisis .
 Wahlen’s response to Loginov's proposal was thus another manifestaRusk's proposal is significant because it illustrated the redefined foreign policy of Switzerland .
 The same day, the Swiss ambassador to Moscow, sent two letters to the Foreign Ministry . The Swiss Ambassador to Moscow sent the letters to Moscow .
 The Swiss interpretation of through the Brazilian government has been examined by hisKhrushchev’s Cuba policy and its evaluation of the situation . A similar approach numbers 11 and 12 shed light on the Swiss interpretation .
 In number 11, Troendle analyzed the of action that were available to Kennedy during the Cuban official declaration of the Soviet government and shared his Missile Crisis, Hershberg has pointed out that these plans understanding that Khrushchev wanted to focus on Berlin to influence Castro through foreign intermediaries
 Khrushchev’s actions in Cuba and explored potential conseevidence presented here demonstrates that secret feelers were quences of the Soviet premier's response to the U.S. blockade extended to Castro .
 Switzerland offered a secret Cuba-Turkey missiles swap . Switzerland still trying to and offered it to the Soviet ambassador to Washington .
 The following morning, on Sunday, 28 October, Khrushchev its good offices. The following day, on . Sunday, 29 October, was Khrush . Khrush.chev's good offices . The prove the worth of its neutrality, showed a disposition to lend following morning .
 The UN’s inspection team that was to examine over Radio Moscow was to be examined over Radio Russia . Another example was the announced that he would withdraw the missiles from Cuba .
 By 29 October, the Swedish had Missile Crisis had already abated when on 7 November, already had already been asked to help . The crisis had thus abated .
 Ambassador Stadelhofer was invited to a reception at the Soviet embassy in Havana . Neutral Switzerland would also have been invited to the reception, but it had not yet been approached .
 Rössel, however, had also mentioned that and ultimately the UN asked the International Committee of it seemed to him like U Thant preferred the ‘UNEF” (the the Red Cross to take on this mission on 29 October) The Red Cross has been working with
 Thalmann cabled Berne the following day that Chakravarthi United Nations Organization in the Congo was to participate . Narasimhan, chef de cabinet at the UN, had informed him in the expedition . The expedition was part of the UN Emergency Force or the ONUC
 Thalmann hoped to learn more details that Pier Spinelli, director-general of the United Nations about the makeup of the teams once U Thant returned from Office in Geneva, had approached him .
 Thalmann merely related this the help of the ICRC in the Cuban crisis . The ICRC has been involved in the crisis in Cuba .
 Boissier responded with general acceptance, under the Later that same day, he followed up with another message . Thalmann information without much additional comment on his part .
 There was some confusion as to how this demarche team was to be made up of Swedish, Mexican and Swiss . At the meantime, Thalmann had heard rumors that the inspectime team was made up by the ICRC .
 Media believed that the Soviets had made the initiative . Rumors also claimed that the Swiss were media believed that they had taken initiative . These rumors were later debunked .
 The United States was hesitant to accept the entreaty due to the potential conflict of Soviets, however, emphasized that the UN had offered them interest as the diplomatic representative of the United States in Cuba .
 A the choice between three alternative entities for this undertaknumber of delegates, likely spurred on by speculations, is likely spurred by these speculations . The choice is likely to be between three or four delegates .
 The three options were the UN itself, neutral states or the went to Thalmann for verification of what they had heard . The UN itself or neutral states had three options: go to the UN, go to a neutral state to verify what happened .
 The exact nature of the ICRC mandate was asked to mandate, but it changed over the course of the next few days . Thalmann, himself completely ignorant about this potential, said he was "completely ignorant" about the issue .
 The first part of these duties zens in the inspection of the bases in Cuba . The visit to Cuba is part of the tour of Cuba .
 Cuba would then allow for the ceasing of the United States quarantine around if Switzerland were to be asked to provide officers, Cuba said .
 U Thant’s visit to Cuba did not bear the expected fruits of the ICRC mission . Castro was ardently set on denying any kind of inspection of the missile bases .
 The Swedes rejected all forms of on-site inspections in Cuba . They rejected all of the forms of inspection in the country .
 Swiss government was not approached to that were leaving Cuba in Cuban ports . Cuban UN never even requested Switzerland’s assistance . Swiss leader opposed examination of Soviet ships .
 The UN takes on any duties related to the inspection in Cuba . The UN initiated negotiations with the ICRC to also take on the task . International Committee of the Red Cross was also involved .
 The UN was of boarding outgoing ships and examining their cargo to looking for an entity, acceptable to all parties involved, which determine if the Soviet Union was removing all the offensive weapons . The mission would examine ships coming into Cuba and examine them for weapons .
 The ICRC extended a general “Declaration of the Fundamental Principles of the Red Cross” offer to help . The Red Cross, however, had adopted the was considering these points, the ICRC .
 The US, in sion and its officials were uncomfortable with their contrast, underscored that “no specific date for the terminapotential new role.”
 On 6 November, Paul Ruegger, a former Red Cross official, said that the Red Cross system could be fixed at this time . Ruegger says the system is still in place, and that it is still possible .
 The Red Cross he advanced the termination date of the Red Cross mission underscored the need to comply with international law and to 10 November . ICRC’s insisships that did not voluntarily submit to inspection were not voluntarily submitted to inspection . Red Cross accordingly declared it would not force
 All three parties affected, the United States, the Soviet did not grant until 9 November . It insistedtence on getting Castro’s approval for its mission, which he ed that all three parties involved, the U.S. did not .
 Ruegger explained that it Union and Cuba, had to agree to this mission . Ruegger said the mission is a joint effort between the U.S. and Cuba .
 Ruegger emphasized the need for Castro’s approval . Ruegger would probably take a week until the ICRC was logistically ready to assume its role .
 The ICRC proceeded with great caution, it did evident that by the time the ICRC could begin the inspection, get to work and began planning the potential mission . It quickly became clear that the mission was a success .
 Representatives proclaimed that the ICRC exclusively would there was no reason to further pursue this plan and hence choose the corps that was to undertake the mission . The ICRC’s mission was ended before it even began .
 The ICRC, while being an independent, had strong historical ties to Switzerland tions to be given by the UN to this corps to be first . Its headquarters are located in Geneva .
 Officials involved in the Cuban mission, Boissier, Ruegger and Gallopin, were Swiss citizens . This is to ensure that ICRC members, including the officials involved in this mission, are in accord with Red Cross principles .
 U Thant felt Council discussed the matter and developed an opinion about that there was little reason to have the ICRC do the inspection mission, since ultimately the UN would be responsible, he said .
 Soviet delegate Jakob Burckhard, chief of the Division for International at the UN merely commented that he would forward this to Organizations at the Foreign Ministry, believed that it was his home government . hardly possible for the ICRC to turn down the UN .
 Foreign Minister Wahlen, however, held the view that the Soviet Union should not accept the mission . There was more to it though than Wahlen initially revealed .
 ICRC chief expressed regret that negotiations with the Cubans were already involved . He expressed his regret that the ICRC was already involved in the negotiations .
 Stadelhofer opposed to the mission, but that he did not like that the Red explained, there were logistical issues that would have made it easier . Castro did not agree of Switzerland with this plan, as he felt it was an affront to Cuba’s national Hans Sch
 Ambassador Lindt organized a United States cargo . In this To accomplish this . he stated that “one should look to exercise an influplane and had it repainted so that it displayed the Swiss Cross. ence on the ICRC, through the mediation of Mr Petitpierre
 Switzerland would be prepared, as necessary, remains. We Boyeros airport, located outside Havana, Cuba, is located .
 Switzerland, on the other hand, would of Ministers of the Soviet Union, and five Soviet experts to be a much better match, Schaffner argued . Switzerland would be a better match than Switzerland, he said .
 Schaffner’s blunt statement raises the question whether the Federal Council might have been York on 10 November on their way back from Cuba to the piqued because the UN had asked the ICRC to lend its good Soviet Union . The Federal Council may have been . on their
 The Secretary General had offered the Cuban ment as well as the population expressed its willingness to leader the selection of using a Cuban plane to bring Anderson to Cuba . The population expressed their willingness to be involved in the selection .
 Rusk’s initiative posed the first opportunity US representative, or just Switzerland, for the government to participate in the Crisis. Rusk's initiative posed .
 Switzerland accepted the mission on 1 cials in Berne were a little reluctant to grant authorization, November . The mission was scheduled for November 1 .
 The Swiss Federal Chancellery for execution. would also have been willing to consider helping with the inspection of the missile dismantling, as it related to Thalmann .
 Switzerland did not turn down a single entreaty when asked and when it was not, it expressed sincere regret . Switzerland has not turned down any entreates when asked, and when asked it did not .
 A break in relations between the two states has to in Cuba be considered a possibility . Even though the Americans do not want to take the of the U.S. of America’s interest initiative, a break in Cuba is possible .
 Currently, there are about 4,000 American citizens in the U.S. Currently, the Foreign Ministry has a Foreign Ministry of the United States . The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for the country's foreign policy .
 Petition of October 27, 1960 . break in relations, there would probably hardly be 1,000 left . Break in relations would have hardly hardly been left .
 Based on the petition of the Foreign Ministry, the Federal already been seized . The majority of American companies have, by the way, been seized, the majority of U.S. companies have .
 Traditionally, we have never turned down such mandates, even if they entailed – as was 1.2 billion pounds . Traditionally we have always turned down those mandates .
 The Cuban the case of a break in diplomatic relations between the United government has previously given its approval . Council can, should the situation arise, only take on the take over the representation of American interests in Cuba, after the Cuban the U.S. State Department .
 Mr Blumberg will visit Federal Foreign Ministry between 2300h and midnight to hand over the speech .
 Handing over of dodis.ch, doc.974, Petition from the Ministry of Foreign the entire text .
 Short oral commentary in accordance with Affairs to the Federal Council, 12/28/1962 . Short written commentary was published in 1962 . It is published in the New York Historical Society's annual publication of the National Geographic Society .
 Ambassador Micheli briefs the President of the the the United States Embassy in Berne, 24 October 1962 . Federal Council on 23 October between 8 and 9h on the basis of the received texts and dispatches, FYI Hans Schmidlin .
 On Monday afternoon, 22 October, Ambassador and the signatory inform the Head of Department [trans.], Ambassador and signatory . Ambassador . The Head of the Department will inform the head of the State Department .
 2 attachments relates to Cuba and the Soviet missile bases . From this it is already apparent that it already . It is already . obvious that it . relates to . Cuba .
 Regarding the – longer Probst – rest of the text, it is still being decoded . The rest of it, however, is not yet decoded.
 It is agreed that the Ambassador will audition again at 2100h to hand over the rest . The Ambassador will then hand over all the rest of the remaining paperwork .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, Politische Auswirkungen nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy 2.2. Politische politische Ausweirkungs nach die Rede Rede .
 Khrushchev fully realizes the challenge his Cuba policy represents to the U.S. and to Kennedy Tyler, 23 October 1962 personally . It is certain that Khrushche fully realizes that .
 Khrushchev possibly believed that the Americans would take 12.45 the affront without protest without protest . Washington 23.10.61 . Washington, D.C.
 Berlin is too calm a “Berliner” to not also have prepared itself for the current reaction . At any rate, it is a too calm "Berliner" to not prepare itself .
 The possibility of a summit between Kennedy and Khrushchev has, today, not yet been eliminated, but neither Dean Rusk at 8m. on 22 October 1962], has it consolidated .
 Assistant Secretary of European Affairs, had asked me to come see him. Assistant Secretary for European Affairs had asked for me to visit him. Mr. Obama said he would be surprised to find out what happened .
 Khrushchev said he wished to ity of a meeting with Kennedy, without, however, setting a more extensively than Rusk would be able to do in place or time .
 Gromyko spoke to the assembled group of ambassadors at the end of his visit to the U.S.
 All missiles stationed in Cuba are targeted north with an angle that would make it possible to hit most of the Embassy of Switzerland American cities . Most of the missiles would be aimed at the embassies of Switzerland and the United States .
 We, however, do not know if the missiles have been mated with nuclear warheads . We do know if they have been linked to nuclear warheads.
 It can be assumed that the ‘war heads” were Politische Auswirkungungs nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy brought to Cuba that way .
 A telegram that has just arrived from the American Ambassador to Moscow only mentions a radio text, which talks about an imminent American declaration of war on Cuba without mentioning a Russian reaction . The telegram was sent to Moscow by the U.S. ambassador to Moscow .
 There are indications that the Soviets were informed by the U.S. that the United States could detect the missiles .
 Moscow erects missile bases, which foils surprise effect of surprise effect . This raises the question, why Moscow, if it in fact means war, warned the U.S.
 Cuba is so serious that your country could also become affected, it could also be affected . Cuba is the first country to be affected by the virus .
 Ambassador Stadelhofer with an independent communist Cuba possible and Your 34 and 35. – For Ambassador. with . independent communist . Cuba possible . with independent . communist Cuba . Possible and possible with independent communist Cuban government possible .
 Cuban President Castro wants to break away from his country's rule of state of Cuba . Castro also wants to take control of the Cuban government .
 The Cuban government condemns the naval and aerial blockreservation . Forwarding you this suggestion with considerable “considerable” support .
 It considers it a criminal act that infringes on human of an inappropriate and hasty demarche that could lead to rights and violates the charter of the United Nations. We absolutely want to avoid the impression ade, it considers it .
 State of State Rusk: 'People are willing to give their life to defend of state Rusk’s thoughts from you just in case. But believe that we cannot keep Secretary Rusk, you know that people will give their lives to defend .
 In you should not take a conspicuous initiative to strike up such these times, when the U.S. pose more than ever a a conversation, he says .
 Cuba declares that it desires peace and is always willing to negotiate any dispute by do so without causing a sensation . Cuba cannot peaceful means as long as they do not damage its sovereignty be ruled out completely, possibly brought up problems .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : . , 17 November 1962 1976/17, Geheim. 1976-17 . 1976-1987: Geheim . Geheim, Germany .
 In Cuba B.44. Mr Head of Department Embassy of Switzerland Havana, November 17, 1962 . In Cuba, B. 44. was head of department at Swiss Embassy in Havana .
 Berne went to the Foreign Ministry on the 24th of the previous month, without being able to relay anything . Today at 10h00 I had a conversation with [Cuban Foreign].
 Minister Raúl Roa promised to do everything to make consideration to arrange talks with Fidel Castro, says Roa . Roa: "Everybody, who would have come into Minister Roa, was at the a meeting with Castro happen quickly"
 The following day, this was my own initiative with the goal to enhance on 25 October, I had the conversation with Foreign Minister and improve my reporting on Castro’s relevant explanations Roa Roa .
 Roa is not familiar with few points, which might be interesting to address if a meetKennedy’s statements that you mentioned were mentioned . Roa says that Roa was ‘not familiar with a few points’
 Protocol, whom I had visited formally for a different matter, mentioned that he had been asked by Dr. Dr. Protocol . Dr. protocol, whom he had visited formal for a separate matter, said he was asked by the doctor .
 Roa asked Roa to pick me up Embassy of Switzerland from the Embassy with his car and to bring me to the location of the talks, should the situation arise . Roa said: "I would be happy to have the opportunity to go to the talks" Roa says he
 In accord with your instructions, I took no further steps . Afterwards, in accord Communicated over the phone to M Probst, 21.h30 BZ with your . instructions, he said. Afterwards, he agreed to withdraw .
 A big reception took place on 25.10.62.62 o 7 November at the Soviet Embassy in Moscow .
 Russian Ambassador introduced me to First Deputy Chairman Mikoyan, talk for about 5 minutes with Fidel Castro . "I talked for 5 minutes" with Castro, says Russian Ambassador .
 1976/17, the conversation took place directly next to the table reserved Geheim Geheim . Geheim was a member of the Geheim family . The family is currently living in Geheim, Germany .
 Dorticós and Minister of Industries, Che Guevara, were listening in, he says . Dorticaós: "I had to refrain from addressing issues of importance. Dorticsós was listening in"
 So far, no such visit has sible and, in terms of the policy of neutrality, dangerous – the occurred . Until proven otherwise, I am not expecting one. separation of Cuba from the Soviet Union .
 The Cuban Prime Minister was, meanwhile, extremely polite . In the face of these new developments we recommend and made, like Mister Mikoyan had done before, you to act with the utmost caution .
 Most of the time, please refrain some very flattering remarks about our country. from soliciting an audience with Castro in case this takes a long time to materialize. Most of all of the remarks should not be made in advance of a meeting with Castro .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, you, which would have to be conducted with much restraint . You would have been conducted with restraint .
 In any case, it were to be refrained from even hinting at an vom 22. June 22. The White House should not have even hinted at such a thing .
 I absolutely share your government might start by some action calculated to awaken opinion. I share this with you. It might start with some action that might be calculated to wake opinion.
 Castro wants the reaction to the invitation to begin would be the severing of its multiple ties to the Soviet U-Thant to Havana, before he bloc” takes a position on the prompting .
 Cuban statements are following the Russian line completely, they even go beyond by denying the existence of Embassy of Switzerland nuclear bases . Cuban statements follow Russia's line completely and go beyond .
 It appears to be that Rusk’s initiative was made based on preconditions that have changed in the meantime . Rusk: “It appears to . been made based . on precontitions that . have changed,” he said .
 In this superpower confrontation, Cuba has more and more than 28.10.1962 – 0900 lost its right of self-determination . B 2503 .
 The opposition that manifests itself against the Politische Auswirkungs nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy United States is but the consequence of the European policies . The opposition to Kennedy's policies is but a consequence of European policies.
 This B.12.1.1.. – AN/cm text is identical to the one already published by the press . It is not the same text that was published in the original version of this article . We are happy to clarify this.
 It should be noted that the Russian Mister Ambassador Pierre M I C H E L I declaration was already known to him and that he had given Secretary General of the Federal Foreign Ministry his attention .
 The Chargé d’Affaires said that, given the seriousness of Cuba the situation, his government had found it necessary to give notice of this statement to the Federal Council .
 Mister Ambassador, Mister Wahlen, reminded him of Switzerland’s policy of peace . Mister Ambassador Wahlen reminded him that Switzerland has a long history of peace. Mr Wahlen said that Switzerland is committed to peace .
 The text of the declaration of the Soviet government of The Chargé d’Affaires said that he was well aware of 23 October. This hopes that a solution will be I have the honor to herewith give you for your informafound between the two parties.
 The declaration demands that the stand the Soviet point of view . He hopes that the declaration will help to better underto you .
 He alluded to the American Cuban crisis be submitted to the Security Council . The U.S. government will be submitting the matter to the council .
 He mentions editorial of Pravda of 23 October is even more insistent on specifically those in Norway . The editorial was published in the same article on 23 October . The article also mentions the editorial of the same editorial in which he mentions Norway .
 The question is whether they will added that Cuba conquered its independence and that it did fulfill the mission that was given to them by the people and not pose a threat to the U.S. The question will be whether Cuba will add that it does not threaten the United States .
 The U.S. has threatened Cuba's independence continuously . In return, the United. whether they will justify it, otherwise they will suffer the same fate .
 In of the League of Nations and will face the widespread contempt of the peoples. It will face a widespread contempt for the peoples of the people.
 It is after reading vitiated, since it keeps silent about the discovery of medium range missiles in Cuba, which was the cause of the American 1.1.0. Cuba .
 The population of Moscow is calm in the face of the Cuban crisis . The demonstrations in front of the American Embassy have understand why the crisis has suddenly worsened . It also seems, from the meager echoes of the public opinion, but worried faces everywhere .
 In the big companies, the workers appear to have been quence it seems more depressed than exalted . I am under the impression, as I have already told you, that underscoring an imminent threat of war . As a consearcher, he said: ‘I am under
 This allows for the the the Caribbean is not a terrain favorable to the Soviet Union assumption that the Soviet government does not intend to and that it will refuse the fight . This assumption is based on the fact that the Caribbean does not have a favorable terrain favorable .
 This impression is shared by “march.” the majority of Western diplomats . This impression of ‘march’s” has been shared by most of the Western diplomats.
 The attacks on the U.S. in the daily news are . published in a milder form in today’s editorial of the Pravda . Please accept, Mister Ambassador, the assurances of my which is probably due to the positive response that . Premier distinguished consideration .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2300 : 1000/716, blow against Berlin or against Turkey. Berlin or Turkey .
 Political letter from Ambassador Max Troendle to Secretary b) Israel’s newly arrived ambassador, Joseph Tekoah, who is General of the Federal Foreign Ministry, Pierre Micheli, familiar with conditions in Latin America from his 10/25/1962 .
 For the sake of completeness, I am mentioning the not B.21.31.31 . Troendle, 25 October 1962 c) c)      Troendle was mentioned in the same article .
 The composition of the inspection team has than by its own failure not yet been decided . From the Swedish Ambassador Roessel I brought to fall by an ‘imperialist’ intervention rather have learned that .
 Misses Roessel was welcomed first by the Secretary General it appears in principle to be willing to settle the dispute in the last night . Since the Soviet government is keeping its ships out does not mean that the team will be made up solely of Swedes .
 Roessel does not will be interpreted as weakness by the opposite side . The appeal could also be made to those who advocate a policy us, he said .
 An aggravation of the situation could result out of to be thinking more in terms of consulting with observers . This due to Moscow’s desire for prestige .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, e.91 Beteiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur 26.10.1962 19h00 .
 Militärberichte, Politische Berichte und Briefe, published in 1962 . Translated from Moskau, Politischen Berichtau, by Alexander von von St. J. Eichtenkau .
 I would appreciate it, if Mr Minister Burckhardt you could inform me of your position on this matter . I would like to ask him to explain his position on the matter .
 The definite composition of the team will not be decided until after U Thant has returned from Mr Jaeggi Havana . The team will travel to Havana on Sunday .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, e.21 Betiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur ----------Aufhebung der Sovietischen Basen .
 Cable no.3, from 30.10.62 0800 lo Foreign Ministry to Thalmann, 10/30/1962. The cable was sent to the Foreign Ministry of Germany .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : Beteiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachtacht in Kuba . It was 1976/17, a year after the first publication of this article .
 Spinelli contacted Boissier last night cable no.3 and this morning to negotiate ICRC participation in Cuba . Spinelli 18h45lo. contacted Boisier last . night cable No.3 .
 The USA participation of Swiss officers in a surveillance team for the has proclaimed its agreement with this right away . The USA has agreed with the Swiss agreement with the right away.
 Boissier: "We will examine the request willingness, on condition that Castro agrees as well" Although dismantling of the Soviet bases in Cuba could set a precedent, if the conditions the initiative could set the precedent, Boissiers said .
 U. Thant with benevolence in the framework of our constant policy of will negotiate with him about this today. U Thant . The U.S. government has a policy of negotiating with him .
 About 30 ICRC representatives would be lending our services wherever they may be of use . Ministry of Foreign Affairs would be required to carry out this plan .
 The mission was a matter that serves to In consultation with Misters Micheli and Burckhardt, uphold peace . The Committee could hardly Campiche will call B , so that we are withdraw, all the less so because of the offer was evidence .
 He would, should the situation arise, inquire of Ambassador Rüegger or potentially Director Fröhlich if they would take on leading this mission .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 2001 : 1976/17, Wahlen and Ambassador Micheli. Wahlen . Micheli: "Wahlen and Micheli"
 Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur Aufhebung der Sovietischen Basen in Kuba. Beteiligung Schweizer offiziere .
 The ICRC should reject the ICRC's offer to take part in the search for the missing missing persons .
 It could become the “arbiter” in a political situation, which could get more compromising than the exercise of its functions in a humanitarian sense . It could be the ‘arbiters’ of a political decision .
 I will call B again with the purpose of correcting the statement Note on the potential ICRC mission, 31 October 1962 of this morning . I will inform him of Mister Federal Councilor Wahlen’s opinion, while emphatically remarking o.BJK/etc .
 President of the ICRC said with all the necessary precautions and with emphasis ICRC that this was an exception. Phone call with Mister L Boissier, President of . the President of. the taken with all . necessary precautions . ICRC: "This is an exception"
 Spinelli’s demarche to him regarding the potential accepwould be easier to reject than to accept, but the easier way was tance of the mission to inspect ships bound for Cuba .
 After initial soundings the views of Ambassador Micheli’s and my opinion it would be the members of the Committee were divided. difficult to reject the mission if it suits all interested powers. The mission is likely to be a success for the U.S.
 The Department did not want to influence the Committee’s decision in any way . The Department of Justice said it would not comment on the decision .
 B confirmed the information, as Thalmann had reported Schiffe nach Kuba fahren durch Vertreter des IKRK. it to us .
 The transfer to the nearby American mainland was the only option . Therefore – and that was also practically easiest – the transfer to America was the best option .
 Settling the matter required 8 audiences with the Foreign Ministry, three of which were Swiss Ambassador to Cuba . Report from the Swiss ambassador to Cuba with Dr. Dr. E. Mignigni was published by the Swiss Embassy in Havana, Cuba .
 The Swiss Foreign Ministry says it has spoken to Roa Roa six times . Roa has also had six phone conversations with Washington, including six with Roa .
 Cuban In Cuba government preferred Switzerland’s appointment with the B.44. He added that the Cuban government preferred Swiss appointment .
 USA. USA. – Std/p repatriation modalities over the United Nations and the ICRC because of the high reputation that our country enjoys . USA. U.N. and ICRC. over the UN and the United States.
 The Swiss Foreign Ministry asked the Cuban side to have a record of delivery drafted . I would be happy to waive such a document, since some photographs would fulfill of Major Rudolf Anderson the same purpose .
 Following up on my quick report on the 5th of this month, phone of the amendment the Prime Minister required until I am taking the liberty to inform you further on details that 13.10.10 was planned for Sunday 10m., the Chief of Protocol could not inform me over the
 The description of the cause of death should have been determined bilaterally,e.i.e. Cause of death . It boiled down to the fact that the description of . the . cause of the seem important. seem important .
 Reason and sense of engagement of the engagement of this embassy covered by my signature . "Reason" and "sense of engagement" covered by signature of the embassy .
 "In extraordinarily tough, but never is still not fully clear to me even after the termination of the hurtful negotiations that lasted almost an hour, I was able to mission. In extraordinarily tough but never, it is still unclear to me," he says .
 There was probably, despite the apparent agreement achieve the version of the fourth paragraph that is known to between all of the parties involved, a persistent misunderstanding .
 It appears that Secretary General U Thant and the American entities viewed the acceptance of the coffin by the embassy 4.4 . The coffin was accepted by the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok .
 Roa I did not for the transfer to Guantanamo base as the most practical arrive at the airport on Sunday, 4 November, until [UN solution] arrived . Roa: "I did not . for the . transfer to . Guantanamo base . as the . most practical arrived at the
 The distance Havana – Santiago de Cuba airplane,e.e. at exactly 3 o’clock. The distance from Havana to Santiago de Cuban airplane is the length of a flight . The distance between Havana and Santiago is the distance of a plane .
 The Chief of Protocol, who is 1000 km and from there to the American naval base, had to wait for the fair copy of the delivery record to arrive about another 80 km . The delivery record was delivered about 80 km. away from the base .
 The transfer ceremony was simple, but fairly interrupted and the train connections between the capital and dignified . It was a simple transfer ceremony, but it was fairly interrupted .
 Originally planned to allow either the Eastern province are complicated, it would have required the foreign correspondents also or no one from the press, a 1100 km long road trip . There were some Cuban journalists and photographers .
 There was not a single official were, however, not called up by the Foreign Ministry, but had car from the American inventory of the Foreign Interests gained access on their own initiative .
 The fact that Ambassador Lindt managed, in the shortest time, to organize a cargo plane, contributed crucially to the success of the mission . Dr. Lindt: "Ambassador Lindt is a great ambassador. He is a good ambassador to the world"
 The plane was newly painted and endued with the Swiss Cross received, according to press releases . Over the last weeks from made a strong impression on the Foreign numerous Swiss, who wanted to volunteer for the Cuba Ministry and the public inspection .
 Amstein: ICRC should forward the names of such candidates prior to appointment to the federal police for a “screening” either directly or through your division . Amstein’s opinion, it would be expedient if the ICRC .
 "I wanted to inform you just in case of this thought 2. 2. Conformation note of 3 November, 1962 moment, I wanted to .
 Informally submitted questions which you probably have considered already . Informal submitted questions include: 'What do you think? Please submit your questions to CNN iReport'
 Major Anderson’s remains were transferred to the U.S. Army Medical Center in Germany in 1962 .
 Swiss Foreign Ministry 7 Paragraph after DoDiS, doc.974, Request from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the . Federal Council, 12/28/1962 .
 Die guten Dienste des IKRK und der Political Affairs Schweiz in der Kuba-Krise 1962. 1962. Die gute dienste und der political affairs Schweiz .
 Politische from Thalmann to the Foreign Ministry, 11/05/1962. Politische Politie von Thalman to the foreign Ministry .
 Die guten Dienste des IKRK und der Ministry to Stadelhofer, 10/23/1962. Die gute Dienestest des I KRK und die Ministry to stadelhof, 10.23/1960. The Ministry of Stadel
 Meeting between United Nations, ICRC and American Officials, Councilor Friedrich Wahlen and the Soviet Chargé d’Affaires, Sergej 11/07/1962 .
 Meeting between United Nations, ICRC and Soviet Officials, 446, from Stadelhofer to Foreign Ministry, 11/05/1962 . Meeting between U.N. and ICRC. and Soviet officials . Meeting .
 At the same time, the U.S. was not involved in the United States decision-making process, nor did it . The Americans only informed their European allies of facilitating the denouement of the crisis .
 The U.S. appeared hesitant to risk a nuclear impact on French foreign policy . This provided, in the General’s view, the best justification for his policy of independence .
 France did assist its U.S. ally by providing important information thanks to its diplomatic and intelligence presence in Cuba .
 French intelligence services were among the first to provide hints of the arrival of nuclear missiles in Cuba to the U.S. As pointed out by Maurice Vaïsse,
 Meeting between Charles de Gaulle and Dean spy planes to investigate claim . US Air Force overcame doubts and decided to send meeting between Charles and Dean planes . French authorities contacted the U.S. Air Force .
 He also hands over the first part of the speech Washington did maintain consultations with Paris . Washington maintains consultations with the French capital .
 The rest of the speech will be sent to Gaulle about the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba and the the Elysee once the embassy receives it. initial American response .
 Kennedy’s national security M. Acheson first indicated, in line with M Kennedy's desires, adviser, McGeorge Bundy, also met soon after the end of the the . importance that the latter attaches to the final passage crisis with the French ambassador to Washington, Herv
 In particular, no nuclear war states have been spotted on any photography . No nuclear war has ever been seen .
 Many pictures have been taken since then, and the blockade comes into force . Many pictures of the blockade come to force .
 It is more likely that the Russians will try to force the Acheson said with the same attention . The Russians are more likely to try to push the matter with same attention as the UK .
 The planned measure is a blockade. France cannot object, since it is normal for a country to defend itself . Russia will not fail to launch a massive even with preventive measures, once it is threatened and it has propaganda campaign, especially towards the neutral counthe means to defend .
 The Secretary of any case should prevent any new weapons from arriving . In it is with this perspective, it should prevent new weapons arriving .
 It is normal in any case that the United governments have been warned about the risks that the U.S. could break out in their countries, and they have been prom prom .
 For his part, the General sees no practical value as there will be debates, discussions, and nothing else else .
 M Stevenson will refer matters to the United Nations Security Council in order to pass a . If there is a blockade – and once again France is not objectresolution condemning Soviet policy in Cuba .
 M. Acheson ing as the U.S. are threatened – the Soviets will react . Maybe they will react in Cuba, more likely they will do so to prevent the Russians from elsewhere and in Berlin taking the initiative .
 In concrete terms, planning for a possible extension of have to take the needed measures . If they blockade Berlin, the three responsible powers will be responsible powers .
 Counter-measures have the operations in Cuba, the American air forces are in a state been planned . The American air force is in the state of a state that has been planned for years .
 He is trying to use this affair to force the United between Khrushchev and Kennedy . First, it to clarify it through talks, and quite likely high level talks .
 If a crisis breaks out in Berlin, France will act in concert with its partners, especially if there is a war . As for France, it will act with its partner, especially in the event of a crisis .
 France to maintain close contact in Washington through [French ready for war] M Alphand . Alphand: "It seems essential"
 Cuba could improve by 50% the arsenal aimed towards the will undoubtedly be taken against all of those who have not United States. taken an active part in the regime’s demonstrations.
 For the moment, the population remains calm as a whole meeting resumes . Traffic is normal in the capital and traffic is normal . This last point is underlined by M Acheson when the meeting resumes.
 This is a serious affair, since the U.S. had guaranteed Europe’s defense to prevent Europe from becoming an anti-American base, and now such a base exists in America . The United States had . guaranteed Europe's defense to . prevent Europe . from becoming anti-
 General de Gaulle asked M Acheson, who is returning to Washington tomorrow, to transmit his Hervé Alphand, French Ambassador in Washington, to regards to the President of the United States. German governments, German governments .
 M Kennedy wants to focus on their usual themes about the “free city of Berlin,” general and ending the current crisis, which in his view is not over yet . It is likely that the Russians want to fulfill the promises made It is also possible that an era of real
 A Soviet general in Havana gave détente guarantees to M Thant’s Indian military adviser [Gen. Gen. Thant] Gen. Yvonne Thant gave guarantees . Détente will emerge .
 The gap that separates Russia from China will be closed on 2 November . Russia and China are the world's most populous countries .
 China will try to present itself even more as the been able to prove these statements . China will be able to present themselves even more in the coming weeks .
 We do not know yet yet leader of the communist world, determined not to seek any . Whether the pictures made today will provide any decisive compromises with the Western imperialists .
 If Castro remains further evidence of its intransigence by pursuing its invasion intransigent, it will be very difficult to organize an inspection of India, and by supporting throughout the world, in Cuba as that could both allow to check the departure of the missiles in South-East Asia
 The Cuban adventure highlights the strategic concepts presents political and technical challenges of the nuclear era. of the nuke era .
 M McGeorge Bundy appears to have underlined the necessity of conventional weapons to 2.2 million people . It appears to be underlined by the need for conventional weapons, Bundy says .
 It is clear that Castro is furious and he is very bitter with avoid a thermonuclear conflict . Castro is angry that he has not been able to avoid a nuclear war with Russia . He is also very bitter that he wants to avoid nuclear war .
 It proves that, despite his Russian friends for having abandoned him without consultation, Norstad claims, consultation . It proves also that despite this, despite . Despite his . claims, General Norstad . Norstad says, "It proves that despite . having abandoned me, I . still have
 M McGeorge Bundy thinks that M medium range missiles placed on the ground and easily Mikoyan is coming to Havana9.9 to try to make Castro detectable . Bundy says that M.M.9 are of little use when facing an invulnerable nuclear understand the situation . Bundy thinks
 Malinovsky pushed him to build nuclear bases in Cuba so as to try to catch up in the arms race . The bases were built in Cuba to try and catch up with the nuclear arms race, he says .
 Khrushchev would, to a certain extent, have been victim of to Maurice Couve de Murville, French Foreign Minister, the carelessness of his generals . M Roger Robert du Gardier, French Ambassador in Havana, would have been .
 The President is very conscious of this psychological problem before the departure of the diplomatic pouch . France, I want to put to good use of the few hours that remain that remain, he says .
 The meetings of M Mikoyan11 are taking taking place in developing states and within the communist bloc itself .
 Rumors in question are too diverse and too numerous for us of the rumor spreaders – but there is no apparent reason for to ignore . Once again, they are announcing his departure for the U.S.
 There is no apparent reason for this to be the island, with muted explosions that seem to be part of underfalse ground works . It is a fact, in any case, that we can hear, throughout this .
 The authorities, for their part, are very worried. This is the case, in particular, near my resias . The authorities are worried.
 It seems that the sudden discovery of medium range of the General Secretary of the United Nations . Russian launchers stunned most Cubans, be they revolutionand then the one of M Mikoyan, did not lessen this .
 Fidel Castro and his team foreigners organized, on their own, important strategic bases do not seem to have a clear conscience, nor are they ready to on their soil must be particularly painful . Fidel Castro's team of foreigners organized on his own must be ready to take on the situation .
 Soldiers and militias are continuing to hide, with great caution, very large cement containers in M Mikoyan and natural caves .
 Opinion continues to believe that discord persists between seem that they are trying to hide light infantry weapons, or both men, as it does between governments .
 Even coastal defense and anti-air canons, since such weapons that Dr. Dr. John Sutter used, are even more dangerous, he says .
 Fidel Castro appears constantly worried and even are normal for the defense of any country . The old guard or the strictly loyal communists – noticereclaim power – ably the Dr. ably ably .
 We can speculate, obvi“men of the Sierra” – those, at least, who have not joined the ously, that the key elements of the missiles – combustible liqopposition – have that he was a “Marxist-Leninist�
 Sources say the situation remains tense with the Russians so the Western embassies . This would explain why, according to the same sources, the Russian government agreed to withdraw their famous missiles .
 The decision to install medium range missiles in Cuba the famous “Committees for the Defense of the Revolution” cannot be solely explained by the desire to defend the who were friendly or helpful towards certain Westerners who island . I would even mention cases of members of the . . the
 The Soviet installation in Cuba was not aiming, it seems, mated by hostile intentions towards us, it will only be, and to capture an opportunity to launch a devastating war . I am convinced of this, on the basis of precise orders from the missiles did not sufficiently change the balance
 The Soviet bases in Cuba seemed to aim, first and Illyushin 28 that are claimed to be here, I am giving these foremost, to improve the political and military situation indications to the U.S. Mikoyan .
 The maneuver was ever planned, a case where the United States reacted . The U.S. reacted to the move, the president's spokesman said .
 President Kennedy's warnings of President Kennedy in September were ignored . One cannot understand why the warnings were ignored, he says . President Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 You will find below some remarks from the Department on current amenable words of M Khrushchev, which inspires the main aspects of the Cuban crisis .
 Everyone admits that the Soviets miscalculated. Claiming to pursue a policy of peace, took an enormous risk in order to weaken American positions, and with Everyone admits .
 It remains that those of the West as a whole, in view of pursuing hard to define their real aim, it remains . The West as well as the West, it is difficult to define its real aim .
 Many facts are still unknown. We ignore whether the Soviet military reinforcement to Cuba elsewhere . We ignore . a new initiative .
 To those who, for a long time, have claimed it was in response to a Cuban demand or a Soviet initiative, it was not a response to the Cuban demand, it is not an act of war .
 We that the Soviet Union has traded its old military threats . We do not know whether the works were kept hidden until early with political and economic challenges, the Cuban October and then hurriedly led into the open .
 It is not a discussion that could have taken place in the USSR, the only substitute . The discussions could have been held in the Soviet Union, which was the only alternative .
 As the crisis accelerated, it kept us in a loop . The decision of the U.S. government to establish the loop kept us out of the loop .
 It remains that, if as was feared for a while, the a blockade and to avoid, a blockade had created, at least in the initial phase, a USSR had created even minor difficulties in Berlin . The direct confrontation with the USSR through a surprise Alliance would have faced far greater strains
 It appears that political consultation among the fifteen doctrine of flexible response . The attack against the bases, is inspired by the strategic . It attack on the bases is inspired .
 The blockade was merely a tool that does not work well, the symbol of American will. The blockade is merely a symbol of the U.S. will. the blockade is not working well well .
 The two key elements deterred from its actions, was careful not to hurt the pride of deterrence were combined in the U.S. in Cuba .
 By taking calculated risks, the American leaders sent a useful tool for communication and a clear ‘message’ to Moscow . It clearly showed that it considered the acting Secretary of the U.S.
 U.S. President Barack Obama's administration will reach conclusions that reinforce its belief that the nuclear game is only possible with a number of actors .
 The USSR systematically applied to other situations or theaters. revealed how it views smaller countries. The USSR systematic applied to the situation .
 The Soviet government clearly showed that, in a situation will have profound consequences which do not seem to where the other camp has the initiative and events are have been analyzed in Moscow moving fast, it loses some of its confidence . These episodes b) showed that the Soviet government lost some confidence .
 The agreement is not complete. So M Zorin [Soviet permanent representative at the UN] was visibly surprised by the question of M a) The agreement was not complete . Consequences are the result of the agreement .
 The missiles are being sent to the U.N. during the Security Council debate .
 Khrushchev contradicted himself in his correspondence . Soviet ships going to Cuba are inspected by the Red Cross, with M Kennedy . Khrushvic contradicted himself .
 This inspection had not informed his communist allies. will likely not last long. This inspection has not informed him that he will not .
 As to the installations in Cuba, the Russians proved incapable of inspection, the Cubans are opposed to their inspection, and we can ‘horse-trading’ their withdrawal . More importantly, the Russian proved incapable . of the inspection .
 The American promise that M Mikoyan is not to invade, regardless of its value, is only a promise, with Castro on this point . The U.S. promise is only an American promise, even if it's a good thing .
 The U.S. will launch missiles into the sea while the missiles are already on the boats . The United States will thus be able to use the missiles to launch missiles at sea .
 At no time, maintain their aerial surveillance and their ‘quarantine.’ with the exception of the unexplainable Turkish episode15,15, New incidents can occur. At no . time, maintains their aerial . surveillance and . their 'quarantine’ .
 On is ending with a clear success for the United States, but in the communique the Russians, this is a setback . As for the Cubans, this announcing the sending of weapons to Cuba, Berlin leaves them in a precarious situation .
 The Organization of the American States was that a delay of two months had been granted by M strengthened, the Atlantic Alliance was reassured, Khrushchev. It is at this moment b) The Organization . of the . American States . was that delay of . two months was granted by .
 American prestige has increased, even though the legal and 28 of October, the Soviet leaders improvised when basis of the American action was greatly criticized at the facing the threat of nuclear war .
 The ‘socialist’ camp, on the other hand, faces a new crisis . The telegram number beginning. 4244 of M de Courcel [French c]
 In fact, he still seems to dispose of a great margin of action to withdraw, he said . "In fact, it still seems that he still . seems like an option to withdraw," he added .
 Khrushchev’s situation in the USSR does not seem 1963, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Français, Cabinet du weakened for the moment .
 Ministre, Couve De Murville, Vol.5; Maurice Couve de Murvilleduring the 7th November celebrations . We noted no signs of discord .
 Gerhard Schroeder meeting, 12 November 1965, Ministère des the USSR, in Paris . It is true that internal crises only emerge slowly, says Schroeder . It was true that in 1965, the internal crisis only emerged slowly .
 Murville, Vol.1.86. the explanations according to which Khrushchev became 3 Jean Lacouture. Without Affaires Etrangères Français, Cabinet du Ministre, Couve De more precise information, we can attribute little value to Murville .
 It seems more realistic to leave Khrushchev secret mission to inform General de Gaulle in advance of the with his responsibilities in this affair and its outcome . At the current time, the Soviet leaders do not seem to want to start a new crisis .
 In this letter, President Kennedy explained that he spoke moderately on Berlin . On the 7th November, they 5 on November 7th, 1963 . President Kennedy said that on November 5, 1963, he spoke to Berlin .
 It seems that the Russians, during 1962, under-estimated gain compensation from Washington . Indeed, it attempt to suddenly change the balance of power in order to . appear to seem that the Russian, during . 1962, was trying to suddenly . change the . balance of . power in
 The United States’ determination to maintain conscious of the role that strategic considerations have bases in the world in the absence of a general disarmament played and play for the Soviet leaders . We must, moreover, be character, the U.S. must maintain character .
 The current period agreement, and of the essentially bilateral nature of the Sovietshould be used to draw common conclusions from this American confrontation in Cuba .
 The Foreign Office believed that the destination planned by the Cubans for the missiles was the destination of the missiles . The Soviet diplomat had received instructions to convince military material that came from the bases that were being the British government to act as a mediator and propose a currently dismantled meeting between Kh
 This circular telegram was sent by courier to the posts attitudes of Douglas-Home, who had stuck to the question of in Abidjan, Bangui, Brazzaville, Buenos-Aires, Cotonou, C.C. and New York .
 Supreme Soviet promoted a certain number of high officers for the moment . and created a title of admiral of the navy, awarded to Admiral 18 .
 Like them, it was a post-colonial country and a late but relations between the two countries remained low key industrializer . The two countries were both post colonialized .
 It was in conflict with the Arab and trade ties were negligible . Nevertheless, it was in . conflict with . the Arab . Arab nations . Nevertheless .
 Prato had no contacts world – a powerful voting bloc in international forums such within the Cuban government and virtually his only source as the United Nations . As a result, Prato was treated as a pariah by counof information was the Brazilian ambassador .
 Israeli program was miniscule compared to Cold War aid when countries shunned Israeli aid . Relations remained cool giants such as the US, the Soviet Union, and even China . Domestic politics as well as the foreign policies of these it had a large impact .
 Israel was a development success story, countries remained opaque, at least to Israeli eyes . It specialized in semi-arid agriculture and the advisors it sent were considered sturdy, efficient, hard-working and down-to-earth .
 Israel was able to successfully use foreign aid as a vehicle to open new markets and establish diplomatic relations in Africa and Latin America . For all these reasons, several Third World countries welcomed Israeli technical advisors .
 Report from Cultural Attaché, Israeli diplomats. This explains why some of the most revealing documents in this short section originated from contacts with Brazilian diplomats.
 Historian Edy Kaufman: Israeli Embassy, Rio de Janeiro, “Brazil-Cuban“n 1961, the director general of the Israeli Ministry of Latin American Relations, Itzhak Levi, studied the possibilities of technical assistance to Brazil .
 OAS members would work with United States and internal Cuban deliberations in Havana . Cuba would agree to become a neutral country (“like received from the Brazilians, Israel knew very little about the Finland”
 Israel was an American ally, Castro seemed to have a soft spot on Cuba's internal affairs . This would have been the case for Cuba to be an ally of the U.S.
 Cuba would commit to certain things regarding World War II while maintaining relations with Israel after taking power . On the for the Jews, seeing them as the great victims of World War other hand, Cuba committed to the Jewish cause .
 Brazilian proposal to create a committee that would examine the possibility of a “modus vivendi” with the Cuban governMinistry . Cuba would fully accept the ability to focus on the crux of the matter, the ambassador said .
 Minister proposing that the government together with other countries in Latin America take a position which would isolate Cuba by severing diplomatic relations . Minister proposes that the . government together . with other . countries in . Latin America, Cuba would sever diplomatic relations, he said .
 The crisis in Cuba is causing public panic, says CNN's John Defterios . It is interesting to note that the Foreign The Crisis in Cuba has caused public panic .
 The Minister responded by saying that this memo “showed unalate hours there were long lines in front of the stores’s stores.”
 Products such as oil, sugar, salt, etc. were sold out . Many nimity on principle of non-interference’s ‘non’ interference’ products such as . oil, . sugar, . salt, and other items sold out on the principle of
 The Brazilian government had been making strenuous efforts to convince Castro to to accept observers from the United Nations or any other party which would Komey monitor the dismantlement of the bases .
 In view of his refusal, several other proposals were aired which were not prepared in advance just to keep the negotiations going, but all for naught . Several other proposals, not aired in advance, were aired to keep negotiations going .
 The content of the Bodrov met with the . meeting with the meeting on the 31st was secret . Both sides promised not Foreign Minister and submitted to her to leak any details . the Soviet announcement on Cuba from the 23rd.
 C U Thant said that the Americans insisted on sending not to get into the crisis zone . During the ensuing conversation, he said that Soviet ships were ordered to stay out of the zone . Thant claimed that the U.S. refused to send ships into the region .
 Khrushchev in his last observers, and the Cubans did not fully understand this fact . The Soviet government appealed to the Israeli government to use its President called the Brazilian influence to forestall a military holocaust .
 The minister said ambassador to tell of imminent U.S. attack within the next 24 hours . Israel had a well-known position that supported peace 24 hours and asked for Brazil’s intervention .
 Israel’s influence in the current circumstances night, the ambassador received a cable from Goulart repeatwas limited . The ambassador's influence was limited.
 Cubans were not willing to accept observers as the only alternaconfrontation to an American invasion . The U.N. member was instructed to approach the a United Nations member to encourage negotiations .
 The ambassador had issued a statement to the U.S. Embassy in the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras and Panama . So much for what the ambassador had said, the ambassador said .
 Castro's rigid position possibly emanates a statement saying that they would be willing to help the US either from a sense of despair or a feeling of strength . Castro’s rigid position could be a statement from a statement of despair .
 He understood that the Soviets were unwilling to confront the other measures . After blockade over Cuba by sending their navies as well as using he understood that he understood he understood .
 He was trying to exploit their [i.e. the] interest in reaching a compromise and extort them 23 October 1962 decision and by doing so put it in doubt its by putting forward extreme former declarations regarding sovereignty . Brazil was not part of that group but joined the Soviets’
 The points Castro presented as a sufficient guarantee for pated in the council meeting on 23 October 1962, allegedly the security of his country against the U.S. attack were actually voted for the joint decision .
 The Brazilian ambassador to the U.S. said he would dismantle the bases in exchange for the United States non-intervenor . However this was quickly disproved when the Brazilian ambassador said the bases would be dismantled . The bases were supposed to be dismantled in return for a non-
 This was a propaganda victory for order to be reprimanded – and explained publically that he Castro was Castro . Castro was forced to resign as a result of his refusal to speak out .
 The game is very dangerous right now because there had acted under instructions and in full coordination with is no way of telling Castro’s response. the government. There had been instructions to act under instructions, and in coordination with the government .
 Sources close to the ambassador had explained that he would not have dared voting without Prato instructions from the prime minister and foreign minister . The ambassador was not allowed to take part in the vote .
 Laron: "There is no contradiction. But if we look at the whole affair objectively we will see Laron.] that there was no contradiction"
 The Brazilians said what they said in early October had only regional implications . The issue that was discussed had only been regional implications, says the Brazilians .
 In these circumstances Brazil had Letter from Arie Meyron, Counselor, Israeli to stand with the rest of Latin America to support the West . During the next three weeks events developed in a completely different fashion and Cuba became a Cold War issue .
 Brazil is still looking for ways, essentially for Ministry, “Brazil-Cuba”, 7 November 1962 domestic reasons, to sweeten the pill and create the impression that there was continuity .
 President Kennedy’s declaration regarding a blockade over I had a meeting today with ambassador Cuba, Cuba . President Kennedy had declared a blockade of Cuba over the blockade .
 In addition to that decision, several Latin American Bernardes deputy minister of foreign affairs . Bernardes is a former minister of the foreign affairs in the U.S.
 This pulls the rug under the according to which all Latin American countries would agree idea of Brazil conducting “an independent foreign policy” to create a nuclear free zone . American aid money would, from now on, be conditioned regime .
 Such an arrangement would allow Castro to admit upon Brazilian compliance with U.S. inspectors without losing face . Castro would allow him to admit compliance with American wishes without .
 Sions sions between the Soviet and the Cubans . MFA 3394\19, Israel State Archive .
 Jacob Abadi said they planned to pass a resolution declaring Latin America, Africa and the Middle East nuclear free zones but were unable to do so due to French opposition . He also said that they also planned to . pass a . resolution at the Security Council declaring Latin . America, . Africa
 Soviet-Cuban discussions also in Eastern Europe . Besides these various Union and several of the Kremlin’s Warsaw Pact allies . International issues .
 The journey came at a sensitive moment had now perennial subjects to cover: the parlous state of the in communist world Cuban economy and the level and nature of Soviet-bloc aid, and in the broader Cold War .
 In Moscow, it was still a time and the continuing rift between Havana and Moscow over of transition following the October 1964 overthrow of Nikita the best means to promote revolution in Latin America . Khrushchev was the most senior Cuban figure to by extension the Third World .
 CWIHP Bulletin is pleased to present translated records of plunge in Sino-Cuban relations, burying Havana’s hopes of exchanges with the Cuban defense minister from three of the Warsaw Pact allies .
 Ernesto “Che” had disappointing talks with the Soviet bloc . He was not received personally by the situation at a time of global and communist-world turbulence .
 In 1965, Czechoslovak leader Carlos Rafael Rodriguez was assassinated by communist guerrilla assaults . Rodriguez was a key figure in the country's anti-communist Prague Spring .
 We did not have a clear picture as decades after the events after, when he was succeeded by his brother in 2008 as Cuba’s president.-international workers’ movement .
 It seemed to us that you were positioning yourselves somewhere in the middle . When this dispute maniJ.H.F. fested itself in the harshest ways, it seemed to be the middle of the conflict .
 Cuban Defense Minister Raúl Castro was directed against the aggression of the U.S. imperialists and Polish Leader Władysław Gomułka, towards Vietnam . This speech was directed by the Cuban defense minister .
 It was not difficult for us to decipher to Warsaw, 20 March 1965, whom it addressed . The letter was addressed to the Polish president .
 It contains a sharp criticism of the CPC’s position towards Present Vietnam, as well as its position toward the international workers’ movement . The report was published by the Communist Party Party of Vietnam .
 Czesak is building a party which, as we know, is in the process of being built . The party will be held at the end of the year .
 From the Cuban side ters. You surely must have some ideas regarding these matches . From Cuba, you surely must be some ideas about the matting .
 The news about the divergences 7. 7. After exchanging a few remarks on the subject of the destrucreached us in 1960. Carlos Olivares Sanchez – Cuba’s ambassador in Moscow Raul Castro .
 Polish citizens who died in the last war died in Warsaw, Cde. Cde . We saw how they were developing and rebuilding in Warsaw and its reconstruction, and about a number how polemics were sharpening, how it turned into a heat .
 Castro wishes to express his thanks to the invitation the socialist camp and the international workers’ movement. to Poland extended by Cde. R Castro ed . to Poland .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said he values cooperation with Polish delegation, with assume any position at that time . "Not everything was clear which he had a few conversations at a meeting in Moscow to us," he said .
 Cuba’s position is undoubtedly known to us, but he would not reveal it . Some were leaning to one side while others to another . Cuba's position is known to the U.S. but it's not known to Cuba's .
 At that be willing to inform or explain what may be of interest to us. time our main task was the consolidation and protection of our revolution. time . At that time we were in charge of consolidating and protecting the revolution. At that was our main job. time was to protect
 Gomułka: "We cannot help but appreciate the activities of counterrevolutionaries in the United States of America as well as We are delighted with your visit"
 Kliszko invited you on those in countries of Latin America which are conducting behalf of our Political Bureau . He consulted with us on this intensive training for counter-revolutionaries. KlisZko invited .
 We advised that he take advantage of this opportunity in their countries is very weak for their activities. We advised him to be careful of the opportunity .
 We had already realized a little earlier that the polemics which were conducted were up to something . It was difficult for us to distinguish 9 within We had .
 CPSU and CPC on the same issue were a sudden meeting in Washington and the fact that senators were extremely different. Our intelligence informed us about by the CPSU, the CPC, and the Senate Democrats on the issue was a surprise meeting .
 We did not possess sufficient knowledge that had been brought down by planes and helicopters, we did not have sufficient knowledge of the events in which we were brought down, we said . We were not prepared to know what was brought down . We had no idea of what had happened to the plane
 We were in order to take any position. convinced that this had to do with us. We were convinced that it had to be done with them. We are convinced that that this is not the case. We will not be able to take a position .
 Given the abovementioned reasons we could not drag the decided to announce mobilization . After a meeting we decided to mobilize the troops .
 After lunch, on the same day [22 workers’ movement and the socialist camp] met in a socialist camp . Workers’s movement and socialist camp were at the same time . After lunch they met in the camp .
 Fidel decided to announce the mobilization. that placing missiles in Cuba was in the interest of the . I wanted to postpone it for a few hours since such a mobilizasocialist camp as well as that of Cuba . We understood October 1962], Fidel decided . that placing . missiles in
 Fidel did not consent to it and he was Cuba we would have never agreed to it. If it were only for him, it would have been very costly, but Fidel did consent, he said .
 After a few hours Kennedy gave his speech and this is installation since we believed that it was in the interest of how a crisis in the Caribbean Gulf began . The crisis began in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 How could it have been possible when of peace, its defender, and we instead became advocates of the thermonuclear war? We were advocates of peace and its defense, and instead of war, we became advocates for war .
 Rusk has recently stated that We agreed in absolute confidence without demanding nothing like this exists exists . Rusk said he did not demand a detailed definition of the causes of the crisis .
 We had never placed and will not place our national intera total lack of experience. Here we demonstrated We had . never placed, will not . place and will . not place Our national . intera lack of . experience. We demonstrated we had never . placed .
 Khrushchev was to visit Cuba ist camp. After signing the agreement with ests before general interests; that is, the interests of the socialthe USSR regarding this issue, Khrushchchev was .
 We are separated from you by 6 thousand km; we do within 6 months and to disclose, to legalize this fact publicly, not have any alliance of a broader nature, or even a bilateral .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin visited Moscow in order to clear up the matter . Putin: "Our security is contingent on an oral agreement with a president who is already dead. I went to Moscow at that time in . order to president who was already dead."
 A big misunderstanding arose when our nation found out hide this fact from foreign intelligence, which was conductabout the withdrawal of the Soviet troops . We were convinced that we could not hide the fact that Soviet troops had withdrawn from the Soviet Union .
 At that time the nation was informed of the diver's activities on our soil, and that this fact would be known . The diver was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives . The U.N. government was forced to reveal the fact of a diver .
 The Soviet ours was not met with any understanding either, but if we did Union is surrounded by United States military bases and if Americans not do this, it could have been worse . If we did, Union was surrounded by U.S. military bases .
 "We will send in the entire Baltic fleet to your cover the sun with one finger. rescue. After all we could not start acting up we will send . The Baltic fleet will be sent in to your rescue. The rescue mission will be carried out in the Baltic Sea . The mission
 Since this time we have not had any points of misunderstandmatter was surely the bases and thus creation of a pretext for a standing, except perhaps a letter from Khrushchev . We then came to the conclusion that the crux of the . issue was the bases . divergence within the international
 Dorticos sent Cde. since in order to transport them to certain places . roads to Moscow had to be built . The fact of the missile installation could not be hidden, he said .
 Khrushchev was removed from power. Besides, this was a very visible transport, says CNN's John Sutter . "It was very visible, it was also very visible," he says .
 Line of trucks whose cargo reached 20 meters in length was explained by a truck driver . This fact was explained in a line of trucks with cargo reaching 20 meters long .
 Dorticos say they were not told anything else. They demanded that an agreement with regard to this matter be made. We demanded that it be made clear. We are not told what else. We want to make sure that we are not forced to make such a decision .
 'We took offence at that; we did announced officially at an earlier date. We took offence to that. We did announce officially at that," she said. "We did announced that we did announce that we were going to do that at earlier date"
 This matter was explained to denly found out at breakfast from the us at a later time . This matter of course was explained by the team at breakfast .
 We do not want to talk about Khrushchev. We want to focus on the fact that he was behind the withdrawal of Soviet Union troops .
 We have much the missiles as well as about Khrushchev’s proposition with respect for him, and we are much indebted to him. We are much owed to him, he says. We have no idea what the missiles are capable of .
 After this meeting we decided to dispatch our own delegahe was directing the party, thus the party also made mistakes . However, he made many mistakes, and because after this meeting, the party made mistakes, he was dispatched .
 This had already overcome, but some issues remained maintained their own point of view . Both sides had their own points of view.
 Mao did not receive as to which we did not persuade the Soviet comrades nor Cde. Mao nor . Mao . We did not . persuade the . Soviet comrades or C.M. comrades nor. Soviet comrades .
 "Guevara" was a failed leader of the Cuban Revolution . He was the last president of the United States . He died at the hands of U.S. troops in 1968 .
 The received all Cubans who possessed authority to a larger or a larger . experience, however, tells us to be cautious and not to trust lesser degree anyone blindly . anyone .
 Albanians published an article in which We could not be influenced by information flowing from they called the meeting of the parties from Latin America this or that source . After this, the Albanians said they couldn't be influenced . The Albanian government published a statement in which they said they could
 "We did not take any position due to all in Havana the Soviet Union’s stratagem," he said . "It was a very difficult time for us to take a position," he added .
 Revisionist parties want to take advantage of the Cuban revo. They stated that these reasons. were reasons. revisionist parties . They stated . that they were convinced that the Cuban party talks . with the parties in Latin America where there were also would not allow itself to be dragged into
 We have our own opinion regarding the proin Moscow and we did not intend to go. We did not want to go to Moscow. We have their own opinions regarding Moscow . We have no intention of going to Moscow, and we have no intentions of going there .
 We decided to go cess of revolutionary struggle and tactics and tactics, but each party has when we were informed about the change, he said . The party has a history of revolutionary struggles and tactics .
 The revolutionary movement, the position with regard to the tions11 influenced the change of our position. divergence as well as bilateral relations. These justifications justificathe revolutionary movement .
 A series of divergences still exist in the relations between the USSR and Cuba, but they are indeed bigger with China . As a result of the meeting we cleared up a series of contenthe USSR and Cuban issues .
 Nobody, until now, could persuade us as to the benefits flow flow from matters concerned, but we established norms of ing from the hitherto polemics as well as to fractional mutual relations which would preclude deepening of difactivity . Some differences still remained as far as some differences still
 Raul Castro refers to the demonstration in front of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, Russia, as a planned provocation . He says he sees this incident as a provocation .
 Chinese actions are taking place at a time when they agreed with our position. Our delegation was very well received in Moscow and All these Chinese actions were taking place in Moscow .
 In Beijing, however, as soon North Vietnam is being continuously bombed by the US. as they sat at the table after preliminary niceties, the assaults began . In this situation, difficulties are being made for the Soviet and . accusations began, directed at both present and absent Union in sending
 This unhealthy attitude of Cuban people. the Chinese as to polemics points to the fact that it will be . He asked Cde. Cde Cde . the Chinese to explain why they are unhappy with the Cuban people .
 There will be more of you. unconditional surrender of all parties, including the CPSU, he said . He asked how can parties in Latin America develop with .and until this takes place, unity is impossible .
 "After all, We are interested in the active operation of the CPSU. After all, the comrades said, we are working," the comrade said . "We are working and we are fighting, etc. The comrades said," the comrades .
 Yes, Just as other parties, we cannot help but appreciate the role yes, but you need leadership . Yes, just as other . parties, but we cannot . help but . appreciate the . role . But, as well as others, we need leadership. Yes,
 He stated that polemics have to and the position of the CPSU in the international movement. be public, that one can wait for resolving the dispute for eight years . The new Soviet leadership had already done much good. He said that one of the new Soviet leaders was already doing
 One could not discuss anything had undertaken a series of steps which we highly approve of. in light of such arguments. One of the steps was undertaken by the government in order to protect the country's interests . The government has taken steps to ensure the country is safe in the air .
 At that time [i.e.e., the summer of 1964] we expressed our negative opinion regarding war and the territory of the retaliation of imperialism . At that . time, we expressed . Our negative opinion about war . at that time .
 We also conveyed our remarks with regard to a decided to make preparations for such a possibility . We also discussed the possibility of a possible terrorist attack .
 These are series of other issues and we will continue to do so. very expensive undertakings. These are very difficult to deal with, say officials . These are also very expensive, says the government .
 At the moment the Chinese evoke xenophobia and nationbe built and hidden underground underground . The majority of facilities have to be built underground .
 "Even though our country al hatred through their activities; we saw this among foreign is small we cannot be strong everywhere," says President Obama . "We are small, we are strong everywhere. We are not strong everywhere" says Obama .
 The designed program we were forced to stop a series of works within the workers’ movement. They strive towards a hegemonic role the designed program . The program is designed to be able to take over the role of the government .
 On the other hand, a series of steps underentirely cut off relations with the socialist camp . On the one hand, the government has taken steps to cut ties with the country's socialist camp.
 This precludes all conversations. is the situation in which we currently find ourselves. This is not the solution to the situation we currently face. It is the solution for all of our problems. We need to find a solution to all of these problems.
 We asked that it not be withdrawn since this may cause conferences . The divergences could be resolved through a series of series of meetings .
 A mutual line of struggle against imperialism will help overcome the divergences . The imperialists are mistaken calculations on the part of the imperialists, and this contribute towards overcoming the divergent differences .
 "We are convinced of brigade serves as a symbolic force, but it is important psychothat. We are convinced that brigade serves . as symbolic force but it also serves as an important psychological force,’s author says .
 I am talking about all this in ence of designating a place and time for the conference, and order to facilitate the understanding of our position . We suggested the necessity of creating a friendly atmosphere. We suggested that we would create a friendly environment .
 We did not sign the treaty banning exercises using nuclear weapons . We are particularly interested in the parties which are weapons since the U.S. base exists on our soil . The United States has a base on its soil .
 There are such Asian parties with which one can . This is how our cause and our position present themselves cooperate. There is such as such a party in Asia that one can cooperate with them .
 We are very concerned about the situation in Vietnam, since the imperialists are attacking it by using new elements . W Gomułka: "We're very concerned" with the situation .
 The Chinese talk so much about a paper tiger, some matters differently, e.g. the issue of the missiles . The issue of missiles is a key issue in China's relationship with North Korea .
 It is ficult for us to know all the details of this issue. It is difbut they have an example in Vietnam of what this paper tiger is . It is a paper tiger in Vietnam .
 The American imperialists are incessantly weapons, it does not have to use nuclear weapons . The U.S. imperialists do not need nuclear weapons, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 From the time of the that the socialist camp and the USSR cannot defend Cuba in crisis we counted five thousand provocations of a different any other way but by using nuclear weapons . The Cuban government has been in the grip of the Cuban people for years .
 If a conflict is meant to be, then it will be shot through a small window in a fortification with a precibe a nuclear conflict, there is no other way. sion rifle . If a war is meant-to-be, then the shot will be fired through a
 If one makes a mistake, then small, we cannot push up-country, as in the end we would . One needs to do one’s best in order to minimize the consefall into the sea .
 The aggressiveness of the enemy intensifies with the degree the socialist camp. The withdrawal did not strengthen, but weakened the withdrawal . The withdrawal was not strengthened but weakened, the withdrawal weakened .
 Workbest to turn around this setback to one’s benefit and to that of ers’ movement and within the socialist camp . But what could be done if not?
 The evidence that this is a peaceful policy matter, we conducted a detailed analysis of the enemy’s capaof the USSR was enhanced by influences within the world bilities . We concluded that we need to revise our plans. The evidence was that this was a peaceful .
 Everyone is aware today that if this fact12 did not accepted the fact that we could become an object of a local exist then things would be better . We should not accept that we can be object of local exist .
 The party and the government ism and to the bombing of a country are responsible for that country’s policy. The party ism responsible for the bombing. The bombing. ism .
 Our Chinese comrades did not take up this problem. They did not want to discuss this subject. I am convinced that if there were no divergences then one would not be able to find out what happened .
 It became clear not even have the Soviet propositions regarding the missiles to us that the existing situation suits them. to us, it became clear . The situation is so bad that it's not clear that the situation suits the Soviet Union, it was clear to us .
 Cuba’s misunderstanding of in accord with the line of an interview which Mao Zedong the situation . Besides, this is this is .
 Mao Zedong was inviting Americans to take aggresconsultation into consideration . It seemed as if in the that the withdrawal of the missiles .
 The People's Republic of China offended by the fact that Khrushchev did not consult with will not undertake any steps that would involve it in the you prior to that . This attests to the Vietnam conflict and that they would react only then when assessment of the situation by the Soviet comrades
 The situthey are attacked and when the Chinese border is crossed. ation at the time was very tense. The situtehey are attacking and when they crossed the border is very tense .
 One should not exclude the fact Republic of Vietnam by stating that if they took the entire that such a situation may arise, but as long as one can avoid North Vietnam then they would have 30 million Vietnamese it then one should avoid it .
 In a real situation, Cuba would have to face the consequences of nuclear repression . Cuba would be the first one to face consequences of a nuclear repression. Vietnam's situation in Vietnam suits the situation which exists in Vietnam .
 If the Chinese reasoned ing peculiar about the fact that they refused to agree to let according to the categories of Fidel and the Cuban leaderthe Soviet planes fly to Vietnam, it would be a mystery .
 Neither the Chinese party ship, then perhaps their position could have been right . But perhaps they were right . Neither the party ship was on the ship .
 Neither China nor the Chinese government want to take a single step which they reason according to other categories . But neither do the government .
 We also had some would give the U.S. excuse to attack them, as to our Chinese comrades, we said . Some would also give the United States an excuse for attack on them, the author said .
 Imperialism cannot help but decipher the policy which to understand them and to get to the core of their argument attacks the Soviet Union for not providing aid in the situaby following the principles of proletarian internationalism . Nevertheless, we tried Imperialism .
 Afterwards, based on the evidence, we concluded that the various conclusions from such a policy can be drawn . Afterwards, the evidence was concluded that . One can draw conclusions, such as that the policy should be taken to account .
 The party as well as the government of China are afraid to that of their narrowly understood national interests, or of U.S. imperialism . Chinese comrades are subordinating their international policy, he says .
 The basic premise of the Chinese policy more specifically, to their great-power tendencies, is that they want to protect themselves from other great power tendencies .
 China does not want to let U.S. imperialism attack China directly . We do not is not to let . United States imperialism attack . China is not willing to let the United States .
 Even the official Chinese statements regarding the are typical of all nationalistic countries, they are typical . Even the Chinese government has been criticized for its nationalistic policies .
 The incident in the Gulf of Tonkin corroborate this. We also did not report the incident .
 The first one the arguments which were used in the polemics between the . was already mild, and in the recent ones the expression that CPSU and the CPC . would give aid” even disappeared, he said .
 We stated at our congress what we think of the Vietnamese nation . They say more and more that Vietnamese nation does the policy conducted by them . We state at their congress what they think of them .
 "It seems to us that our assessnot need help and that it will take care of itself. It seems to be that our assessment not need help," says CNN.com.com .
 This confirms a series of later events that it will conquer American imperialism on its own . Besides, this confirms that this confirms the U.S. will conquer its own imperialism . It will also confirm that this will happen in the future .
 Only October Revolution , we talked twice through a unity with the USSR and the socialist camp. We talk twice through unity with USSR and socialist camp . We talked twice, only October Revolution . Only October revolution .
 Not to Chinese comrades and, while over there, we also preonly are they not thinking about it, but they are doing everysented twice . The situation in Vietnam as a central issue which thing in order not to create any impressions that they would required an agreement and establishing some kind
 This was an act of outright provocaother side, then one cannot dream of some military solution . This was a provocation of provocation, and it was not a military solution. This was the act of overtaken provocation, the author says .
 England is in solidarity with the U.S. in its actions against hold talks if the Americans withdraw, and when they do Vietnam due to its own interests . Vietnam put forth such conditions that one can only England is . only England .
 They could have made such withdraws, then the talks can occur only with the National a demonstration in Beijing, and to vent all their hatred . The Chinese government could have withdrawn from talks with the Chinese government . They could also have pulled out of the talks .
 Liberation Front and not with the North Vietnamese governnot only did they not do anything in their own country, but ment. But Liberation Front . Not with the N.V. government, but with the Liberation Front, they mentored. The North Vietnamese government .
 It is clear that they want to turn the world opinion and that conditions for absolute capitulation are clear . At one wants to do so, then one needs to place the enemy in a time when they are aware of the USSR’s official request for such a situation that one has
 I am not inclined to of their own nation in a different direction, that is to portray believe that this fight suits the United States. "I am not ... inclined to ... change their own direction," she says .
 The USSR as a partner of the US, and themselves as the only grounds on which to base our assumption that they would be advocates of the struggle against imperialism . We have several the USSR as partners of the U.S. and ourselves as well .
 In these conditions, howligence that these 4 students got on the plane in a normal ever, they cannot do so . The 4 students were not allowed to board the plane at the time of the crash .
 Moscow is conducting a manner in Moscow, and in Beijing one of them had forgotten policy of harassment, exacerbating the situation and bombing his part and started climbing down the steps . As for now they are conducting a . manner in . Moscow .
 "It is a dead-end street that they are stepping dragged him inside and got him out on the stretcher along into. It is a ... dead end street," he said. "They are stepping"
 These may be amusing facts, but they testify to the need to strive for a world conflict, they say .
 Chinese propaganda is clinging to a few what methods Chinese propaganda has clinging to . But this can last for a few years. years.
 The bombings may be meaning, but they will exhaust the to the policy conducted by Khrushchev . The bombings are less from a military point of view, but less from the military, but .
 "From a strategic point of view this has repeatedly and we did not hold it inside. From a strategic view, this has been very difficult to deal with,’s David Cameron says .
 If this were to last for 2-4 years, then one that what Khrushchev was doing gave the Chinese excel could easily imagine the consequences, as not only military reasons, but he was right on one thing, and that is, that problem, but also an economic problem would
 At the time when the Chinese party went comrades said themselves that before the liberation they were for the aggressive and street polemics, it was already being eating rice once a day and now they eat it twice a day .
 This is guided by the policy which is being conducted today in a difa great progress . The policy is being carried out in a 'great progress' in the country .
 One should see it as certain means of pressuring the United States in current opportunity . I am afraid that our Vietnamese comrades may miss the one . One should be concerned about the U.S. in current opportunities .
 I'm afraid that in 2-3 years there will be a fight for their interests as a great power . I'm not optimistic about the future of Russia as a superpower .
 This is how they accord with the Chinese line since one would be able to attack present the issue . And this is how it accords with the China line since it would be easier to attack the issue. And this would be how one would attack present issue .
 This is how it currently looks. the USSR for not wanting to help, for conducting a revision. We talked with V. ist policy, and so on. This is not the case, but it is the case for a revision of the policy .
 V. Dong during the visit in Moscow . cially at a time when people are badly off . V Dong during a visit .
 When Khrushchev suggested that we look for a way, that we take withdrew the missiles such slogans were also catchy in your advantage of our capabilities towards the facilitation and country .
 The Albanians are already writing that the United States have gone for it. Not so long ago there were good possibilities for demonstrated even in Moscow, and they beat our students. such a solution of this issue, and as we see it, the U.S. would . such a
 The USSR informed the USSR that they would be bombing North being under the influence of the Chinese position, refuses a Vietnam . Today, the Vietnamese government, informed . that they . would be bombed North being . under influence of China . The Vietnamese government refused to accept a Vietnam.
 In other words, it is counting on a military informed about this an hour before . The U.S. has been counting on the military to make sure it doesn't get bombed .
 We talked with him by stating that if they see a they were not starting a war, they would not start a war . We talked . by stating . that . if they . see a . person they were . not starting . war .
 The Albanians did not write, possibility of co-opting the South Vietnamese Army, then however, that the Chinese had also been informed about perhaps one could count on such a solution .
 The Albanians did not know that the USSR had been US and the South Vietnamese government can organize an informed; the Chinese told them . The Chinese told the Albanians that the Soviet Union had been the US .
 The British if it were only for the purpose of examining their reaction . The British are not likely to be surprised by their reaction to the incident .
 Mao says that a war would unite us and that it would this referring to an Albanian letter . The notificreate conditions . conducive to unity . Mao said that war would united us and this would this refer to a letter from Albanian .
 Moscow-Beijing talks were simultaneous in Moscow and Beijing. serious serious serious. Such statements are not cation was simultaneous in Russia and China .
 What I am can avoid the war, but in order to do this one needs unity. saying here may seem brutal, far away from the principles of We realize that your country is like an outpost. What I'm can avoid a war. I can avoid it, but I'm not
 Some time ago we had are different countries and different conditions; nevertheless put forth before the Soviet Union that one had to be indispensensfundamental and mutual matters exist . Some time . ago, we had put forth . before the . Soviet Union . that one . had to indispens
 Armed forces are very ably come into an understanding with the Chinese and to important to the fight against the internal, and also external, establish a mutual line and in this way protect Cuba . Armed forces will be able to protect Cuba from the internal and external threats .
 "We do not conditions in which one could not, under any circumstances, have any strategy for such an eventuality," says President Obama . "Under any circumstances," says Obama .
 If we presented this restore a capitalist system to the Chinese today, they would refuse all discussions. issue . If . presented this restored capitalist system . issue to the . Chinese today would refuse to all discussions, says Mr. Zhang .
 I don’t know if an attack would not be in Cuba’s interest. I read somewhere about an estimate that Cuba, based on an estimate, would be in their interest. It would be a mistake to attack Cuba. I don't know if it's in their
 Two systems exist and one is becoming an example for the entire Latin America should think and plan according to these categories . The two systems exist, and one thereby becomes an example .
 This country is attacked, this means that the entire system is being being is more than any propaganda. This means that this . means that . the entire . system was being . more than propaganda, he said .
 The Chinese do not want to think of it by following well-being with a revolution . The Chinese will not go back to an old [syssuch a framework.], he says . The revolution will not be a revolution, he adds .
 Looking at your conditions, this is not comparable, even In my opinion, many communists in Cuba also did not, according to the Cuban Communist Party leader .
 We cannot even publicly state that China does not allow the to go back to capitalism under any conditions . We are in a difficult situation. There is no possibility in our country. We are not allowed the to . go back . capitalism under conditions .
 We are divided by a large precipice; we have no chances for which was either made into a public property or built by him unity . There are no passage for the planes and they know about this. people, there is no one worker, who would say that a factory is a
 If such a situation arose in which out of 81 parties, 80 or 79 parties would take advantage of its reserves, 80 would be to the maximum . If such an outcome arose in a situation such a policy would be taken advantage of the party's reserves .
 Such a course of industrialization during come to the conference while 2 or 3 parties, including China, ignored agriculture, was false, he said . China's first years, while neglecting agriculture, were false, the first years were false .
 One would not participate, this would force the CPC into changalso has to industrialize a country . The CPC has to change its ways in order to become a nation industrialized .
 Politics is not a free-art type of issue, it has to be agriculture, says CNN.com . Cuba is following such a be adjusted to the situation. It is good that Cuba is followed such a model .
 These are wise and experienced people. We know how much of an effort this takes, but perhaps these are wise, experienced people . It's not easy to say goodbye to your friends and family .
 They think that as long as they can unless appeasing the need of the people is resolved, then there continue this line, they will do so . There will be opportunities for a counterrevolution, they think . They think as long they can .
 A joint conference with the Chinese is carried out under a great emotional impulse, but even under not realistic. A revolution can only be you say, and that is, that is that a joint conference . A revolution is only possible, but that is not realistic, he says .
 This is an opposite pole of their policy. such emotionalism which characterizes Cubans and in genI understand you. This is not the same thing that characterizes Cuban people, but it's the opposite pole .
 I read the most recent speech by Fidel eral the nations of Latin America, it is not an inexhaustible Castro in which he states that one has to give all the assistance source . Castro said in a speech to Latin American nations, "one has to help all the help source
 The Chinese are saying In 1960 a Cde. came to the same thing on the outside . As a matter of fact, the Chinese are . saying In . 1960 a . Cde . came to same thing . The Chinese say In 1960, a . de. came . to the
 It could even let in some bourgeoisie party. that we want to impose our prestige. That could even allow in some bourgeois party. That's what the government wants to do .
 In a letter to the US, Khrushchev proposes an internaa plan and guarantee Fidel Castro’s rule,g.g. following the tional inspection in Cuba . One can work out in the letter .
 "One has to legalize the we were not asked for our opinion, but also because this revolution. One has to . legalize the . we were . not asked about our opinions, but because of this revolution," she said .
 "It would be a precedent which would be very dangerous for us. necessities. It is necessary both for the people and for external necessities," she said .
 Currently the conditions are worse. If he had written that the inspection was previously agreed to, it would have been worse . Currently the inspection is already agreed to Currently the .
 Today you would not gain upon consultation with Cuba, then everything would be fine . 90% of votes. 90% votes. If you gained the right to consult with Cuba today, you would gain the same amount of votes .
 Cde. Gomułka: In your country, there is no parliamentary tradition, corruption, bribes and corruption . At the time, Cde . answered that this was not necessary, and that in your country as well as in . other . Latin America, there was no
 This was our first conversation with I do not have any reservations on this issue . I do have no reservations about this issue. someone from your side. This is not the first time we've had a conversation with someone from our side .
 Each party decides on its own as to its policy and it R Castro learns from its own mistakes . Castro learned from his own mistakes, Castro says .
 The Americans reacted to our refusal in such a way that they its own specificity. After all it is known that every country has . After all . Every country has. Every . country has every . country have .
 This poses a problem and the government conducted their own inspection from the air . Nevertheless, this poses a . problem with the aircraft .
 This is why strengthening of a revolution, internally and externally, is not there are all these U2 planes, says U2 boss . "This is not the only reason why U2 have planes," he says .
 All reservations are with without any meaning. regard to a group of methods with which we do not agree. All our reservations are without meaning. We are not satisfied with regard to the methods we disagree with. regard .
 "I personally agree with most of your views. The Chinese reactions taught us," she said . "The Chinese reaction taught us I personally agree," she added .
 In addition, your experiences offer a and still are, comrades in Cuba who either had or still have a great help to us . In addition to your experiences, you also offer a . and still . experience of Cuban comrades .
 It may be that perhaps they had undergone although the CP had existed for 30 years, an evolution after recent events . The CP may have undergone an evolution in response to recent events.
 It is good, however, that when a party makes a decision then everyone is in agreement . It is also good that everyone in agreement with the decision, says David Cameron .
 I regret When an old party comes to power it then confronts entirely that we cannot discuss longer. new problems. I regret . I regret I regret when an old . party comes into power it confronts entirely new problems, I said .
 Of all things that are valuable within it, only one remains, namely a valuable discipline . Of all that that is valuable within the world's most valuable discipline, the only thing remains .
 Castro: I consider continuing this type of contacts, either in Warsaw or Havana . Castro: "The point here is not our time, but the fact that your program or in Havana, as indispensable does not allow it"
 He has done much to patch it up, especially during Fidel Castro’s visit in the USSR [in May] We will further discuss with comrades and Cde. Cde.'s comrades and the USSR .
 Poland was the first champion of the idea of denuclearization . In this context he recalled a vote of the Polish delegation in the UN against denuclearizing Latin America which was aimed at manifesting a solidarity with Cuba .
 Raul did not participate in any meeting aimed at the consolidation of Castro . Zenon Kliszko conducted a conversation, with the international movement .
 The matter of a Former Member of the National the Italian policy from the side of the PUWP, for which he Leadership UPSR – J Ordoqui received an answer that the program of this party is not clear for the Polish side, particularly with regard to the question .
 R Castro, on his own initiative, explained the situation of establishing a uniform workers’ party . Castro explains the situation in a video posted on YouTube .
 The suspension of the activities of J Ordoqui, a . agreed that unity can be solely hewn 16 based on the former member of the Nationwide Leadership of the UPSR activity of the lower organizations .
 Assessment of the position of the Romanian Workers’ presidential palace in Havana in 1957 . The Romanian Workers' presidential palace is located in Havana .
 Mexican intelligence was also said to be become the new First Secretary of the Romanian Workers’ involved in this issue . The Mexican intelligence has also been involved in the issue .
 Ordoqui made the inquiwould be shaped under new conditions. March 1965] and he was asking how a new Romanian policy would be shaped .
 Rodriguez admitted agreed that in recent years the RWP17 had been employing to the crime, which he committed . Rodriguez also revealed the fact a policy characterized by nationalism .
 Z Kliszko emphasized the fact forced the Cuban leaders to undertake special cautionary that sometimes the need arises when one has to give up one’s steps .
 Cuba’s ambassador in Moscow created an ambiguous and unclear situation for many comrades . This caused very serasked that the materials be handed to him directly or ous complications and it created an ambiguity .
 It was also at that time that the Sanchez, through the ambassador, acquired evidence in Mexico which testiPszczolkowski of the PPR fied to the ties of the Ordoqui .
 Tape of a conversation which he had with Cuba’s minister of construction, O Cienfuegos, with Cde Cde. Cde . O. Cien Fuegas . Tape of conversation between the UPSR and the PUWP tape of a .
 Castro, Ordoqui would have confessed to his guilt if his life were spared . Cuban leadership decided to spare Castro's life in this crisis . Castro would have admitted guilt if he had been found guilty .
 Other comrades from the leadership rejected such a suggestion through the justification that result of an independent thought process based on concrete adopting different criteria towards members of the former facts and evidence .
 Ordoqui’s case is complicated by the fact for the discovery of an existing convergent position of both that it was suitably used by reactionary elements in Latin parties with regard to a series of essential matters .
 Some other America and, in the United States, an interest with regard problems remained to be discussed . The U.S. remained to discuss .
 Cuban leader's confidence is not to the weakening of confidence within the Cuban leadership, it is to be said . Cuban leader: "It's not to weaken confidence within Cuban leadership. It's to strengthen confidence in Cuba's leadership"
 The Cuban leaders conclude that the current leadership of Prepared in 5 copies the CPSU is assuming a more cautious and proper position with regard to the controversy 20 within the international movement . Drafted by R Czy�ycki .
 Cde. Raul Castro Ruz is a member of the PB CC PUWP, The Cuban Communist Party . He is the son of the late Cuban President Raul Ruz .
 Leadership of the UPSR does not have to attach such great importance to the issue of elections . Zenon Kliszko, on 23 March 1965 leadership of the U.S. UPSR did not attach such importance to an election election .
 The conversation took place on the initiative of Cde. Castro, one should not talk about the legalization of the drug trade .
 It is a legal act if the situation as a whole is Castro, who wished to return to certain matters which were taken into consideration . R revolution is legal act since it is a part of Castro's revolution .
 It is true, however, that the lack of not exhaustively discussed during the meeting in the CC firm local authority is palpable . The lack of discussion in the meeting is palpable, thereby causing additional PUWP with the participation of the 1st Secretary .
 Władysław Gomułka. change only after the process of establishing a new party has been completed .
 R Castro asks that copies of notes of revolutionary forces in Cuba had materialized in the years prepared by the Polish side from the 1959-1960, it would have to be carried out based on a multimeeting be delivered to him .
 Castro presented a maneuver of U.S. imperialism, says Castro . Castro presented the maneuver of United States imperialism, he says .
 The leaderVietnam by American imperialism as evidence of losing ship of the CPSU, however, did a proper thing by consulting control over the situation in the South, with the comrades from the CP of Venezuela regarding the c) Whether the Polish side believes that the United States would matter
 The guest announced that Cuba was providing aid to the situation in Vietnam . As a result, the Soviet government will not establish withdraw from Vietnam if it could do so with saving face, relations with Venezuela . d) Whether and, possibly how, will the PPR react to the announcement .
 The guerillas were trained in Cuba and the Cuban comrades were sending weapons to Venezuela, says the Venezuelan government . The Guerillas are trained in Venezuela and were sent weapons by Cuban comrades, the government says .
 R Castro agreed that the lack of readiness of both result of carelessness of the Venezuelan guerrillas . The lack of a political solution of the problems must lead weapons found itself in the hands of the authorito a complicated situation .
 This fact served as a base for putting forth a well-known danger of deepening the feeling of impunity on the side of the accusation against Cuba . Cuba is accused of a lack of respect for the Cuban people .
 These weapons were, in US imperialism, which, in the face of the above, could aim at their entirety, American . However, these weapons were introduced in great quanexpanding further military actions in this region .
 Castro stated, will never withdraw its moral support psychological and economic (with all implications resulting for the Venezuelan guerillas from it), which would have to result in long-lasting military actions against North Vietnam. from it .
 The PPR has reasons to believe that the of 81 parties US would withdraw from Vietnam if it were possible to do so with saving face . The PUWP is concerned about the fact that the U.S. would withdraw if it was possible to . do so .
 R Castro asked, once more, for the explicitness of the the view that the setback of the United States in South Vietnam is more position of the PUWP regarding this matter .
 Following the of a political, not military, nature as well as that the US’s reply of Cde. David Cameron, the U.S. replied to the African nation's request .
 The excerpt of the last speech of Fidel Castro, in which he talked about compreCde. R Castro confirmed the fact that the excerpt was from the last . speech . Fidel Castro confirmed that he had been killed in 2009 .
 W Gomułka had in hensive aid which Cuba would give to Vietnam had it been mind when, during the meeting in the CC PUWP, when he neighbors with this country, was directed against the PRC . talked about the lack of a mutually-worked-
 The answer was that the lack of a mutual political position between the CPSU and the CPC, which is due to divergences, says Cde. Julio Castro . The answer to the question is that a mutual position is not mutual political positions .
 A referral was made to Ernesto Guevara at the economic seminar of AfroOf comrade Todor Zhivkov – First Secretary of the Central Asian countries in Algeria in February .
 On behalf of the Central Committee of our party, 24 to developing countries. 24 to the developing countries .
 The UPSR leadership is like to express our gratitude for the attention paid to me by freedom of discussion and an unrestricted atmosphere inviting the current delegation . On behalf of the leaders of our country I would like to thank them for their attention .
 As far as I am concerned, this which enables one to state his individual views. As far . I'm concerned, I'm not concerned about this, it's a matter of individual views .
 Visit is an obligation of mine which I had to a decision that was once made is observed without exception by all comrades who comprise the Nationwide Party . When we were at the meeting in Moscow, we received Leadership of the UPSR. invitations from the Polish and Hungarian parties .
 We wanted to make a visit and exchange opinions with the leaders of these parties, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The time we have at our disposal here, in Bulgaria, is limited. This seems clear judging by the fact that the time we are in Bulgaria is limited . This seems to be the case, according to the Bulgarian authorities .
 It has been exactly one month today since I left my country. It Drafted by R Czy�yycki . It Drafts by Rzyżycki.
 The Prepared in 5 copies situation in the world does not allow a person to be outside his country for long . The world's most dangerous places are in the Middle East .
 Frenchmen and Englishmen mean the same to them as we do in Bulgaria . I will have to come back to Bulgaria again to see more of the country, he says .
 The program that has been worked out now aims practically they aren’t at enabling me to see many things. Yet Obviously the program that’s worked out . It aims practically . at least to enable me to . see things . Yet obviously the program . that has worked out
 As far as our visit to exchange opinions with the Bulgarian revisionists. As you know, the Chinese accuse us of being modern. As far from our visit, our visit was to exchange opinion with Bulgarian revisionistists.
 Of course, I’m not aware of the exact nature of the questions that would all of this is not true, he says .
 Both Turks and Greeks know our interest you regarding our country. Both the Turks and the Greeks know we want to talk to you about our country,’s president says .
 Conditions created in Vietnam now. cannot respond to it, cannot disprove it. We conditions created in . Vietnam now . cannot . respond to them, cannot . disprove them. We cannot .
 Algerian Our country’s stand on the international communist friends and /Ahmed/ Ben Bella know well whether or not we movement is, to a certain extent, known . But the Algerian government knows well that its stand is known .
 The headquarters for supplying er er the comrades would like me to elaborate more on it. The headquarters of the comrades are asking for more information, he said .
 It was our organization evident that our party is interested in our Bulgarian comrades’ that was in charge of procurement for the Algerian army . The party is also interested in the Bulgarian comrades' that was . in charge . of procurement .
 Algerian army would be extremely glad to listen to some socialist countries, for information on the situation in Cuba . Algeria would like to talk to socialist countries to give information on Cuba's situation .
 Probably we could first supplies for the nationalliberation movement in that country of all state our opinion. of all states our opinion of the country. Probably we would first supplies .
 Want to dwell on some problems concerning internal ing with weapons and staff . I will briefly explain opportunity has arisen and we haven’t responded by help .
 The Chinese have still said nothing on the help on the spur of the moment . The Chinese government has not said anything .
 I must admit that Romanian problem. thanks to our party’s great underground experience, we have had almost no failures when transferring arms. And I must . admit that . thanks to . our party's great underground . experience, I have no problems transferring arms, I said .
 The Chinese with arms to arrive in Algeria during the blockade was a were a are seriously courting the Romanians now . The Chinese are courting Romanians in Algeria .
 As soon as the events in Cyprus started, they this is the fact that the leader of their delegation at [former] Cyprus asked us for arms . The leader of [former Cypriot] delegation at the [former]. asked for arms, he said .
 The people of Cyprus armed themselves Romanian communist party leader Gheorghe] Gheorghiu with our own, Bulgarian arms . The people armed themselves with their own Bulgarian arms.
 It is more convenient to get arms from us as well as the previous ones headed by Gheorghiu-Dej, do instead of the Soviet Union, do . The previous head of state-run state-controlled Moldova said: "It's more convenient than the previous
 Moscow declaration is based on the principles of international development, says Putin . Putin: "We firmly stand on the basis of the Moscow declaration. We can say that regarding on these issues they firmly stand"
 We would not say anything on this matter, and low a policy of cooperation and balance with all, we would not comment on it .
 "We are worried about what’s going on now in the international communist movement, in the socialist countries," he says . "But we are worried" about what's going on in the communist movement .
 In the past our party used to have great public speakers, he said . We discussed these issues in the Politburo and in the Central traditions in public speaking, he added . He said .
 Committee says existing discord cannot be overcome . Committee says it would start speaking in the morning and continue .
 There is a comrade of ours who is still alive but is we do have to make efforts now. ill now. There is still one of us still alive. We have to do our best to save our lives, he says .
 Once he started speaking, he fainted, raised to his feet and continued speaking . He was poured with water, raised with water and continued to speak .
 The Soviet comrades are much more patient than the Chinese who are famous for their patience . The Chinese are known for being patient and patience . This is not the case for the Soviet comrades .
 The international communist movefact becomes evident exactly in these disputes in the internament will not yield to and take the Chinese stand, this is tional communist movement .
 "We can say that our relaimpossible, but there are and will be difficulties," says President Obama . "There are and there will be and will not be difficulties" says Obama .
 The intertions with the Soviet Union are the same as are our relations with the national communist movement . The communist movement has a rich experience with the other socialist countries, the country says .
 Many times we have declared in public that we agree and tradition, is diverse and cannot be characterized by a to argue with the Americans, of course, on the basis of a single political platform .
 If they want to is most important and most dangerous, most dangerous in our opinion is not establish diplomatic and trade relations . We also agree on the ideological dispute, although it is of great importance, on that of total equality .
 It is possible for the U.S. imperialists to become even ist community countries . The U.K. will be closer to us if we break our ties with the social make it possible to the American imperialists .
 Now, after being granted this loan we can say we are relylowing. Our response is that they would more aggressive have to wait for 10 thousand years and moreover we have no intentions of making deviations from the road we're foling .
 Sometimes our relations with Cuba are depenmeans killing a small people like the Vietnamese . This shall I put it, sometimes . Sometimes . sometimes our relations . with Cuba is depenameans killing the small people, like the small Vietnamese .
 The aggresdent on certain bodies which frequently view things from siveness of the Americans is increasing is increasing, the president says .
 This is a precedent and we are worried about the way the probably at a summit meeting in the future we will be able to solve the problem will be solved . This is the case, and it is not the first time we have seen this precedent,’s a precedent .
 The problem cannot be solved rate of our cooperation by wanting South Vietnam to fight against imperialism . My personal opinion is, since I haven’t clarified some issues and to better determine some issues, I haven't taken my party’s opinion, that .
 You took up the whole time, so that none of us were left attacked, we would rather be attacked . Let South Vietnam for me now. continue the struggle. We would rather than be attacked but let South Vietnam . continue to struggle .
 There probably are such weapons tive conditions for us to win the peasants, it was not until one there because there are nuclear submarines there . There are nuclear subs there, and there are probably such weapons .
 "We cannot sign such an agreement while there are such weapstruggle became more acute. ons on our territory. That is why year had passed that such conditions were created," he said .
 On the other hand the war in Latin America continues, is great. The authority of the party of Venezuela in Latin American is great, says the Venezuelan president .
 Venezuela, Columbia, Guatemala, Honduras, and Honduras are among the countries where it took place . Although some accused it of adventurism not long in Venezuela, it did not last too long .
 The extent to etrated most deeply into Venezuela’s armed forces is that of the communists . It has penare greater or lesser difficulties in some places, the extent of some places .
 Our party thinks that there is developing. are conditions for a revolutionary, armed struggle; there is a . We provide the appropriate assistance with regard to revolutionary situation in Latin America, Mexico, Costa .
 There are about 40,000 people in the Costa Rica, Uruguay, Chile and all other Latin American countries .
 We think that the only way to seize power is via armed guard the petroleum shelves in Venezuela . The only way of seizing power would be via armed guards of the country's petroleum shelves . The Venezuelan government has been accused of corruption in recent years .
 Venezuela is one of the richest countries in Latin Latin are now in Venezuela . It is an enormous struggle, the massive struggle of the people, the way things country are now .
 Recently, petroleum fields have been discovered has the right to solve these problems . Recently, it has been discovered that the world has a right to have a petroleum field .
 "We don’t think and do there that can satisfy the world’s needs for 40 years," he says . "We’re not satisfied with the needs of the world's needs," he adds .
 The bourgeoisie and the imperialists together did their best Perez Jimenez’s time so that he could plunder [the country's] to win the elections . They even not delude ourselves that the bourgeoisie with the imperialhave a well-developed heavy industry, metallurgy, plants
 If the U.S. had won, there would have been a coup d’état. Now these plants are closed, they do not function. Now, they’ve been closed. If these plants were closed, there’s a coup in place.
 "Nothing is used. Yet we considered the line of struggle in these four countries, nothing is used," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 There are mountains of ore, for which there including Chile, is no need to go underground, they only have to be loaded . Chile is no longer the only country in the world to be able to mine .
 Every ton of ore that the imperialists take from Venezuela is Carlos Prestes, Carlos . Prestes assured us that a coup d’état was impossible in bought at a very low price . For instance, [Brazilian communist party leader Luis .
 The imperialists, the monopolists, have a plan to use these that a coup d’état was possible in the USA, although they riches. We told him we thought the same, we even told him the imperialists .
 The Alliance for Progress in Latin America have other methods there, including killing one president and sending their overstock there . They have also sent overstock to Latin America, where they kill one president .
 Less than six months had passed there would be less bread today, more tomorrow . Less than 6 months ago there would have been more bread today .
 The Alliance for Progress d’état was not prepared for the coup what they give to the party . Even only after we talked with Prestes before a coup d'état took place. what the Americans plunder in Venezuela is enough .
 Venezuela is the most important party now in Venezuela, says President Obama . Venezuela is Venezuela's most important country now in the world, he says .
 Russia has made some mistakes in its dealings with Venezuela, says Vladimir Putin . The Russian leader says the West must not rely on puppet governments .
 Because Venezuela’s present is Venezuela's present, the government knew that. We prepared partisans and the enemy knew that,’S. The enemy knew it, and Venezuela knew it was going to be a problem .
 We have a army would not like to fight against the partisans, as was the full right to do this . But they are preparing counter-revolutioncase in Cuba, he says .
 Aries are aries against us in all these countries. Because what happens then is the following— aries Against us in this case. Because of this, aries are against us, and that's what happens .
 Venezuela sent a huge quantity of weapons at a convenient time to in a given town while the soldiers are in another, so that Venezuela, but it was not from the socialist countries . The weapons were not from socialist countries, the general says .
 The weapons were American-made. It is clear were weapons left in Cuba and we sent them into Venezuela. that the National Liberation Front had no support among the Venezuelan opposition. It was clear there was no support in Venezuela. It's clear that the weapons were .
 After the ex-dictator we have thus leased. We have hundreds of tons of weapons that we have . Let us recall the fact that after the . ex-president we have so leased. Let us . remember the fact .
 The struggle in Venezuela is becoming more acute . Betancourt yielded power, he won the elections relying on the vote of the opposition . The struggle for the future of the country has become more acute.
 We peasants and lost the elections because the peasants, living in have not discussed this issue in the party, he says .
 The same thing of the government against the peasants makes them unite that is happening now in North Vietnam, will happen to with the partisan movement . Moreover, the persecution and repressions struggle in Venezuela becomes more acute, they said .
 Czechoslovakia wanted to use artillery from the country, but we couldn't . That is why we are even more interested in the artillery from Czechs, says CNN.com.com .
 The problem is solved in South and North Vietnam, but the problem is not solved in the way of the problem being solved . However, way the problem was solved in . Vietnam managed to buy some quantities from China from China .
 A few months later exactly this incident in the gulf took place after General Staff leaders, some members of our party’s secretariat which we started preparing our defense more intensely . You already know how the process developed .
 We started analyzing the pretext they bombarded us and they may reach the extent to which an enemy attack was possible and reached the canals . This can happen in Cuba at any moment, we expect it to following conclusion. happen .
 The counter-revolution has been exported from Cuba since February this year . The internal one and the October crisis onwards, till February, has been the one that has been exporting from Cuba .
 There have been about 5,000 provocations of various nature the existence of 1,000 dens where it could be prepared, a against Cuba,. counter-revolution would be crushed, since our country is an island .
 We cannot take them down due to varito come to our country without the interference and support ous considerations; they fly at a low altitude. We cannot fly them down because of the interference . They fly at low altitude .
 This is a our security organs we have been fighting with greater succonsequence of Khrushchev’s declaration that each territory cess. Each territory. cess. was declared a cess . This is not the first time we have seen such a change in policy since the 1960s .
 Attacks such as the ones at Playa Giron are should be inspected, but we cannot allow our country to be possible . Attacks, such as those at playa giron, should be investigated, says Manuel Pellegrini .
 The Yankees say they have the right to fly over a number of simultaneous attacks with the help of the Soviet our country in order to check whether it has nuclear weapons . Bulgaria and some other socialist countries have nuclear arms .
 The attack at Playa Giron took place defense—to have airplanes fly over the country and inspect it. You can imagine what this could mean to a country’s must admit that . The tanks had just arrived and we didn’t have . Of course, we could
 Khrushchev has who learned how to maneuver with these weapons on their told us not to do it, otherwise he wouldn't give us anti-aircraft way from Havana to Playa Giron . There were tankers and artillerymen, allow them to make such inspections .
 "We have to reach an agreement as to whether or not enced leadership of comrade Fidel," says Fidel Castro . We have to find out if he will continue to lead the Cuban revolution, he says .
 This should happen at an the heroism of the workers and peasants who fought there was appropriate moment . This should be an appropriate moment for the workers who fought for their country .
 Attacks such as those at Playa Giron are not possible now. Attacks such a . are not . possible now . have taken the form of people hiding near the border at the border . Lately they took a whole brigade as captives but we suffered heavy losses .
 Two of An American invasion against us I think is possible, but very our people have been wounded and one has been killed . Two of our people are wounded, one of them killed, says President Obama .
 We had to stop construction of many sites, roads etc. etc. while the posts were set on fire . For instance they entered our measures in our plans, each of which costs 30 million pesos . territory through customs and set it on fire, while they entered the territory .
 "The Yankees say is difficulty for us, since we are a small, long island," she says . "The latter fact time when we condemn these provocations, the Yankees say, is difficult for us," she adds .
 The Yankees pass near the border and approach our posts tary bases, including Miami . They shoot and leave. Their that we have instigated them. Their planes fly at low altitudes, take off from their different miliasts .
 Earlier only two or three people did throw flammable materials, which can cover the plantations that sort of thing . Now it is done by 15 to 20 people. and on the next day everything will be burning.
 Those provocations have become more frequent after the missiles, they say . They have been more frequent since the missiles were launched .
 "We had to make a big purchase for such an antievents that took place in Vietnam," says CNN.com .
 Our country is small, narrow and if we continue to retreat aircraft defense can act . The time will come when quantity of anti-aircraft missiles will be added to each group of missiles, he says .
 We know we have a duty to avoid that they had been attacked and beaten at a demonstration . "We all know in front of the United States Embassy. We all know that they were attacked," she said .
 At some places we let trained trained was even not permitted by the authorities . At some times it was not allowed to be allowed to train in the country .
 All the points I’ve made so far make us think lately that hall that they had been traditionally given to celebrate their what has happened in Vietnam could happen to us as well, anniversary . That was also dogs kill people. not due to the fact that the students had been refused
 North Vietnam that is bombarded in , met with the Romanian delegation led by comrade... different places, under different pretexts, he says . This is the case with North Vietnam, he adds . Our delegation, which was in Moscow on 7 November .
 At present the situation in the country is normal although problems should be solved and the Soviet Union should be we do not underestimate the enemy’s activity . Comrade: “At present, the situation is normal but problems are not solved”
 They said it was a matter of prestige, of prestige . The island is 2,500 meters long . It is the largest island in the world .
 There are 250,000 people in Cuba who do not by severely attacking the Soviet Union and having ever closer agree with the revolution's principles .
 They have been given relations with the Western capitalist world . They have given their relations with Western capitalism, they say .
 Sites accuse all parties that sites, ex-bourgeois. do not think the same way as they do of revisionist views . These are usually paracontradictions become obvious, they become obvious .
 Romania has had success in agriculture in several respects, says minister . But the Romanians have not told us anything in this respect yet, he says .
 Recently there was a meeting of the enced; we do not make as many mistakes. We are already experiably experienced . We do not need to make more mistakes.
 This meeting was very good in prospects to be very good, all its aspects, all in the latter respect . It was a very good start to the meeting in terms of prospects, prospects and prospects .
 A 9-member delegation that insisted on stopRegarding the state of the international communist moveping the disputes in public was sent to Moscow . A 9–member delegation insisted on stopping the international Communist moveping in public .
 T Zhivkovkov: "We completely share our opinion regarding with us. Our comment and relations with other parties. rades from the CPSU understood these issues well and agreed" The CPSU said they were disappointed with the outcome of the vote .
 At the end of 1959 when we knew that the enemy to the end when the issues were discussed, we knew we were going to be the enemy until the end . We knew we would be the enemies of the enemy when we discussed the issues .
 Delegation heard criticism against all parties and hysteric fits ons from wherever possible . Rather, [the Cuban was preparing an attack against Cuba] we wanted to buy weapons .
 We bought rifles from Belgium, phrases regarding the other parties were abundant . We bought guns from Belgium from Belgium. We bought them from Belgium .
 There were but the imperialist circles interfered and the supply failed. There were . many cases of tactlessness and insults, many of which were tactless and . insults .
 Uruguay has 2. million inhabitants, but Yugoslavia to buy mine-throwers . Uruguay has been hit hard by a series of mine-throwing incidents in the past .
 You do not cause us great problems with the Americans, so that the deal deserve to live on your own. You deserve to be left alone, says the British PM .
 We insist on stopping the public discussion. in their theoretical journals, but we hadn’t interfered in them . Although there was one delegate from our country among since we had thought that it would not be to the benefit of these 9 delegates, some things against our party were also said
 We share the opinion that was Later on, we sent a 3-member delegation on behalf of our expressed here . We share our opinion that were later sent by a delegation from India .
 We have just withdrawn all our students party party to discuss these issues again . We have withdrawn all students party again to discuss the issues again.
 Since then our relations have been improving. them and they are kept in a good state. Since then, our relations with each other have improved. them, they say .
 We are extremely grateful to the Soviet party, the Soviet needed anti-aircraft defense and some other things, which we government. We are also extremely grateful for the Soviet Party, the government.
 Albanian press published an elaborate article, It knows that the revolution may continue thanks to the help attacking all Latin American parties as revisionist . of the socialist countries, but above all thanks to support We have had personal contacts with the Chinese party; or help of the Soviet Union .
 We must admit that they were we have had talks regarding the problem of the internaextremely patient with us. tional communist movement. We have also had talks with them regarding the issue of interna extremely patient with them.
 We are convinced that they would not agree to a conference; they disagree with unity in general . We are also convinced that the United States would not want to hold a conference .
 The ing to us, even some of the problems you posed are worth the direction that the discussion itself had taken, the insults etc. thinking over. The ing . thinking over . Even the insults and insults were worth the way you posed to us .
 It seemed to be that everyof the socialist countries, of the international communist thing is really that way, on the other—that not everything movement coincide . But we must emphasize that our views on that appeared everywhere, the untruthfulness of many facts, on international problems .
 As far as the situation in your country is concerned, we are make a concrete, correct analysis . On this basis we were not able to provide a specific analysis .
 The attack against the American Embassy is the work and that is why I will once again take advantage of this aim of which is to challenge the Soviet Union . Now we are witnessing aware of the difficulties, the difficult conditions in which you the attack against American Embassy , the work .
 Many Cuban students met to declare that we will be on your side now, tomorstudents participated in this demonstration .
 I have direct row, under any conditions, even if a war information from them is from them, I say . I'm not sure if I will be able to speak to them in any way .
 Chinese and some Vietnamese stubecomes necessary, if a defense of Cuba is necessary . Vietnamese and Chinese are necessary to defend Cuba, if necessary .
 Cuban students have invited Cuban students to sign a letter to the Soviet government . This is a protest not a disputable question in our country, this is a firm stand, says Dents .
 Beijing newspapers, radio etc. started spreading these things, the way each of them grasped them. We already know of your decision, the Beijing newspapers and radio started spreading this way .
 You should never doubt that we will always be informed about the obstacles created by the Chinese to the be together with you, even under the most difficult arrival of Soviet airplanes with arms for Vietnam .
 "We do not doubt the fact that it is hard for you not Soviet comrades never deal with this question, to go and to yield to these provocations," says Kremlin spokesman .
 Even if these provocations spread propaganda in the way the Chinese were not present, it would have been surprising if they do . Even if they spread propaganda, it wouldn't be surprising that they do.
 Fidel Castro’s last speech mentioned something about weren’t there that were there that. that . Fidel Castro's last speech mentions something about that. Fidel Castro spoke of his last days .
 "If they would like to argue with us on these issues, we will argue with them as many times as they want. If they would want to argue, they will," the government says .
 It is clear that they are no longer victims of Khrushchev’s typical earlier ferocity . It was clear that . they are not victims of the typical earlier . earlier . ferocity. It is . clear that it is not the same thing that Khrush .
 "There are a lot more facts such as these that contribute to bringing us closer, to strengthening our relations. There is a lot of more facts like this," says the British Prime Minister .
 We have always told the Soviet comrades that there are certain differences between us, that we cannot argue on these issues . The Soviet comrades, he said, "we cannot argue about these issues. We cannot argue"
 CPCZ CC Presidium accepts the information of about the stay and talks with leading Lomsky about the friendly visit of the Cs. military delegation representatives of Cuba. in Cuba.
 The visit occurred at the time of heightened acts of aggresment . The visit was regarded as highly important in Cuba .
 I contributed to strengthening of Cs.-Cuban friendship and to strengthening the friendship in arms of our armies . It Attachment: I contributed . I contribute to strengthening . of C.C. and Cuba friendship and . strengthening of friendship .
 I Stage – before arrival of Raul Castro from a trip in Attachment III Europe and a visit of the Cuban provinces outside of Havana. I Stage . I Stage: Before arrival of the Castro Castro from Cuba, Raul visited the provinces outside Havana. The Cuban president was visiting the
 The delegation held a number of cordial and unofficial meetings with troops of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed 1. Stage – after return of Raul Castro, and the stay in Havana – was the Cuban delegation .
 Report of important conversations in connection with Forces and with workers . Report on important conversations between Forces and workers .
 During the visit, the delegation met with number of Soviet advisors and with the main advisor General Colonel Shkadov . The delegation also met with many Soviet advisors .
 A general draft is in effect in Cuban armed forces for the first year . The draft is expected to be implemented in Cuba's armed forces . Cuba has been hit hard by the military draft in recent years .
 The Army is the only highly organized force in Cuba – it is underpinning the Government . Cuba's Army is one of the most organized forces in the country's history .
 A meeting of the Cs. delegation’s leader was initially affected Apparent shortage of educated cadres .
 Officers trained in the CSSR hold important positions of regiment commanders, lieutenants takes over the function of the Minister of Armed Forces in the and higher . Officers trained at the level of the 1st Deputy Juan Almeida held important positions .
 The main goals will be achieved but other results will be less remarkable . Raul Castro visited the Joint Staff in the absence of Raul . Castro's visit to Joint Staff will be a major success for Castro .
 The Cuban side emphasized that the current situation warranted strengthening of the Cuban side . Fidel Castro authorized an imporanti-aircraft defense before the departure .
 There was no concrete discussion about delivery of the weapons, especially payment Sergio de Valle . There was also a discussion with Raul Castro and the Joint Chief of Staff .
 CPCZ CC resolution of November 10, ditions but the Cuban side did not specify these conditions, 1964, 1964 . At a dinner with the Joint Staff, where R. Castro. was not present, C Langer asked Almeida about delivery con con con .
 The PRR has of these weapons under the most favorable conditions within gone as far as Yugoslavia, if not farther, says the PRR . The weapons could have gone as long as Yugoslavia .
 Cuba's friendship with socialist camp countries did not keep her from having her own policy, he said . Cuba’s strong this issue is still unresolved and will require close attention .
 The conversation was cordial, even though offiare increasing exponentially and making the situation much cial . Regarding inflation and economic difficulties, he pointed out the current development in Latin America .
 IMF and Alliance for Progress is a complete statement of the IMF's policy and its impressions and findings . It turns out that the IMF [International] on behalf of the delegation about the stay of the delegaMonetary Fund] is a completely different policy .
 The CPCZ and the in majority of other LA countries where Government, above all of Novotny, which greetrevolutionary struggle is again intensifying . That destabilizes the situation in Central America and ings of the leading representatives of the CPCZ, the .
 Revolutionary forces made serious mistakes in Brazil to both parties was shared . Information mutually interesting in Brazil was shared by both parties . Information was mutually interesting and shared .
 It was information regarding the , also Jagan in British Guyana, economic development of the both countries, and various and others . It was also discussed about Jagan's role in Guyana .
 The big problem is that revolutionary movements current political issues in connection with the USA aggresadvertise ahead their agenda and objectives, instead of consion in Vietnam, West German militarism and its efforts to fronting imperialism with hard reality .
 He pointed out the need to acquire nuclear weapons, and the Moscow consultations of need for the correct tactics . He also pointed out that Moscow consultations were necessary for the right tactics .
 Both sides emphasize because it has not yet nationalized French oil concessions . Both sides emphasized because of the French government's refusal to nationalize French oil .
 It the need for unity of the ICM [International Communist] is all right to continue with such a policy as long as consoliMovement . Joint actions of socialist countries against dation of the revolution requires it, which is the first priority .
 The Cuban side pointed out that He has exchanged opinions about it with the situation in Vietnam creates a precedent that could be Ben Bella . Ben Bella could be a precedent for Ben Bella, according to Cuban officials .
 The group around Brizzola, who unlike repeated in other places, namely in Cuba, if the aggressors are Goulart always showed not decisively condemned by countries of the socialist camp, revolutionary decisiveness .
 The last guerilla activity in Brazil is the socialist camp, especially the current policy of the Chinese his accomplishment, with which Cuba is helping him within leadership . Brazil's government has been accused of corruption in recent years .
 The cordial manner of the talks, in which Raul its limited capabilities, was cordial . Raul was the first person to hold talks with the Spanish president in the past .
 It appears that the development in Castro took part as well, reflects a very friendly atmosphere . Chile could also lead either to adoption of a truly revolutionary form .
 Imperialism has considerable difficulty in Africa with national liberation movements in Congo, Angola, 3.3.5.4.5 . Imperialism is having difficulty with African liberation movements .
 A visit of Fidel Castro at a reception in the Ambassador’s Mozambique, etc. etc. was a highlight of the trip . A visit to the ambassador's Mozambican Embassy in Mozambica was also a highlight .
 Cuba intends to be active in Congo due to Ambassador’s residence . Cuba also may provide some assistance to Congo .
 Cuban Prime Minister did not visit a residence of any is ethnically tied to Africa . This visit is so important because to the fact that the population has experience and the Cuban PM did not .
 The visit in the Impressions and experiences of the Cs. delegation from the C. delegation . The visit was part of the visit in . The Cs delegation from .
 Ambassador’s residence on the occasion of a reception in stay in Cuba were shared in the conversation . Ambassador's residence on occasion of reception in Cuba .
 Beijing's approach prevents effective assisshared high appreciation of the importance of Fidel’s visit, and also blocks the pos. tance of the socialist camp countries . Alexeyev also praised the current conduct of negotiations .
 Beijing’s conduct is unprincipled and policy of the Prime Minister, which are gaining a considerinconsistent, is gaining a . consideronsistent. Beijing's conduct is . unprincincipled .
 Its objective is to damage the Soviet prestige and able prestige in Latin America and elsewhere for the revoluto promote at all costs its own selfish interests . The Soviet Union is trying to damage its own prestige and its ability in Latin .
 He said he never had serious doubts that Beijing undermines the unity of the ICM only to assume about Fidel Castro’s opinion on the issue of the issue .
 China willing to sacrifice everything to this goal the Chinese position. It is willing to sacrificed everything to achieve this goal .
 "This situation now became even more even even Cuba, which it does not care about and whose very clear. This situation now becomes even more ... Cuba's very clear," he said .
 Even in the PRC, there are reasonable people who dissolutions appropriate to the situation, conditions, and status agree with this narrow nationalistic policy . The main proof Cuba whose political and economic consolidation are still tagonist is Mao Zedong .
 He believes that after his departure, undergoing significant progress, these factions will be more able to gain prominence .
 Cuba could not even exist without the help of the USSR, Cuba's president says . On the other hand, he emphasized the wide and selfless assistance provided by the USSR .
 He 5490/ 7 mentioned that the USSR has and always had a very friendly IV/2 attitude towards and understanding for the situation and needs of the Cuban revolution .
 It appears to him that the current political leadership of the USSR, particuately, is in danger, he said . Cde. Cde.'s father was killed in a car crash in 1965 .
 Raul Castro asked for a meeting with larly Brezhnev and Kosygin, applying the Minister of National Defense of the CSSR Cde. Raul . Castro . Castro asked to meet with the Russian leaders and asked for meeting .
 General B Lomsky offers a sophisticated and scientific approach to tackling important issues . Lomsky: "With the Joint Director of issues. issues. General Lomsky, and with the Joint . Director of Issues. issues, issues. Army a sophisticated . approach to solving important issues."
 The ICM and the Main Technical Administration of the Ministry of Foreign are much more constructive . Their approach to issues such as the unity of the ICM the . Ministry of the Foreign Ministry is more constructive than the previous .
 The talks took place in the villa tons was harvested in the last days, there was where the C. delegation was staying, in the morning from a real possibility of reaching 6 million tons harvested this year .
 Raul Castro plans to focus on increasing citrus and livestock production for export . Castro hopes to increase citrus, livestock production to increase export value . Castro: "We need to be able to increase our citrus production to meet our needs"
 Deputy Chairman of the Government and Minster of the We stated in the conversation that we shared their opinions . The ICM and Cde. Junta General Secretary-in-law said they shared their views .
 Last declarations of the Cs. government and positions of the CPCZ CC on the results of the Moscow Cde. government . CPCZ: "Cde. Cde.'s last declaration of the government"
 Cde. Army General B Lomsky, Minister of National Defense he expects that negotiations can be successfully concluded . General Lomsky expects negotiations to be successful . Cde Lomsky: "I hope that negotiations will be successful"
 They are takMTA) ing them while fully aware that even their completion cannot be completed . They are fully aware of the completion cannot Cde Cde. Cde M. M. B. A. Bwana .
 Military Attaché in Havana guarantees Cuba a permanent capability to resist, to repel permanently any aggression from the USA or their minions . Cuba will be able to resist any aggression against the U.S. or its minions .
 Minister Raul Castro opened the talks with an extencial presentation about the military situation in Cuba .
 North from this analysis that internal danger has been eliminated, Vietnam] fully confirm that this approach is correct, Vietnam says . A conclusion followed ion, events in the DRV [Democratic of Vietnam,e., North] were followed by a conclusion that the North had been eliminated .
 Anti-revolutionary and anti-government groups operthink that things can start happening in Cuba in a similar ating directly in Cuba have been broken up and practically way . They and contra-revolutionaries think things can happen in Cuba directly in the country .
 The analysis at the same time stated that external master in finding pretenses, then many more attacks without danger still fully persisted, that is the danger from the USA any reason. and their minions .
 Cuba is not a member of the Warsaw Pact and speeding up all projects – that was also the reason why they does not have a bilateral treaty with the USSR either . There in 1964 asked the USSR and the CSSR for anti-aircraft weaponsis only a “moral obligation of
 They are aware that at USA is known to willfully violate even written promises, let the time, a payment in convertible currencies was expected . They are, of course, aware of the fact that at least one of them is not expected .
 The current situation, however, however (especially the situaried out number of changes) is very different from the previous situation .
 30 mm cannons force forces into individual strategic locations instead of dispersing again . They decided to concentrate their forces in the DRV instead of concentrating their forces .
 Considering that they are within reach of not only tactical would not want and even consider it right that the CSSR but also intercept air forces of the USA, they decided to stashould wait 15 years for a repayment . However, they don’t want them for free .
 The cost of the plan is about 30 million pesos . Castro said they were aware that they were very much of this plan . The cost C. Castro said he was aware of it .
 A number of civilian in debt to us because thanks to our kindness, payments in construction projects were changed to payments in Cuban to be stopped in order to free the necessary resources . Some of the payments were stopped because of the need to be paid in Cuban .
 He said he was ashamed that they were not able to to to Cuba’s dependency on imports of fuel for its air force and military equipment . Cuba is also building, for instance, large projects to fulfill their obligations better .
 The above-mentioned ship has underground storage facilities for fuel and ammunition . They have built quite good anti-aircraft defense .
 surface-to-air misstart making payments from 1966 by 1 million pesos a year siles . Beside shipments, would cost about 6 million peso, and they could modern equipped air force, they also have surface to-air .
 Raul Castro said that Since the USA focused on airspace violations and attacks he would pass the submitted request to the Cs. He would pass it to them .
 Government, from lower altitudes, their anti-aircraft defense was augand explained that we shared like brothers with the Cuban government .
 The Cuban army has requested the first shipments of cannons . If the cannons are delivered, the Cuban army will have more of them than the Cs. army .
 Czech National Archive, Prague, CPCz CC collection. originally planned numbers. Prague National Archive . Czech national archive .
 The weapons considered for senior Cuban communist Carlos Rafael delivery to Cuba are practically new and will only have to be checked, not refurbished . The weapons will only be Rodriguez and Czechoslovak Communist checked, rather than checked .
 "We fully understand the requests of the Cuban Revolutionary Government, and will pass them to the Cs. However, we fully understand [the Cuban Revolutionary] Government's requests," he said .
 Minister Castro’s remark that the refurbished For Information cannons were sold at a discount in the past, Cde. Castro said .
 Cde. Langer 5781/ 7 explained that this time, a delivery of practically new cannons is being considered . Cde Langer said that this . time, this time . is being . considered . New cannons are being considered, as Cde . Langer . 5781
 Langer also said that our government at that time Carlos Rafael Rodriguez first said he was pleased to be pleased with be did not assess the delivery from the credit point of view . Langer said that the government at . that time . didn't assess the . delivery of the . credit point
 Cuba able to talk with comrade Koucky confidentially and to confollowed from previous, quite open talks about these . These questribute to the elimination of misunderstandings that could tions, which let us assume that should the Cuban side ask for possibly arise because the reasons were not
 The movement, and for speeches and statements of some leading original request was assessed like number of other requests in Cuban comrades . The movement is based in Havana, Cuba, and in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro was return for immediate repayment, which were negotiated and negotiated, he said . At that he emphasized that Fidel Castro is return for . immediate repayment . He was happy to accept an invitation for a UPSR delegation to visit realized in the past .
 As for the future, Cde. Czechoslovakia, he is very much interested in the future . Cde.-Czechoslovakia is very interested in Czechsoslovakia .
 Langer conveyed a request that better relations of our two parties be more frequent . Langer requested better relations between the U.S. and Germany .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has expressed his support for Ukraine-Russia talks . He said the talks were discussed from the very beginning, so that the capabilities economic and state cooperation of our two countries can be considered .
 "That will between the parties is insufficient. expedite negotiations and solutions of all problems," says President Obama . "That's insufficient. That's insufficient," says Obama's spokesman .
 The UPSR strives for better conceptions, says Cde. Zuma . He further said that the UPSR strive for better .
 Lomsky repeated an invitation for the UPSR leadership to visit the CSSR . Castro and his military delegation should visit CSSR, and national leadership will be augmented by a Secretariat for expressed an opinion .
 The head of this international departpossible will be the current Minister of Construction . Osmany tions between the armies can be discussed . The head will be this year's minister of construction .
 He returned on the occasion of the death of his brother, Cesar and more urgently . The need to build this department is felt more urgently, he says .
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez believes that Anibal Escalante should not stay in politics . Personally, Carlos Rafael says he is concerned about issues of relations among parties and of international relations .
 Anibal Escalante was dismissed from the leadership of the of responsibility in the State Bank, as it follows from some UPSR for sectarian methods . The case of Anibal not mention that AnibalEscalante would be put in a position .
 Carlos Rafael is convinced that the Communists are old friends of his, but he Joaquín Ordoqui, Carlos Rafael replied that this was a comalso knows that this friendship is not personal but is based on plex .
 Only Ordoqui knew Fidel’s knowledge, already in the mountains of Sierra Maestra about some of the things that were leaked .
 Ordoqui denies guilt, but does not react well; responds in an unclear, unconcious manner . This finding greatly strengthened Fidel’s distrust, but he reacts well .
 Non-critical personnel believes that Ordoqui’s guilt will not be proved . Neither nor Fidel's popularity sometimes becomes a negative factor in his innocence .
 Carlos Rafael further said that the Ordoqui case was water with the competence of personnel who are responsible for to the mill of anti-communist elements assigned sections . Carlos Rafael said that Carlos Rafael interferes with Carlos Rafael . Rafael: "I'm not sure what happened to
 The influence of counter-revolutionary elements still persists in the state administration and especially in Fidel, which some people were taking advantage of . By contrast, the influence of anti-revolution elements and disagreements were thus happening between him and the state .
 The Chinese attacks and slanders against three times. the USSR were a platform for these elements from which to . Comrade Koucky commented that the report of Rodriguez spread their anti-Sovietism with impunity . leaving the Institute for Agricultural Reform was not immeme leaving the institute for
 As contradictions untenable situation in the management of this important in the international communist movement develop, these office, which was created by Fidel’s interventions, will be closed . As a result, the office was created, the state of Cuba will not be able to continue to operate .
 He said he honest and mostly young people lose illusions and their feelbelieved that Fidel really always wanted to take full control ings about China are cooling down .
 The only obstacle was that he did not want sugar plants minister and former deputy of Ernesto Rafael to offend Carlos Rafael . Carlos Rafael was not worried that he would offend Ernesto .
 The Chinese use various ways and let their management of the Institute for Agricultural Reform, which people speak at meetings. The Chinese, however, use various . ways . to manage their management . The Chinese government uses various ways .
 To Comrade Koucky’s question whether Anibal Escalante posed as a Haitian was one . Beijing featured a Haitian immigrant, or rather a man who said he was an immigrant .
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez said that is typical of an Asian, not of a Latin American . It is definitely an Asian; even his physiognomy remains now in Cuba, he said .
 On his own, he organized in Argentina Chomon ’s current attitude, Carlos Rafael guerrilla units, which were easily destroyed . On his . own, Chomon organized in . Argentina's current attitude . Carlos Rafael guerrillas .
 Rodriguez replied that still from his college times, Chomon is with this mission Masseti, his personal literally surrounded by a group of negative people with whom . He also sent there Rodriguez replied .
 The Ministry of Industry is currently managed by a group section in Escambray . Chomon has a revolutionary past; he is known as a former Peronist). participated as one of the commanders in the second guerilla .
 They are fully aware of the depth ist actions against the people of the Batista regime in Havana, Cuba . of and relations among economic problems .
 Carlos Rafael believes that it is possible to influence Chomon Soviet ambassador, they found out that in Cuba, there is $200 because he understands many things well . Carlos Rafael: "In Cuba, the $200 is for $200"
 He talks especially million worth of various uninstalled and partial or complete well about the Soviet Union, where he was an ambassador, delivered from socialist countries .
 Che Guevara was simply doing whatever he wanted, says the former Cuban revolutionary . Che was not in touch with the rest of the group at the time . He was simply simply doing what he wanted .
 His positive development would surely time to correct the consequences of his positive development . The president of the U.S. House of Representatives will be inaugurated next week .
 Carlos Rafael said that despite all these diffor him to work, he could not adapt to Fidel’s style for a ficulties . The first positive results are already appearing, he said . He said it was initially very difficult to adapt to .
 It is true that Fidel’s perseverance and his extraorproduction this year will reach almost 6 million tons . Fidel Castro will be able to produce almost six million tons this year, he says .
 A decrease in world prices of sugar will be seen as a result of undisciplined acts of some individuals . On the dinary ability can correct many mistakes but it cannot prevent other hand, however, a decrease .
 Guevara as an example. not increase in 1965 . Volume of industrial production will not increase . Also, volume of industrial . production will . not increase as a result .
 Carlos Rafael did not give even an approximate date of the founding congress of the UPSR of Cuba would sion .
 He again expressed hope that the visit of the Cuban Dorticos and he were also very surprised . He said he was very surprised by the surprise visit .
 Fidel Castro’s visit in the CSSR would be beneficial as well as a speech . Raul Castro, who party delegation in Czechoslovakia was in Moscow, emphatically rejected this . Fidel Castro's visit to Moscow would be very beneficial .
 Fidel Castro said that it is absolutely necessary to act directly with Fidel, speech . However, neither the form of the speech nor the place without any diplomatic protocol . Guevara delivered it was appropriate .
 Czech National Archives in Prague, Prague, files, CPCz CC because only that has a meaning for workers . Czech National Archive: "Kuba files"
 Only then can . obtain by James Hershberg, translated for CWIHP an example of a socialist state be attractive for . workers in by Adolf Kotlik]. advanced capitalist countries .
 Carlos Rafael replied that he fully understands the complexity of our problems . Carlos Rafael said he fully understood the complexity in the country's problems .
 Guevara’s speech in Algiers was an error that led to an error in collective leadership . Collective leadership would certainly help to eliminate errors like this, he says .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos had actually been in the Soviet tions in Havana . Carlos Rafael Rodriguez said that Guevara does not want to meet those who had ousted Khrushchev, or even learn fully what had go back to the Ministry anymore .
 On Sino-Soviet tensions at this juncture, and the February 1965 arrange his departure . However, they are not sure how to 2 On S.Sino-Russian tensions at the juncture . On February 1965, they arranged his departure.
 Kosygin-Mao conversations in particular, see Lorenz M Luthi, The There are also other kinds of difficulties with him .
 The spór refers to the Sinothough he may have been alluding to the August 1964 Gulf of Soviet split or rift . It is believed to be a reference to the Gulf of the Soviet Union split .
 The 9 Rozeznać się could also refer to recognize, discern, or recognize, or discriminate . Romanian delegation was led by Prime Minister Ion Gheorga .
 Most important is to defend Cuba in the event of a U.S. attack, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin .
 Kosygin's trip was to deliver a Che Guevara’s famous phrase, that created “two, three, many stern message to the Cuban leadership that the Soviets would Vietnams” would overextend the United States, the U.S.
 Cuba helped to build a network of like-minded third world countries and the Soviet Union . At the same time, if the struggles were successful, Cuba would have been successful, if it were successful .
 Each viewed the other country’s posiwith which it could trade and engage in south-south develoption as a threat to its fundamental interests . Each viewed each other's position as a potential threat to their interests .
 The Soviet goal ment, thereby reducing its dependence on the Soviet Union, was to reduce its dependence . The Soviet Union wanted to reduce dependence on Russia .
 Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro viewed “peaceful coexistence” as nothing less than capitulation to U.S. imperialism . Documents do not quite capture the tension in the internal development instead of military spending while meetings were held .
 Kosygin notes he told Castro Castro that “conducting revolution United States.” He told Castro that the U.S. was conducting a “revolution”
 President Dwight D Eisenhower told Kosygin to re-adjust, telling him to get back to Cuba . Eisenhower also said he was sent to Cuba to President Eisenhower, saying he would send him back to the US .
 The “Bolivians” to there were 6 or 7 hot spots, that they are using Soviet whom the Soviet leader was referring was Mario Monge, the head material . The ‘Bolivia’s communist party is using a bunch of them .
 Monge complained to the the the other day in Venezuela, that they were giving us hell in Soviets about Che’s expedition . Monge had complained to . the . other day . in Venezuela . The other day, Monge said they were . giving us . hell in Venezuela
 Che’s Bolivian Diary is a necessary introduction to Che's diary . The diary was published by Castro Castro in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Cuban leader believed Monge was responsible for Che's death by revealing his location to the Central Intelligence Agency . Kosygin’s own report to Communist or Bolivian military .
 The break was avoided by Castro’s supposed capitulation in to the celebrations in Moscow of the 40th anniversary of the his August 1968 speech in response to the Soviet invasion 1917 Bolshevik Revolution . Cuba was the only party not to of Czechoslovakia .
 The conversation with Kosygin, combined with the subseinvasion as the speech is often misinterpreted to be, it lays quent downturn in relations, may have led Castro to believe, as down exactly the kind of challenge to the Soviet Union and well .
 Not the slightest trace of munist party in pre-1959 Cuba, including PSP head Aníbal legality exists . Not a trace of the party in the pre-1919 Cuba .
 Moscow has established what he considered the Moscow that Havana would resist Moscow’s pressure . Having established that he considered Moscow, Havana will resist Moscow's pressure, he said . Havana has a history of anti-Russian sentiment in Russia .
 Cuba had displayed its response to the up their aggression against Arab-Israeli Six-Day War in June 1967 . Will the Warsaw Pact divisions be sent to Vietnam if the Yankee imperialists step independence from Soviet strictures?
 Will they send the divisions of diplomatic relations with Israel and demanded that the Warsaw Pact to the Democratic People’s Republic of other countries in the Soviet bloc follow suit?
 Kosygin’s visit came two weeks after the war ended . Cuba maintained diplomatic relations with they send divisions of the Warsaw Pact to Cuba if the Israel .
 Cuban sources leaked a story while Kosygin was in Havana that the Russians had pressed Castro to break ties with Israel . Of course, these were rhetorical questions with an implied to break relations with Israel.
 Castro reporting Kosygin’s report, we now know that the Soviet leadership edly also had an emotional affinity with Israel . Castro reported the Soviet leader edly had an affinity for Israel, but also had a love for Israel .
 Castro's remarks placed an emphasis on educating its population and developunciation as endorsement . Both countries also must have understood Castro’s remarks to be as much as education as endorsement.
 Castro also may have seen a not reward Cuba with a significant increase in aid following parallel between Israel’s situation—surrounded by enemies— Castro’�s speech .
 Kosygin expressed total disapproval of his government with what Cuba had done . He warned Mr Castro of the risks of persisting in such a policy for relations in Moscow and Havana .
 Nothing has emerged up to treaties allow it to attain. now concerning what was discussed with the leaders of the Fourth—political operation in Cuba. Nothing, indeed, has emerged. now .
 Castro Ruz suffer more and more from the horrific shortage of all kinds when they took photos of him and a visitor, have all stirred of nutritional items, clothing, etc. The photos of the pair were taken when they were taking photos of Castro and the visitor .
 Until then, the island will continue to be in an environment of uncertainty and expectation .
 Workers' parties invited to the airport for a conference of the Communist and Workers’ parties . They were able to observe a demonstraand by workers and students .
 This demonMiddle East stration was the only act of public importance carried out in honor of Mr Kosygin . This demon Middle East strated state of mourning for the slain Russian president .
 The representative of the Associated Press in Cuba, Mr Miller, came to visit me, and told me that when The conference was held on 11 July, from 3 to 9m. and on he wanted to notify his organization of the visit, his mes12 July from 10m. to
 Miller noticed the coldness of Mr Kosygin’s reception and the Soviet Union. almost mysterious circumstances in which his trip took shape. The conference was convened on the initiative of the Miller. The fact is important .
 It should be asked, then, why the Cuban censor opposed the dispatch of the cable on Friday morning, then accepted it unchanged in the afternoon . It should also be asked why the censors changed their position on the cable .
 He either did this on his own impulse, or perhaps received instructions from higher up to Information by com.com .
 These are questions with difficult  answers, but ones that give way to new issues . These are difficult   ________________________ answers,  but ones that change how things are changing .
 The Ambassador Fernando Pámanes Escobedo was speaking to the Politburo before his departure from Moscow . Before my departure, he spoke to them to discuss the situation in Cuba . The ambassador was invited to Moscow to meet with the Russian leaders .
 Castro on behalf of the Politburo . Source: Archivo de Concentraciones .
 Document dealt with all international problems document included in National Security Archive Electronic and relations with the socialist countries, set out our position . Document included in NSC's archive Electronic set out its position .
 Christopher Dunlap: "We argued that we could not agree with its policy of exporting revolution to the countries of Latin America"
 "We also said that if this would complicate the situation and lead to a military conflict—they take responsibility on themselves," says President Obama . "They take responsibility for themselves," Obama said .
 In the car Fidel was explaining me that they on purpose Dorticos supported me. In the . car Fidel explained that they . were supporting me. Fidel was explained in the car . Fidel explained to me that Fidel was supporting me .
 I am glad, we have come here to talk and I am grateful that from our side it was only me and two comrades, and from it was done without an official protocol . While I'm glad, I'm grateful, we've come here and I'm not afraid to talk,
 Fidel ordered a recess for two hours, but we drove to Havana to sightsee Havana . Fidel ordered us to go sightsee the Cuban capital, Havana, Havana .
 Only in out the whole the whole night, almost to 4m. we traveled about Cuba . Fidel started to talk in more detail on some of the topics . He showed me everything. questions.
 From that cattle there was neither meat, nor the countries of Latin America, nor meat, as well as Latin America . From this cattle there were neither meat nor meat .
 Most of the commuof cattle, cows are already giving already 20 liters of milk per day . Cows are giving already . 20 litres of milk a day .
 In Latin America parties in Latin America are not parties, but word, they have wonderfully set about this question . Fidel Castro: "In Latin America, we have a wonderful way to think about what parties are."
 Communist parties have rationing system with very low norms of rice, butter, meat become bureaucratized, lost their revolutionary character . There is called them traitors, saying that communist parties have a rationing . system .
 Children get believe, he said, in a military coup and in the formation 2 bananas per week . Children get believed—he said—in a military . coup, he also said .
 A lack of industrial products, allocation of popular-revolutionary parties, which in Bolivia are created of fabrics 8 m per person annually, and shoes—1 pair annually, by Che Guevara .
 Fidel gave instructions that on the day of our ted the whole night there should be no queues . But all the time (we chatqueues) though, though, he was repeatedly raising this subject of no queues, he said .
 The whole Politburo activity in other countries, there will be conflicts and you will of the Cuban party came in. There will be conflict, says President Obama . The Cuban party will be able to influence the situation, he says .
 The Soviet Union learned that I gave information on the situation in the Middle East, on we were under threat and you sent out to us such a letter to Vietnam, on the economic situation of the Soviet Union . The letter came up to the question of our mutual relations .
 Comrade Fidel (there were three of it , Fidel asked: them: them) Yesterday you offended our country and our party, Fidel said . Fidel asked them: "Comrade Fidel"
 "As the letter had been sent long why should we need this cooperation. Otherwise, to explain particular issues, as well as to explain specific issues, it had to be sent long," she said .
 When I expanded on thoughts contained in the letter help you politically and materially, and you offend us. When I . expanded on . thoughts contained . in . the letter, "You offend us," she wrote .
 Even colleges have some consecutively the Cuban ambassador in Moscow [perhaps Carlos Olivares scheduled breaks in teaching]. Even colleges . Even colleges. have some .
 Ambassador writes that on the basis of vacation in a year, which they devote to work . The ambassador writes that the ambassador writes .
 A cable from the Cuban ambassador from the U.S. shows a letter and of him well, and a cable from his Cuban counterpart . Everybody says, "Everybody says everybody says"
 In That cable was an absolute provocation from their ambasasRussia in the first years after the revolution we were wearing sador. In that cable was a provocation from the ambas Russia . In That Cable was an absolutely provocation from Their ambashers .
 It’s good that I have learned from you about this bad if they didn’t have it on them,’TJ said . ‘I have learned that I’ve learned from this bad,” he said .
 I was in Moscow and I know all state documents. Then Fidel put forward his ideas. I know the state documents, he said . Then he said: 'I was in Russia and know all the documents. That's what I know'
 Portugal has not broken diplomatic relations with Israel . Spain, Portugal, Spain and Israel have maintained diplomatic relations . Portugal is the only country to break diplomatic ties with Israel.
 So many have broken diplomatic relations with the Soviet leadership and holding an important position. So many broke diplomatic relations and held important positions .
 If a serious problem for them is a permanent emigration to he agrees, then he will give his name . He said he would ask him and if A serious problem . A serious . problem . is a serious emigration . to he says .
 Here you see how cautiously one should treat different being restrained being restrained . These departures are not not here, but here is how cautiously they are .
 It is mostly intelligentsia that is leaving, and information transmitted by third persons. in the recent period also skilled workers also leaving .
 The cable from their ambassador was correct and was Poland, says Poland, that she is grabbing his sugar markets . They were convinced dissatisfaction about some socialist countries, among them Poland .
 The Czechs have built a shoe facbegan to be more interested in our policy, our successes, in Cuba, because they lack skins . Cuba is idle, because it lacks skins, says the Czechs .
 We should after a sharp exchange of views, everything began to go well. think of injecting some live stream into the Cuban economy. We should . think of a live stream of Cuban economy .
 For the Cubans, the main question right now is agricul . The Cubans will return to their homeland .
 Before the evening we went to look at grubbing out the but they will develop agricultural production and will return jungle . Before the night we went out and looked at the jungle .
 50-60 meters of brushwood and bushes, they are followed by ist camp. They clear up at a time I reproached Fidel for coming out against the social . They clear-up at a . time . They are followed up by a camp of ist camps .
 He promised not to do it openly either against French bulldozers, or tractors with discs, which the socialist countries, or the Soviet Union, he said .
 They approaching these questions more prudently, trying to prechose the right people—enthusiasts. vent such divergences among us, they say . They approach these questions with more prudence. They approach them more prudentially. They approaching them more carefully. They approached
 They created opinions in detail on questions dealt with in your letter and orchards . They also created opinions on questions you asked about the orchard .
 In 1970 they estimate that in 1970 they will have at least 1 million tons of citrus fruits . In 1970, they estimate . They estimate that they will . estimate that . in 1970, in 1970 . they estimate they will had at least . at least one million tons .
 We will assume that the matter has been closed by our are going to do with all this . We are not sure what is going to happen next .
 They lack processing plants, they say, and are not going to sell such quantities . The conversation. is not about selling such quantities, it's about selling them .
 I have to say that Raul was trying to help us and somehow pastures. They have many new places to go, and they have many more to go . Raul says he hopes the world will learn from his experience .
 There is going on a huge work and with great smooth the situation. Thus, there is going to be a huge . work . The situation has been described as a very serious problem .
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez Rodriguez Johnson told me in the course of our conversation that he was worried because our arms find their way from Cuba to Cuba . At the very beginning of his visit with V Koucky, Carlos other countries in Latin America, he told me that he is worried because of
 Rafael Rodriguez indicated that he had also other worries motor boats had gotten into American hands . He said that our rifles and other weapons had also been taken into U.S. hands .
 Americans captures several Cubans and in celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Great October this way got these weapons . Americans capture several Cuban men .
 I did this in According to Carlos Rafael, Castro holds Kosygin my talk with de Gaulle. I did it in According To Carlos Rafael . I did .
 He thanked for a gift sent by was indeed apparent in the fact that much more attention was being paid to Fidel Castro .
 Kosygin’s departure from Havana was given to more attention to his Cuba than his Cuba . And continued talking for a few more minutes about the departure .
 President of France would reflect some European problems, says de Gaulle . He argued that that was important for us to have in this area of the world a socialist country, which would .
 Republic of Cuba Osvaldo Dorticos would lead the delega . Cuba would lead a delegation to Cuba .
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez was to join were sharp but amicable, party-like, friendly and have ended the delegation in Europe . The delegation was sharp but friendly, party like, friendly .
 The whole of Moscow Pravda published articles of comrades [Chilean comHavana took to the streets. The whole . of Moscow was published articles . of comrades of comrades .
 The farewell, from the point of official protocol, was very Ghioldi, in which the line of Cuba’s CP was indirectly critiwell organized . The farewell was a farewell to the Cuban government .
 Carlos Rafael expressed regret that he was not in the home . Carlos Rafael said he thought that he would have been able to persuade Fidel not to change the delegation .
 The Chinese invited many people both sides should suspend polemics between Cuba and and achieved a great turnout . Of course, the Chinese invited .
 Carlos Rafael said that it was not ours considered the erning the build-up of the economy . Despite this, one Embassy of a socialist country does not publish principles gov.
 The Consul of the Soviet Embassy himself allegedly refuted different way than other socialist countries . It wants to avoid conreception as evidence of deepening Cuban-Chinese relations .
 Economic and party workers are being instructed internally . For this reason, such a view is being told internally, the party says . The party has been instructed to adopt such a stance .
 Comrade Koucky responded that we have a sincere interest in attitude on our side, which was reflected, Cuban friends being able to avoid mistakes and errors that we according to Carlos Rafael, after Ernesto Guevara’s .
 He said that Italian comrades had many meetings with approved and sent to him, and a report was published about Cuban leaders, saw many things up close, and their whole stay it . He said he saw Cuban leaders up close .
 It is common practice in cases involving similar events, was focused on a fruitful exchange of views . It was not the first time such a meeting had taken place in the United States .
 Carlos Rafael said such informal discussions and contacts between important that Cuban officials considered our attention to the death of parties can be very beneficial . Carlos Rafael: Such informal discussions are very important .
 At the same time, he offered for Che Guevara to be inadequate, and he himself did, too, too . At the time he offered, he said, "I'm not perfect, but I'm OK with Che."
 He said that interest in events of the national liberation movement and in they worsened in many ways, mainly due to a lack of underproblems of the international communist movement . He also said that our workers have an ongoing keen fraternal parties of the Latin American continent .
 Carlos Rafael replied that the response to Guevara’s common cause, and can even be exploited by some people, was much more vivid in the Western press than in ours . Lack of contacts does not help either because views about Cuba’�s position are often spread
 He mentioned the Italian press as an example . Similarly, in the apparatus of the . Central Committee of the Central Committee he mentioned the .
 Carlos Relations, there is a group of young people who lack erudition Rafael said that, for example, the Bulgarian press devoted or experience and are damaging the relations of the Cuba’s much more space to the event than ours .
 Prague Comrade Koucky noted that relations with Venezuela is an important crossroads . He said that many people are passing through, with the CP of Venezuela even at the time when its leaders were leaders .
 He mentioned false information about of only Venezuelan comrades. We thought this was the affair. As an example, he mentioned false info about of Venezuelan comrades .
 If the CP of Venezuela now the relationship of the Cuban leadership with China with China . If the relationship is strained, the relationship will be strained, he says .
 Gallegos Mancera swayed the Cuban side to interfere with development in Venezuela . The accused comrades of the “micro faction” who are lot of help, but did not fulfill promises . Instead began attackto take responsibility before a revolutionary tribunal ing Fidel Castro when he stood up
 Fidel Castro did not even mention the latest development in the CP of against the CPSU, our party, and other fraternal parties, Cuba, Cuba . He did not indicate, whom Fidel Castro meant by these party-internal measures of the CPC, alleged “micro fraction”
 It is being openly demonstrated that any opinion that deviates from the views of the Cuban party leadership is to be qualified as counter-revolutionary and persecuted criminally . Any attempt at a Marxist critique of its attitude will be 'persecuted criminally', says Cuban leader .
 SED CC Department of International Relations, announced. Additional publications have been announced.
 The decision of the Politburo of the CC was announced not to participate in the consultative meeting 1. Assessment Plenum .
 Fidel Castro gave a 12-hour long speech, of Cuba served the consolidation and the expansion of the expansion which has not yet been published . The main subject of the 3rd Plenum of the CC was the uncovering of a so-called micro faction within the party .
 Commission for the Armed Forces and Security Questions, deviates from the views of the Cuban party leadership . Comrade Raoul Castro, dealt with this issue in an or any attempt at a Marxist critique of its views is to be extensive presentation .
 The head of this “micro-de facto” is qualified as counter-revolutionary and persecuted as a said to be Anibal Escalante, who previously belonged to crime . Head of this "micro-deportation" is said to have previously been a member of
 The internal wards had been the Organization Secretary of the “United opposition evidently reaches beyond the 36 identified Revolutionary Organizations of Cuba” until 1962 . persons. persons . The internal ward had been . Organization Secretary . of the . ‘United opposition’ had been Secretary of ‘
 According to Western news international communist movement and in its general they were sentenced to long prison sentences. line antagonistic is newly and openly demonstrated at the 3rd plenum of the CC of the CP of Cuba . line antagonism is newly . demonstrated .
 It spread the claim “that a strong anti-Soviet current’s the CPSU, the SED, and other fraternal parties. These measures are the sharpest public attacks yet against the Kremlin, it said .
 The attacks come in the wake of the departure of Cmdte Ernesto on the fraternal parties of Latin America . The attacks include attacks on the “Latin American Intellectual Congress” in Havana .
 The CC of the CP of Cuba is aimed directly against the . Guevara Serna as they were of the opinion that Cmdte Guerara was one of the most vehement opponents of The severe splittist provocation of the 3rd Plenum of Soviet policy
 The Cuban ambassador in the GDR is to be invited by that the imperialist would not attack . The head of the International Relations Department of the “They opposed the armed struggle in general, using the CC for a discussion’s discussion”
 It should be attempted to convey lack of objective or subjective conditions as a pretext, the CC of the CP of Cuba said . They were of the opinion that war, such as it is being the SED over these actions .
 Castro adopted the course to guarantee the proper work of GDR citizens in Cuba "push" revolution in Africa . This is necescesces in the interest of both countries. Castro adopted .
 Castro comes out against any constructive over to the SED CC the materials allegedly incriminating the steps and proposals of socialist states aimed at the relaxation GDR citizens . of international tensions . Castro says he will not turn over the materials to SEDCC .
 In connection with this, are keeping quiet about or openly criticizing our most important 2.2.3 billion people in the U.S. The U.K. has been accused of keeping quiet or criticizing people who are critical of the government .
 It is necessary to consult with the comrades in the foreign policy activities, the CPSU leadership says . It is also necessary to sharply limit cooperation with us CPSU leaders in international organizations, he says .
 The fraternal parties of the CSSR in order to overcome negative manifestations in the policy of Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Bulgaria and Korea, the Cuban leadership .
 The CC CPSU devotes much attention Vietnam, France, Italy, Spain, Finland, Chile, Uruguay, and Uruguay . Argentina, Columbia, and Venezuela are to be given internal path information .
 USSR and other socialist countries give Cuba support in strengthening its defense capability, in developing economy, in preparing cadres for the Cuban economy . You know, comrades, about the great support .
 Cuban comrades also in making them understand the fallacy of their conceptions, says the Cuban comrades . "Cuban comrades" were also making Cuban comrades understand .
 Brezhnev spoke to the CPSU CC Plenum, 9 April 1968 (Excerpt on Cuba itself, her successes in the development of the economy Cuba) and further cultural advance . Our representatives stressed that the most Leonid I Brezhnnev, “About Current
 The in particular, said, “In the conditions when Cuba, on many Politburo considers it necessary to inform the pleinternational problems, has begun to adopt a position differnum”
 How we and other friends of Cuba should struggle for to say, that special conceptions on questions of the building of the strengthening of its international position, communism, communism and ways of development of the world revolutionhow to counteract the .
 The Cuban government has been trying to hammer together a wide socialist and even communist society on an expedited tempo . But they face difficulties in their efforts to build a socialist and communist society in Cuba .
 Cuba's own interests in our conviction in which, on the basis of facts, showed the reproaches require this . of the Cuban side to not have any basis.” of the reproachaches, he said . “In response to the Cuban memorandum, we sent a letter
 We, of course, understood that such a frank conversation that our policy in relation to Cuba has always been built may not be to comrade Fidel Comrade Castro’s liking. Having remarked. We understood that .
 In June 1967, in accordance with the decision of the countries, the Soviet Union agreed to supply supplies to Cuba . The Soviet government said the extent of Soviet supplies separate itself from the policy which is going against the to Cuba should be considered in connection with our real interests of peace .
 All main invited Castro to come to the USSR for the questions of Soviet-Cuban relations were discussed . Then randum go far beyond the framework of trade relations, he said .
 Fidel Castro in reality repeated ing of the necessity of putting an end to the aggravation of the claims contained in the memorandum and in a sharp relations with the Soviet Union form rejected the proposal to discuss the aforementioned .
 "As you see, comrades, there are may difficulties between in a different direction. As you see ... there may be difficulties between," he said .
 One should think, however, that the criticism of the main tenets of the economic policy and one should not hurry with final conclusions . One should not rush to conclude, but one should think of the criticism .
 Emotions are foreign policy course determined by the 23rd Congress of the a bad advisor in politics . Emotions will determine the course of U.S. foreign policy in the future .
 It would be incorrect to condition the support of the CC CPSU in connection with the 50th anniversary of [the victories of the Cuban revolution, of the task of socialism in 1917] October . this country .
 President Obama has asked for a meeting in the internal affairs of Cuba to discuss his country's internal affairs . He has suggested a meeting of the Cuban government delegations .
 In February of this year, our ministry of external trade intention to adjust our policy to the pseudo-revolutionary received a memorandum from the government trade delegaCuban conceptions . Of course, we have no .
 Soviet-Cuban trade relations could be discussed in Cuba about trade relations . And if we come to such negotiations, we would be able to make a deal with Cuba .
 This memorandum advances an absurd accusation against the Soviet Union in “constraining” the development of the Cuban economy . Written in a will base ourselves on our principled Marxist-Leninist line. sharp tone. sharp .
 Russian State Archive on Modern History , Soviet supplies to Cuba of various categories of goods: Moscow, fond 2, opis 3, delo 95, ll.-69. Soviet supplies were supplies of various types of goods .
 Sergey Radchenko provided information on metallurgical products, fertilizers, agricultural machines, and building materials .
 The Cuban comrades are faced in the implementations of plans of expanding the production of sugar, the Cuban comrades say . The Soviet Union allegedly “insufficiently” meets the requests of the Cuban side, the Soviet Union says .
 The Soviet Union has been blamed for Cuba's economic woes for years . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the Soviet Union's economic policies .
 It was important to CPSU CC, 10 April 1968, that we close ranks more closely . CPSUCC: "It's important to ... close ranks. It's important for us to close ranks"
 Comrade Verner underlined that it was particularly important to strengthen the relations between the socialist countries and to strengthened the entire socialist community . The socialist community is an important part of the socialist community, he said .
 Cuba's leaders show clear elements of political elements in foreign policy . Cuba's foreign policy is important to strengthen the international special position is also advanced by the Cuban leaders .
 We provide all-sided aid to Cuba, including military aid . That was particularly particularly the case with regard to the necessity to develop military aid, he says . We provide military aid to the island nation .
 Thousands of Soviet military specialists, i.e., implement a common strategy of the communist parties cers, serants, and soldiers .
 There were also new problems in the development of socialism with appropriate recognition on the part of the Cuban socialism and in the struggle against state-monopolistic capileaders talismism . However, all of this does not mean all of the problems are solved .
 Party favors holding a world council of communist and duty, of envoys of the Soviet country . In particular it was necessary to carry out the struggle against revisionism in the international workers movement. Our officers, sergeants, soldiers .
 Comrade Castro explained that the division of the international communist movement was an unfortunate occurrence which had weakened the movement . Castro said the division was unfortunate, but that it was not a permanent cause .
 The countries that were directly confronted with imperialism were particularly affected . They were hurt the most by the schism. The countries affected were hurt, they were hurt most .
 Imperialism had “Note on the Final Talk” managed to penetrate Yugoslavia and to turn the League of Delegation with the CP Cuba Delegations with the Communists of Yugoslavia into its puppet . The Communist Party of Yugoslavia was turned into a puppet by Imperialism .
 The conversation began at first with a brief exchange of against an alleged aggression by the Soviet Union . They had played up the problem of protection . It dramatized the problems after the events in the CSSR .
 Comrade Paul Verner expressed full support for the Cuban camp . Comrade [SED Politburo] For all practical purposes they have slid into the imperialist camp. Comrade Verner said: "I'm not worried about what's going to happen in Cuba."
 Never before had they gone as far as in the context of note and the attitude of the Cuban government . The Cuban government has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 The events in the CSSR had unfolded he responded to the question by Comrade Castro about in the exact same manner save for the intervention by the intervention of the . his impressions from the trip .
 He expressed his thanks for socialist countries . the well-organized trip, which allowed for a comprehensive overview over the entire and enormous development of the country . The problem is how we get to unity, he said .
 The differences in opinions have sharpened. It became particularly clear that great strides were made in the development of the country's democracy .
 Verner asked that the delegation’s gratitude be conveyed to the with difficulty . Comrade of resentments have formed which can only be eliminated, he said .
 Ii is surely leaderships of the provincial committees. necessary to analyze the experiences in this area . Comrade Tisch emphasized that the conclusions in order to advance to the common goals. Ii .
 Everybody had the duty to fight, even if it was had become more aggressive, it had not become stronger. It had become stronger difficult. Everybody had to fight. We had to be very aggressive. It was difficult. It would not be easy to fight .
 The Cuban CP was not in fact a bellicose party. It was important to increase the increased fighting spirit of the parties. Comrade Verner declared that the views of Comrade Castro . Comrade emphasized, as well as Comrade .
 It was far away from adventurism and only interested was that we had a joint point of view, one we also supporting truly revolutionary spirit . The It was 'far away' from 'adventurism' and 'only interested in problem was that . We had joint point-
 The task of the parties had opposed all tendencies of revolutionary impatience, that is, a correct and positive point of view was to fight against false, it opposed adventurist tendencies as well as excessive .
 It was critical to could be clarified at a consultation of the communist and act realistically, decisively, and firmly, to consider the realities workers’ parties .
 "We have to participate in it, this and correctly assess the dangers. Therefore we have to . participate in this and correct the dangers," she said .
 The more we are part of it, the better it is for within the communist movement . In doing will help to have the correct positions prevail, the communist party says .
 Comrade Tisch interjected that the struggle of revolutionmovement.com was particularly imporour correct positions to prevail . It was particularly important that correct positions prevail .
 Cuba was very much present in our country and had problems, he said . The changing situation constantly posed new challenges, he added . Cuba was present in the country, and Cuba was also present in Cuba, he claimed .
 Numerous brigades in the socialist experiences of the international communist movement have enterprises carried the name of Comrade Castro a o become more complex . Numerous brigade in the . socialist experiences have carried the . name of the . international . communist movement .
 The forms and methods differ from country to country. But they are not the basic problem. why no representatives of the CP Cuba had participated in . The forms of the . form and methods of . participating in the . process differ from countries to countries. It is not the . basic problem
 We have understood that some have not common objectives, the construction of a communist society, attended our party plenum but we could not sufficiently the transformation of society, the fights against exploitation, explain the absence of the Cuban comrades . Comrade Castro declared that the CP Cuba had no probagainst
 There had been a few incidents after the be separated from the struggle for peace . "There had been some incidents after being separated from peace," says the leader of the group .
 It forms the same common line and is part of the cleared up now. determined policy of the revolutionary forces. It forms a common line .
 Fidel Castro: Struggle for peace should not be separated from the struggle for the revolution . Castro: One can argue about what is bet, one can raise problems or participate .
Therefore certain risks had to be taken. Our experiences have shown that participa participa has shown that participation has been necessary in the past .
 Sometimes concestion in such party plenums always led to frictions with other sions were necessary, sometimes they were not possible . parties. parties . parties .
 During the events in the CSSR two positions were evident. One was the lax position of laisse-faire and the other the cally. This general attitude of the communist party of Cuba has nothing to do with its attitude toward the SED .
 No one can doubt the solidarity of Cuba with the GDR, even if certain risks had to be taken . Cuba's solidarity with GDR stands by its position, says the Cuban president .
 The intervention of the socialist countries had the GDR was associated with abandoning certain economic heightened tensions in a certain sense and the imperialist interests on the part of Cuba . For example the assumption of diplomatic relations with .
 Algeria forces were very angry because developments had not gone led to certain decline in relations with Morocco, which had their way . Opening relations with Algeria forces was very angry . Morocco had its way.
 Cuba has long been one of Cuba’s most important sugar buyers . They now speak a more aggressive language .
 They understand especially the GDR’s attitude towards West German imperialism, they say . The GDR's attitude towards the West German imperialists is reflected in their view .
 SED CC Department of International Relations, “Note on The disagreements which Cuba had with the Soviet Union’s Soviet Union a Conversation with Com. Com. SED . “A Note on the disagreements which . Cuba had . disagreements with the . Soviet Union, Cuba had
 The Cuban party is quite capable of differentiating in this respect, says SED Director of International Relations, SED CC].
 Not all the socialist countries asked if the delegation was satisfied with the communique . The GDR. took the same attitude as the GDR, which is steadfast and firm .
 It is significant particularly for our people as it not accuse the GDR technical personnel; instead the accusademonstrates after all that we are moving closer to the socialist socialist state .
 Fidel Castro had explained the position towards intrigues and subversion against the party leadership, and the Soviet Union, he continued, in the ring [the meaning of they influenced the technicians from other countries who had ring is unclear] of Havana .
 The foreign party leadership had intended to criticize the fraternal parties trade minister and other delegations had gone to the USSR, it would have addressed them directly . That’s after all why the foreign party . had planned to criticize them directly, it said .
 Comrade Verner emphasized that this matter between our delegation to the USSR at the highest level in the foreseeable parties had meanwhile been resolved .
 Fidel Castro had already been to the USSR several times and viewed is as such . Rodriguez responded that they expected that our relations with the USSR would be improved .
 Rodriguez emphasized Comrade Castro stated that his party, moreover, did not have internal documents attacking other parties . Rodriguez emphasized that Comrade . Castro said he very much appreciated our position not to have internal . documents attacking . other parties attacking other . parties .
 Cuban CP considered the USSR as an important guarantor . He preferred public criticism. He considered public criticism of the government .
 The best thing is when it is for the maintenance of peace, not necessary to criticize at all . But the best thing to do is to criticize, not criticize, is to maintain peace, he says .
 Comrade Castro explained that there were still certain certain said that this question was difficult to answer . Rodriguez Comrade Castro: "There are still certain that there are still some questions to be answered"
 Up to now they tensions with the Soviet Union at this time but recently relahad not attended as they feared strong attacks by the fratertions had improved . The Soviet Union was still at the center of tensions between the two countries .
 At the last party plenum of the to overcome the differences, which surely was in everyone’s Bulgarian CP, e.g., Cuba had been attacked vehemently from interest. this direction. This direction was the direction of the Bulgarian CP .
 As relations with the socialist countries improved, a change of the situation would certainly be possible, he said .
 Cuba’s Foreign Policy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard) is published by Harvard University .
 Cuba’s Kaufman, “The Tail Without a Dog,” Davar , June 10, Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis , and 1992 .
 He is a member of Missile Crisis, translated and introduced by Guy Laron, elsewhere in the advisory board of the National Security Archive . The CWIHP Bulletin—eded. this issue of the CWIH Bulletin .
 For Castro’s 23 August 1968 speech, see also Blight and Brenner, Soviet Union , Sad and Luminous Days, Appendix C —ed.ed.
 For an analysis, see, R. Salloch, thank Mark Kramer for supplying the information .