 Actor-producer Kevin Costner arrives in Cuba to present Cuban audiences with the film ""Thirteen Days" Costner's film tells of how the crisis pushed the world to the brink of nuclear war .
 Costner was accompanied by fellow producers Armyan Bernstein, Beacon Pictures chairman, as well as Peter Almond, along with several others .
 The film will be shown to Cuban government officials who were involved in the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, known here as the Crisis of October .
 The change of heart meant that the U.S.-Soviet understandings that resolved the 1962 crisis never were made permanent . The change in heart means that the agreement was never renewed . The U.K. and the Soviet Union agreed to an agreement in 1962 .
 Kennedy said he was worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect the U.S. ability to respond if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked a pro-United States country such as Guatemala .
 Ball said the United States had a right to take action under the Rio Pact . Ball: The Rio Pact is the common defense treaty of the Western Hemisphere . Ball says the U.S. has a legal right to act .
 The exhibit also includes rooms of period furniture, including a kitchen and knotty-pine cabinets . The exhibit includes a tabletop radio tuned to the civil-defense frequency .
 Pupils of the era often were encouraged to duck under their decks during civil-defense drills . Civil-defence drills were often carried out during the time .
 The soundtrack of the exhibit features the eerie sound of an air-raid siren . The soundtrack is accompanied by an eerie sound from the sound of the siren.
 A vintage black-and-white TV set is tuned to President John F Kennedy addressing the nation about a possibility of a nuclear attack .
 A jukebox playing hits of the era, and authentic yellow-and-black ""Fallout Shelter" signs place patrons back in time . The museum also features a juke box playing hits from the era .
 Newspapers and magazines, displayed throughout the exhibit, feature news stories of the time . Newspapers, magazines, newspapers and magazines are displayed in the exhibit .
 Posters, headlined ""When the Cold War Got Hot" and ""What Would You Do if You Suddenly Realized Your World Could End Tomorrow,"" dot exhibit walls .
 Adjacent to the Missile Crisis exhibit is the Kennedy Collection . The Kennedy Collection is another permanent display at the museum .
 Full-size re-creations of the Oval Office, Rose Garden and other famous scenes are on display .
 Hundreds of artifacts are set up, including one of first lady Jackie Kennedy's cocktail dresses . The exhibit includes one of the first lady's cocktail dress .
 The museum is about five miles north of the Sunshine Skyway Bridge, east of Interstate 275 . Museum is located in the area .
 Two-star Division General Sergio del Valle gave previously undisclosed military details of the crisis . The crisis brought the U.S. and Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war .
 Two missiles were fired, one of which hit the U.S. plane, which came down on Cuban soil, killing the pilot, he said . The pilot of the plane was killed .
 A total of 24 SAM anti-aircraft missile batteries were deployed to protect the 42 medium-range R-12 Soviet nuclear missiles shipped to Cuba . The missiles were deployed in Cuba to protect them from the Soviet Union .
 Del Valle said Cuban forces helped escort the huge Soviet nuclear missile transporters to the designated launch sites around the island . The Cuban military said it had helped to escort the Soviet nuclear missiles to designated sites .
 A total of 43,000 Soviet military personnel were also deployed in Cuba to operate and protect the nuclear missiles . He added that a total of 42,000 personnel were deployed to protect the missiles .
 The missiles were eventually removed by the Soviets beginning in Oct., 1962 after President Kennedy pledged that his country would not attack Cuba . President Kennedy promised not to attack Cuba in 1962 .
 Del Valle repeated the Cuban position that the missiles were originally deployed to deter an expected U.S. attack against the island . The missiles were deployed in the 1980s to deter a US attack on Cuba .
 The general said 270,000 Cubans had been armed and mobilized to confront a possible U.S. attack in the last 10 days of October . The general says 270,00 Cubans were mobilized to face a possible United States .
 He said the United States had prepared up to six divisions of ground troops as well as combat aircraft . The U.S. is prepared for six divisions, he said .
 Cuba's Communist government has said that it is willing to reveal previously secret details about the 1962 missile crisis . It has called on the Soviet Union and the United Staes to do the same .
 Soviet crew show down spy plane without direct order, Cuban says . 'Missile Crisis Details Revealed,' Reuters News Service says .
 The compilation of documents includes notes taken by then-agency director John McCone during White House meetings, estimates by the intelligence community, reports from Cuban agents, and memoranda coded Ironbark .
 If the CIA could do it over, Studeman says, it would pay more attention to informants' reported sightings of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Studeman: The CIA would analyze better how the Soviets viewed deployment of missiles outside their borders .
 The documents and reminiscences highlight how the U.S. missed the deployment of the SS-4 medium-range missiles in Cuba until it was almost too late . The documents show how the United States missed deployment .
 A U-2 spy plane photographed the launch pads in the western third of Cuba on Oct. 31 . The deployment became known only when a spy plane captured the launch pad in October .
 Much of the Cuban agents' reporting was collected in Miami at what became the largest CIA station in the world . Warren Frank, then with the agency's foreign intelligence branch, said much of the reporting was gathered in Miami .
 A landmark analysis on Sept., 1962 -also declassified Monday -said the Soviets were deploying anti-aircraft missiles in Cuba only to deter a possible U.S. invasion effort in the wake of the botched Bay of Pigs landing .
 At the same time, U-2 reconnaissance planes and lower-flying spy aircraft were providing photos of Soviet ships laden with crates of military material . At the time, the U.2 were flying reconnaissance planes .
 Government papers released under a 30-year secrecy rule showed that thenPrime Minister Harold Macmillan was skeptical about Kennedy's decision to blockade Cuba to prevent the Soviet Union stationing nuclear weapons there .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to dismantle Soviet missiles in Cuba under international supervision . The Cuban crisis brought the world close to a nuclear conflict, but was resolved .
 Macmillan indicated he was ready to use Britain's international status to try to resolve the crisis . He indicated that he was prepared to use the UK's international role to help resolve the issue .
 The letters between Nikita Khrushchev and President John F Kennedy dated from Oct. to Dec., 1962 . The letters showed the superpowers setting the stage for a slightly less confrontational phase of the Cold War .
 The books contain no major revelations but make poignant reading, especially in the context of the collapse of the Soviet Union and end of the Cold War .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles while Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba . Kennedy promised to remove a naval blockade he had imposed around the island .
 Kennedy was seen as the winner, Khrushchev seemed anxious to dispel that impression . Kennedy had been seen as a winner, the impression Khrushchev seemed to dispel . Kennedy was considered the winner in the world .
 Khrushchev addressed Kennedy in long, rambling letters with frequent personal touches and occasional joking . Kennedy kept his letters rather short and strictly formal and businesslike . Kennedy's letters were often more formal and formal .
 Khrushchev told Kennedy that the Soviet Union wanted him to win the 1964 presidential election . In one poignant comment in a letter of Dec. Dec. 1963, he said that the U.S. wanted Kennedy to win .
 Khrushchev was removed as Soviet leader in 1964 because of his domestic and international failures and died in 1971 . He was removed from power in 1964 due to his failures .
 Peter Jennings talks to Soviet, Cuban and U.S. officials whose actions ratchecheted up tensions . One false move could have meant nuclear war, Jennings says .
 Communist Cuba has been a thorn in the U.S. side ever since Fidel Castro took power and kicked out the United States corporations . The Cuban government has been cracking down on American companies in Cuba .
 The United States nuclear arsenal greatly outnumbers the Soviets', but fears the gap is closing . Newly elected President John F Kennedy campaigned on the 'missile gap' with the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy signs onto the Eisenhower CIA plan to invade Cuba with exiled Cuban nationals and oust Castro . Kennedy signs on to the Eisenhower plan to oust Castro in Cuba . Kennedy: "It's a war of war"
 Nikita Khrushchev puts Soviet missiles and nuclear warheads in Cuba . The Cold War adventure provides a golden opportunity to close his real missile gap by putting them there .
 On Oct. 1962, Kennedy learns of Cuban missile sites and that every state except Washington and Oregon are vulnerable . On Oct., 1962, JFK learns of the Cuban missile site .
 Still photos show the calm voice of defense secretary, Robert McNamara, outlining the option of an air strike to take out the missile sites . You see the excellent still photos of White House photographer Jacques Lowe and hear the calm .
 Documentary retrace evolution of United States 'quarantine' - an act of war - and raising of the United States military to DEFCON 2, one level below actual conflict . Documentary interviews Excom members who retrace the evolution of the U.S. quarantine .
 Kennedy and his advisers did not believe there were warheads in place for the Soviet missiles . First, Kennedy and advisers didn't believe there was even a nuclear weapon .
 There were 36 live missiles on the island, and each had a one-megaton warhead . Each had a live missile that could carry a nuclear bomb . The island is home to 36 missiles, each with a one megaton nuclear warhead.
 U.S. officials believed they could bring a 180,000-man invasion force against Cuba . Second, United States officials thought they could have 180,00-man force .
 The Soviets had 12 tactical nuclear missiles -short-range battlefield missiles -to use against U.S. invaders . Yet they did not know that the Soviets had . 12 tactical . nuclear missiles to use against United States . invaders .
 Writer-producer Sherry Jones, executive producer Lionel Chapman and director Foster Wiley have made a fascinating piece of television history .
 The situation wasn't really under control, despite the reassurances from the White House and the Kremlin . What will bring the sweat to your palms is the realization that the situation isn't under control . The White House says the situation is under control.
 Americans, Soviets and Cubans were operating in the dark, ignorant of their opponents' plans and intentions, with virtually nonexistent communications with the opposing side . These Americans, Cubans and Americans were operating without communications with their opponents .
 U.S. officials had underestimated Soviet troop strength and the number of Cubans under arms, it was revealed .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro reportedly sent a message to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev urging that the missiles be fired . A Soviet participant in a seminar on the missile crisis reportedly said that two days before the crisis peaked, Fidel Castro sent a . message to . Soviet leaders urging that missiles be
 According to this account, Khrushchev agreed to U.S. demands that the missiles be withdrawn . The message convinced him that matters had gone too far and he agreed to withdraw .
 At the time the Soviet Union had only ""about 20" intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching the United States from its own territory . General Dmitry Volkogonov, head of the Moscow Military History Archive Institute, reportedly told the conference on Saturday that at the time .
 42 intermediate-range Soviet missiles were installed or in transit to Cuba by October would have represented more than two-thirds of Moscow's ability to deliver a nuclear attack on U.S. territory .
 The existence of such a cabled plea from Castro could not be corroborated from Soviets and Cubans attending the meeting . Three conference delegates confirmed that they had heard a knowledgeable Soviet participant give the account .
 Cuban and Soviet officials disclosed there were more than 40,000 Soviet troops on the island and 270,000 armed Cubans . Instead, Cuban officials disclosed, there were 270,00 armed Cuban citizens .
 Cuba had expected to lose as many as 800,000 people if the U.S. attacked, Cuban president says . He told reporters that Cuba had hoped to lose up to 1,800,000 if the United States attacked .
 Theodore Sorensen, former special counsel to Kennedy, offered a different view yesterday . Kennedy and Khrushchev avoided a nuclear conflict that seemed dangerously near .
 Sorensen said he had drawn up a list of 10 mistaken assumptions by parties to the crisis that were revealed during three days of formal and informal meetings .
 A Soviet participant confided his decision to send his family to the countryside at the height of the 1962 crisis for fear of a U.S. nuclear attack on Moscow . McNamara recalled in a closing statement that a Soviet participant had confided he had sent his family away .
 McNamara: It would require "a leap of imagination for us to conceive of our national roles in a world not dominated by the struggle between East and West" McNamara says both nations need such a vision .
 ""Conflicts within and conflicts between nations will not disappear,"" he stated .
 The fact that such prominent personalities on all three sides of the 1962 crisis could for the first time sit down with one another to discuss it was hailed by all as a sign of significant progress .
 Yesterday's news conference also showed that the scars still run deep . But yesterday's press conference showed that there are still scars still running deep .
 Cuban delegation leader Risket repeatedly threw verbal jabs at the Americans for maintaining a hostile policy toward his country . Risket also leveled rare public criticism at Cuba's Soviet allies over the fact that Havana was never consulted before Khrushchev finally pulled his missiles out of Cuba .
 Former Soviet Ambassador to Washington Anatoly Dobrynin defended the Soviet action . Former Soviet ambassador to Washington defended the action .
 American participants in the conference visited the graves of Khrushchev and Mikoyan, who was first deputy premier in 1962 . The conference broke up yesterday .
 They were guided by Sergei Khrushchev and Sergo Mikoyan, sons of the two leaders, who had also participated in the meeting . The meeting took place in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 McNamara's comments came in the wake of a Soviet-U.S.-Cuban conference held in Moscow to remember the crisis . McNamara: "The nearest the world has come to nuclear war was the Cuban missile crisis .
 Communists expected `invasion' Communists expected 'invasion', Communists expected . Communists expected to be 'armed'
 Forty years ago today, an American U-2 spy plane secretly swooped over western Cuba and shot photographs that revealed the first hard evidence of Soviet ballistic missile sites in close range of the United States .
 The two superpowers pulled back from the brink of war . This story had a happy ending, with a worldwide cry of relief .
 Some experts trace detente to the peaceful resolution of the missile crisis . Detente was a policy marked by reduced tensions and arms-control agreements of the 1970s and '80s .
 U.S. and Cuba have an antagonistic relationship that outlasted the Cold War and persists today . Yet this suspenseful episode, perhaps the most dangerous moment in world history, cemented an antagonism relationship .
 Fidel Castro compares the U.S. trade embargo to the monthlong naval phalanx that put the Caribbean island under quarantine four decades ago . Fidel Castro is comparing the trade embargo with the month-long naval quarantine that put Cuba under quarantine .
 Bush administration calls Cuba a sponsor of terrorism and a potential bioterrorist threat . Bush administration's suspicions reflect a Cold War mentality that goes back to the missile crisis .
 "It did lead to a hotline between Washington and Moscow and much more willingness of both sides (Soviet and American) to engage in arms-control discussions," said William LeoGrande .
 The effect was to confirm Cuba as the enemy of the U.S. yet also constrain the United States from direct military force against Cuba,"" LeoGrande said .
 In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the immediate task before Kennedy, Khrushchev and their advisers was to prevent nuclear war . The immediate task was to stop nuclear war in October 1962 .
 Documents indicate the risks of annihilation were even greater than the participants had imagined . Recently uncovered documents indicate the risk of annihilation was greater than imagined .
 Many Americans around the country were digging bomb shelters even before Kennedy disclosed the U-2's photographs . Kennedy warned the Soviets that any nuclear missile launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack on the United States .
 Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine around Cuba to prevent delivery of Soviet offensive weapons . The quarantine was approved on Oct., 1962, and announced two days later .
 Robert McNamara, defense secretary at the time, later recalled going to these meetings wondering if the world would come to an end . McNamara: "Robert McNamara's defense secretary later recalled wondering if world would end"
 "They knew there were missiles and missile sites and they just had to assume there were some nuclear warheads," the author says . The U.S. knew there was a missile base in the area, the author adds .
 Kennedy faced a decision on whether to launch a pre-emptive strike to destroy missile sites, similar to the decision President Bush faces today on . President Bush faced a similar decision to decide whether to invade Iraq today .
 With warheads already ensconced in Cuba in various places, "the chances of some kind of nuclear exchange, if only by accident, was even greater than was known at the time,"" Blanton said .
 The U.S. underestimated the extent of Castro's anger toward the Soviet Union in the wake of the crisis . The United States also underestimated the true extent of the Cuban anger .
 Castro scorned his ally for leaving Cuba to stand alone against the wrath of the North American colossus . Furious that the Soviets had struck a deal with Kennedy behind his back, Castro was furious .
 The full force of Castro's sense of betrayal and vulnerability was revealed in a recently uncovered text of a ""secret speech"" he delivered to his Soviet comrades in 1968 . Castro's feelings of betrayal were revealed in the text of the speech .
 The ""secret speech" debunks the long assumption that by the mid-1960s Cuba was merely an agent of the Soviets spreading monolithic communism to other parts of Latin America . Brenner: The speech debunks that by mid-'60s Cuba had been spreading monolith communism .
 The Soviets actually were trying to curb Castro's foreign adventures, the speech indicates . They feared it would undermine Soviet leadership in the Third World and enflame relations with the U.S.
 Khrushchev expressed worries that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tensions and possibly provoke war, newly released documents show . The Soviet Premier expressed fears that an 'irrational' Castro would provoke war .
 Khrushchev warned in a letter dated Nov., 1962, to diplomatic aides in Cuba . Cuba wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions, he wrote in 1962 .
 United States had assumed that Cuba was a puppet of the Soviet Union, Brenner said . The U.S. didn't need to deal directly with the Cubans, he said .
 Some evidence indicates that Kennedy had some knowledge of Castro's bitterness and tried to exploit it by exploring back-channel discussions that might pull Cuba away from the Soviet orbit . Kennedy had knowledge of Cuba's bitterness that might have led him to try to exploit the situation .
 An unofficial emissary, a French journalist, was actually meeting with Castro on Kennedy's behalf in Havana when Cuba got word that Kennedy had been assassinated . According to Brenner and other scholars, the journalist was in Cuba when Cuba heard the news .
 Castro patched up relations with his Soviet patrons, and the U.S. settled into a hardline policy toward Cuba that continues today . Castro gradually patched up his relations with the Soviet Union, but the United States continued to push for Cuba .
 Both sides abided by the agreements that were made in the exchange of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev . The letters set the course of U.S.-Cuba relations through the Cold War and beyond .
 Kennedy had forced the Soviets to back down and withdraw their missiles, but in exchange he agreed to discretely remove U.S. missiles based in Turkey .
 Kennedy promised the Soviets that the U.S. would never invade Cuba, a bitter pill for many CubanAmericans . Kennedy also promised that the United States never invaded Cuba . Kennedy promised to never do so .
 Brenner contends that the missile crisis left Castro feeling more vulnerable than before . Brenner: Castro felt betrayed by the Soviets and constantly fearful that the U.S. would try to overthrow him .
 The fear of U.S.-instigated assassination plots and the tightening embargo prompted a mania for security, suppression of any signs of political opposition within Cuba . This fear was further fueled by the tightened embargo and the fear of assassination plots . The Cuban government has been in the grip of
 Echoes of missile crisis still resound today, more than a decade after the demise of the Soviet empire . Echoes of the missile crisis are still reverberating today, 10 years after the fall of Soviet Union .
 The Bush administration continues to list Cuba as one of the states that sponsors terrorism . The U.S. has concluded that Cuba posed no security threat to the United States . Castro abandoned his foreign interventions and the Pentagon long ago concluded that it posed no threat .
 The confrontational relationship has taken many forms over the past 40 years . It spans the terms of nine U.S. presidents, spanning nine terms, but its underpinnings remain firmly in place .
 Key actors in 1962 Cuban missile crisis meeting learn events nearly spun out of control 40 years ago . Fast-moving events brought them closer to nuclear disaster than ever imagined .
 Robert McNamara, President Kennedy's secretary of defense, recalls the tense period in the nation's command center . Television news marked the 25th anniversary of the resulting season of crisis by interviewing him .
 As he spun his grim tale, Carolyn and Carolyn relived the anxieties that engulfed all of us living in south Florida while Krushchev and JFK stood eyeball to eyeball .
 Our sense of peril was so real that we prepared for the catastrophe, just as we did when a hurricane was heading our way, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We prepared for disaster," he says. "Just as we prepare for disaster"
 Michael, 9, was 9 years old, a pupil at Pinecrest Elementary School on Red Road, Miami . He was halfway between our house on S.W. 112th St. and south Miami . Michael was a student at the elementary school .
 He and each of his cohorts were required to stash under their desks a blanket, two large cans of fruit juice and a gallon jug of water . Each of the students was required to carry a blanket and two cans of juice under them .
 Parents were instructed not to rush to the schoolhouse when we came under attack . The roads must be kept open for emergency vehicles and the movement of troops, the school says .
 Other orders were to top off the car's gas tank each day, to load the trunk with enough water and dry groceries for five days . Extra batteries for flashlight and portable radio were also required .
 Nike missiles showed up on the railroad tracks alongside Dixie Highway south of Miami . Nike missiles were found on the tracks alongside the tracks .
 It was white-knuckle time when the first Army detail set up a Nike battery to do business out of our neighborhood . "It was white knifing time," says author of the Nike battery .
 As a consultant to the meat industry, I was at a client's plant in Boston during the week that the Army moved troops into South Florida .
 The deployment was inconspicuous, the men travelling in civilian clothes aboard Hertz and Avis rented cars and commercial aircraft . The men travelled in civilian cars and planes .
 There were no civilian seats; I was bumped from my Friday afternoon flight back to Miami, stuck in Boston's Parker House to worry over my family .
 Carolyn heard from her folks in Pulaski, N.Y., that her naval officer brother Tracy had been plucked from his house painting in Norfolk, Va., splattered blue jeans and all, to urgent duty aboard the USS Stickle . Tracy was skipper of the radar pick
 Tracy took the Stickle to sea, to join, as we later learned, the fleet enforcing the quarantine around Cuba . Tracy took it to sea .
 Carolyn's phone call told her that her parents were not in dire straits, so we deciphered the message from the fleet to be the warning that the danger to Florida was real, and imminent .
 We emptied the car's trunk comestibles, filled it with suitcases and evacuated the battle zone . With no debate, we decided to pack the suitcases into the trunk of the car .
 Michael's third grade class was asked to report its reactions to the scary period . Michael's class also reported their reactions .
 Michael, deep in the clarinet at that time, submitted a musical score to express his feelings . Michael was deep in clarinet when he wrote the musical score .
 Michael said it was too bad she didn't understand about music, but there was no way he could explain his Cuban missile crisis with words . Michael: "I'm not sure what I'm going to say about Cuba, but I'm sure it's a good thing about music"
 Every time we break bread at our houe we ask God to help Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev stop the threat of nuclear war . The best way for Michael's parents to communicate how they felt in 1962 is to let you know .
 Fyodor Burlatski was a member of Khrushchev's inner circle . Sergo Mikoyan is an expert of Soviet-Cuban relations . Burlatki is the son of the late Soviet leader and expert of relations with Cuba .
 Garthoff also quoted a number of unidentified Soviet officials . He said they are well-placed but not ready to step into the spotlight . The former Soviet officials are not ready for the spotlight.
 Anatoly Gribkov, who supervised the deployment of the weapons, describes how Soviet missile experts flew the length of the island scouting out places to hide them . The Soviet weapons were deployed in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Urbelino Betancourt Cruces, charged with defending the island, detailed preparations to shoot down U.S. aircraft .
 Former White House aide Theodore Sorenson wrote the speech in which President Kennedy demanded that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev withdraw the weapons . The speech was written by the former president's White House aides .
 The rare reunion capped an anniversary conference in which such erstwhile adversaries as Cuban President Fidel Castro and former United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara discussed thousands of pages of newly declassified documents on the standoff .
 40 years ago today an American U-2 spy plane first photographed Soviet R-12 medium range ballistic missiles at a base in the leafy jungle at the foot of the Cordillera de Guaniguanico mountain range . The U.2 plane was sent to the base 40 years
 Kennedy announced the discovery in a televised address on Oct. 1962 . He ordered a blockade of the island and mobilized troops for an attack .
 The most striking information released during the conference detailed events on Oct. 31, widely considered the most dangerous day of the crisis . Most striking information was released during a conference on that day .
 One U-2 strayed into Soviet airspace that afternoon, and a second was shot down over Cuba . It had long been known that one of the U.2s had strayed in Soviet airspace .
 Surveillance photographs had disclosed that Soviet missiles had been placed on their launchers . Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an airstrike and invasion to start within 48 hours .
 A Soviet submarine commander readied a nuclear strike on a U.S. destroyer, conference participants learned . The attack almost certainly would have provoked massive retaliation .
 Khrushchev was about to withdraw weapons in exchange for NATO concessions . The White House sent its only message to Castro, a cloaked communique, ostensibly from the Brazilian government .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the weapons in exchange for a public pledge by Kennedy not to invade Cuba . The next day, the U.S. agreed to remove the weapons from Turkey, and a secret commitment to remove missiles from Turkey .
 For 24 years, Moscow's chief representative to the US helped to defuse a series of other East-West crises . His mastery of backstairs diplomacy led to an era of détente and an end to nuclear arms race .
 Dobrynin, as Soviet Ambassador to Washington from 1962 to 1986, served six Soviet leaders and worked with six U.S. presidents . He served as ambassador to Washington between 1962 and 1986 . He also worked with American presidents .
 A suave and affable diplomat with an easygoing manner who spoke fluent English, Dobrynin made himself much at home in the United States . He became a Washington celebrity and the doyen of the diplomatic corps .
 Dobrynin found himself immersed in the missile crisis after American spy planes detected Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in October 1962 . Seven months after being appointed Ambassador at the age of 42, he was in Cuba at the time of the crisis .
 President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba in a tense 13-day stand-off that almost led to a nuclear war . President John F Kennedy ordered the blockade of the island .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy met Dobrynin secretly three times in Cuba . Pressure on Kennedy to bomb or invade Cuba mounted .
 President and Soviet leader Khrushchev negotiated a secret deal for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in exchange for the pullout of American missiles from Turkey, ending the threat of world war .
 Robert Kennnedy later stated that Dobrynin had remained calm and analytical throughout the crisis . Robert Kennningy said Dobrynins remained calm throughout the ordeal .
 His diplomatic presence was felt in every Cold War issue including Vietnam, the Middle East and nuclear disarmament negotiations . This established for the next quarter of a century his special role as a trusted go-between in US-Soviet relations .
 He had a private phone line to President Lyndon Johnson, later a hotline to Henry Kissinger and a private parking space in the underground garage of the State Department which he could enter and leave unobserved .
 His gregarious manner and westernised ways led some to believe that he was a liberal with proWestern sympathies . He was a popular figure in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In reality he was a hard man dedicated to Soviet interests . He showed no interest in the denial of human rights in the Soviet Union or the repression of satellite states in the USSR .
 He was educated at a Moscow aviation institute and helped to design fighter aircraft . He was chosen for training for the diplomatic service .
 This he entered in 1944 when Josef Stalin was leader and was sent to Washington as an Embassy counsellor in 1952 . This was the first time he had been sent to the US Embassy in 1945 .
 In 1960 he became head of Soviet foreign ministry's United States and Latin American Department . In 1960, he was head of the Soviet ministry's U.S. and Latin America Department .
 Dobrynin, while committed to the ideals of communism, also strongly believed that the two superpower adversaries could coexist in peace in peace . Dobrynins believed that Russia and the U.S. could co-exist peacefully .
 He cultivated a wide network of Americans which included Presidents, congressmen and journalists . He had an especially close relationship with Kissinger .
 His private meetings with the National Security Adviser and Secretary of State led to the 1972 antiballistic missile treaty . The treaty essentially ended the US-Soviet nuclear arms race .
 Moscow's Ambassador to America's Six Cold War Presidents Dobrynin said that Leonid Brezhnev sympathised with President Nixon over his torments during the Watergate scandal . Dobrynins said that the Soviet leader sympathised with President Nixon .
 At a 1973 meeting at Nixon's home in San Clemente, California, Brezhnev had too much to drink and started making scandalous remarks about his Kremlin predecessors and rivals .
 Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to Washington 1962-86, was born on November 16, 1919 . He was born in Russia in 1919 .
 Only the intervention of a third officer stopped an attack that almost certainly would have led to an annihilating retaliation by U.S. forces . It was only the intervention .
 The little-known incident was detailed publicly at a conference of U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials who were involved in the 1962 crisis . It offered a chilling glimpse of how close the superpowers came to a nuclear exchange .
 The discovery of Soviet missile bases in 1962 triggered a two-week standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union that brought the world to the edge of disaster .
 President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade, readied forces for an attack, and demanded that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev withdraw the missiles . President Kennedy also demanded that the missiles were withdrawn .
 World watched as Soviet ships steamed toward the United States line . The world watched and waited for the ships to arrive .
 U.S. destroyers came upon a Soviet B-59 submarine, one of four in the area, and began dropping signal charges to force it to surface . The submarine was one of the four Soviet submarines operating in the region .
 Ships' logs from the USS Beale and USS Cony released Friday confirmed the bombardment . Ships' log from the ships' ships were released Friday . The logs confirm the bombardment of the Beale .
 After a hit by a ""practical depth bomb,"" Orlov said, submarine commander Valentin Grigorievich Savitsky thought a war might have begun . Orlov: "A war may have begun" after a hit .
 Unable to communicate with the Soviet general staff, he ordered the officer assigned to the nuclear-tipped torpedo to assemble it and prepare it to be fired . He ordered the torpedo to be assembled and fired .
 The conditions for firing the torpedo -a rupture of the hull -had not been achieved . Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov intervened, telling Savitsky that a rupture of hull had not been reached .
 Peterson, who kept the log aboard the Beale, said the ship's officers did not know the submarine they were bombarding was armed with a nuclear weapon . Peterson: The Beale's officers didn't know they were bombing a submarine armed with nuclear weapons .
 The missile crisis was defused the next day when Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the Soviet weapons from Cuba in exchange for a public pledge by Kennedy not to invade the island and a secret promise to pull U.S. missiles out of Turkey . Kennedy also agreed to pull United States missiles
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and former Soviet KGB agent Nikolai Leonov gathered in Havana on Friday to open a two-day conference and release several declassified documents . McNamara: "It's been a long way since the Cold War"
 Understanding the crisis could help future leaders avoid nuclear war, conference organizers say . Conference organizers say understanding the crisis will help leaders avoid a nuclear war .
 McNamara credited Castro, Kennedy and Khrushchev with averting a nuclear disaster . McNamara: "We're not going to be able to get nuclear weapons"
 McNamara said he didn't know how many of the former officials, most of them now in their 70s or 80s, would make the next one . McNamara: "Most of them are in their 80s or 90s and 90s, most are now in the 70