 The Soviet Union secretly placed missiles in Cuba in 1962 to support Fidel Castro’s administration against the United States . The missiles were placed by the Soviet Union in support of Castro's government against the U.S.
 Castro and his rebels had overthrown the American-backed president and military dictator, Fulgencio Batista, in 1959 . Castro overthrown Batista in 1959, and the U.S.-backed government overthrew the Batista .
 After a failed invasion by Cuban exiles and the Central Intelligence Agency under the United States at Bay of Pigs in 1961, the U.S. started to offer more military and economic support to Cuba .
 During the Cold War, the United States and U.S.R. had many proxy conflicts in places like Berlin, Vietnam, and Korea, but the Missile Crisis was the first time nuclear weapons were involved . The Missile Crisis occurred in the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 President John F Kennedy of the United States and Nikita Khrushchev of the U.S.R. wrote several letters over the 13 days after the discovery of the missiles on October 16, 1962 . President Kennedy and Prime Minister of the Soviet Union wrote letters over 13 days following discovery
 Khrushchev was willing to negotiate and make an agreement with Kennedy to promise no further invasions of Cuba and remove the missiles in Cuba if the U.S. removes missiles in Turkey and Italy if the United States removes them .
 Both sides understood what was at risk, and both men acknowledged that war had to be prevented any way possible . Both sides agreed that war should not be allowed to happen .
 Khrushchev was writing the truth; Castro had asked for shipments of larger arms in the fall of 1961 . Castro asked for arms shipments in fall of that year, Khrushche said .
 Khrushchev did not agree at first, but later did because it was vital to not lose Cuba to China or the United States . Cuba was U.S.R.’s ‘prime example’ of how successful they were able to undermine capitalism through the liberation of
 Khrushchev approved the delivery of the missiles on April 12 . Therefore, in order to keep Cuba in their camp, the missiles were delivered to Cuba . The missiles were ordered by the Soviet Union .
 In the same letter Khrushchev also tried to clear up what he thought were President Kennedy’s and the U.S.’ misunderstanding about the missiles and in general, Communism . In the letter he also said President Kennedy and the United States had a misunderstanding .
 Khrushchev criticized the United States policy and blamed it for invading Cuba in the first place . He still used this chance to explain the similarities between capitalism and Communism .
 Khrushchev could not risk starting a war with the U.S.R. with China, the second largest Communist country . The two countries were not on good terms with each other .
 Khrushchev called for a negotiation to cease the tension and ask for Kennedy’s agreement . The letter was signed by the then-President of the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Khrushchev wanted to use the missiles to make the U.S. back away from Cuba . The missiles were launched in Cuba in 1962 .
 Kennedy warned Khrushchev that the U.S. was ready to take action if nothing was done about the missiles . Kennedy and the United States saw the missiles as an offense weapons and warned the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev, who also wants to prevent a nuclear war, started to see the need to call for an agreement . The two sides agreed to avoid nuclear war in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev also used the missiles to trigger the United States to make an agreement to leave Cuba alone . The agreement was made based on the common goal between the U.S. and U.K.R., which was to prevent a nuclear war in any way possible .