 JFK planned to remove a major nuclear weapons build-up from the soil of Cuba . 'My fellow Americans, with a heavy heart, and in necessary fulfillment of my oath of office, I have ordered and the United States Air Force has now carried out military operations with conventional weapons only,
 Robert F Kennedy served as Attorney General and his brother's closest confidant during the missile crisis . His remarks were among the many private thoughts revealed in new papers released by the estate of the late Kennedy .
 RFK scribbled notes during a meeting about a possible airstrike on Cuba . RFK said only his brother was able to lead the world away from the edge of disaster . JFK's brother was JFK, RFK says .
 Strategic nuclear weapons are used to attack strategic targets, such as military installations, missile command centers or cities .Tactical nuclear weapons tend to be smaller devices that are used on the battlefield . Strategic weapons are often smaller devices used on battlefield .
 Professor Allison believes that the Russians would have responded with tactical nuclear rockets striking American ships and troops . Americans had no knowledge that these smaller nuclear weapons were already on the island .
 The Americans would have likely used nuclear weapons of their own, almost certainly drawing in a further Soviet nuclear response . The U.S. would likely have used their own nuclear weapons in response to the Soviet response .
 RFK's papers reveal that outcome didn't happen only because JFK and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev both realized the severity of what was coming . RFK: JFK's papers show that outcome wasn't only because of JFK and Nikita . JFK's Papers reveal the outcome of the
 The Soviet ships carrying missiles to Cuba turned back thanks to a series of public, private and secret concessions . NATO missiles were withdrawn from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of NATO missiles from Turkey .
 Documents released just shy of 50th anniversary of Cuban missile crisis . They don't rewrite Cold War history, but provide insight into personal thoughts of Cold War leaders .
 Kennedy advised John F Kennedy during the Bay of Pigs invasion and the missile crisis . He advised his brother during key moments during his brother's presidency . Kennedy advised JFK on how to deal with the Cuban crisis .
 Robert Kennedy doodled the Liberty Bell and wrote down a quote from a Polish World War II memorial in Italy . Dobbs: 'It gives you a sort of insight into what was on his mind, what he doodle'
 We the Soldiers of Poland for your liberty and ours give our souls to god, our bodies to Italy and our hearts to Poland,’ Kennedy wrote .
 The 1961 botched invasion sought to oust communists with the help of anti-Castro Cuban exiles and veiled U.S. support . The 1961 invasion was a botched invasion of Cuba .
 Another plan with connections to the Mafia outlines plans to assassinate Castro, including a 1964 plan . Another outline plans to kill Castro in 1964 .
 Documents detail the 13-day crisis over Soviet missiles in Cuba . Another prominent thread throughout the documents is the crisis in which the U.S. tried to pull missiles from Cuba .
 Dobbs: 'It's interesting to see in his handwriting who's on which side,’ Dobbs said. ‘I'm not sure if he's on the right side. It's interesting that he's not on the left side of the fence,” Dobbs
 The views expressed in the comments below do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline readers . View all the views expressed by users of this article .