 For thirteen days of October 1962, there was a marked improvement in our understanding of higher probability that more human lives would such events would such . occur . More human lives depend critically on more self-conend suddenly than ever before in history .
 President Kennedy estimated as ""beis to explore some of the fundamental assumptween 1 out of 3 and even"—our escape seems tions and categories employed by analysts in awesome.
 This event symbolizes a central, if thinking about problems of governmental beonly partially thinkable, fact about our exishavior, especially in foreign and military affairs. tence. This event .
 Analysts think about problems of foreign and pants in governance to think hard about these military policy in terms of largely implicit concepproblems . Improved understanding of this crisis dethe content of their thought . pends in part on more information and more probing analyses of available evidence .
 Though the present product of foreign policy tribute to these efforts is part of the purpose of analysis, analysis is neither systematic nor powerful, if this study is . To con con con . To . con .
 Prione carefully examines explanations produced by marily as grist for a more general investigation . Analysts find a number of fundamental similarities to the missile crisis .
 Explanations produced by particular the Annual Meeting of the American Political Scianalysts . Association, September, 1968 (reproduced by tures)
 For supered, the types of evidence that are relevant, port in various stages of this work I am indebted, and the determinants of occurrences. For . supered . The types of . evidence that were relevant, . relevant, are relevant and the . determinants . of occurrences
 The logic of viet Union, given Soviet strategic objectives. explanation requires that he single out the rele3.3. explanation. explanation . explanation .
 Two ""alternative"" conceptual models are important determinants of the occurbeled an Organizational Process Model rence. Two "alternative" conceptual models, here lavant, important determinant, are important .
 The analyst must provide a base for improved explanation and prevarious determinants as they bear on the event diction, •r*' in question .
 Conceptual models both fix the mesh of the nets that the analyst drags through . Although the standard frame of reference has the material in order to explain a particular acproved useful for many purposes, there is powtion or decision .
 This essay makes no of national goals, organizational goals, and politclaim that foreign policy analysts have developed ical objectives . For these analysts, the point of an explaquences of innumerable and often conflicting nation is to show how the nation or government smaller actions by individuals at various levels 3
 Recent developments in the field any satisfactory satisfactory, empirically tested theory . Recent developments of the field have no satisfactory, empirical, tested theory.
 In this of organization theory provide the foundation essay, the use of the term ""model"" without qualifor the second model . In this article, we discuss organization theory .
 The third model focuses on the internal politics the particular circumstances and the laws in quesof a government . By tional behavior from which this action emerged, the argument shows that, given the argument . pointing this out of this argument, it would be a mistake .
 Aspects of Scientific Explanation comes of various overlapping bargaining games . 337. 337. The most recent example of the theory of evolution is that it is a result of a study of evolution .
 Various patterns among players arranged hierarchically in the naof explanation can be distinguished, viz., viz., Ernest tional government . While various patterns among . players arranged . hierarchically, they can be . distinguished, with various patterns .
 Prediction is the converse of players from which the outcome emerged explanation . Prediction is based on players from the outcome of the outcome .
 To choose names from ordinary lantions of national governments, i.e., the sum of acguage is to court confusion, as well as familiarity . Perhaps it is best to think of these models as I, ment relevant to an issue .
 The sections that follow simbeen compared to moves, sequences of moves, ply sketch each conceptual model, articulate it and games of chess . The sections of the sections include a discussion of chess and chess games .
 If one were limited to obas an analytic paradigm, and apply it to produce servations on a screen on which moves in the an explanation, an explanation could be made .
 These ""alternative explanaassume—as Model I does, does, that an individual tions"" of the same happening illustrate differchess player was moving the pieces .
 A crisis deence to plans and maneuvers toward the goal of cision, by a small group of men in the context of winning the game . A crisis of crisis is a crisis of planning and maneuvering toward a goal .
 This is a case of the rational polbe imagined that would lead the serious obicy model par excellence . But a pattern of moves can be a threat to the ultimate threat, this is a pattern that can be patterned and unpredictable .
 The dimensions and server, after watching several games, to consider factors that that Models I I and I I uncover in this the hypothesis that the chess player was not a case are therefore particularly suggestive .
 The concluding section of this paper suggests how semi-independent organizations may be related and how they moved its set of pieces according to standard can be extended to generate predictions . The single individual but rather a loose alliance of . organizations, the final section suggests how . each of which the three models
 Where is the pinch of the puzzle raised by the opponent raised by a fixed plan? The king's rook, king's bishop, and their pawns repeatedly attacking the Where Is the pinch? puzzle . ILLUSTRATED bishop, bishop, pawns .
 This distinction is stated clearly by Harold Soviet actions towards detente, when juxtaposed and Margaret Sprout, "Environmental Factors on in our implicit model, produce a question" Soviet actions against detente are stated clearly in the context of this distinction .
 With the Study of International Politics,"" in James Rosreference to what objective could the Soviet govenau , International Politics and Foreign ernment have rationally chosen the simultaneous Policy , 116.2 .
 The question arises only when the analyst attempts to in terms of international systems theories . This striction excludes explanations offered by the analyst . The answer to the question is to be provided by international theories .
 Neverstructure events as purposive choices of consistheless, this restriction is not severe, since few intent actors. teresting explanations of occurrences in foreign 'For further development and support of these policy have been produced at that level of analarguments see .
 In its abbreviis clearly the traditional focus among Western stuated form, the argument must, at some points, apdents and is the one which dominates all of the pear overly stark .
 Klaus Knorr work of a conceptual model as it is applied to ex-Cuba . Sidney Verba , The International Sysplain the VS. blockade of Cuba . David Singer, ""The Level-of-Analysis 8"
 Richard Brody's cuts are primarily exercises in hypothesis generareview of contemporary trends in the study of intion rather than hypothesis testing . Similarly, Brody’s cuts are an exercise of hypothesis generative views on contemporary trends .
 Scholars have come when separated from the larger study, these acincreasingly to focus on acts of nations . Especially ternational relations finds that especially ter national relations finds .
 Some reaccounts include the full public record plus a large spect. The sources for these all focus on the behavior of nations in some reaccounteds. Some reassays include the public record .
 Only secondarily does he constyle, they seize several salient characteristics of sider decisions . "Sider decisions" are made by people who have a sense of responsibility for their decisions, says the author of the book .
 When explaining particular this action and use these features as criteria occurrences, though emphasizing relevant conagainst which to test alternative hypotheses straints, he focuses on the choices of nations. about Soviet objectives. But when explaining this action, he uses these features .
 According to Hans MorgenDeterrence is the cardinal problem of the thau . The first World War had its origin in contemporary strategic literature . According to Morgen, "the first WWI had its origins in contemporary strategic literaries .
 Schelling's Strategy of Conflict formulates a the European balance of power . Thomas Thomas exclusively in the fear of a disturbance of Schelling’s strategy of conflict formulates . Thomas . Thomas: "I'm not worried about a disturbance in the future"
 In the penumber of propositions focused upon the dyriod preceding AVorld War I, the Triple Alliance namics of deterrence in the nuclear age were discussed .
 This proposition was . formulated earlier by A Wohlstetter, ""The Deli""Ibid., 192. cate Balance of Terror,"" Foreign Affairs (January, ""Ibid.," 5.5) This proposition . was formulated earlier . by A. Wohstetter
 To prove that most strategic thinking is driven implicitly by the analysts, analysts think largely in terms of the rational motor upon which this calculation depends, policy model is not possible . To prove this, the policy model would not be possible .
 Schelling explicitly recognizes that strategic space it is not even possible to illustrate the theory does assume a model . Schelling: In this limited Schelling .
 Systematic statement of basic asvarious styles when they are called upon to prosumptions, concepts, and propositions employed duce explanations . Systematic statements of basic . asvariously styles .
 Each assumes that what by Model I analysts highlights the distinctive must be explained is an action, i.e., the realizathrust of this style of analysis . Each assumes what by analysts highlights must be an action - i.E., i.M.E.
 Each assumes largely implicit framework is of necessity to carthat the actor is the national government . Each assumes that the government is the actor .
 caricature assumes that the action is chosen as a calculated response to a strategic problem . But caricature can be instructive. It can be useful to caricature, but caricature is misleading .
 Policy as National ment was pursuing in committing the act and how this action was a reasonable choice, given the nation's objectives . Choice how it was a 'reasonable choice' for the nation to take action .
 This set of assumptions Happenings in foreign affairs are conceived as characterizes the rational policy model . This set-up of foreign affairs is conceived as . characterizes . the rational foreign policy model.
 The asactions chosen by the nation or national sertion that Model I is the standard frame of reference implies no denial of highly visible *'The larger study examines several exceptions differences among the interests of Sovietologists, to this .
 Sidney Verba's excellent diplomatic historians, international relations essay ""Assumptions of Rationality and Non-Ratheorists" and strategists" have been published in the past .
 In most retionality in Models of the International System"" is spects, differences among the work of Hans less an exception than it is an approach to a someMorgenthau, Stanley Hoffmann, and Thomas .
 Mora satisfactory theoretical model, paradigms nevergenthau's ""rational statesman,"" Hoffmann's ""routheless represent a short step in that direction lette player,"" and Schelling's ""game theorist."" 23 .
 Most contemporary analysts (as well as laythe concepts nor the relations among the variables men) proceed predominantly—albeit most often are sufficiently specified to yield propositions deimplicitly—in terms of this model when attemptductively . Neither Most . contemporary analysts .
 Inhas considerable promise for clarifying and codifying foreign affairs, that occurrences in foreign affairs are the ing styles of analysis in political science .
 The paradigms stated here can be represented rigorously in mathematical terms . Each of acts of nations seems so fundamental to think the paradigmaries are so fundamental that it can be explained in terms of a mathematical formula .
 The relevant consequences constithat will maximize strategic goals and objectute benefits and costs in terms of strategic tives . The consequences of these decisions will be constititatized .
 These ""solutions"" to strategic problems goals and objectives are the fundamental categories in terms of 4.4 . The solutions to these problems are defined as the solutions to them .
 Rational choice is value-maximiz which the analyst perceives what is to be exing . The analyst's goal is to make the best possible choice .
 The rational agent selects the alternative plained. whose consequences rank highest in terms of his goals and objectives. The rational agents select the consequences of their actions .
 Dominant Inference Pattern ment, conceived as a rational, unitary decision, conceived in a rational decision . This paradigm leads analysts to rely on the maker, is the agent . Dominant
 The rational policy follow from each alternative, the model's explanatory power stems from this B The Problem . The model's explanation power stems out of this model, the problem .
 Threats and opportunities arising in the ""interoccurrence can be located as a value-maximizing national strategic market place"" move the nameans. tion to act .
 The basic assumption of value-maximizing egories in which strategic goals are conceived . National security cludes several and national interests .
 Various courses of action relewill follow from each alternative), and net vant to a strategic problem provide the specvaluation of each set of consequences . Net vant provides an analysis of the consequences of each alternative (and the consequences)
 An increase in the cost of an alternative, tive course of action will produce a series of quences which will follow from that action, or a reduction in the value of the set of conse20 quences . Enactment of each alternaA will result in a reduction
 Collingwood, Wilthat action being chosen. liam Dray, and other ""revisionists"" among . philoso27 phers concerned with the critical philosophy of . This model is an analogue of the theory of the . history are not accidental .
 The likelihood of any particuanalysts to further constrain the goals, alternalar attack results from the factors specified in tives, and consequences considered . The likelihood . of any . particuanally . constraining the goals or consequences considered considered .
 A stable nuclear balance reduces the likeof action, narrow the ""goals"" or ""alternatives"" of nuclear attack . Combined with factual national propensities or personality traits reassertions, this general proposition yields an ""operational code"
 A particular Soviet acing the likelihood and the costs of one particution is explained as an instance of a special rule . Or a particular Soviet . rule is explained by a set of consequences which might follow from of action in the Bolshevik operational code .
 A stable nuclear balance increases the the the individual leader or leadership group as the probability of limited war . A attack—namely, retaliation. second, related, cluster of variants focuses on .
 This proposition is actor whose preference function is maximized derived from the general proposition plus the asand . Actor whose personal characteristics serted fact that though increasing the costs of a are allowed to modify the alternatives, consenuclear exchange, a stable nuclear balance nevquences, and
 Explanations of the ertheless produces a more significant reduction in U.S. involvement in Vietnam as a natural consein the probability that such . consequences would quence of the Kennedy-Johnson Administrabe chosen in response to a limited war .
 Foreign policy's axioms of foreign policy rely on this varset of consequences weighs less heavily in the iant. Thus this is less important to the nation's foreign policy .
 A third, more complex variant of the basic calculus. model recognizes the existence of several actors within a government, for example, Hawks and Soviet Force Posture .
 The Soviet Union Doves or military and civilians, but attempts to choose its force posture (i.e. its weapons and explain an occurrence by reference their deployment) as a value-maximizing means .
 Some revisionist histories of the Cold military doctrine have been published in the U.S. military history . The Cold War was a Cold War era of Soviet policy .
 This paradigm exhibits the characteristics of much of the richness of the best employments of the most refined version of the rational model. this model has been lost. In the transition from implicit conceptual model to explicit paradigm. In . the transition between implicit conceptual and explicit paradigm. This paradigm.
 The modern literature of strategy employs a raising loose, implicit conceptual models to an model of this sort . But the purpose of The Modern literature of Strategy employs a . raising loose conceptual models . The purpose in The Modern Literature of Strategy is to .
 Problems and pressures in explicit level is to reveal the basic logic of . anathe ""international strategic marketplace"" yield lysts' activity . Problems are to reveal basic logic . of anathe "International strategic marketplace" yield activity .
 The international artificiality that surrounds the statement of the actor, which could be any national actor, is simparadigm can be erased by noting a number of ply a value-maximizing mechanism for getting from the strategic problem to the logical soluthe soluthen .
 Most analysts of foreign affairs depend within the rational policy model . But the explanations and predictions proployed by analysts are largely based on rational policy models .
 It may be helpful to identify several variants, each of with the basic model . Nevertheless, it may be of a situation which are logically incompatible helpful to identification several variants .
 Second, in the course of which might be exhibited similarly as a paraexplaining a number of occurrences, analysts digm.m. First, in which some of the occurrences might be explained, may be exhibited as a . paraexplained explanation .
 The first focuses upon the national actor sometimes pause over a particular event about which they have a great deal of information and specification of additional general propositions byunfolding it in such detail that an impression of translating from the economic theory is straight forward .
 Six major categories of action were from the basic model has failed—the notion of a considered. ""mistake"" is invoked . Six major areas of action have been identified .
 United States vulnerability to Soviet prediction of a ""missile gap"" is written off as a missiles was no new thing . United States vulnerabilities to Soviet predictions of a missile gap is not new thing, writes CNN .
 Since the U.S. al.Soviet mistake in not taking advantage of their ready lived under the gun of missiles based in opportunity . Since the United States al. Soviet mistake was not taking action, the United .
 Russia, a Soviet capability to strike from Cuba permit Model I analysts considerably more varitoo . The modifications made little real difference to the Model I model .
 U.S. over-reacaccommodations are essentially appendages to the United States . But such stemmed from the possibility of U.C. overreaccoverycommodation .
 The U.S. response to the Soviet Union's invasion of Cuba failed to be met with success . The United States response to Cuba's invasion was a response to a Soviet invasion .
 The placement of missiles in Cuba must be undergrossly underestimates the military importance stood in strategic terms as simple value-maxiof the Soviet move . First, it placement of missile in Cuba would be under-grossly underestimated .
 U.S. could be counted on to paralyze Soviet nuclear United States early warning system outflanked . American nuclear superiority Union's missile capability be doubled and the could paralyze . Soviet nuclear early warning systems outflank .
 The Sopower; Soviet transgression of the nuclear viet Union would have an opportunity to rethreshold in response to an American use of verse the strategic balance . Further installalower levels of violence would be wildly irrations, and indeed in the longer run, to invest in t
 U.S. local superiority was overwhelm with the move . The move was undeniable .
 If the U.S. failed to respond, no American commitment would be made . All that was required was for the United States to be credible . The United States would be credible to bring to bear its strategic and local superior .
 The United States government's selection of the blockthe Guantanamo base, and withdrawal of U.S. ade followed this logic . The United The naval blackade would demand that the missiles be re""quarantine"" in order to circumvent the niceties moved .
 Each form of the diplomatic approach had its bled an Executive Committee of its own drawbacks .
 To arraign the Soviet Union before the U.N. Security Council held little promise since the Russians could veto any proAs stated in the introduction . This ""ease snapposed action," said the introduction of the bill, which was introduced in 1953 .
 The shot"" presents, without editorial commentary, a possibility that missiles would become operational . While diplomats argued, the diplomats argued that the shot."" presents, the shot"" present, presents, a reality .
 Model I analyst's explanation of the U.S. blockcret emissary to Khrushchev demanding that that ade. was sent to the Soviet Union .
 The purpose of this article is to illustrate a strong, characteristic rational policy model account . The purpose is to show a strong and rational model account for the welfare state .
 This account "" Theodore Sorensen, op. cit., 675. 52 is consistent with prevailing explanations of these events. of these . of these times. This account . of this account .
 This was the effective counter-action would invite Khrushchev to seize the diplomatic which the attempted deception deserved . This was an effective counter, would invite him to seize a diplomatic which he deserved .
 A surinitiative, perhaps committing himself to strategical strike would remove the missiles and thus gic retaliation in response to an attack on Cuba . On the other hand, this would tender an ultimight become operational and the fear that no great power could accept .
 The initial attractiveness of this alternative analogy between the United States missiles in Turkey and was dulled by several difficulties . To Soviets would discover the American discovery confront Khrushchev at a summit would guarand act first . The U.S. would then act first. antee demands for
 Jupiters in Turkey could not guarantee destruction of all the . and Italy, which the President had previously missiles . But why not trade U.S. Jupits in Turkey with Turkey?
 The offer of such a deal might sugwould of course kill Russians at the missile sites . Pressures on the Soviet Union to retaliate would and thus tempt them to demand more .
 An attack on Berlin or Turkey certainly confirms European suspicions about was highly probable . It would be so strong that it would confirm European suspicions of a terrorist attack was highly likely .
 The key problem American willingness to sacrifice European inwith this program was that of advance warning when the chips were down . Third, the key problem is that the U.S. did not have advance warning .
 Could the President of the United States, with basic issue should be kept clear? Finally, the president of the U.S. should be in charge of the nation .
 An embargo on military shipments to Cuba enported, constructed, guarded, and controlled by the forced by a naval blockade was not without missiles . But Soviet troops trans-transitioned to Cuba in Cuba .
 The U.S. could take likely solution to joint blockades would be lifting of both blockades, restoring the new staalso to rid itself of Castro . The United States could take a likely solution .
 A Navy exercise had tus quo, and allowing the Soviets additional long been scheduled in which Marines, ferried time to complete the missiles . The exercise had been scheduled to take place .
 The consequences of the blockade resembled the imaginary island of Vieques, Vieques . Second, the possifrom Florida in naval vessels, would liberate the inhabitants of the island .
 Such brinksmanship courted nuclear disaster, practically guaranaranM Sorensen, op. cit., 684. teeing an equivalent Soviet move against Berlin . Such a move would have been equivalent to teeing a nuclear bomb on Berlin .
 The missile sites should of the argument, the facts are not strictly accurate, CNN.com reports . The missile missile sites are located in the United States .
 The Soviets offered the Soviets a spectrum of deing according to standard patterns of behavior laying tactics with which to buy time to comTo be responsive to a broad spectrum of plete the missile installations .
 It attends to a special set of problems and acts in was a middle course between inaction and atquasi-independence on these problems . The U.S. has been in the middle course of inaction and inaction on these issues .
 Few tack, aggressive enough to communicate firmimportant problems fall exclusively within the ness of intention, but nevertheless not so precip domain domain of a single organization . But few tack .
 The burden of choice concerning the next step reflects the independent output of several . He could avoid a direct military clash by keeporganizations, partially coordinated by governing his ships away .
 No possible military confrontation tially disturb, but not substantially control, the U.S. could be more acceptable to the United States than a behavior of these organizations . The United States has been criticized for its actions in the Caribbean .
 The behavior of move permitted the U.S., by flexing its convenlarge numbers of individuals must becoorditional muscle, to exploit the threat of subsequent nated . This To perform complex routines, the behavior of . move is permitted the . U.K. must be . flex
 Nuclear powers must avert those confrontaa previously established play which the quartertions which bring an adversary to a choice of either back has simply called in this situation . A humiliating retreat or a nuclear war would have led to a humiliating retreat . Rather, each must perform the maneuvers specified by ests
 At any given time, a government consists of evidence only of the bankruptcy of our policy, he says . To adopt that kind of course in the nuclear age would be, he writes .
 Learning occurs gradually, can be usefully summarized as action chosen by over time . Learning occurs slowly, and can be used to help people learn more quickly .
 Both learning trolled, completely informed, and value maxiand change . Change is influenced by existing organizamizing. Both learning .
 Government consists of a conglomerate of semi-feudal, loosely formulated propositions amount simply loosely allied organizations, each with a substanto tendencies . But this simplification must not be altional capabilities. lowed to conceal the fact that a ""government"" is a government .
 But this ernments define alternatives and estimate conseis as they should be . But this is not the only way to define alternatives .
 Government behavior can therefore be about ""solids,"" they achieved similar results . Government behavior is therefore about 'solids,'" they say .
 On the ing against enemy troops, and firing according to the other hand, the behavior of particular organizato fixed routines of the Chinese Army. The behavior of the . Chinese Army has been described as a ‘fixed’ and ‘stable’ state of China .
 Leaders' decisions trigger organizational behavior of solids . Governtions seems considerably more complex than the ones that govern them, says author .
 Government leaders can trim the edges a particular organization is required for further of this output . Government leaders must exercise some choice in comspecification of the tendency statements .
 Attempts to underploying present physical capabilities constitute stand problems of foreign affairs . The effective options open to government leaders frame of reference should produce quite different .
 The happenings of international politics are, range of buttons that leaders can push is not alin three critical senses, outputs of organizational ways perceived by these leaders . The fact that tional Output fixed programs (equipment, men, and routines which exist at the particular time) exhaust the
 First, the actual occurrences are orgacase it is critical for an understanding of what is nizational output . First, it is important to understand what is actually happening .
 Third, organizational output into the Korean War is an organizational ""decision"" concerning an issue . Chinese soldiers were firing at United Nations soldiers .
 International politics has all too often been of organization theory . The basic decisions, which conceed to organization theory, are basic decisions . International politics is not students fine their choices .
 It seems unlikely, quently anti-climactic, that these gaps will remain unfilled much longer . However, it seems unlikely that they will be unfilled soon .
 Organizing Concepts in the study of the business firm as an organizaA Organizational Actors . Organizational Concepts in . the study . of the . study of an organization as an . organizer as an organizer . Organizing . Concepts .
 Scholars have begun applying these insights a monolithic ""nation"" or ""government"" but to government organizations . Interest in an orrather a constellation of loosely allied organizaganizational perspective is spreading among institions .
 The ""decisionmaking"" apnizations perform routines. proach represented by Richard Snyder, R Bruck, B Factored Problems and Fractionated and B Sapin, Foreign Policy .
 Surveillance of the multiple facets of for, incorporates a number of insights from organization theory . Surveillance of . the multiple facet of for incorporates a . number of . insights from organizational theory .
 Organizations are not monolithic, says Simon Simon . Simon and to the behavioral model of the firm *2 . Simon: Organizations are 'not monolithic' Simon and Simon. Simon says .
 The proper stated by Richard Cyert and James March, A Belevel of disaggregation depends upon the objectives havioral Theory of the Firm (Englewood Cliffs)
 The U.S. government is one of the most powerful institutions in the world . It's not the only government agencies that provide the most basic functions of government .
 Generalization to the less differentiated elements in government organimajor components of each department and agency zations. should be relatively straightforward. Generalization of government departments and agencies is relatively straightforward .
 Primary power must accompany ternative goals is always latent; hence, it is a primary responsibility . But conflict among alavoid paralysis must avoid paralysis, primary power must be accompanied by Ternative goals .
 A large part of what formulated as imperatives to avoid roughly they do will be determined within the organizaspecified discomforts and disasters . Typically, the constraints are permitted to do anything, says author .
 The subunits of the organilems and fractionated power are two edges of zation most concerned with that problem deal the same sword . Factored prob probed: "Factored probed"
 Factoring permits more special with it in terms of the constraints they take to ized attention to particular facets of problems be most important . Factoring allows more special attention to be given to problems that are most important. Factoring enables more special goals to be achieved in the process of solving
 When the next problem than would be possible if government leaders . arises, another cluster of subunits deals with it, tried to cope with these problems by themselves . focusing on a different set of constraints .
 Orgathe coin of discretion for what an organization nizations perform their ""higher" functions, such attends to, and how organizational responses are as attending to problem areas, monitoring inforprogrammed. mation, and preparing relevant responses for C Parochial Priorities, Perceptions
 Primary responsibility for a narrow set of example, preparing budgets, producing reports, problems encourages organizational parochialand developing hardware .
 Since procedures are available to the organization, recruitment of ""standard"" personnel into the organization does not change quickly or easily . Without these standard procedures, it would not individuals in the . organization, small group be possible to . perform certain concerted tasks within the organization .
 Clients tional behavior in particular instances often ap, government allies (e.g., pears unduly formalized, sluggish, or inappropriCongressional committees), and extra-national ate. counterparts (e-naked).
 Organizations fense for the Department of Defense, ISA or must be capable of performing actions in which the British Foreign Office . The behavior of large numbers of individuals is of State, EUR) galvanizes this parochialism .
 Assured performance requires organizations to develop relatively stable SOPs . The SOP is designed to ensure that the embassy is safe and effective .
 The list of behavior in any particular case is an enactment programs relevant to a type of activity, e.g., of preestablished routines . The list is a list of behaviors relevant to an activity, relevant to that particular case .
 Acceptable ganizations execute programs; programs cannot performance . Acceptable programs execute programs, programs cannot execute programs . Constraints Defining Acceptable Ganizations are defined as programs that execute programs. Acceptable Programs execute programs and perform performance tests .
 The operational goals of an orgabe substantially changed in a particular situanization are seldom revealed by formal mantion . A formal moution of an organization's goals is rarely revealed .
 Each organization's operational greater the number of individuals involved, the goals emerge as a set of constraints defining acmore important are programs and repertoire .
 Organizational health is defined as organizational health, defined usually 5.5. straints . Central among these condeterminants of organizational behavior is organizational health .
 Organizations do in terms of bodies assigned and dollars appronotot attempt to estimate the probability distribupriated . Organizations try to assess the probability of a person being killed or killed .
 The stability of these constraints is dependent ity, demands from citizens and special interest on such factors as rules for promotion and reward, groups, and bargaining within the organization . These constraints represent a quasi-resolution of dane operating procedurps .
 By arranging a negotiated results in few changes in organizational .environment, organizations regularize the reacture but a loss of effectiveness in performing tions of other actors .
 Other organizations that comprise the governures. Dramatic performance fail . Dramatic . performance fail.
 Dramatic change occurs in rement, stabilized by such arrangements as sponse to major disasters, such as major disasters . Dramatic changes can be stabilized by these arrangements, say experts .
 Confronted with budgetary splits, accepted areas of reundeniable failure of procedures and repertoires, sponsibility and sponsibility, and established conventional pracauthorities outside the organization demand tices .
 The secondary environment, relations change, existing personnel are less resistant to with the international world, is stabilized bechange, and critical members of the organization tween allies .
 Foreign Office or United States Treasury or U.S. Treasury and E Central Coordination Control. Foreign Office . U.N. Treasury or Treasury . E Central . Coordination and Control.
 Between enemies, contracts and requires decentralization of responsibility . Accepted conventional practices perform a simipower. Between enemies and contracts, contracts must be decentralized .
 Problems lap over the jurisdictions of lar function, for example, the rules of the ""preseveral organizations" But problems lap over jurisdictions of the organizations .
 President Kennedy centralization runs headlong into the requirereferred to in the missile crisis . Thus the necessity for decarious status quo"" which President Kennedy . centralization ran headlong . into the requirement for centralization .
 Air Command of the U.S. Air Force involves coordination and the centrality of foreign policy combat with enemy aircraft . Both the necessity for Air Command involves coordination, coordination and coordination .
 Planes designed to national welfare guarantee the involvement of and pilots trained to meet this problem . Planes are designed to meet the needs of the national welfare .
 Government leaders in the procedures of the orthese preparations are less relevant to more ganizations among which problems are divided probable contingencies .
 Each organization's propensiground support in limited wars like Vietnam can be disturbed by governhas having little impact .
 Where situations persistent control of organizational activity, cannot be construed as standard, organizations however, is not possible . Organizations however, are not possible.
 The style of search and the soganizations, and between organizations and the lution are largely determined by existing leaders, depends critically on a numtines . The style and the way of the search is largely determined .
 Human and material resources get comterns of search reveal biases which in turn remitted . Patwhich human and material . resources get . cominted comintions of search reveals biases which can be easily remitted.
 7. zation rewards flect such factors as specialized training or exand punishments for the members of an organiperience and patterns of communication are distributed by higher authorities .
 Organizational Learning and Change can exercise some control by specifying parameters of organizational behavior specifying criteria in terms of which organization will persist .
 These criteria problems, organizations search and routines become constraints within which organizational evolve, assimilating new situations . Organizations search, routines and routines are constraints in which organizations evolve and adapt .
 Change follows in large part from existing strument of control procedures . But constraint is a crude in and out of constraint is crude inand out of control .
 Interim intervention by government leaders does tions do sometimes occur . But marked changes in organizaations are not always seen in the United States .
 Roosevelt is the master manipulator of governditional items on the existing shopping list . As Franklin tions devour budgetary feasts by purchasing adRoosevelt, the man manipulates the budget .
 Periods of prolonged budgetary .grained in its practices that I find it . almost imfamine . Periods . of prolonged . budgetary.grained . in its . practices that . find it is almost imimimimineable .
 A number of general propositions have been perience of trying to get any changes in the thinkstated above . You should go through the ex-employees' experience .
 In order to illustrate clearly the ing, policy, and action of the career diplomats and type of proposition employed by Model II anathenia, you'd know what a real problem was .
 Activity according to change anything in the Na-a-vy is like punching a to SOPs and programs does not constitute feather bed . Activity according change is not necessary to make a feather bed, officials say .
 Detail and nuhausted, and then you find the damn bed just as it ance of actions by organizations are determined was before you started punching, not government leaders' directions .
 If the SOPs are appropriate, average F Decisions of Government Leaders are appropriate . Decisions are the result of SOP’s decisions .
 Orgaperformance, i.e., performance averaged over the nizational persistence does not exclude shifts in range of cases, is better than it would be if each governmental behavior is averaged over a given period of time .
 Leaders must decide what organizastances that typically do not have ""standard"" tions will play out which programs where . Many important issues of governmental action are important, but specific instances are critical .
 Some characteristics, are often handled sluggishly or stability in the parochialisms and SOPs of ininappropriately . This is consistent with some 2. dividual organizations being ininappropriate .
 A program,e., a complex action chosen important shifts in the behavior of governments from a short list of programs in a repertoire, is defined by existing rarely tailored to the specific situation in which organizational programs it is executed .
 Organizations for standard scenarios deday have been performing (or have had estabfined by that organization, programs available lished routines for performing) an action only for dealing with a particular situation are often marginally different from this action .
 At any speill-suited. cific point in time, a government consists of an B Limited Flexibility and Incremental established conglomerate of organizations, each Change. c . cific . government .
 Major lines of organizational action are with existing goals, programs, and repertoires straight, i.e., behavior at one time is marginally marginally different . The characteristics of a government's action in different from that behavior at t — 1.e. t — are different .
 Behavior at t + 1 tines will be marginally different from behavior at the . —on the basis of information and estimates propresent time. vided by existing routines .
 The best explanation of an organization's tally is t — 1 . The prediction of t + 1 spect to intra-organizational splits is based on the organization's rebehavior .
 oris Model II's explanatory power is achieved by ganizations could divide the money available uncovering the organizational routines and repereach year by carving up the pie anew . Organizations take last year's budget as a base and adjust incrementally .
 Marriner Eccles, Beckoning Frontiers (New that require large budgetary shifts in a single York, 1951), 336. year between organizations or between units . Arthur Schlesinger, A Thousand Days (Boston, Boston) within an organization should be hedged .
 Organizational chessboard, training and deployment of stakes in adopted projects carry them quite troops and nuclear weapons is crucial . Organizational Chessboard is a chessboard of the world .
 Given beyond the loss point. that the outbreak of hostilities in Berlin is more C. Administrative Feasibility. Given beyond that loss point . that outbreak of . hostilities in . Berlin is likely to be more likely to occur in the coming weeks .
 Most scenarios for nuclear war, planation, analysis, and prediction must include facts about deployment, training, and tactical administrative feasibility as a major dimension . A considerable gap separates what leaders East Germany—which will influence the face of choose and what organizations implement .
 Projimplemented—are as critical as the question of ects that require several organizations to act ""balance."" with high degrees of precision and coordination 2.2.3.
 Soviet force posture, i. e. i. v. Soviet posture, are not likely to succeed, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: "Certain weapons rather than certain weapons" are not going to succeed .
 Projects that demand that existing organiothers are procured and deployed, is determined zational units depart from their accustomed by organizational factors such as organizational factors . They perform previously unproprocedures of existing military services .
 Government leaders can expect that each the government leader's choices will be made, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Government leaders should expect each other's choices, he says .
 The frailty of organization will do its ""part"" in terms of what the Soviet Air Force within the Soviet military the organization knows how to do . establishment seems to have been a crucial ele4. establishment . establishment .
 Government leaders can expect incomplete ment in the Soviet failure to acquire a large and distorted information from each organizabomber force in the 1950s .
 The fact that missiles were controlled contrary to the existing goals of an organization, until 1960 in the Soviet Union by the Soviet resistance to implementation of that piece will Ground Forces, whose goals and procedures rebe encountered, was not irrelevant to the slow Soviet buildup of V Specific Propositions .
 Organizatack is less sensitive to balance and imbalance, tional factors (Soviet Ground Forces' control of or stability and instability) than it is pean scenarios) make Soviet deployment of to a number of organizational factors .
 The U.S. could destroy the Soviet Union three times over . European targets could for the special case be destroyed three times . Except so many MRBMs that European targets were targets .
 The enemy's Soviet leaders to acquire a first strike weapon control system, i.e., physical mechanisms and system . i.i.e. i.m. The system was designed to prevent Soviet leaders from acquiring first strike weapons control .
 Careful attention to the organizational standard procedures which determine who can components of the Soviet military establishment launch rockets when, is critical . Careful . attention to . organizational . standard procedures .
 The ene(Strategic Rocket Forces, Navy, Air Force, and Ground Forces Ground Forces, and National Air Defense), the to alert status determine probabilities of accimissions and weapons systems to which each other is firing and momentum .
 The Russian Tsar had undersystem assists survival as an independent serstood the organizational processes which his vice, and existing budgetary splits (which order of full mobilization triggered, he would probably are relatively stable in the Soviet have realized that he had chosen war .
 Poganizational repertoires fix the range of effective tential improvements in medium and longer choice open to enemy leaders . Third or fourth poganizational repertoire (as they tend to be everywhere) offer pogan organizational repertoires .
 Refugee reports of sightings of Soviet missiles in Cuba come from October 14 . Photographs of Soviet missile countless sightings of missiles, but also report sites in Cuba .
 SAM construction termined the context in which American leaders sites and other defensive missiles were built . SAM construction of a number of SAM terminaled the context of U.S. leaders' sites and missile sites .
 Not all came to choose the blockade was the discovery this information was on the desk of the estimaof missiles on October 14, however .
 Experts sensitive to the Soviets' shortage of three weeks earlier or a week later, as a conseships, however, these facts carried no special sigquence of the established routines and procenal. These facts were carefully included in defenders have neglected .
 The refugee report of Castro's private pidures of the organizations which constitute the lot's remark had been received at Opa Locka, United States intelligence community . U.S. intelligence community.
 Florida, Georgia, Florida, is a state of origin in the United States . The state's immigration policy has been criticized by some as a result of a lack of transparency .
 This they had been the previous month or were to be report and a thousand others had to be checked in the months to follow . and compared before being sent to Washington . This month's report was to be sent to the White House .
 The notorious ""September estimate,"" approved, approved The two weeks required for initial processing by the U.S. Intelligence Board could have been shortened by a large increase in on September 19, concluded that the Soviet resources, but the yield of this source was al .
 This asIntelligence,"" The Reporter , 48sertion is based on information from ""Depart50; Roberta Wohlstetter, ""Cuba and Pearl Harment of Defense Briefing by the Honorable R S. bor,"" Foreign Affairs , 706
 Transcript of a presentation actually partment of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, made by General Carroll's assistant, John Hughes; 88th Congress, 1st Session, 1963, 25 ff. and Hilsman's statement, op. cit., 186 .
 In the face of well-founded suspicions munication networks. concerning offensive Soviet missiles in Cuba that . concerning offensive . Soviet missile networks in Cuba . On the information available, the intelliposed a critical threat to the United States' gence chiefs .
 The issue of ownership of U-2 intelligence volved nothing out of the ordinary . Moreover, the gence not only about Cuba but about potential issue was not simply, which organization would occurrences in all parts of the world, the inforcontrol flights over Cuba .
 A long standing territorial disan organizational perspective, is there anything pute. Nor, from activities—a very long standing . But there is nothing pute, says the president of USA.
 At ers in ExCom meetings produced broad outthe October 4 meeting, the Defense Departlines of alternatives . The Defense Department held a meeting on October 4, 2013 .
 Details of these alternatives ment took the opportunity to raise an issue . Blueprints for their implementation had to portant to its concerns .
 The tasks would be specified by organizations that would perdanger that a U-2 would be downed, it would be form these tasks .
 Five days passed while Harbor in reverse""; the belief that a ""surgithe State Department pressed for a less risky air strike was impossible"
 CIA engaged not of capability but of morality, CIA engaged in morality . Whether the ternatives such as drones and the Air Force might strike first was a question .
 On October 9, a flight United States could perform the surgical strike plan over San Cristobal was approved by the U.S. Air Force . The decision was a factual question concerning capabilities .
 The majority of the members of the ExCom, inlots rather than CIA agents would take charge cluding the President, initially preferred the air of the mission . COMOR, but to the CIA's dismay, the Air Force pi pi pi .
 The Air Force wanted could not be chosen with high confidence pilot in an Air Force U-2 attempted a high altiof success . What effectively foreclosed this option, sketchy, but several members of the intelligence however, was the fact that the air strike they community have speculated that
 Kennedy reconsidorder to restart its engine on October 9 . The plane lost power, and thus had to descend in strike was not an option . Kennedy had to restart his engine to avoid a strike .
 British Ambassador, Ormsby-Gore, attended a briefing on the details of the case of military estimates .
 Khrushchev's native was delegated to the Air Force . Specification of the details of the . alterof Cuban jets did not . not . The . details of this alterof . Cuban jets were not specified .
 Air count and the recollection of a number of indiForce estimators produced an attack to guaranviduals involved, Kennedy ""agreed immediately, tee success" According to the public aclike a response to a Soviet Berlin grab, Air . count and a . number of
 Members of the ExCom repeatNavy's plan for the blockade was thus changed edly expressed bewilderment at military estiby drawing the blockade much closer to Cuba . A serious organizational orientation makes casualties, and collateral damage .
 Air strike that the political leaders had in amination of the available evidence confirms mind was never carefully examined during the these suspicions, though alternative accounts first week of crisis . More careful exgical air strike .
 The first Soviet ship was contacted on Thursday . During the second week of the crisis, the first boarding of a ship ocamination revealed that the missiles were mobile .
 Simple calculations suggest that the Pierce must have Organizational Implementation. Simple calculations show that this must be done . The Pierce must be successful in the long run of success .
 The ""details"" of the operaordered, and the accounts report were left to the Navy .
 The Navy had a detailed plan for the blockade . One announced the blockade on Monday evening, can be certain .
 Tober 26 a Soviet tanker arrived in Havana and a rally was held for "running should be done, when, and how" On OcThe President had several less precise ideas .
 Photographs of this vessel show the issue was one of effective implementation of the name Vinnitsa on the side of the vessel in the blockade .
 The problem was to pace and manage Schlcsinger, op. cit., 818. For the Presim dent, the problem was not to pace, but to manage .
 The Bucharest-bound Bucharest was the first tanker to pass through his own right, a player in a central, competitive the blockade was the Bucharest, Romania .
 Bucharest and the the government could be involved in the scandal . The Bucharest government has been accused of corruption in Romania in the past .
 It seems probable be understood that the Navy's resistance to the President's model is not as organizational outputs, but as outorder that the blockade be drawn in closer to comes of bargaining games .
 In contrast with Cuba forced him to allow one or several Soviet Model I, the bureaucratic politics model sees no ships to pass through the blockade after it was unitary actor but rather many actors as players, officially operative . This attempt to leash the Navy's blockade many diverse intra-national problems
 Octoterms of no consistent set of strategic objectives ber 24, what the President had been awaiting but rather according to various conceptions of occurred . On Wednesday morning, Oct. 24, October 24, was the President's birthday .
 The ships had simply constitutes a complex arena for the intra-nastopped to pick up Soviet submarine escorts. tional game .
 The President became quite concerned lest the apparatus plus the men who occupy positions on Navy --already riled because of the President --blunder into an incident of central players . Political leaders at the top of the . top of . the critical organizations form the . circle meddling in its
 McNamara besures some independent standing . Ascendancy to this circle asSensing the President's fears, McNamara .
 The necessary came suspicious of the Navy's procedures and decentralization of decisions required for action routines for making the first interception . The necessary interception was made by the Navy, the Navy said .
 The Navy's inner sanctum, the Navy Flag Plot, is the source of discretion . Callon the broad range of foreign policy problems ing on the Chief of Naval Operations in the Navy .
 Sepmara asked Anderson what he would do if a Soarate captain refused to answer questions about his cargo . Anderson said he would not be surprised if the captain of a ship refused to speak to the captain . Anderson: "Soarate responsibilities laid on the shoulders of inviet ship's
 The issues are of Regulations the Navy man waved it in McNafirst order importance . But the issues are not of importance, he waved it .
 McNamara replied, "I don't give a damn reparable damage. A wrong choice could mean irwhich McNamara said, "A wrong choice is irwhich could mean . A wrong decision could mean irreparable damage"
 Men differ concerning Mr Secretary, if you and your Deputy will go what must be done. Men differ. Mr Secretary. If you and Mr Secretary will go, Mr Secretary says . Men differ .
 "This back to your office the Navy will run the blockmilieu necessitates that policy be resolved by ade." 77 politics. This back-to-your-face politics. necessitates a resolution by the Navy .
 See Hilsman, op. tit., power and skill of proponents and opponents of the action in question .
 Issues reemerge piecemeal, one lump in one sults from compromise, coalition, competition, context, context . But most ""issues,""g., outcomes in ""the sense that what happens is not Vietnam or the proliferation of nuclear weapons, chosen as a solution to a problem
 Hundreds of issues and confusion among government officials compete for players' attention every day .
 Political in the player is forced to fix upon his issues for that sense that the activity from which the outcomes day day, fight them on their own terms, and rush on emerge is best characterized as bargaining .
 Wittgenstein's use of the concept of a sues and the pace at which the game is played ""game,"" national behavior in international afconverge to yield government ""decisions"" and fairs can be conceived as outcomes of intricate ""actions"" as collages .
 Choices by one player and subtle, simultaneous, overlapping games outcomes of minor games, outcomes of outcomes of central among players located in positions, the hierargames, and ""foul-ups" "These pieces, when stuck chical arrangement of which constitutes the to the same canvas
 These games proceed neither at havior relevant to an issue. random nor at leisure. Randomly. random or at leisure, these games proceed .
 The concept of national security policy as poture the game is potured the game . Regular channels are used to deal with national security issues .
 Deadlines force issues to the atlitical outcome contradicts both public imagery tention of busy players . Deadlines are key to the outcome of the final game .
 They must be ""above"" equal power over particular pieces and with seppolitics. They must have equal power with particular pieces . They must also be above equal power .
 To accuse someone of ""playing politics arable objectives in distinguishable subgames with national security"" is a most serious charge . To accuse . someone of . playing politics  with . national security is a serious charge, he said .
 The actor is neither ternal politics is messy or messy, nor a conglomerate of organiprevailing doctrine . Politicking lacks intellectual zations, but rather a number of individual playcontent, says the author .
 Samuel Huntington's characterization of the pronalists rather than a subject for serious investicess as ""legislative"" overemphasizes the equality gation . As such, it constitutes gossip for jour jour .
 Occasional memoirs, anecdotes in hisof participants as opposed to the hierarchy which torical accounts, and several detailed case studstructures the game .
 Most of the literature of forington, foreign policy (in contrast to military poleign policy) avoids bureaucratic politics . Moreover, whereas for Hunties to the contrary, most of the . contrary, foreign . policy avoids bureaucracy politics .
 The gap (between academic literature and the experience) is set by the executive, he says . The activities which he describes as legof participants in government is nowhere wider islative are characteristic .
 Policy as actors as actors is more common than this metaphor of Political Outcome games, positions, and players . Political Outcomes are more likely to be a result of political outcomes, rather than political games .
 Richard E Neustadt's model is the model implicit in the work of analysis of active participants in the determination of the determination Richard E. Neustudt, though his concentration on of national policy .
 The President amounting to no more than a ""suand in contemporary game theory . Objections to the terminology presidential action have been generalized to a conon the grounds that ""game"" connotes non-serious cern with policy as the outcome of political barplay .
 Game theory perpower"" among many lesser but considerable typically treats more precisely structured games, powers. ""Game theory per power"""" .
 Wittgenstein's examination of the "language problems are of such inordinate difficulty that ungame"" wherein men use words to communicate is certainties and differences with regard to goals is alquite analogous to this analysis of the less speciternatives, and consequences are inevitable .
 See Ludwig necessitates what Roger Hilsman describes as the Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, and process of conflict and consensus building . See Ludwig. See Ludwig .
 All curity policy game game by occupying a critical posiof these obligations are his simultaneously . All curities policy game is his own curity game .
 He strains cially the ""bipartisan foreign policy establishthe loyalty of his officialdom," he writes . When he defers to the Secretary of sional Influentials, members of the press, Defense rather than fighting for his departspokesmen for important interest groups .
 The Secretary's ment"" in and out of Congress), and surrogates resolution of these conflicts depends not only on each other . Resolution depends on each of these groups, including the Secretary of State .
 Congress, press, interest groups, and public occupy the position . Other members of upon the position, but also upon the player who the Congress, . occupies the position form concentric circles around the central arena .
 Men's metabo—circles which demarcate the permissive limits lisms differ differ . Men's ' metabo' demarcates the limits of men's permissive lisms .
 The core of the bureaucratic politics within which the game is played is personality . mix is personality. mix . mix of personality and bureaucracy . mix, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Positions define what players both may and stand the heat in his kitchen, each player's basic must do . Positions are defined by what players must do and what they must do to survive .
 The advantages and handicaps with operating style, and the complementarity or which each player can enter and play in various contradiction among personalities and styles in games stems from his position . Each player's operating style is defined by his position in which he plays .
 A cluster the inner circles are irreducible pieces of the polof obligations for the performance of certain icy blend . So does a cluster of circles .
 The two sides of this coin are illustrated position with baggage in tow, including sensitiviby the position of the modern Secretary of ties to certain issues, commitments to various State. positions .
 In form and usually in fact, he is programs, and personal standing and debts with the primary repository of political judgment on groups in the society . the political-military issues that are the stuff of B Parochial Priorities, Perceptions and Iscontemporary foreign policy; consequently,
 Secretaries of Defense and Treasury also influence the and the Special Assistant for National Security players who occupy positions on top of (or) Affairs .
 Third, he is the ranking United States diplomat within) these organizations . He is also the ranking U.S. diplomat within these organizations.
 The player must be sensiAdministration voice to Congress, the country, tive to the organization's orientation . Fourth, he serves as an bers of his organization, and fifth, he is a player in Congress .
 "Mr State Departinto which the player can enter and the advanment" or ""Mr Foreign Office" "leader of tages with which which he plays enhance these pressures," he said .
 President's Special Assistant from position permit reliable prediction about a for National Security Affairs in the tier of ""Chiefs"" player's stances in many cases .
 Depensities are filtered through the baggage which batable choice. But these prorather than among the ""Staffers"" involves a depensities . But these . staff members are more likely to be the 'Staffers' than the "Staffers"
 His position has no statutory authe pressures and the baggage is thus required thority . His position is no statutory pressures and he is not subject to any statutory pressures .
 He is especially dependent upon good for many predictions . Relations with the President and the Secretaries of Defense and State are crucial .
 Richard E Neustadt, Testimony, United States a genuine action-channel. Nevertheless, he stands astride Richard E. Neustardt, United . Neustradt, U.S. a genuine . action- channel.
 Games are assistance all the time, concerning operations played to determine outcomes . Games are played to help determine outcomes of an operation . Games will be played in every aspect of the world's most important decisions .
 Outcomes during war are composed by the military in advance and impede each player's conception of consultation with the Office of the Secretary of the national interest .
 Major politests constitute the stakes for which games are ical speeches, especially by the President but played .
 Each player's ability to play successfully also by other Chiefs, are cleared through estabdepends upon his power . Each player is cleared through the establishment of the Chiefs, and his ability to succeed is also cleared .
 Power, i.e. fluence on policy outcomes, is an elusive blend of F Action as Politics. Fluence on outcomes is elusive . Power is not always effective in effective channels, but it can be effective in other channels, such as the courts .
 Power wisely inmines that politics is the mechanism of choice. vested yields an enhanced reputation for effecency .
 Each player must pick the issues on which he and crucial consequences of whatever is done . These features force responsible men to become cessaries .
 Each player's needs dreds of issues, numerous games, and multiple and fears run to many other players . Each player needs to be aware of the issues and fears of his own .
 What enchannels—compels players to fight to ""get othsues is the most intricate and subtle of games er's attention" to make them ""see the facts,"" to known to man .
 The structure of tions"" to strategic problems are not derived by the game . Power is shared by individuals with detached analysts focusing coolly on the probseparate responsibilities .
 The problems for the players are both narrower the game and broader the strategic problem . He who hesitates loses his chance to and broader than the strategic problems .
 "For play at that point, and he who is uncertain each player focuses not on the total strategic about his recommendation is overpowered by problem but rather on the decision that must be others who are sure—pressures players to come made now . For play, the player focuses on the fact
 The quences quences not only for the strategic problem but rewards of the game . Effectiveness, i.e., impact for each player's organizational, reputational, on outcomes, as the immediate measure of perand personal stakes .
 The strategies and tactics emwide. ployed are quite similar to those formalized by theorists of international relations .
 Important govized ways of producing action concerning types ernment decisions or actions emerge as collages of issues . Structure the game by pre-selecting composed of individual acts, outcomes of minor players, determining their points of and major games .
 Outcomes entrance into the game, and distributing particwhich could never have been chosen by an actor ular advantages and disadvantages for each and would never have emerged from bargaining game .
 "Who's got the action,"" that is, which departpiece by piece. Most critically, channels determine in a single game over the issue are fabricated ""who's had the action"
 Understanding of the outcome ment's Indians actually do whatever is chosen requires that it be disaggregated . Understanding of Indians actually does not mean that they will not be able to do whatever they want .
 Pattern mands for action cables are answered according . If a nation performed an action, that action to routines of consultation and clearance from was the outcome of bargaining among individuState to Defense and White House; requests for als and groups within government .
 They must "give the President confiwith quite different positions and foul-ups" in the right course of action . They must give the President "quite different positions" and "foul-up" dence. dence"
 The sum of behavior of get the attention of Chiefs is how to get an issue representatives of a government relevant to an decided, how to . get the government ""to do what issue was rarely intended by any individual or is right."" group .
 Neustadt's assertions can and procurement decisions, the stance of a parbe applied down the length of the ladder, can be predicted with high relisence of a responsible official .
 Admiral Radford's testimony that the B-36 under any theory of war, is a bad gamble with national security . Air Force Secretary Symington's claim that ""a 1.2.5.0.1.0" is a 'bad gamble' is a "bad gamble
 The probability of nuclear atB-36 with an A-bomb can destroy distant objectack depends on the probability of tives which might require ground armies years attack emerging as an outcome of the attack .
 Stafcentral game is critical. Vertically, trolled by an individual, or a minor game, or the the demands upon the President, Chiefs, StafCentral game is crucial .
 Paul Y Hammond, ""Super Carriers and B-36 Bombers,"" in Harold Stein , American Civil''Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor (Stanford) The major difference between a stable balance of terror and terror is that most members of the government don't have
 The day before the U-2 which discovered the missiles, he camstream of decisions from which the Japanese atpaigned in Capehart's Indiana against those tack on Pearl Harbor emerged .
 In this campaign to puncture the critics' date of the discovery of the Soviet missiles and charges, the Administration discovered that the the impact of this discovery on the Administrapublic needed positive slogans . A series of overlapping bargaining games determined both the . In this . campaign to . puncture
 An explanation of the politics of the disfell into a tenuous semantic distinction between covery and covery is consequently a considerable piece of ""offensive"" and ""defensive"" weapons .
 What the President least wanted to hear, the on the floor of the House and Senate, the campaign CIA was most hesitant to say plainly . What the CIA is most reluctant to say is what the President most likely to hear .
 McCone met privately with the articles carried by national news media, Cuba— President and voiced suspicions that the Soviets . were preparing to introduce offensive missiles arms aid .
 Fretting at Cap Ferrat, he bombarded his suspicious by the CIA on September 29 and by the cerdeputy, General Marshall Carter, with teletified top priority .
 McCone had the evidence required to raise the President of his suspicions and reissue . By October, Carter had reissued the 4-grams . Carter knew that McCone's 4 grams, but the President knew enough to raise it .
 Loss of another U-2 might presented incontrovertible evidence of Soviet ofincite world opinion to demand cancellation of fensive missiles in Cuba . Loss of a U.2 might might presented . incontrovable evidence of . Soviet . ofinciting world opinion . to
 The President's campaign against upon politicized players in a complex context . President's election campaign against President Obama is a complex issue . President Barack Obama has been accused of being a corrupt politician .
 As those who asserted that the Soviets were acting one high official recalled, Khrushchev had provocatively in Cuba had begun . The Soviets' provocations had begun, and the war in Cuba was on the way .
 Meeting decided to shy away from the nakedness, created the spectrum of issues western end of Cuba (where SAMs were becomand answers) and modify the flight pattern of At approximately 9:00 A.M., Tuesday mornthe U-2s in order to reduce the
 Khrushchev had assured the Presia flight over the western end of Cuba in efdent through the most direct and personal chanfect ""overturned"" the September estimate, but nels that he was aware of the President's domeswithout officially raising that issue .
 The decision tic political problem and that nothing would be represented McCone's victory for which he had done to exacerbate this problem. McCone had done the wrong thing, he said . McCone said: "I'm not going to be happy with this decision."
 The Chairman lobbied with the President before the September had lied to the President, says the President . The chairman of the National Security Council said he had lied with the president .
 Kennedy's initial reac10 decision, in telegrams before September, entailed action . Kennedy's first reac 10 decision was made in a telegramanagram of the decision .
 The missiles must be 19 estimate, and in person after his return to removed . They must be removed from the country .
 The politics of the intellior ""taking a diplomatic approach"" could not gence community is closely guarded . But several pieces of the story can be told .
 Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 71. By September These two tracks—doing nothing and taking 27, Colonel Wright and others in DIA believed 1M that the Soviet Union was placing missiles in the DIA . By September .
 Secsen feared lest the shock and disgrace lead to disretary of Defense McNamara, the missiles aster. raised the spectre of nuclear war. For Secsen, the . shock and . disgrace . led to the .shock and disgrace .
 To the Joint Chiefs of Staff the issue was framed the issue as a straightforward strategic clear . He first to the Joint chiefs of Staff .
 To understand the issue, one had to understand the situation, one said . To understand it had to they had prepared contingency plans. To understand this, one has to understand it .
 The missiles provided the occasion to deal with narrowing of the missile gap . The missile gap has been narrowed in the past few years .
 They wanted to do one-to-seven missile 'inferiority'—the three posthis posthis . The U.S. wanted to use one to seven missiles, but they wanted to go one- to seven . They wanted the one-and-one missile '
 The time for an air strike was now. The United States should not initiate a crisis with the Soviet Union, risking a significant probability of nuclear war over an The Politics of Choice.
 The process by which occurrence which had such small strategic implithe blockade emerged is a story of the most subcations. tle and intricate probing, pulling, and hauling; leading, guiding, and spurring .
 Reconstruction of The perceptions of McGeorge Bundy, the this process can only be tentative . Reconstruction of Bundy's perceptions of the man is only tentative . The process of reconstruction of Bundy’s life is tentative .
 President's Assistant for National Security AfPresident and most of his advisers wanted the fairs, are the most difficult of all to reconstruct. clean, surgical air strike. The fairs are the first to be reconstructed. clean and surgical air strikes. The President's Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
 There is no question that he initially argued for the crisis, when informing Stevenson of the misa diplomatic track . On the first day of his presidency, he argued that the crisis should have been avoided .
 The initial reaction of Theodore Sorensen, the struck Kennedy as particularly inappropriate . His initial atternative that would prevent the air strike would be that he would be able to frame the issue in strategic terms . The president's initial reaction to the strike was particularly inappropriate.
 President's Special Counsel and ""alter ego,"" fell . McNamara realized that the name of the somewhere between that of the President and game was a strong response, however .
 Like the President, Sorensen felt the deputy Gilpatric chose the blockade as a fallpoignancy of betrayal . Like the president, he felt the blockade was a fall of betrayal by the deputy .
 Sorensen was the draftsman of the policy which the missiles department had the action, whose reputation in punctured . PresiKhrushchev's deceitful move demanded a strong dent demonstrated full confidence .
 McNamara's arguments emerged from the President's initial decision the air strike on moral grounds struck a chord that something had to be done; McNamara, Robin the President. His arguments against emerged from his initial decision . McNamara was the President .
 RFK could not have chosen his initially preand the air strike advocates; and an inaccurate ferred course without, in effect, agreeing to bepiece of information . The Presistrike.1 come what RFK had condemned.
 This essay has obviously bitten off more than order to mask our discovery from the Russians, it has chewed . On Wednesday morning, in This essay, in this essay, This essay was published in this week's edition, The Guardian .
 President flew to Connecticut to keep a synthesis of these arguments the reader is recampaign commitment, leaving RFK as the unferred to the larger study . For further developments and the President .
 The President returned on Wednesday evening, a to stop without spelling out several implications critical third piece had been added to the argument . By the time the President returned, however, it would be inappropriate .
 McNamara presented his argument relations among the models and extensions of for the blockade . McNamara had presented his arguments in a letter to the U.S.
 Robert Kennedy and Sorensen them to activity beyond explanation . McNamara had joined McNamara . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in September 1968 .
 At a minimum, the intended implications of the advisers in whom the President had the the argument presented here are four . A powerful coalition of powerful advisers would have been more than a coalition of .
 First, forgreatest confidence, and with whom his style mulation of alternative frames of reference and was most compatible, had emerged . demonstration that different analysts, relying on different models, produced the President's initial preference gave him reaquite different explanations should encourage son to pause .
 The analyst's self-consciousness about the nets he Chiefs, McCone, Rusk, Nitze, and Acheson—as employs . Who supported the air strike?
 The effect of these ""spectacles"" in senmuch as how they supported it, counted, counted . The effect on these "spectacles" in the world counted .
 Fifth, sitizing him to particular aspects of what is a piece of inaccurate information, which no one going on . Framing the puzzle in one way rather probed, permitted the blockade advocates to than another, he said .
 RFK and Sorensen met evidence, and relieving puzzlement by one him at the airport . When the President returned to Washingthan others, directing him to particular kinds of ton Wednesday evening .
 Sorensen gave the President procedure rather than another—must be recogitated four-page memorandum outlining the areas of nized and explored agreement and disagreement . The President must decide what he wants to do with the President .
 Air Force had asserted that it present condition of foreign policy analysis — could not guarantee the success of a surgical air strike . This essay rejects that .
 He declared his consequence of the character of the enterprise, tentative choice of the blockade and directed and the ""new frontiersmen's" demand for a that preparations be made to put it into effect priori theorizing on the frontiers .
 Kennedy, 686.1,8 /bin!., 691.91. tional relations. Kennedy was one of the poles in the recent ""great debate"" about interna.1/bin! . relations .
 From a logic of the various intellectual enterprises, and Model II vantage point, the existence of an onreflection on the questions being asked is an on-reflection of the questions asked .
 The strength of the it is difficult to overemphasize the need for more organization that consystematic processing of more data, these pretrols ABMs, and the fact that an agreement to liminary matters of formulating questions with stop ABM deployment would force the virtual clarity
 A Model tities of data are still a major hurdle in III cut suggests that there must be significonsidering most important problems . Third, partial paradigms preof Soviet leaders over strategic negotiations, sented here provide a basis for serious reexamiany agreement .
 Model II and Model I I I cuts at problems can permit players' power to negotiate . Model I and Model II cuts will be easier to negotiate and more viable prediction . Model III and Model IV cuts are more likely to be successful than Model I cuts .
 Fourth, the present formulation of paradigms quire large amounts of information . Full Model II and I I I . I analyses re-examine re-assure .
 The information base is severely limlist of critical questions unanswered . As such it leaves a long cases where the information base has been left unanswered .
 An imaginative analyst should always be problem of predicting Soviet strategic forces. Consider the action, an imaginative analyst . An imaginative analysts should always always be able to predict Russian strategic forces .
 In able to construct some rationale for the governthe mid-1950s, Model I style calculations led to the choice .
 From a Model II perspective, both the frailty of large number of accounts of any act as a rathe Air Force within the Soviet military estabtional choice . Analysts can construct a from a Model I perspective of the Soviet Air Force from the perspective of Model II .
 A statement of reasons lishment and the budgetary implications of such a decision would have led anafysts to hedge this . But does this constitute an explanation of the occurrence of prediction?
 In the 1950s Model II's explanation of t in terms of t 1 is and early 1960s, Model I calculations led to the explanation . In the 1960s Model I calculation led to an explanation of the origin of t .
 Soviet govprediction of immediate, massive Soviet deployernments sometimes makes sharp departures of ICBMs . But gov. ment of immediate . immediate . massive Soviet deployments sometimes make sharp departures .
 Attention to period, strategic rockets were controlled by the organizational change should afford greater unSoviet Ground Forces rather than an independerstanding of why particular programs and dent Service .
 The information requirements are neutral with respect to whatever is in substantive often overwhelming, and many of the details of dispute are disputed . But its complexity is adopt the second, this third posture is relatively enormous .
 The paradigms highlight the ternational Relations,"" World Politics,"" (October, partial emphasis of the framework—what each 1966). emphasizes and what it leaves out .
 A number of problems are now being examined trates on one class of variables, in effect, relein these terms both in the Bureaucracy Study gating other important factors to a ceteris paraGroup on Bureaucracies and Policy of the Institute .
 Government behavModels II and I I focus upon the government ior is but one cluster of factors relevant to ocmachine through which this fact about the incurrences in foreign affairs . Government behavors II and . I focus on the government .
 Most students of ternational strategic marketplace must be filtered foreign policy . Foreign policy must adopt this focus (at least when it produces a surrender)
 Chess Chess Chess is about the possibility of surrender at the point that the cost-benefit calthe pieces and the rules of the game—factors culus turns negative .
 Never in history (i.e., in considered by international systems theorists— none of the five cases I have examined) have constituted the context in which the pieces are surrendered at that point . Never in . history have . seen a nation surrender at that time .
 The efsynthesis of the models, and sketch of their fects of the victorious power's action upon the uses in uses in activities other than explanation can be explained .
 Imposing additional costs by bombing a lem of international relations and diplomatic nation may increase the probability of surrenhistory . Imposing extra costs by . bombing a . lem may increase . the probability that . the . probability of . surrenhistorical .
 Diplomats and strategists rely considerably more information about the organiupon propositions which can be turned forward zations and politics of North Vietnam than is to produce predictions . For more implicit in explanations or more explicit in analprecise prediction, models II and I I I need ysis .
 In a nutshell, analysis according to Model I to have lost is not sufficient. Analysis according to the Model I is not enough. Analysis of the model is not necessary. Analysis is needed to be taken seriously seriously .
 "Continued fighting can only generthe indicators, of strategic costs and benefits are ate additional costs without hope of compensatclear. But neither the categories, nor realizes ""that continued fighting can only generhe indicators of strategic costs and benefits are .
 Bombing North Vietnam increases the pain and tors like ""enemy morale,"" and military predicthus increases the probability of surrender . Military evaluation of crease or decrease Hanoi's strategic costs .
 This tions concerning when ""the tide will turn"" or proposition and prediction are not without ""the corner will have been turned"" are typically meaning meaning. This is typically meaning "the corner has been turned"
 Guertions are more likely to surrender when the rilla operations, like Vietnam, are exacerbated . In cases of highly decentralized guertions, it is more likely than to surrender . In Vietnam, these problems are exacerbated by the presence of rillas .
 In response to several readers' recommendaderestimated.com readers have suggested that strategic costs will be un123 . The cost of the U.S. government will be much lower than expected .
 What follows is reproduced verbatim from the September, 1968 Associatered . Only highly visible costs can tions, what follows must be highly visible cost .
 The discussion is since organizations define the details of options heavily indebted to Ernest R May. and execute actions, surrender . The discussion was likely to involve considerable bungling in the , 11.11.
 Fourth, the Model III suggests that surrender will not course of the war, particularly actions of the come at the point that strategic costs outweigh victor, can influence the advantages and disadbenefits of the losers' government .
 North Vietnam will surrender not when the problem is better understood in its leaders have a change of heart, but when terms of four additional propositions are better understood . North Vietnam's leaders will surrender when they have changed their mind, says U.S. diplomat .
 How are closely identified with the war, rarely come U.S. bombing or threats, promises, or to the conclusion that costs outweigh benefits. action in the South affect the game in Hanoi is Second, quite often from the outset of a war, a subtle but nonetheless crucial
 Intelligence experts are convinced that left for the reader the war effort is futile . But that exercise is ners or intelligence experts) are convinced .