 These assignments comprise sources, questions and mark schemes . These assignments will enable pupils to fulfil the coursework requirements in history for Edexcel Foundation specifications for first examination in summer 2003 .
 Assistance may be given in class to aid the comprehension of the sources . Assistance may also be given to students to help with comprehension .
 If you wish to make changes you should submit these to the Edexcel Foundation for approval . However, if you want to change these please submit them for approval to ensure that revised sources or questions give candidates appropriate opportunity .
 The assignment has been designed to accommodate some flexibility of classroom practice .
 The timing of individual questions within an assignment may be staggered over a period of time and integrated into the programme of study . Students may also be asked to answer individual questions in a series of questions .
 The historical content listed below should be familiar to candidates before they attempt to answer the questions . Candidates should also be familiar with the content of these questions .
 This assignment should arise from a teaching programme designed to occupy approximately half a term . It should be a teaching assignment that should take place during half-term .
 In the autumn of 1962, the Superpowers came closer to a ‘Hot War’ than at any other time . In the summer of that time, the superpowers were at odds with each other .
 Leaders of the USA and USSR soon made it clear they intended that such a crisis would not happen again . In fact the crisis subsided very quickly and the leaders of the U.S. and USSR made clear they wanted it to never happen again.
 These are some of the issues that you will be asked to consider as you tackle this assessment .
 Robert Kennedy's book '13 days' was written by Robert Kennedy and published in 1968 . It was written in the wake of the Kennedy assassination in 1962 .
 He told me that a U-2 had just finished a photographic mission and that he was convinced that Russia was placing missiles and atomic weapons in Cuba . He also said he believed that Russia had placed missiles in Cuba and atomic arms .
 The general feeling in the beginning was that some form of action was required . A map showing Cuba and the USA is shown in the book '13 days’
 Most felt at that stage that an air strike against the missile sites could be the only course . Most felt that an attack on the missile site could be only course of action .
 It was during the afternoon and evening of 16 October that we began to discuss the idea of a blockade . The idea was discussed in the hours of the day leading up to 16 October .
 Photograph shows missiles being directed at U.S. cities . Photographs show missiles are directed at American cities . The missiles are believed to have been launched in Syria .
 The estimate was that within a few minutes of their being fired 80,000,000 Americans would be dead . The estimate of the deaths would be within minutes of being fired .
 The B52 bomber force was ordered into the air fully loaded with atomic weapons . B52 bombers were ordered to fly with atomic arms loaded .
 All ships bound for Cuba will, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back . President Kennedy made the announcement on 22 October 1962 broadcast .
 Any missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western hemisphere will be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States. The missile attack would be considered an attack on the U.S. and any other Western hemisphere .
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt this reckless and provocative threat to world peace . I call on Chairman Khruschev to stop this reckless, provocative threat of world peace, writes .
 From memoirs of Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign Minister at the time of the Cuban Missiles Crisis .
 In 1989 I put the Soviet position to the President. These memoirs were published in 1989 . I put it to the Soviet President. I put a Soviet position .
 Three months after the crisis, the U.S. removed all its missiles from Turkey and Italy . Three months later, the United States removed all missiles .
 We agreed to remove our missiles on condition that the President gave us his assurance that there would be no invasion of Cuba . We sent the Americans a note saying that we agreed to . It was sent to the Americans saying that they would remove their missiles .
 Describe how relations between the superpowers worsened between 1959 and the summer of 1962 . Describe the relationship between Russia and the U.S. as one of the world's most powerful superpowers . The relationship between the two nations is said to have changed dramatically .
 Use these sources, and your own knowledge, to explain why Kennedy decided to blockade Cuba . Study Sources B and C .
 Study Sources F and G give two different views about who won in the end . Study Sources G and F give different views of who won the election .
 Use the sources and your own knowledge to explain which view you think is more accurate . Use the internet to help you understand which view is accurate .
 Coursework Assignments Mark scheme Mark scheme Cuban Missiles Crisis Assignment One Assessment One Assessment Objective 1 1 1 .
 Key features affecting change / recall of knowledge: Simple statements supported by some knowledge of how relations changed, e.g. A simple statement supported with some knowledge that relations changed . Simple statements: simple statements supported some knowledge about how relations were changed, g.
 Developed statements showing how relations worsened supported by relevant knowledge,g.g. Details of events in Cuba, Berlin, effects of Khrushchev’s policies etc. etc.
 Explores the implications of a range of ways in which superpower relations worsened supported by appropriately selected knowledge, e.g. Explores how superpower relations can be improved by knowledge .
 Khrushchev wanted to take advantage of the weakness of the USA, how U2 incident antagonised USSR, U2 antagonised the USSR, Kennedy’s inexperience etc. etc. The U.2 incident was a major incident in the history of the Cold War .
 Causation / recall of knowledge Level 1: Simple statements giving reasons for the Crisis supported by some knowledge,g.g. The Crisis is a simple statement of support for some of the Crisis's causes . Level 1 is simple statements of the crisis's cause or cause . Level 2
 Castro seized power and nationalised US property, nationalised U.S. property, there was an exodus, Soviet missiles placed in Cuba, etc. etc. There was also an exodus of US citizens, a US exodus, and a Soviet missile strike in Cuba .
 Change/making a judgement on the importance of a key feature/recall of knowledge . Simple statements giving changes supported by some knowledge g. it led to détente, it made the superpowers realise the dangers of nuclear war etc. Level 1: Simple statements .
 Level 3: Developed explanation supported by appropriately selected knowledge showing understanding of the situation before 1962 and the situation after . Developed statements giving changes supported by relevant knowledge .
 G. argues whether new relationship between the two countries and between their leaders developed, evaluates the significance of détente in the 1960s . Sustained argument supported by precisely selected knowledge showing clear understanding of the nature and extent of change .
 Cuban Missiles Crisis Assignment Two Assessment Objectives 2 and 3 . Coursework Assignments Mark scheme Mark scheme . Mark scheme Cuban Missile Crisis Assignment .
 Comprehension of and inference from a source Level 1: Information taken from Source A at face value, . Inference from the source, . details of how seriously Kennedy took the photographs, . it undermined US defences, etc.
 Use these Sources, and your own knowledge, to explain why Kennedy decided to blockade Cuba . Use these sources to understand why Kennedy did it .
 Analysis of sources / recall of knowledge to explain cause . Simple statements using the sources as information at face value and/or some contextual knowledge, e.g. the USA was threatened, missiles were directed at United States etc.
 Developed statements using the sources and relevant own knowledge, g. refers to the dangers to the United States cities and population; this was the first time that the . United States had been threatened in this way etc. refer to the . U.S. cities and . population .
 Developed explanation of the reasons for Kennedy’s decision using the sources as evidence and selected knowledge, g. the President clearly believed that the missiles posed a very serious threat . Not only did he consult his brother but also went on TV, Kennedy knew he could rely on public support
 Sustained argument using the sources as evidence and supported by precisely selected knowledge, e.g. sets into context of events of the Cold War 1958 to 1962 .
 Evaluation of sources for utility: Makes simple statements about value based on content or nature of sourcesg. e.g.
 Source E shows that United States and USSR have different views about Cuba . Source E also shows that U.S. and USSR had different views on Cuba .
 Developed statements about usefulness drawing inferences from nature of nature, origin and purpose of sources . Developed statement about usefulness .
 Developed analysis of strengths and weaknesses of the sources in explaining reasons for conflict crisis using nature and content of the . sources .
 Source E gives Soviet perspective; includes direct quote from Kennedy but written after the event, so may have elements of hindsight . Includes direct quote .
 Developed statements making inferences from the sources OR referring to the tone of the sources, e.g. Or referring to a source's tone . Developed inferences are based on the content of the statements .
 Developed explanation using the sources as evidence, e. g. making positive use of the sources and contextual knowledge to explain different points of view . 5.
 Study Sources F and G give two very different views on who won in the end . Study Sources G and F give two different views of who won the election .
 Use all the sources, and your own knowledge, to explain which view you think is more accurate . Use this article to help you understand why you think you need to know more accurately .
 Analysis of interpretations of events . Simple statements offering points in support using sources or own knowledge . Analysis of interpretation of events. Simple statements . Use of analysis of events to support your own knowledge of events in this article .
 Developed statements offering points in support of choice using sources and supported by relevant knowledge . e.g. both sides could claim victory as both gave way etc. Both sides were able to claim victory in the process of choosing. e.G. Both parties could claim victories as both sides
 Developed statement giving a judgement about view making confident use of sources and supported by appropriately selected knowledge, g. g. Developed statements giving a view .
 United States seems to have won but may have had to agree to remove its own missiles . Level 4: Sustained argument giving reasoned explanation using evidence and supported by precisely selected knowledge, which critically evaluates the sources .
 Khrushchev now out of office is trying to present his own role in Crisis as a triumph, he needed to explain why he appeared to have given way . Source F gives victory to Kennedy but generally a balanced view of United States actions .