 The crisis was so intense that it absorbed the entire attention of President Kennedy and his closest advisers . Although the crisis itself was short, the crisis was intense . President Kennedy was the only person in charge of the crisis .
 The Cuban missile crisis, the “sixteen days in October,” ended with the Kennedy-Khrushchev “agreement” of October 28, 1962 . The Cuban missiles crisis ended in 1962 with a "agreement"
 The countries that were closely involved were Cuba , USSR , USA and Turkey . Cuba, USSR and Turkey were the most closely involved countries .
 Cuba’s original government was corrupted and overthrown by a group of rebels led by a young lawyer called Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the leader of the revolution that overthrew the original government .
 He had ideas closer to communism thus relations between Cuba and USA worsened . Cuba's relations with the U.S. worsened due to his ideas of communism .
 USA then found out that the Soviet Union had missiles in Cuba, which could hit most of the major U.S. cities . The Soviet Union could hit the major American cities with missiles .
 USSR also had 40,000 troops in Cuba, and Soviet submarines armed with nuclear warhead on the way to Cuba . Soviet submarines also had nuclear warheads on their way to the island .
 The United States missiles were there because of a formal alliance with Turkey . The U.S. missiles were deployed because of an alliance with the Turkish government . The missiles were launched by the United States and Turkey .
 Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing nuclear missiles in Cuba as a means of countering an emerging lead of the United States in developing and deploying strategic missiles . The idea was to protect Cuba from another United States-sponsored invasion, such as the failed attempt at the Bay of Pigs in 1961
 The Bay of Pigs invasion by exiled Cuban rebels trained by USA also failed . The Bay was the first attempt to invade Cuba in the 1960s .
 President John Kennedy was shown photographs of Soviet missile installations under construction in Cuba . President Kennedy had a paranoid America wanting to invade Cuba .
 More than 100,000 U.S. soldiers were sent to Florida, the part of the United States mainland nearest to Cuba . They would be ready to carry out an invasion of Cuba .
 U.S. forces around the world were placed on high alert . United States planes were also loaded with nuclear bombs and United States forces were also placed on alert .
 President Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations and proclaimed that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba on October 22 would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union . After seven days of debate, Kennedy announced that any such an attack would be responded to accordingly . The Soviet Union would respond accordingly .
 President Kennedy and a group of advisors thought up the 4 ways of dealing with the Soviet missiles in Cuba, thought up by President Kennedy . That was one of the 4 . ways to deal with Soviet missiles .
 1962, USA warned that if the missiles were not removed, it would invade Cuba . Do nothing and wait for USSR to make a move . Bomb the places where the missiles are kept . Invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev ordered the Soviet ships that arrived at the blockade not to move any closer to Cuba . The Soviet ships arrived in Cuba were ordered to stay away from the blockade .
 He said he would remove missiles in Cuba if USA promised not to invade Cuba . Subsequently he sent a letter to USA and said that he sent it to remove the missiles . He also said that if USA did not invade Cuba, Cuba would remove them .
 Khrushchev announced on Radio Moscow that the USSR would remove its missiles from Cuba . The crisis ended as the USSR removed its missiles . The USSR was forced to pull the missiles out of Cuba .
 The USA announced that it had promised the USSR that it would not invade Cuba . The USSR had promised that the U.S. would not attack Cuba . Cuba was ruled out of Cuba by the USA .
 A second dangerous crisis emerged over removal of Soviet IL-28 bombers from Cuba . The United States insisted they were “offensive weapons” and thus subject to the October 28 agreement . The U.S. insisted that the bombers were ‘offensive weapons'
 Their removal entailed further diplomatic negotiations that were not concluded successfully until November 20 . The removal of them from the U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C., was a major diplomatic effort .
 The return of these bombers to the Soviet Union was checked as carefully as that of the missiles . The return was checked carefully as well as the return of missiles, the author says .
 You are commenting using your WordPress.com account . Use the comments to comment on articles you like about the Daily Mail .