 Variations m sound quality and in the aural acuity of sound quality . Produce wide variations in what is heard . Variations in sound quality, acuity .
 Transcripts may be prepared at great effort and with great care, many points of ambiguity are inevitable . But erroneous interpretations from transcripts are always possible, and erroneous interpretations are possible .
 McGeorge Bundy is the President's Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs . Bundy is a former CIA director of operations in Washington, D.C. He is a senior adviser to the National Security Council .
 Alexis Johnson is Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs . U.S. Rep. Johnson is the U.K.'s deputy under secretary of state for political affairs .
 Llewellyn Thompson was Ambassador at Large and Special Advisor on Soviet Affairs to the Secretary of State . Thompson was ambassador at Large at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow .
 There are 13 pages of transcript representing 55 minutes of recorded conversation . The transcript is a transcript of a conversation between the two men .
 Meeting Item 40.3, Reference Reel 1 Cuba Tape (This is a transcription of tapes recorded in the Cabinet Room on Saturday, October 27, 1962) Meeting Item: Cuba . Meeting Item .3, reference Reel . 1 Cuba tape was recorded in Cabinet Room of October 27
 The tape begins with an inconclusive discussion of current tactical questions, including plans to stop a ship . A proposal for two daylight surveillance missions, morning and afternoon, is discussed .
 It creates a pattern of increasing intensity of surveillance, Mr. President. Mr President. It creates an increasing intensity, Mr President said .
 "I would also recommend, although we don't have to decide now, that we conduct a night surveillance mission tonight," he says . And he also recommends that the U.S. carry out the mission tonight .
 There appears increasing evidence that they are working night and day on these sites, two in daylight and one at night . There appears to be increasing evidence they're working night .
 "I fully agree we ought to put out an announcement that we are going to send the night mission over. This is why I would recanmend the two daylight and the one night missions," he said. "This is why we should put out a announcement that . we are
 'I think we ought to go ahead if they want it, so it's all right with me,' he says . 'I'm not afraid. I think we should go ahead,' he adds .
 "I think we might have one more conversation about it, however, at about six o'clock just in case during the day we get something," he says .
 Hare says this is absolutely anathema, and as a matter of prestige and politics . Hare says he wants to keep the government in control of the world's most powerful .
 Ball; Yeah, we have a report from Finletter and Rome on the Italians which indicates that that would be relatively easy . Ball: "We have a lot of things to do to win the title, but that's not easy."
 It's very odd, Mr President, if he's changed his terms from a long letter to you and an urgent appeal from the Counselor only last night, set in a purely Cuban context, it seems to me we're well within our — there's nothing wrong with our posture in
 A special message appeared to call for negotiations and both nations, Cuba and Turkey, should give their consent to the U.N. to visit their territories .
 Khrushchev said the Security Council of the Soviet Union was solemnly pledged not to use its territory as a bridgehead for an attack on Turkey . He called for a similar pledge from the U.S. from the United States not to let its territory be used as a . bridge
 Broadcast it was out of the question for the U.S. to abandon its Turkish military bases . The U. S. has been criticized for not abandoning its Turkish bases .
 Rusk ; We've asked Finletter and Hare to give us their judgments on Rusk . Rusk is the latest in a long-running series of television dramas .
 JFK says most people will regard this as not an unreasonable proposal . JFK says JFK is 'unsettled now George' and 'not unnerved now'
 B undy ; I don't see why we pick that track when he's offered us the other track, within the last twenty-four hours. I don’t see why . We pick the track, and I’m not going to pick it, because he's
 Sorensen ; As between the two I think it clear tliat practically everyone here would favor the private proposal . Sorenten: "I think it . think it is clear that practically everyone would favor private proposal"
 Rusk ; We're not being offered the choice — we may_ not be offered a choice . Rusk says we may not be allowed the choice. Rusk: We may not have the choice .
 "This is the one tliat the Soviet government obviously is going on. But in any case this is now his official , and we can release Ms other one, and it's different .
 NATO-Warsaw Pact arms problem is a separate problem, says Rusk . Rusk: "I think, yes, I think that the — uh, I . think that NATO-Poland Pact arms problems should be discussed between NATO and Warsaw Pact"
 The Cuba thing is a Western Hemisphere problem, an intrusion in the Western Hemisphere, says President Obama . Cuba is a problem for the U.S., Obama says .
 Nitze: "I think we ought to stand as much as we can on the separate stages. Nitze ; I think we should stand as little as possible on separate stages"
 Voice ; Absolutely, Absolutely, Nitze ; Fight the Turkish one with the best arguments we can. Voice ; Nitze .
 The other way, it seems to me — if we accept the notion of a trade at this stage, our position will come apart very fast. Bundy ; Bundy ; It seems to seem to be the other way . Bundy ;
 Ball ; Because immediately the Soviet Union would know that this tiling was being discussed, it would have been discussed by the Soviets . Ball ; Ball ;
 "It seems to me we ought to get word to Stevenson that if this is put up up there he should immediately say we will not discuss — discuss the Turkish bases," he says .
 President Obama must guarantee not to intervene in Turkey and Cuba, he says . He must also guarantee not intervening in Turkey or Cuba, says Obama .
 "He's put this out in a way that's caused maximum tension and embarrassment," he said . He added that he's put it out in the way that it has caused maximum embarrassment .
 "It's not as if it was a private proposal, which would give us an opportunity to negotiate with the Turks," he says . "It was not as private proposal," he adds .
 It may be preparations for counteraction against those particular bases that we — uh — Cuba could be that . Cuba could well be that, it may be that. It may also be preparations to counterattack against that particular bases .
 Governor Stevenson also recommends that we not consider the Turkish, offer as reported in the attached Eeuters dispatch as an alternative or an addition to the Khrushchev proposal in his letter . Governor Stevenson: "Governor Stevenson recommends not considering the Turkish offer"
 I think that — uh — we ought to get a statement ready which will — uh, I'm not sure that — wide** would — uh - uh — these references to last night's — back on that, number one . "I think that ... we should get a — uh
 Khrushchev may have picked up the statement which Kreisky, the Austrian Foreign Minister, made day before yesterday — has made and which he may think was inspired by us, in which he raised the question of Turkish . The Russians got Kreisky to do it, too. .
 U.S. would consider negotiating the giving up of bases in Turkey if it can be assured of security assurances . President Obama would also consider negotiating a deal with Turkey to give up some of the bases .
 The U.S. will inspect Cuba's military bases at the time bases are withdrawn from Cuba, the president says . The Cuban government says it will be inspected by the United States and Cuba .
 No — uh — unless the Soviet Union is also going to give up their weapons . Voices: "No — uh, unless the . Soviet Union also gives up their — uh – Voices : weapons. No .
 We think that's a very good point made by the Russians, and we would be glad to — and we finally feel that tlds is a major breakthrough . We would be happy to discuss that, says the Russian ambassador to Ukraine .
 In the meantime tlds is a threat to the United States and not just that — to all of Latin America and let's get that done. Let's get it done. The United States is at risk to the U.S. and to Latin America .
 Khrushchev's statement to U Thant is absolutely contradictory to Ids statement to the President. Well, well-known to the U.S. President. I think it's a sign of solidarity with the Soviet Union .
 Meeting Item 40.3, Reference Reel 2 and the next reel begins with low voices and side conversations, not clear ~ President not present . The reel of tape ends here .
 The gathering cares to order after about five minutes as Rusk begins to read from the Khrushchev public letter . Rusk reads the letter from a meeting of Soviet diplomats in Moscow .
 What does Tommy say? Bob, we've got three positions, i a long letter last night he wrote himself. Bob, Bob, writes himself. Tommy, Bob and Bob are at the top of the three positions. Bob writes a letter to Tommy .
 McNamara: 'It completely changes the character of the deal we're likely to be able to make, and also therefore our action in the interim' McNamara .
 A private — let me suggest this scenario — we knock this down publicly in the way we've just described, separating the issues, keeping attention on Cuba, and the four-point reply that Bob has framed. A private scenario . A private .
 Khrushchev: "Your public statement is a very dangerous one because — uh — it makes impossible immediate discussion of your private proposals and requires us to proceed urgently with the things that we have in mind. Privately we say to Khrushvic, "Look, uh — your public
 "We don't have very mud* time. I guess we say we are reluctant to release this letter," the letter says . "Which would display the inconsistency in your position, but we don't want to show it to the public," says the letter .
 I don't know what — where you are in twenty-four hours from now — uh, so we win that argument but what twenty-24 hours . We incorporate a new deal in our letter. I don’t know what, where you’re going to be in
 KFK t now the problem is going to be — uh — not just this fact that we have this exchange with him and . but the fact that he's going to have a ploy publicly that's . going to look rather satisfactory at present at present, KFK says .
 "How are we going to have him do anything but take the ball away from us publicly, if we don't," she said . "We just write him a letter. How are he going to do anything?" she asked .
 "We have an exchange with him and say he's double-crossed us and we don't know which deal to accept," says McNamarai . "In the meantime he's got all the play throughout the world," he says . "Just turn it down publicly. Just turn
 McCone: "I don't think you can turn that down publicly without — uh -referring publicly to his letter of yesterday. McCone . McCone ; I don’t think you . can . turn that . without . — uh-referbing publicly to
 He's offered this deal — uh ~ that he will withdraw the bases in Cuba for assurances that we don't intend to invade. He's also offered this . He's said he will pull out the bases for assurances we won't invade .
 "This is a question of all the Latin American countries, which have all joined together in this effort," says President Obama . This is a matter of all Latin American nations, he says .
 We will withdraw the bases frcm Turkey if — uh — and allow inspection of Turkey, Turkey, and you withdraw your invasion bases of . uh, of the Soviet Union and permit inspection there, President Obama says .
 JFK: First thing we should try to do is not let the Turks issue some statement that's wholly unacceptable . JFK: Wait, just, it seems to be the first thing we ought to try to ... not let them issue ... unacceptable .
 President Obama seems to have set the groundwork to do something in Turkey, says CNN's John Sutter . "Whatever we do in Turkey — in Cuba — seems to be the groundwork" for a deal, he says .
 I think they've got to understand the peril that they're going to move in the next week. So I tiujik we ought to have a talk with the Turks, he says. We ought to talk with them .
 When we take action in Cuba, the chances are that he'll take seme action in Turkey, and they ought to understand that . Turkey should understand that, says CNN's John Defterios .
 President Obama may threaten to take action on Cuba, Turkey, if he does not try to be fair . He may even cone out and say that once he's tried to try and be fair, he'll do it to Turkey .
 "We ought to try to get them not to respond to this till we've had a chance to consider what action we'll take. So I think the Turks ought to tl»ink a little."
 "They ought to — they can certainly make a statement disassociating themselves. They ought to," he says .
 "If anyone pulls their in, it'll be us, and they can't be expected to do that," says Drexler .
 The warheads belong to Turkey and are manned by Turks, but the warheads are in U.S. custody . They belong to the U. S. but are in Turkish custody . The warheads are still in the country .
 We cannot permit ourselves to be impaled on a long negotiating hook while the work goes on at these bases . They all are complicated matters that involve some discussion to get their true meaning, we cannot permit themselves to be .
 U.N. Secretary of State Clinton suggests that the United Nations immediately, with the cooperation of the Soviet Union, take steps with regard to the cessation of the work . Clinton: "I therefore suggest that — uh — work -that the . United Nations ... take steps"
 I think it would be very important to say that the current threat to peace is not restricted to Cuba . The threat is not only to Cuba, it's also to the rest of the world, he says .
 "There's no pain in saying that if you think you're going to make a trade later on," he says . "You're not going to be in pain in the process of saying that," he adds .
 "We have an immediate threat — what is going on in Cuba, and that is what has got to stop," he says . "That is what we need to stop. I think also that we ought to — uh — say that we have a immediate threat," he adds .
 "We have to get something on work - the main weakness here is the work's going on," he says .
 While you were out of the room, Mr President, we readied an informal consensus — I don't know whether Tanny agrees — that this — last night's message was Khrushchev and this one is his own hard-nosed people overruling him . Mr President .
 The only tiling is, Tanny, why wouldn't they say it privately if ti^ey were serious? Tanny says .
 JFK: "The fact that work is going on is the one defensible public position we've got" JFKT: "Now let's — uh — I would think the first tiling we have to do is to"
 These are all the tilings that — uh — why this is a pretty good play of his . These are the reasons why it was a good play, and why it's a good one .
 The only tiling we've got him on is the fact that now they've put forward varying proposals in short periods of time, all of wliich are complicated, and under that shield this work goes on .
 Until we can get some un — agreement on the cessation of work, how can we possibly negotiate with proposals coming as fast as the wires can carry them? We can't negotiate until we can’t get some agreement on an agreement .
 HSht's stuff was pretty good; this is impossible, at this stage of the game, and that time is getting very short . Sndyt 9 I%self would send back word, by Fcmin, for 'gj » *f ^
 He certainly doesn't have the text but he knew when he heard the broadcast . "He doesn't know what he means, but he knows when he hears the broadcast"
 Well — uh — well, well, Governor we'd be — I think your message — uh, you know the letter that I received last night was different than this. Well, uh, well- well, governor says . Governor: "You know that you know that I'm not
 "I think we've been around and around too much of that. Yeah, that's what it presented us," he said .
 "Let's get it out of this problem, then we might as well just decide on sand in his gears for a few minutes," he said .
 I'm just trying to cope with what the public problem is about — because everybody's going to think tl*at this is very reasonable, he says . He says he is 'trying to cope' with the public's view .
 This Turkish tiling has got to be tlorown — you're quite right, Mr President . And you can bring in Berlin; I think it's fine. This is fine, says President Obama .
 Turks and Germans will be answering questions in the next few hours, CNN's John Sutter says . "They're going to take a very strong position," he says . Sutter: "They are going to be very strong"
 The Turkish proposal opens the way to a major discussion of a lot of tensions in Europe, including Berlin, Dillon says . Dillon: "The Prime Minister talked to our delegation to — uh — to — um Dillon : I would say that you say that the Turkish proposal ... opens the .
 Voice: I don't think you — if you mention that, you've lost the Germans. Oh no no no . Voice: If you mention the Germans, you'll lose the Germans! Voice: "Oh no no. No. I'm not going to mention that" Voice:
 They turned away from their targets and returned to base, "" Taylor ; they run into resistance Rusk : Rusk . Rusk: "It looks like we'll have to make a statement today as to what we do about that as far as surveillance is concerned"
 Mr President I wonder if it wouldn't be wise to put the announcement about night surveillance whether we decide to carry it out tonight or not . JFK ; Well we better wait till we hear more about why they aborted, McNamara . McNamara ;
 This is the announcement we would propose, Voice ; They've commonly referred to is — uh — different than the resolution . This is a proposal that would change the name of Voice .
 The decision was made just before the Foreign Ministers which isn't really very strong as decisions go. It's not very very strong, it's just a decision to make just before Foreign Ministers .
 JFK: "As I was preparing this letter, which was prepared in response to your private letter of last night, I learned of your — this immediate crisis in Cuba, and so forth. I think we ought to say "Mr Secretary" JFK . JFK .
 "When we get action there I shall certainly be ready to discuss the matters you mentioned in your public message," says the Prime Minister . "We are certainly prepared to discuss these matters," he says .
 Be prepared to discuss our actions, the detailed thinking (voices unclear) JFK . Be prepared for discussion of the matters in your public message .
 Tomorrow he'll come back and say the U.S. lias rejected this proposal we've made . Tomorrow he will come back to say the United States lias reject this proposal .
 President Obama says the matter of Turkey and other matters can be discussed if he'll cease work . "All these matters of Turkey, and so on, should be discussed," he says .
 I read of your public message accepting bases in Cuba. — uh ~ contact as necessary. But until we get that — so I think we ought to put that in — just say, I think it's OK . But until that, he says, "I read of . your public
 You must realize that these other matters involving NATO and the Warsaw Pact countries will require time for discussion, says President Obama . You must also realize that NATO and Poland need time to discuss, says Obama .
 Unless we all agree, unless we all mean to announce that we've rejected it, I don't think we ought to do it today . I think we should reject it today, and I'm not sure we should do it .
 That's our only... it seems to be ... defense against the appeal of his — uh, trade . That's the only defense against his trade .
 "I think we (words unclear) glad to discuss this and other matters, we've got to get a suspension of work. I think we ...got to discuss it and other things,’s got to talk about it,” he said. “I think (
 Mr Zorin has been to U Thant, and one of the people who was there came out and said that the position that was . . was that the first letter was confidential and it was designed to reduce tension . But as far as he was concerned the second letter contained the
 U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton says it's time to send U.S. delegation to U.Thant . Clinton: "It's bound to take time, and everybody will recognize that"
 If we can get assurance from — which can't be inspected that they will cease the work, then we'll discuss these matters . We'll discuss the matter with the government, he says. We need to get assurance that the work will cease .
 We ought to make it a formal request, I think, George, George. Then I think we're on a much better ground, he says . We should make a formal proposal, he adds .
 Ball ; All right JFK; Well just let this go for just a second while we send a message to U Thant. Ball . Ball: "Just let it go, just let the message go, go for a second" Ball ;
 If we're going to discuss these we must have some assurances which can be verified that the Soviet Union will cease work on the missiles and that the missiles which are presently there have been made inoperable . If we want to discuss this, we need assurances that they will stop work on
 Would the Secretary General get from the Soviet Union these assurances? Secretary General would get assurances from Soviet Union .
 The United States would be prepared to discuss anv proposals of the Soviet Union . In that case, the U.S. would be willing to discuss the proposals of Soviet Union.
 The proposal involves a number of countries and issues unrelated to the existing threat to peace posed by Soviet planes and missile bases in Cuba . Sorensen: The proposal made by the Soviet Union this morning involves a variety of countries .
 The lengthy discussions required for any possible settlement of these matters cannot be undertaken by this country until it is assured that work on these bases is halted and the bases themselves are inoperable . The discussions need to be held until the bases are halted, the government says .
 The Soviet Union has introduced issues which are not directly related to the Cuban crisis, CNN's John Defterios says .
 The United States would be glad to discuss these matters with the Secretary General and the Soviet Union . They do involve the interests of the fifteen countries of NATO and obviously would take, therefore, some time .
 I ask the Secretary General whether he can get assurances from the Soviet Union that the missiles and so on and so . on the missile bases that they have been rendered inoperable. I ask, therefore, the Secretary . General .
 If this can be dene then the conversations can take place in an atmosphere which would be more suitable . If this is possible, it would be a more suitable atmosphere for discussions .
 JFK: "I talked to Bohlen in Paris. I would think — uh — Jack it would be well — Jack" Bundy: "That's why we want to get it out tomorrow morning tomorrow morning" Bundy : "I would think ... Jack it was well done, I would
 He said the knockdown of the trip to Cuba had been very well received there . He said it had been well received by the Cuban people .
 Bundy : well I've also talked to Finletter and asked him to check the Permreps and say that the United States stands for this position but if the NATO countries should feel that it places them in unusual hazard, he is authorized to elicit their points of view . Bundy:
 One developed mechanical trouble so a pair turned back, approach the Cuban coast in three flight plans . One of the three plans was to fly over the island of Cuba . The other was to sail over to the island in three different plans .
 Trie President asks what kind of fire was received and the answer is not clear . The answer to the question is not yet clear .
 There follows low and apparently less general conversation including discussion, not very audible, by Rusk of possible public comment on the off-course U-2 over the Soviet Union . Rusk and Rusk discuss possible public comments on the U2 .
 JFK: I think we're better off not to do it if we can get away with not having some leak . JFK: "I think we think we should not have some leak. I think it's a mistake"
 I think our problem is to maintain our credibility with Khrushchev. But I think -I think our . problem is . maintaining our credibility . I think . our problem was to maintain . our credibility, says David Cameron .
 Mr President, may I say in relation to that, I think if we haven't announced already, we shouldn't now . Mr President. I think we should be announcing already, and I know we haven’t now. Mr President .
 One is, do we want to have these conversations go on, on Turkey and these other matters while there's a sort of standstill in Cuba? One is to say that we won't talk about Turkey and other matters until they've settled the Cuban crisis . Another is to talk about
 "We won't discuss Turkey till they settle Cuba," he says . "I don't think that's as good a position as saying we're glad to discuss Ms offer if we can get a standstill"
 Most people will think Ms offer is reasonable, Ms. offer is rati»er reasonable, she says . That puts us in a much stronger world position, she adds .
 "I think that if we don't say that he's going to say we rejected Ms offer, he'll have public opinion with him," she says . But she says he's not ready to say he's rejected the offer, and therefore he will be angry .
 President Obama has said Turkey is irrelevant in the Middle East . He has said it's unlikely he will act as a threat to Turkey's influence in Syria .
 The proposal made by the Soviet Union broadcast — tMs would be to the Secretary General — this morning involved a number of countries and complicated issues not directly related to the existing threat to peace posed by Soviet offensive missile bases in Cuba .
 The United States would be glad to discuss the matter with you and others after consultation with the members of NATO, whose interests are also involved . The U.S. would be happy to discuss tMs matter with .
 The discussions reauired for any peaceful settlement of these other matters, however, will require time for consultation with the countries whose interests — uh – with these countries – are with these nations . The discussions will need time for consultations, but cannot be undertaken by this country until it is assured
 I therefore request with the utmost urgency that you seek such assurances from the Soviet Union in order that negotiations can be moved forward . I therefore . request . from the . utmost urgency . to seek assurances from Soviet Union, Mr. Putin says .
 Bundy: "If we sound as if we wanted to make this trade, to NATO people and to all the people who are tied to us by alliance, we are in real trouble" Bundy says: "There are two different audiences here, Mr President, there really are, and I
 "We'll all join in doing this if it's the decision, but I think we should tell you that that's the universal assessment of everyone in the government that's connected with these alliance problems," he says .
 Bundy Bundy says the knockdown in this White House statement this morning was well received . Bundy: "That knockdown ... well received. That knockdown is well received" Bundy says . Bundy says he hopes Bundy will be able to continue to work with Bundy .
 JFK ; Yes, but I should say that also, as the situation is moving, Mac says . If we don't for the next twenty-four or forty-eight hours, this trade las appeal appeal, JFK says . JFK: "If we don’t" for the
 The only thing we've got for which I would think we'd be able to hold general support would be — well let's try to word it so that we don't harm NATO — but the tiling that I think everybody would agree to — wldle these matters, which are
 McNamara: Couldn't we just add in there, "Inasmuch as they relate to the defense of NKK> bases in Italy, Turkey, the UK and elsewhere — tl»en you go on"
 CNN.com: "You take away the attention from Turkey. So you link it all together and you — and you ... take away from Turkey" CNN's John Sutter: "So you link all together ... and you . link it together"
 McNamara repeats his point, to get away from specific reference to Turkey . McNamara: "Turkey is not a country that has a history of terrorism" McNamara says .
 Many voices at once but also audible discussion not transcribed here because the President was not present . President Obama was not at the White House at the time .
 He thinks that we ought to have a meeting of the NATO Council tomorrow morning to present this to them so that they all have a piece of it . He says that we should have a NATO Council meeting to present the proposal .
 If we don't take it, we're blamed, if we do take it we're just as blamed . Otherwise no matter what we do, we'll be blamed . If we take it and don't, it's just as bad for the country, we will be blamed for it
 President Obama says the U.S. position should be that here it is . "We ought to have the — uh — if we don't take it what the prospects will be, as well as what we do," he says .
 'We ought to get up a message to Finletter/ instructions, and he ought to call for a meeting at 9 or 10 in the morning. We should call for Finletter to meet with us, he says . We should get him to send a message, he writes .
 CNN's John Defterios: "That's the disadvantage of a Council meeting. Of getting an acceptance of the proposal that goes up in your letter now, which is has nothing to do with that"
 It's probably obvious that they made a suggestion about Turkey which the NATO Council would be interested in meeting about . NATO Council should meet about Turkey, says CNN's John Defterios . Turkey is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 JFK: The advantage of the meeting is that if we reject it, they participate in it, if we accept it . JFK: "The advantage of this is that it's not only that they participate, but it's the advantage of it" JFK: 'If we reject them,
 The possibility is if you wait twenty-four hours to see if they accept this other tiling accept it yet, we'll have to wait 24 hours to find out .
 We wrote him this letter that you've approved where we say that we won*t invade Cuba in return . We said that we would not invade Cuba if they did, and that we wouldn't invade Cuba again .
 You send a query this afternoon as to whether they're willing to stop work . Then you send a reply to the question this afternoon . Then send a request this afternoon that they are willing to work .
 CNN's John Sutter says Italy is likely to come up with a proposal to withdraw the bases there, the missiles there. Thompson says .
 Voice ; Well I don't know. , Rusk ; Well now in view of that message just gone up to U Thant we wind up~this letter . As I was preparing this letter let me (words unclear) many countries and complicated issues not related to Cuba and the Western
 The United States would be glad to discuss these matters with you ana other governments concerned . The U.S. government would be happy to discuss the matters with other governments .
 JFK: "In this language are you rejecting their proposal of this momma; I don't think so. JFK ; In this language, are you reject their proposal?" JFK says . JFK ; "I don't believe so. I think so," JFK .
 If we're going to reject it we ought to have all of NATO reject it. It's rejecting the immediate tie-in. Now don't we just have to ask — we don't have to reject the
 Ball suggests that NATO Council meeting in the morning would be a 'flat rejection' of the proposal . Ball: "I don't want them around saying — that's the essence of it — it's just a question of timing, isn't Ball .
 NATO 'strongly' opposed to any action in Cuba, says spokesman . "If you have a Council meeting you'll probably get a strong reaction," he says .
 We might be able to either shift the area in which they would apply their militaiy force or give them no excuse to apply military force by taking out the Turkish Jupiters and the Italian Jupitsers before we attack Cuba .
 We've already detected three submarines off the U.S. coast in the last forty-eight hours . Three submarines have been detected off the coast of the United States this week .
 JFK: If we took them out, we'd get the trade the Russians have offered us . JFK: "I think, 1 think we could, first place we can tell than (words unclear) ' JFK : If we take them out of the U.S. they'd get
 It's one thing to stand them down as a favor to the Turks while we hit Cuba, and it's quite another thing to trade them out. Bundy t t It's a good thing to have them down, Mr President, in political terms . Bundy t said .
 We agree not to invade, you agree to take your McNamara ; Turkey is gone. Turkey is dead . We agree to not invade . Turkey is no longer safe in Syria .
 Bundy: It could lead the Soviet Union to come back to the next problem . Bundy: "It could lead [the Soviet Union] back to [Russia] next problem" Bundy says . Bundy says it could lead to a return to Soviet Union .
 If U Thant should come back and say, 'number 1, that they're going to continue to work, in which case I suppose we have to move in some way' KFK; If you made an offer — up there now — and you also ask U. Thant
 If they say they're going to continue the work on the bases, I think then we've got to decide whether — if they have said by tomorrow morning they're . going to . continue the . work . on the basis — whether we should have a military strike .
 NATO meeting of NATO tomorrow morning is unlikely to happen, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "I think we're keeping the pressure on, we don't look like weakening on the whole Turkey complex"
 "If tomorrow we don't have a favorable answer from U Thant or Khrushchev to this message that's going cut now, is it important to strike tomorrow or do we have some more time?" asks Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 McNamara: 'No, that's an excellent course of action which I don't believe he's going to accept' McNamara . McNamara says he's not sure McNamara will accept the job .
 RFK ; Yeah, but of course we're in — before the world we were in much better shape, he says . RFK: "Before the world, before the [world] we're ... in better shape. We're in a better shape"
 Thompson ; It would seem to me that we ought to surface all of this correspondence including this letter . Thompson ; Thompson . Thompson .
 Rusk ; On the other hand, Mr President, if NATO seems solid on this, thi ; has a chance of shaking Khrushchev off this point .
 Martin ; Suppose that we give him a letter which is addressed to his letter of yesterday and ask U Thant to release then both — he's the fellow to release them — and then he releases correspondence which consists really of an offer from Khrushchev and we — we core back and
 JFK; Well, I think that he'd probably just say that the work's going on, that we're not going to take these . Then I think we're going to have to do something — I don't think he has to say that it is — but the escalation is going
 The missiles in Cuba and the missiles in Turkey should be turned over to the UN for destruction, says Rusk . Rusk: "Mr President, here's one other variation here that Mr Foster has given some thought to, and that we say that we turn over the missiles"
 An actual disarmament step, send them off for destruction on both sides, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I think that — uh — the real problem is what we do with the Turks first. I think that . I think ... I think we have a problem with Turkey," he says .
 JFK: "If we follow Secretary McNamara, what we're going to do is say to the Turks — which they're bound to think is — uh — under Soviet pressure, we want to get your missiles out of there"
 If we get a negative answer to the message that's just gone up to U Thant, we really ought to consider whether in actually as low key as possible although there'll be a tremendous flap about it ■— in order to provide — to give you the necessary authority to call up
 I think seme mobilization measures, not only here but in other NATO countries, might be very timely here in shaking Khrushchev off this position at this point . The U.S. has been in the throes of a crisis in the Cold War .
 Ted Cruz's change of position, in a matter of hours here, means either that — uh — Ted points ait that his message of last night is not categorical about taking the missiles out, he says .
 Turkey would still have technicians and planes and guarantees still exist for Turkey, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Today it sounds great to reject it, but it's not going to, after we do scmethino. It's not a good idea to reject the idea, but we will reject it today . It will be a bad idea for the world, but not for the future,
 One of them is to tell that this is going to result in an attack by them some place even if you do . One of the things you can't do is tell that you're going to be attacked by them even though you don't .
 "I think we're in pretty good shape with this morning's message about the work ceasing, so I think if he feels that strongly, it's pretty good to think he feels strongly," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Dean Obeidallah: 'I had a meeting with the Four and brought them right up to the point of seeing how serious this was' 'Dean talked to them about the alternatives they face'
 Norstad's advice is against having them in a group, but he may not be as shrewd as Norstad . Norstad may not have been more shrewd than Norstad.
 Norstad just feels that no matter what we do, there's going to be — we've got to have NATO have a hand on this tiling or otherwise we'll find no matter . Norstad: "If we take no action or if we take action ... they're all going
 The question is whether we go immediately to the Turks and see if we can work out sane — see if they're receptive to the kind of deal which the Secretary talked about . Now the question really is — two or three — two questions — first, whether we should go to Turks and
 "I would say that an immediate personal telegram was the best tiling to do," he says . "If you have that conviction, and you are yourself sure that — uh — this is the way we want," he adds .
 CNN's John Defterios says he'd rather go the total blockade route than military action . He says the blockade route would be a lesser step than the military action, which would be less likely to be accepted by the Turks .
 Sorensen wonders whether we can't defer this for twenty-four or forty-eight hours wldle we try to try the private letter route in answer to his private letter .
 Adlai Stevenson has suggested a letter here that may not be bad in this particular context . The letter may be bad, but it may be not bad in the context of the situation .
 All weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use in Cuba should be rendered inoperable . The first thing is to be done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba .
 U.N. action is likely to take place now, says CNN's John Sutter . "We're likely to hear something about U N. action now," Sutter says .
 I would like to say again that we very much want to move in this direction. I would also say that we are very much interested in moving this way. We are very keen to move this way, and it is very important for the country's future .
 If your mention of Turkey signified that you are prepared to discuss a detente affecting the whole of Europe, we are of course quite prepared to consider with our allies the suggestions that you and your partners in the Warsaw Pact might have been in mind .
 To continue work on the missile bases or prolong the discussion of removing missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba would intensify the Cuban crisis . It would be a grave risk to the peace of the world which you described in your letter .
 "We've got to get an understanding in the next — on the question of the cessation of work," he said . "So we don't you think we ought to say very hard what we've . got to do, in the end, is that we've got an understanding"
 Rusk ; to have a letter in hand though, which would give him a chance to work it out without relation to Turkey . Rusk hopes to have it all sorted out by the end of the year .
 The poii± of the matter is Khrushchev's going to come back and refer to his tiling this morning on Turkey . Khrushchevitch will come back to refer to the tiling on Turkey this morning, says CNN.com .
 "We're going to be screwing around for another forty-eight hours," he says . "And then we're going on to screw around for more than a week," he adds . "We are going to have to wait to get back in the air," he said .
 I think what we've got to do is make the key of this letter the cessation of work . I think the key to the letter is to make it clear that it's not to work, it's to say that the key is to stop work .
 "We're glad to settle the Cuban matter. Otherwise he'll come back and say, ""Well, we're glad for settled the matter," he said . Otherwise he would come back to say, "Well,  we're glad of settling the matter"
 "We haven't had a chance to specifically get his good faith on the cessation of work," he says . So then we're on until Monday afternoon, and the work goes on, and we haven't been able to .
 The end of work is the key question for the future of the U.S. President Barack Obama's presidency, he says .
 The Cuban question and a few other tilings could be settled, he says . "Then if we get the cessation of work, we can settle the Cuban question," he adds .
 "Otherwise he can hang us up for three days while he goes on with the work. Otherwise he can hung us up," he says .
 I don't think Adlai and U Thant have yet abandoned the possibility of working this out without direct relation to Turkey though. I think they're not quite sure if they'll work out a deal with Turkey .
 I thought — you haven't got those to the point that we have this letter and in that letter. I thought . I thought ... you didn't got that, I thought, I didn't think it would be a good thing to say that . It's not a good idea,
 "Let's start with our letter to start with that, because otherwise we'll never get an answer," she says . "We're going to get a lot of what we need to know," she adds .
 "We're going to take the cease-work and I think our letter is specific that it's desirable," says the mayor . The mayor's office says it's "definitely desirable" to have the work cut short .
 The only problem is "when we get agreement on Cuba,"" which he isn't going to give us . Now the only problem with this letter again on page 3 is that he won't give us, he says . It's not a good sign that the U.S. won
 He's now moved on to the Turkish thing so we're just .going to get a letter back saying ""well we'll be glad to settle Turkey if we'll settle" Cuba if they'll settle Turkey, he says .
 President Vladimir Putin has agreed to stop the work on the bases of Turkish military bases in Turkey . Putin says he wants to open up Turkey without opening it up to the EU .
 If he says No to that, then we're — at least have — some indication, we have some indication of what's going on .
 The deal is they remove the weapons, we guarantee not to invade, and then put paragraph 1 at the end . The deal was done with a guarantee that the U.S. would not invade Iraq .
 In Number 1, you'd undertake agreement to cease work on offensive missile bases in Cuba and promptly to render inoperable all weapons systems in Cuba . In Number 2, you would also agree to cease working on offensive missiles bases in the country . And you'd also agree that all weapons
 "I think that that that ought to be made as a separate matter in the letter. But I think that . that should be . made as separate matter," she said .
 RFK: If the Cubans would agree not to interfere with reconnaissance. A week ago — the work has stopped RFK : Trees trees . RFK would like to see if Cubans allowed to interfere in reconnaissance. RFK said last week .
 I mean I don't think we're going to get as much as possible, but I mean let's make it as reasonable as possible . Let's make a reasonable amount of money possible, he says .
 Adlai — his draft — an| put in the specific tilings down there where the arrow is . See if you don't think that you could use it, consider it a good idea .
 Just put in ""this to be verified — this to be satisfactorily verified," says the minister . "This to be . verified under — well, right. Just put it in," he says .
 JFK: They've got to get the weapons out of Cuba before we'll discuss the general detente . Rusk: What Adlai says about what to do about Turkey — another problem is pretty good, JFK .
 "Now we're not going to be able to effect that, He doesn't agree with that. Now we're going to have that, he doesn't want that," he says .
 Let a couple of us go out and try to put the specifics of this letter in with the paragraphs of Adlai. Rusk . Rusk ; Let a few of us try to . put the . specifics of the . letter into the . paragraphs of Rusk; Let a
 "I don't think there's any doubt he's not going to now that he made that public. I don't have any doubt there's no doubt he'll be going to," he says .
 Thompson: "I think there's still a chance that we can get this line going. Thompson ; I don't agree, Mr President, I think there are still a . chance" Thompson says . Thompson says he doesn't agree .
 Thompson: This is, maybe, just pressure on us, to accept the other, I mean so far . Thompson: "This is maybe, maybe ... just pressure ... on us" Thompson says .
 Khrushchev can get away with this, if he wants to, and he's had a go at this Turkey tiling, and that we'll discuss later . Thompson ; The important thing is to be able to say ""I saved Cuba, I stopped an invasion,"" Thompson .
 There can be a larger... jFK when all this is over, says JFK . He's going to want to have that spelled out a little .
 Voice : I really think — uh — JFK: Let's send this. They're more confused . Voice: "Let's send it. They are more confused" Voice: JFK: "I really think ... let's send that. Let's go."
 "You know it puts seme heat on him if you put out ~ if you can get his message out of last night," he said .
 "There will be no change of policy. How about you put, as you have said before," Mr. Obama says .
 The U.S. has no hostile Indentions towards Cuba, just so we state it as an obvious fact. Well I'd say, I'd rattier say that the United States has no . enemies towards Cuba .
 To force out the Khrushchev letter to which this is a response, the letter was sent to the White House . The letter was a response to the letter, which was signed by Vladimir Putin in 1961 .
 Cut the next sentence of your desire Statement of a . desire of a desire on your part to seek a . prompt solution to the problem statement of . your desire welcome the statement of your . desire just say my desire is the same. Cut it next sentence .
 I can assure you of the great interest of the people of the U.S. to find a satisfactory solution to this . President Obama: "I'm sure you're going to have a great interest in this"
 The first tiling that needs to be done is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba, says Rusk . All weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use to be rendered inoperable under effective United Nations arrangements, he says . Rusk says: "The first t
 Rusk ; I note the indications in your second letter which you have made public that you would like to work toward a more general arrangement as regards other elements . Rusk: "I note the . indications in . your . second letter that you . made public"
 CNN's John Sutter says he was under the impression that his reference to Turkey was just sort of an example of . Turkey . Sutter: "No, I know, but — uh — this morning before I studied that letter, because I hadn't seen a copy of it"
 CNN.com: "I suppose we have to fudge it somewhat, but I agree with you, he's just talking about Turkey" CNN's John Sutter says he agrees with Sutter's point of view . Sutter: "He's just saying Turkey. So I suppose
 If your mention of NATO bases . signifies that you are prepared to discuss a detente affecting the whole of NATO and the Warsaw Pact . We are of course quite prepared to consider with our allies the suggestions that you and your partners in the . Warsaw Pact nJ.-.jht have
 Continued work on the missile bases and . prolonging the discussion of removing missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba would intensify the Cuban crisis . It would be a grave risk to the peace of the world described in your letter of yesterday .
 I therefore most earnestly urge you to join us in a rapid settlement of the Cuban crisis as your letter of October 26th suggests is possible . I am convinced that other serious problems which I'm convinced are not insoluble are not .
 RFK: "I don't understand — can I just say — what's wrong — uh, what about all the points that we made in this letter" RFK says he doesn't understand RFK's response to the letter .
 Well these are points that have already been — uh — been set out, up there. Well these were points that already been . up there, he said . Well, these were already set out .
 The President's desire not to get his hands too tied with respect to the Turkish problem. The reason for the — the actual reason we didn't have those points in this letter was the President's . The President said he didn't want to get too tied .
 One, two, three, four, four letters are pretty good to have on the record, Sorensen says . Well I don't think this does that. Well, this doesn't mean that, it means that the letter is going to be made public .
 Send this letter and say you're accepting his offer — he's made an offer and you're in fact accepting it . Send it to CNN.com/Heroes.com .
 I think that letter sounds slightly defensive about the fact — God, don't bring in Turkey now; we want to settle — we're not - I don't know whether it adds anything . And you think — I think . that letter . sounds slightly . defensive .
 Rusk ; By the way, there is another — there's another paragraph to be added . Rusk .
 The first ingredient is the cessation of work on missile sites and measures to render such weapons inoperable under effective international guarantees . The first step is to stop work on missiles sites .
 "We don't want to get in that far. That's correct, but I don't think, if we're going to ^ make this public at this point, when we don't know how much we re going to get," he said. "That's correct."
 Bundy: You've got to give him something to get him back on track . RFK: Well, can't you say ""Like I've said publicly before. What? . Bundy: "You've got . got him back in this track. He's got to do something to
 "Please don't into discussion of NATO, or Turkey, because we want to talk about Cuba. Why? , .. rfk ; Because I think, one, its just in general terms, rather defensive, and is just says we don't want to get in"
 "I think we just say he made an offer, we accept the offer, and it's silly bringing up NATO at this time," he says . "It's silly to bring up NATO," he adds .
 I tell you, Mr President, I think Adlai — I think if we could take our letter, introduce some qf the elements his letter in the last part of it, that might do it. Mr President . Mr President. I tell him, Mr . President, Mr
 The one you're going to have to worry about is Adlai, so you might as well work it out with him . The one of the ones you're worried about is the one you'll worry about, so might as soon as well .
 I read your letter of October 26th to mean that this will be acceptable . I read it as a response to a letter of support from the public . I hope it will be accepted .
 The elements of the proposal which you have put forth seem to me to be — Voice : These elements seem to be as follows. Voice: These elements are as follows as follows . Voice: "These elements seem . to be ... as follows." Voice: The elements that you put forth
 Bundy: "I don't want him — that's why we've got to end — end with saying, whatever we're going to do" Bundy: We need to get a cessation of work. As I say, we're not going to — he's not going .
 "You have to get them to say we accept your proposal. In other words you want to — you have to . say we accepted your proposal," she says . "You want to ... get them . to say they accept their proposal"
 Hare responds to the message sent to him on Wednesday at great length . Hare: "He'll do his damnedest but it's very difficult, which is in essence what he — the way it comes out. No, we have a long message in."
 President Obama has a choice between bilateral arrangement with Turkey and NATO pressure on Turkey . He says the U.S. has to decide whether to go through NATO and let NATO put the pressure on .
 The President simply sends a message to the Prime Minister and says this is the way I think it ought to be solved, and I'm prepared to do it tonight . If you re going to deal directly with the Turks, the President simply send a message .
 "I need to answer from you within six hours -- or eight hours -- something like that. And I need to be able to do it within that six hours," she asks . "And I need an answer from me within 6 hours — or 8 hours"
 The difference between Reinhardt's report and Hare's is between night and day, says Hare . Hare's report was published by Reinhardt and Reinhardt at the University of Columbia University in 1989 . Hare says the report was "a mistake in hindsight"
 I realize that, but there are — uh — what I m suggesting is that we can do this with both Italy and Turkey and get Italy to 90 along with us, I think, and this will put some additional pressure on Turkey . This will also put pressure on Italy, Turkey,
 CNN's Bob Greene says it's going to look like we're caving in on NATO . "Not having had it explained in NATO what the effects of continuing with it," he says .
 We have to get ground up to do it, and we have to look at some of the actions in between . We have a lot of work to do to get back on the ground, and it's important to do so .
 Flak came up in front of the flight, and they — they veered away, that's not been determined . That's not known if the plane veered off the runway .
 I talked to Captain — there's some difference between Captain and Captain . I think you have to wait until a little later. I'm not sure what's going to happen next. I just want to make a point .
 If we send them in with proper cover and they re attacked, we must attack back, either the SAMs and /or MIG aircraft that come against them, or the ground fire that comes up . We must also attack back either SAMs or MIGs that come .
 If you're going to take cover, the cover isn't much good because you've got antiaircraft guns . Well, we can't send these low-altitude aircraft in JFK : If you want to send them low, you can't .
 "I would think we ought to take a chance on reconnaissance tomorrow, without the cover, because I don't think cover's really going to do you much good," says President Obama .
 "My personal view is that we (mixed voices) and also ready to invade but make no advance decision on that," he said . "We are ready to attack but ... not ready to make any advance decision"
 Let's be prepared for either one tomorrow — let's wait and see whether they fire on us tomorrow . Let's see if they're prepared to fire on either side of the line .
 "Let's be well prepared. Meanwhile we've got this message to U Thant — and we're — so let's be prepared," she says .
 "If we get fired on, then we meet here, and we decide whether we're going to do a much more general one than just shooting up some gun down there," says the commander .
 "Now let's think over the Turkish thing. Well that's what I want to come to now," he says . He says. "Now we have to think over Turkish thing."
 CNN's John Sutter says he doesn't think he'll be able to get NATO meeting encouragement . Sutter: "I don't think we're going to get the NATO meeting ... encouragement"
 Turkish PM suggested to Turks and Italians, their Prime Ministers, saying that as things are developing it may become necessary for us to take forceful action in Cuba . Wouldn't be possible to send something short of what Bob suggested to the Turks and the Italians?
 There is the risk that this would involve an attack on missiles in Turkey or Italy, depending on who you're talking to . The risk is that the attack would involve a missile strike in Turkey, or Italy .
 "We've got to have it look to the general interest, and a more effective defense for you," she says . "So we're got to look at it more effective for you. So we got to ... have it looked to the . general interest," she said .
 "We may just decide we have to do it in our interest. Now, they're not going to want to want it, but we may decide we must do it," he said .
 "I doubt if the Council will recommend that we stand down Turkish missiles," says Putin . Putin says he's not sure if the council will recommend standing down missiles .
 Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has expressed his support for his country's right to speak to the West . Erdogan says he wants to see more of the Turkish president's role in the world as a leader .
 Rusk says the Turkish reaction was the missiles are here, and as long as they're here you're here . Rusk: When we talked about Polaris in place of the missiles, the reaction was 'as long as [the missiles] are here'
 JFK says there's a few club members of NATO who won't like it much . JFK says: "There's no doubt that NATO members of the U.S. will like it"
 Most NATO members aren't going to be very happy about it, because the problem is Berlin or something . Most of the NATO members don't want to see it, as it's Berlin .
 The British have recognized the obsolescence of the Thor and have decided to take it out and replace it with Polaris . Polaris is an effective system, and Polaris is the most effective one, the British say .
 JFK ; Well, they will, as I say, it's bound to be looked on though as the United States — they'll say that this is because of the U.S. — to make a trade . JFK .
 Turkey's security is better with them in than it is with them out, CNN's John Sutter says . The Turks are "pretty tough," he says . Sutter: "They probably figure that — uh — that their security is ... better"
 McNamara: We have our air squadrons there with nuclear weapons . That's exactly right, McNamara . McNamara says. We have to be careful .
 JFK: "We want to send a message to our ambassador to begin this track, some message to NATO what the facts of life are. JFK ; We want — In other words, Bob, we want to . send a . message to . our ambassador," JFK says . JFK .
 If the Turks say no to us, it would be much better if NATO was also saying no, he says . If they decide, NATO would also say no, the U.S. should have asked them .
 JFK: We estimate that — what if we have until Wednesday or Thursday JFK : On the air strike. JFK: "We estimate that – what if ... what if I have until ... Thursday?" JFK: On air strike: "What if ... it's not clear what time is running
 RFK: "I think if you waited till tomorrow morning and he's rejected it ... then you know whether the work's going to continue" RFK says if he rejected it, "then we'd know what we would want to do"
 JFK: "We ought to begin a negotiation with the Turks now. Well one, it seems to me, ought to . begin a . negotiation with Turks now" JFK ;
 Bundy ; I think it's very difficult to negotiate with the Turks as long as we think there's anything in last night's track. Bundy says . Bundy: 'I think it will be very difficult for us to talk to the Turks'
 The letter doesn't not talk to the author of the letter . He was estimating the situation himself .
 I think there was an early conversation raised the question with him of news reports . "There was a lot of discussion with him about the reports," she says .
 Apparently this was a SAM-site that had actually had the energy . It all ties in in a very plausible way. Apparently this is a very good thing .
 McCone ; I wonder if this shouldn't cause a most violent protest a letter right to Khrushchev. McCone . McCone wrote a letter of support for the former Soviet Union leader to Khrrushchev .
 It would be very dangerous, I would say, Mr Secretary, unless we can reconnoiter each day. (words unclear) reconnaissance. (reconnoiter) reconnaissance . Mr Secretary says it would be 'very dangerous' if we could reconnerner each day .
 "You've just got to take out that SAM-site, you can't with them. I think you've just . got to ... get them to the SAM site," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It builds up, though, on a somewhat different plane than the all-out attack plan . The attack plan builds up on a rather different plane, though .
 JFK: There are so goddam many... we could take it all day if ... well let's say if we're sure the U-2*s been shot down it seems to me we've got to announce it — it's going to dribble out. JFK ; There are
 JFK: Then we ought to not say anything, don't you think, and just take the reprisal without making any announcement . JFK: "Then we ought not to say anything. Then we should just take it without making an announcement"
 JFK: "Action will be taken to protect our fliers" JFK: I think we ought to announce that — uh . — uh, action is being taken," JFK says .
 McNamara: We're going to say it was shot down and we're goinq to continue our surveillance protected by United States •Fiqhter aircraft Dillon t Suitable .
 JFK: "I'd like to find out whether Havana says they did shoot it down. That's right, exactly JFK: They say — uh ~ that's why I'd like ... that's the reason I want to know if Havana shot it down"
 SAM-site could be used by Cubans, says U.S. State Dept. Rep. Carlos V. Carlos Lopez . Lopez: "You might have Cubans"
 This is a know 96 ° f pattern ' n ° w wh wh * it's a change of pattern we don't RFK:*Yeah. RFK. It's a new pattern . RFK says it's not RFK .
 McNamara: "It was in operation, we believe, at the same tine that the U-2 was over" McNamara says . McNamara said .
 Voice ; If he had altitude and had any type of failure, he could fly to Puerto Rico . Voice ; He could fly with Puerto Rico. Voice . Voice . If he was flying with altitude, he would be able to fly .
 Let's talk a little. more about the Turks — how we're going to handle that. Let’s talk about how we’ve dealt with that. We're not going to talk about that, but how we've dealt with it. Let't talk about it.
 "I'm just afraid of what's going to happen in NATO, to Europe, when we get into this thing more and more," he says . "I think they ought to feel that they've a part of it"
 McNamara would agree, but I think we ought to know what we want NATO to do tomorrow, which means that we have to have a proposition . McNamara: "We have to be able to make a proposition"
 President should get a message to NATO and get to the capitals, to our ambassadors so they can talk to the governments, says Mr Obama .
 Sorensen: "We just have one last line, Mr President, that Bobby thought you ought to look at. Bobby thought that you should be looking at. Mr President"
 McNamara: "Because of the danger to NATO of this situation, because we can relieve that danger while without in any way reducing the defense of NATO, we believe that steps should be taken, Bundy says . We can't withdraw the missiles, and therefore the action we take is that
 The French would charge this is — the only thing, as I say, if this is going to come, we ought to . The Turks and NATO, this is on the cheap for them, they'll say the United States is — is holding out in order to try to make a
 "No matter whether we say it's to protect Turkey or not, that's the way they're going to think about it," says President Obama . "They're not going to back down. No matter whether or not they're protecting Turkey," says Obama .
 "We can say we're in a position where we believe we're going to have to attack Cuba," says President Obama . "We're not going to be able to go to Cuba," he says .
 If we attack Cuba there's great likelihood that the Soviets will attack the missiles in Turkey . If we attacked Cuba, there's a great likelihood of the Soviets attacking Turkey's missiles in the country .
 We are willing to give you additional guarantees, move Polaris submarines there, deploy additional planes in, and to state beforehand that the missiles in Turkey and Italy have been rendered inoperable, before we attack Cuba . McNamara .
 JFK; JFK; And if they don't take it, we feel they should recognize the danger, accept the danger . JFK. JFK; . JFK; "We feel we should be grateful for the opportunity to live with the world"
 McNamara: The third proposition is that if we do this, and leave those missiles in Turkey the Soviet Union may, and I think probably will, attack the Turkish missiles . McNamara says the U.S. could attack the missiles if left in Turkey .
 CNN.com host John Sutter to CNN iReport: "I've got a — why don't I get through? Then let s go back and attack each one of my propositions"
 I simply said it reduced the chances of military action against Turkey, I said . I said it was reduced to reduce the chance of a military strike against Turkey . I also said it also reduced the likelihood of a Turkish military strike .
 The State Department has invited Cuba to trade missiles in Turkey for Cuban missiles in Cuba . The State Dept. invited them, and they said they'd be delighted to trade the missiles . The U.S. State Department says it's "delighted to trade those missiles" in Turkey
 McNamara: "Don't push us into a position where we haven't traded it and we are forced to attack Cuba, and the missiles remain in Turkey" McNamara says .
 Bundy: "We were going to let him have his strike in Turkey, as I understood it last week. at one point at least that was the way we talked about it" Bundy says . Bundy says the strike was going to be allowed to take place in Turkey . Bundy: We
 Ball ; And then we don't want it, and we're talking about a course of action which involves military action with enormous casualties and a great — a great risk of escalation . Ball says: "We're talking ... of a course ... of action ... with enormous ... casualties"
 McNamara ; Well, why don't we look at two courses of action? Voice ; Let's see what consequence George draws. McNamara . McNamara; Well, let's see if George draws a consequence .
 President Obama says he would far rather trade missiles out of Turkey with Turkey to get them out of the country .
 These things are obsolete anyway — I mean you're not going to reduce the retaliatory power of the NATO Alliance, Voice Voice . You put Polaris in there, it's going to be a lot bigger. These things were obsolete anyway, he says .
 Bundy: I missed your statement: I have to ask you to say it again. Bundy: Well, I think you have two alternatives Bundy : I have no idea what happened . Bundy: "I'm sorry. I have a lot of respect for you. I'm sorry." Bundy
 Ball: What you do, with the Turks and NATO, you go through the propositions that Bob has outlined here . Ball: And surveillance Ball: "What you do with NATO and Turkey is what you do"
 Mac, this other course will in a sense be that, so get first the message written on the assumption that — write that . But Mac will be the first to write that. Mac, Mac, writes that .
 "We can carry this on for a couple of days, maybe three days, possibly even four," he says . "I would think I . think I couple of . days, perhaps three days," he adds . "Perhaps even four days"
 We sat for a 111* n * S * S^erybody was in favor of doing it, and I'd make that part of the message . "We sat for the 111*n *S^ery body. was in favour of doing this," he said .
 That's no ^^""f' You C ° U f v v dn 'i Si9n that and sav we know what we signed . And before we got the damned thing read the whole deal chanced think that s the only answer, and we ought to think of
 I wouldn't try to negotiate a deal. (mixed voieeeO t'a send him a threatening letter. (M.I.T.O.T) Send him a threat letter. I would never try to make a deal with him. I won't
 Let's 90 down and try and draft, oet this (words ^ofce1 ' 3 SrLr,.r, h 1 Ve lat f r t0ni9ht *°*e alternat^'here .
 Itates of p Union, what have you done, what are you doing . The Jr.SfiS^ made a fine speech .
 I think he might... 2iil2S* If you do this if you at the same time send that message to everybody , you see, which is explaining why . The message that's being drafted is being drafted, and that's why it's not .
 Dillon ; We're just talking about missiles, because we can't talk about planes . Dillon: "We just talk about missiles. We're not talking about planes, we're just about missiles"
 "Then we have to take our planes out of Turkey, and we don't want to do that," says Putin . Putin: "We don't like to have our planes taken out of the country"
 "They give up Turkey, then they shoot another — then they give up Berlin," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "We haven't run into the basic thing that all of us talked about less than a week ago," says Dillon Dillon . Dillon: "We're not going to run into something that we haven't done so far this week."
 This proposal is that whatever you want out of Cuba, take out of Turkey . This proposal was proposed by President Obama in March 2013 .
 A week ago, Obama said he'd take everything out of Cuba, and we'd just take the missiles out of Turkey, but now he's saying I'll take missiles out . Dillon ; Oh I see, what you were talking about a week ago was that they'd taken everything out
 Any suggestion that we're willing to accept this unless there is an irrevocable decision to take these out by bombing is very dangerous, says Thompson . Thompson . That's why I think any suggestion that . we're . willing to . accept this is dangerous, Thompson says .
 Either Khrushchev was overruled or his collegues were deceived by the Lippmann piece and the fact that Kreisky put this out which made them think that we were willing to — to make a trade, he says .
 "It's our position to say unless you agree not to shoot at our unarmed planes until these things of yours are inoperable in Cuba, then we're going to have to hit you," says the U.S. State Department .
 A confused discussion of Lippmann' s position follows, largely mixed voices . The choice is yours, and the rest of the discussion follows .
 "I think they'll change their minds when we stop their ship or — or ... taking out a SAM-site," he says . "They'll probably change their mind when we take continued forceful action," he adds .
 Dillon ; Well, would you rather send them a thing like this which says if they shoot at all you're going to take them all out, or would they rather just go in and take one SAM-site out. Dillon says . Dillon: "Would you rather ... shoot them all
 The first letter he was wobbling around rather slowly, (words unclear) but that is not to be ignored, then there is read, probably by McCone, a longer version of the McCone draft letter . Then there is a longer . version of . McCone's draft letter
 Shooting at planes must stop, work on bases must be halted, missiles rendered inoperable, and ultimately to be removed . The essential point is the same .
 LB J ; I'm surprised that they've been allowing these planes to go in all these days anyway without any action . LB J says he's surprised that the planes have been allowed to go into the air without action .
 Thompson: The only thing that bothers me is the — ■ uh — you can see that we have two conflicting things here . Thompson: "The only thing I'm bothered about it is the ... ■ uh, you can’t see that you’re going to have two
 If we want to get him to accept the thing that he put in his letter last night, then we shouldn't give any indication that we're ready to talk about the Cuba-Turkish thing . And the purposes are conflicting because of that, he says .
 McNamara is drafting that message, 55,L L: ‘*f se f "" ha ha ha *, then we can think about that. McNamara’s message is: “ *f sef se . ha ha*”
 "It gets it back on — centered on Cuba, and our willingness to accept it," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Turkey is the focus of much of the world's attention to the country's troubles in recent years . Turkey has been accused of being responsible for the deaths of U.S. citizens . The country has a history of anti-Turkish sentiment in the past .
 It seems to me the public will be pretty solid on that, and that we ought to keep the heat on him and get him back on the line which he obviously was on the night, before . The public seems to be backing him to get back in the line, before.
 Sorensen: "I think we ought to — just a second — I'll just say, of course we should try to go the first route which you suggest"
 Secretary McNamara suggests that we draft a message to the Turks and to the NATO people, saying that we will give you Polaris for the Jupiters in Turkey .
 President Obama says the U.S. is going to hit Cuba and therefore we ought to do this because then it means that you 're safer than you would be. And we're going to . hit Cuba. And therefore we . ought to . do this .
 Ball takes the position that you shouldn't give up the Jupiter, why you ought to get him to take care of Cuba . McCone's got one that lays down an ultimatum, that just says we're going to — you shot down our man there, we're not going
 "It would just get us completely out of Turkey in every respect, and leave the Soviets very much in Cuba," he says . It would leave the Soviet Union in Cuba, he adds .
 Instead of an ultimatum, a lot of talk about if you shoot any more of our unarmed planes, that it would probably be more effective and make more of an impression on him if we did do what we said we were going to do before and just go in and knock out
 Havana has announced it, that it was shot down by antiaircraft fire . Bundy ; Voice ; Havana has said it is Havana, Cuba, shot down . Bundy .
 If that Soviet ship comes in within this line we ought to stop it, Thompson says . Thompson says, "We ought to get that and make sure that McNamara knows that Thompson ; I also think that we should stop it"
 "What we considered offensive and analogous means would have to come out of Turkey," he said . "We considered offensive ... but we would not have to go to Turkey"
 Your representative will make a declaration to the effect that the U.S. on its part will remove the similar means from Turkey . Your representative should also make a statement to the public that the United States will remove them .
 It's either/or we either get out of Turkey completely or we leave the Soviets in Cuba, and only missiles out . That's why I think it's very dangerous to indicate any incentive to play on this thing .
 "Get everything out of Cuba, and negotiate with the Turks with the same objective," says President Obama . "We need to get everything from Cuba out of the country," he says .
 JFK: We can't very well invade Cuba with all its toil, and long as it's going to be, when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles in Turkey . JFK: "We could have made the same deal with Turkey in Turkey"
 President Obama has been criticized for taking Cuban missiles out of Cuba . He has been accused of trying to destroy the country's foreign policy . Obama says the U.S. should have left Cuba .
 "You take everything out of Turkey, 20,000 men, all your (word unclear), all your planes, and all your missiles, and crumple," says Erdogan . "We take everything from Turkey, all our planes, all the missiles and all our missiles," he says
 Voice ; ... get those missiles out of there. This Turkey thing has been Voice . Voice ; . ... Get those missiles . Voice .
 Rusk: If we're going in tomorrow with with with the (words unclear) that we're . going to enforce the right to surveillance, we will enforce the . right to . surveillance, he says . Rusk ; If we . go in tomorrow, we'll enforce the (
 The Chiefs have been — I went back this and talked this over with the Chiefs. Taylor . Taylor ; The Chiefs . have been . The Chiefs. have been – The Chiefs’s been .
 The problem of low level surveillance is becoming difficult because in all the flights today around SAM-sites, the -uh --, , missile sites, there's low-level ack-ack . The problem is becoming . difficult .
 By the end of the day, we probably have seen some of the dispositions around these sites . We have some photography and I would say by tonight — by the end, the day — we would probably have had some of these dispositions .
 "We're faced with taking out a number of SAM-sites that medium and high-level reconnaissance. When we reach that point, and if we're going to continue reconnaissance without actually taking out the whole works, we're faced . When we . continue reconnaissance, we . are faced
 "Low-level reconnaissance probably is on its way out, and I think we'll learn that tomorrow," CNN's John Sutter says . "We'll learn tomorrow that tomorrow. But low-level reconnaissance probably is probably out of control," he says .
 JFK: "I think we ought to wait till tomorrow afternoon, to see whether we get any answer" If U Thant goes down there, we're rapidly approaching a real — I don't think that firing back at a twenty millimeter coming off the ground is good"
 I'd rather take — I don't think that it does any good to take out — to try to fire at a twenty millmeter on the ground, he says . "I'd rather than take out," he says. "To try to shoot at a 20 millm on the
 "If they fire on us, tell them we'll take them all out," he says . "If we don't get some satisfaction from the Russians or U Thant or Cuba tomorrow night, figure that Monday we're going to do something"
 Taylor says shipping is more important than this, although I'm entirely fo r this JFK ; Well, tomorrow, when do we talk, Mr Secretary, I thought maybe tomorrow we'd do the shipping .
 U.S. unarmed reconnaissance aircraft, conducting surveillance of the build-up of offensive weapons secretly introduced into Cuba by the Soviet Union, were fired upon . I would like this to — let me read this and see — Today United States .
 Such surveillance operations were in accordance with the resolution adopted on October 23rd by the Organ of Consultation of the Inter-American system under the provisions of the Rio Treaty of 1947 . The resolution was adopted on Oct. 23rd .
 To ensure that the nations of the Western Hemisphere continue to be informed of the status of the threat to their security, it is essential that such reconnaissance flights continue . The countries of Western Hemisphere will continue to receive information from the CIA .
 To protect these flight against attack, it will henceforth be accompanied by fighter escorts . To protect them from attack, the aircraft will now have fighter escort .
 "The possiblity of further attack on our aircraft, and the continuous build-up of the offensive weapons systems in Cuba, require that we be prepared for any eventuality," says the British ambassador .
 I have instructed the Secretary of the Air Force to order to active duty twenty-four troop carrier squadrons of the . Air Force Reserve with their associated support units . Therefore tonight, acting under the authority granted me by Execution Order such-and-such, I have .
 Gilpatric ; You might . want to take out the sentence about the fighter escorts . You might want to . take out . the . sentence about . the fighter escort escorts. You might also want to delete the .
 McNamara ; Yeah, I'll do this (Discussion in low voices, not general, hard to understand) McNamara . McNamara: "Yeah, yeah. McNamara" McNamara : "I'll do it." McNamara says .
 U. Thant: "They'd keep them out of there. After all, the assurance was to U Thant and not to me, that they'd kept them out there"
 Mr President, with regard to reconnaissance the Chiefs talked this over at great length, Mr President said . The Chiefs talked over this over a great length. Mr President .
 We would say there is no great — no need for more reconnaissance tomorrow, except for the fact that we should check on whether they're working or not . We would like to see if they were working, we would say .
 "I agree ... we also want, to find out (words unclear) if they're firing tomorrow," he says . "We also want (to find out) if (the president) will be firing tomorrow. I agree," he adds .
 "We ought to, tonight, call Stevenson to inform U Thant that this ship is continuing to approach that we'd like to get some answer from them," he says . He says the confrontation must take place .
 Could we have a couple of minutes — just a minute's discussion, as to whether we should intercept it or not? Could we just have a moment's discussion? "Yes, yes, yes."
 "I don't know whether we think that that's ... advisable if we're going to — uh — face firing — if they are firing on us," he says . "We're not going to ... face firing," he adds .
 Well, I was just making a list here of the things that have happened today. Well, it was just a list of things I was doing today.
 By the way the intercept area business was available last night, I think. By the time the intercept business was in the area last night .
 Will you find out where it is, Mac, in a technical way, and give them the latitude and longtitude? Mac asks you to find it out, Mac says .
 "We don't need to say what we're going to do about it, but we ought to say this is approaching, and we'd like to have you know about it"
 Rusk: Mr President, just to remind us of seven things that have happened today. Yeah, we can wait until about noon tomorrow .
 CNN.com: "I think that's — uh — for one day, that's building up. Now, in general, I think ... that's ... building up" CNN's iReport.com will feature iReporters' top 10 most recent stories .
 " POL, all ships, and — uh . — so on. Secondly, we've got the announcement about these — whatever happens — if we don't take the ship, we announce that the (words unclear) been broken, and from now on, it's POL . From now
 What we'd better do is now figure out these messages to NATO and the Turks, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: What we need to do is figure out how to deal with NATO and Turkey .
 NAC meeting will take place in the morning, says Finletter . Finletter is arranging for the meeting, he says . "I just talked to Finletter, who is ... arranging for this morning's meeting"
 Finletter 's presentation should be brief, factual and should be cool and skeptical, without suggesting that you have established a firm and final position . Finletter is a free-pressing journalist and photographer .
 The resulting discussion would, I hope, be useful to you as an indication of European opinion, and might develop some aspects of the problem of importance to you in making your decision .
 In any event it should help to avoid a situation in which you can be wrong whatever you do, and your allies can be right and wise .
 "No matter how productive and useful a NAC discussion may be it will not, I fear, substantially relieve you of the burden of making a difficult decision," he says .
 Khrushchev seems now publicly to have placed Cuba in that category . The former Soviet Union president has been critical of the country's policies .
 This is a very incomplete list of the questions which come to mind as one considers this problem . This is not the only answer to the question: What do you think?
 The answer seems to add up to a rejection of Khrushchev's proposal, the author says . Finletter should be instructed to indicate this as the general direction of United States thinking, he says .
 "We could let them know that we've got to take action in Cuba if this thing continues," he says . "This will create dangers in the NATO area," he adds .
 NATO says it cannot connect the defenses of NATO with the situation in another part of the world . The one is that we — that NATO takes the position that they cannot connect . NATO has been criticized by some of its allies for not linking the defenses with the security situation in the region .
 The Soviet Union realizes that we have to combine with NATO on this issue, says President Obama . Therefore, he says, "We have to stand by them in NATO and make sure that — uh — the Soviet Union ... realizes that [Russia] realizes that ... it's a problem"
 The second alternative would be, on straight security grounds, take Bob McNamara's point, here on page three, here .
 The third would be to take George Ball's proposal, saying that we accept this but on the full understanding that — uh — we will make alternative arrangements, which are easily made, for the nuclear defense of NATO . But — and tell them that in this situation, since we understand the
 Well, if you're going to really present it to them that way, you wouldn't want to state a position, I don't think, Mr Secretary, would you . Because they'll feel compelled then to agree with that — it sounds sort of strong and firm and clear, and
 "It's officially the easiest position, but I think we ought to be sure that that that's what we want to do," he says .
 We have to -what we want to do — even if we want them to end up that way, we don't want to look like that s where we urged them and therefore they have accepted, some reluctantly, some eagerly, the United States opinion . If it goes bad, then
 "All we're doing is saying, ""This is it. I don't think we are even indicating that we're going to have to accept it," says the president .
 "If we don't — take it, then we want everybody to understand what we think may be the alternative i~ we're going to have to move," she says .
 "I think that's probably what this first meeting ought to be, and then we might have another one the next morning," says President Obama . "We might have a meeting the next day," says Obama .
 Some of them may come up with an idea that would unlock this damned thing, something that we haven't thought of . Some of the world's most famous inventions have never been seen in this way .
 Mr. President, do we believe that we'll be able to settle Cuba more easily with or without the Jupiters in Turkey? Mr President, Mr President. Mr President says .
 Russia has made a deal with the West that would allow the West to reach out to Moscow . Russia has offered the West a deal to reach a deal in exchange for a return to the West . The West says the deal is good for the West, but it's not good for Russia
 Why don't we just wait another eighteen hours, see if that's been eased at all? See if that has been eased by the government?
 Voice: You shouldn't discuss the Turkey deal. Well, but the only thing is have we lost anything (words unclear) Voice: "Well, but ... have we . lost anything?" Voice: We should not discuss the deal. We shouldn't talk about it. Have we lost
 It simply leaves out, as I understand it, the recommendations section of both messages . "I understand it leaves out the recommendation section," he says .
 If it's a very serious briefing, this could serve as an indirect warning to the Russians . The briefing could be a serious warning to Russia, CNN says .
 I would suggest you not lead into discussion of this. I would . suggest you don't lead into . discussion of it. I'm not sure what I'm going to say .
 "We won't say that we won't — that we're going to ask for a meeting on Monday on it," she says . "But I think you can say that . We won't," she adds. "We're going for a Monday meeting on it"
 "It is now decided that your briefing should not be related to the Soviet proposal but to the situation," he said . "That's really what s concluded, especially in the light of the fact that tomorrow is the day of signals to Soviet Union," he added .
 He's announced it, so I think the Sorensen ; I think in some ways it's a sign of weakness if we keep resorting to messages . I think he's announced that he's an official, so he thinks it's OK .
 JFK ; I think we shouldn't send him one again. think we ought to just let that one go tonight. JFK . think we should never send him a one again . JFK .
 "We're going to be faced with the problem of that ship tomorrow. Well, I was thinking about that ship," he says .
 Our ambassador should send a letter to de Gaulle, Macmillan and Adenauer, he says . Let's send it to all three, it involves Berlin .
 We'll be in touch with him in twentyfour hours when we find out if we're successful in putting the Russians back on the original track . We'll find out in the next 24 hours .
 You can send this personally to de Gaulle, Adenauer, and Macmillan, if you want to JFK: We've sent a message to MacMillan, send one to Adenauer and De Gaulle .
 RFK: "We ought to be prepared, it seems to me to attack MIGs if they attack our aircraft" McNamara: "This time we would make it perfectly clear that if they attacked our aircraft, we're going in after some of their MIGS" Taylor
 RFK: "We ought to seriously damned sure the and then we need to have two things ready, a government for Cuba, and plans for how to respond to the Soviet Union in Europe" "Sure as hell they're going to do something there," he says .