 Major Heyser went on a secret mission to take photographs of suspicious military sites in Western Cuba . Major Heyster went on the mission in October 1962 to take photos of suspicious sites .
 The images on the photographs were identified as medium-range ballistic missiles . The images are believed to have been taken by the U.S. military .
 The following source contains information regarding the discussions that were held after the discovery of medium-range missiles in Cuba . The source also contains information about the discussions .
 The Central Intelligence Agency chief photo interpreter hovered over (looked over) the president's shoulder . Tuesday 16 October 1962, 11:50
 Arthur Lundahl held a pointer in his hand, ready to reveal a secret that would bring the world to the edge of nuclear war . Lundahl: "I'm going to tell the truth. I'm not going to let the world go to war."
 The secret was buried in three black and white photographs pasted to briefing boards hidden in a large black case . The photos were hidden in the case hidden in three large black cases .
 The photographs had been shot from directly overhead, evidently from a considerable distance, with the aid of a very powerful zoom lens . The photographs were taken from a very high-tech zoom lens and were taken by a helicopter .
 In secrecy, while insisting they would never contemplate such a thing, the Soviet leaders had installed surface to surface nuclear missiles in Cuba, less than a hundred miles from American shores .
 President Obama directed his attention to a canvas-covered missile trailer next to a launcher erector .
 His voice was clipped and tense, betraying a boiling anger beneath the calm . He said: "I don't want to be left alone, I want to make a difference in my life."
 The comment by Nyerere below focuses on Tanzania's policy of socialism and self-reliance in 1967 . The comment was made by the then-President of Tanzania .
 In very few cases, there was any ideology involved, says historian . "We thought and talked of greatly increased output, and of things being provided for the settlers"
 The fact that people cannot be forced into ujamaa villages, nor told how to run them, does not mean that Government and TANU have just to sit back and hope that people will be inspired to create them on their own .
 To get ujamaa villages established, education and leadership are required . To help them to succeed, education is required, experts say .
 The Arusha Declaration and the actions relating to public ownership which we took last week were all concerned with ensuring that we can build socialism in our country, says the president .
 The nationalisation and the taking of a controlling interest in many firms were a necessary part of our determination to organise our society in such a way that our efforts benefit all our people, says the PM .
 Cordially known as Mwalimu, he led by example . His humility equalled by his commitment to the well-being of the poorest of the poor .
 His dedication and identification with the masses, and his passion for fairness, were evident throughout his tenure as the nation's leader . His dedication to the masses was evident throughout the tenure .
 When he became president, he worked and lived with them in their villages, slept in their huts, and ate their food . When he was president he lived and slept with them, slept and ate them . He said: "He worked and slept and lived and lived" with them
 He spent days, and weeks, working with them in the rural areas in all parts of the country . He spent the last few weeks in rural areas .
 He mingled with the peasants so well that you wouldn't even know who the leader was in the group, let alone be able to identify him as president of a country if you didn't know what he looked like .
 No other African leader lived the way he did, and worked in the rural areas as much as he did . He cleared and tilled the land for hours with ordinary peasants .
 Not a detached, arrogant leader and intellectual who felt it was beneath him to soil his hands like the poor, illiterate peasants did, he said . "Not a detached leader," he said. "But not a detached and . arrogant leader."
 I also know how humble he was, because of what I witnessed years before I became a national news reporter, first at the Standard, next at the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as an information officer .
 Nyerere said ten years after his retirement that he would do things differently if he could turn back the clock . He said he would like to turn the clock back ten years .
 As he stated in an interview, 'I would still write the Arusha Declaration,' he said . He said he would still still write Arusha declaration .
 Even voluntary collective settlements would probably not have provided catalytic change in the economic transformation of Tanzania . The main attraction would have been social services – schools and clinics – provided by the government .
 The result was economic failure which may take Tanzania decades to overcome . Tanzania's economic failure may take years to overcome, say experts .
 Tanzania's economy was not a total failure, but with great achievements in health and education, and provision of social equity, it was not an economic failure . The country's economy has been hit by a series of challenges, including poverty and social inequality .
 When Tanzania adopted socialism, she was virtually locked in place in terms of economic development, going nowhere . Tanzania's economic development has been going nowhere since it adopted socialism .
 At one time, the World Bank made more loans per capita to Tanzania than to any other nation . The World Bank has made more than 100,000 loans to Tanzania per capita .
 The Montgomery Improvement Association was formed in 1955–56 . Greensboro, North Carolina, was the site of a second major event in Greensboro in 1960 .
 Four first-year students refused to move until they were served at a segregated lunch counter . North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College students took seats at a lunch counter and refused to leave until they got served .
 Their return each day to the segregated lunch counter drew the support of other black and some white students throughout the South as well as adult leaders . Their actions sparked repetitions of their actions in hundreds of cities across the South .
 Civil rights workers and black citizens were arrested, beaten, jailed, deprived of their jobs, intimidated , and killed . Civil rights activists were arrested and beaten, beaten and deprived of jobs .
 Court decisions handed down, major federal legislation was passed, public facilities such as transportation and waiting rooms were desegregated, and black citizens gained better access to the polling booths . As a result important court decisions were handed down .
 On May 4, 1961, a group of blacks and whites set out on a highly publicised trip to test a Supreme Court order outlawing segregation in bus terminals . The group set out to test the Supreme Court's decision to ban segregation in buses .
 Many members of Congress of Racial Equality tested integration laws during the 1940s . Many of them belonged to the revitalised congress of racial equality .
 Ten days into their journey, on Mother's Day, the first bus of Freedom Riders pulled into the terminal at Anniston, Alabama . The Freedom Riders arrived at the Anniston airport in Alabama on Sunday .
 Waiting for it was a mob of white men carrying pipes, clubs, bricks and knives . Waiting for the mob was white men with pipes and clubs, they carried out the attack .
 The bus driver quickly drove off, but the mob caught up with the bus again outside the city . The bus was stopped by the mob again outside of the city, but was quickly driven away .
 As bus went up in flames, the riders rushed out into the hands of the mob and were brutally beaten . Riders rushed out of the burning bus and were beaten by the mob .
 Eight white men boarded the bus and beat the occupants from the front to the rear . Freedom Riders were beaten by eight white men in Anniston, Alabama .
 Most seriously injured was Walter Bergman, who was thrown to the floor and kicked unconscious . He was kicked unconscious after being kicked unconscious by the crowd .
 He suffered a stroke as a result of the beating and was confined to a wheelchair for life . He suffered from a stroke and suffered a life-long disability .
 A poster informing the American public about the march to Washington, 28 August 1963, was released on August 28, 1963 .
 Mathew Ahmann Joachim Prinz Eugene Carson Blake A Philip Randolph James Farmer James Farmer Walter Reuther . Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated at the hands of the White House .
 This source outlines the march to Washington where Martin Luther King Junior delivered his 'I have a Dream' speech . The speech was delivered by King Junior in 1963 .
 The march on Washington drew a larger number of people to the Capitol than ever before – about a quarter of a million . The march is a culminating event of the movement .
 Estimates are that 20 to 30 per cent of them were white; many interracial northern groups attended .
 The 28 August 1963 march was a peaceful demonstration, a rally . It was perhaps an extension of the thousands of packed mass meetings that had taken place in black churches all over America and especially the South . The march was peaceful .
 Civil rights leaders felt that the events of 1963 required a significant climax . Civil rights activists had felt that they needed a major climax to the events .
 A Philip Randolph proposed a march that would really take place . Randolph was the leader of the anti-war movement in the U.S.
 A main objective was to demonstrate to Congress that public opinion was on the side of desegregation and voting rights . "A considerable number of whites strongly supported these goals," said the White House .
 Unity and goodwill prevailed for the day, at least on the surface, as noted entertainers, black and white, performed . A series of leaders addressed the crowds at the event .
 Dr. King marched on the state capital and delivered his now-famous 'I have a Dream' speech . King marched to the state's capital, calling for equal treatment for all Americans . King's speech was the first in a series of speeches he delivered in Washington .
 Taken from a paper delivered by Steve Biko at a SASO leadership conference in 1971 in Pietermaritzburg .
 Any man who calls a white man 'Baas' is ipso facto a non-white man . Any man serving in the police force or Security Branch is also a 'non-white' man . Police officers and security staff are also non-whites .
 Black people – real black people – are those who can manage to hold their heads high in defiance rather than willingly surrender their souls to the white man . Real black people are people who can hold heads high and refuse to surrender their lives to white men .
 The following is an extract from an interview between Biko and an American businessman . The interview took place in the 1980s when Biko was in the US .
 Biko's death was only printed in The New Republic newspaper on 7 January 1978 . The apartheid government imposed a media ban related to the death of Biko .
 You are either alive and proud or you are dead, and when you're dead, you can't care anyway . When you die, you are either dead or alive, or proud . You can't be proud of your life, or you can be proud and proud .
 "If you can overcome the personal fear of death, which is a highly irrational thing, you know, then you're on the way," he says .
 My attitude is, I'm not going to allow them to carry out their programme faithfully. I'm going to not let them do it, I said . My attitude will not be allowed to allow the government to carry on their programme .
 If they want to beat me five times, they can only do so on condition that they must allow me to beat them five times . If they do so, they will only be able to beat him five times if they want him to do so . I'm not going to let them
 Steve Bantu Biko was an influential leader, but in the way he died so pitiably exposed the poverty of morality at the heart of the state . Biko died pitiably in a state of poverty at heart of state .
 Biko, who had eluded police for a year, was on his way to Cape Town in mid-August . He was arrested at a road block outside Grahamstown and taken in terms of Section 6 of the Terrorism Act .
 He was driven the next day to Port Elizabeth, where he was stripped naked and held in various cells for the next two weeks . The next day, he was driven to various cells and held for two weeks before being stripped naked .
 Still naked but placed in leg irons, he was taken to police headquarters on 6 September, where he was interrogated by five security police officers . He was still naked and placed in legs irons when interrogated .
 On that day or soon after, he was rammed against a wall so hard that he sustained the brain injury that would kill him . "I'm not going to be able to talk to him again," he says .
 Biko did not die immediately but it was clear to his persecutors that something was very wrong . Biko's death was not immediately apparent but it became clear to them that something had happened .
 Three state doctors made false diagnoses to protect the interrogators . The interrogators called in no fewer than three state doctors, who made false diagnosis .
 The 1960s Freedom Struggle (Twayne Publishers: Massachusetts) Byrne, P. Byrne, 2006 . Byrne,P 2006. Byrne: The 60s Freedom Struggles .
 An Illustrated History (Jonathan Ball Publishers: Johannesburg and Cape Town) Mwakikikagile, G 2006. An Illustrated Historian . Mmakikagole, G. 2006. The South African national Geographic Geographic Geographic Dictionary .
 Biko, The Quest For A True Humanity (Developed by the Apartheid Museum) Valtman, S and E 1991. Biko . Biko. The Quest for a True Humanity .