 It was the Cold War era and United States was making operations against Cuban Regime . U.S. was in the midst of operations against the Cuban regime .
 Some of the unsuccessful operations in this period are Operation Mongoose and Bay of Pigs . Some of these operations were unsuccessful . Operation Operation Mongoose and Bay of Pigs were unsuccessful .
 Soviet and Cuban governments built bases in Cuba for intermediate-range and medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles . After unsuccessful operations, Soviet governments decided to build bases . The bases were later abandoned .
 It would make possible to strike all continental U.S. with this missiles from Cuban missile base . The missiles would be capable of striking all continental United States .
 A U.S. Air Force plane captured all bases in Cuba with nuclear missiles and events went to a big crisis . A U-2 plane captured the bases with nuclear missile missiles .
 There were deep conflicts between Russia and USA after unsuccessful Bay of Pigs Invasion . Russia and U.S. were involved in failed invasion of Cuba in 1960s .
 John F Kennedy and Cuban exiles invaded Bay of Pigs in 1961 but they failed . This event embarrassed USA government publicly . The event embarrassed US government publicly.
 Some writers foreseen that Russia will take a step after this fail to get stronger and save Cuba . Russia is expected to take a further step after failing to save Cuba in the future .
 Nikita Khrushchev taught that USA is taking advantage of “splendid first strike” against Russia . He decided to put missiles to Cuba and he decided to do it .
 U.S. turned target of its missiles in Turkey and Italy to Russia . Also turned target targets of its missile strikes in Turkey, Italy and Turkey to Russia. Russia also targeted targets in Italy, Turkey .
 Nikita Khrushchev didn't place missiles to Cuba for hitting USA but he thought to take some concessions and guarantees from USA for withdrawing missiles . According to important political writers, Nikita didn’t place missiles . He thought to have taken some concessions .
 Some of the guarantees he would want were an agreement that USA will not invade Cuba and they will withdraw missiles in Turkey . He would also want a deal that the U.S. would not attack Cuba .
 Kennedy changed it to a military blockade on Cuba . Some politicians decide to attack Cuba in parliament in parliament . Kennedy changed the policy to a 'military blockade'
 USA government announced that any missiles will be permitted to enter Cuba . USA government said missiles will not be allowed into Cuba . U.S. government announced missile missiles would be allowed in Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev wrote a letter to President John F Kennedy and said blockage is propelling Russia to world nuclear-missile war . The letter was sent to President Kennedy in 1961 .
 Russia and USA made aggressive announcements but they searched an agreement in back channels . The two countries signed a deal in October 28, 1962 . Russia and the U.S. signed a treaty in 1962 .
 According to agreement, Russia will dismantle their missiles and took them back to Russia and never mantle them again . USA will never invade Cuba and also dismantle the missiles in Turkey and Italy . Russia also took back the missiles from Turkey, Italy and Turkey .
 Russia started to dismantle all weapons in Cuba and loaded them to ships . Two weeks after the agreement, all weapons were loaded to ships.
 The Soviet Il-28 bombers were loaded to ships and went back to Russia . Also the Soviet I-28s were loaded onto ships and returned to Russia.
 Nikita Khrushchev didn't ask Fidel Castro about situations and agreement in the crisis period . Fidel Castro fell out with Nikita because Khruschev didn’t ask to Fidel Castro for information . Castro was the Cuban leader of the Soviet Union .
 Moscow–Washington hotline is created between two countries after crisis and leaders talked on this phone when a problem occurs . Moscow-Washington hotline was created between Russia and Washington after crisis .
 The Terminator series is one of the most popular sci-fi movie series in the cinema history . The Terminator is the latest in a long-running series of films based on the Terminator .