 The agents reported this ^formation as soon as they were able, but in most cases had to depend on secret writing for communication . The agents had to report this as soon . as possible, but had to use secret writing .
 There was a lae of several days before their information became available . Hence, there was a time before they became available.
 Refugee reports were delayed considerably longer, for other, and uncontrollable, reasons . "The time of the ..in. dividual 's decision to leave Cuba,"" his discovery of means for doing so, and his . discovery of . means for . doing so .
 Many of the reports so received dealt with unidentifiable construction activity . Many of these unidentified construction activity occurred in the city .
 Many of the time-lags noted above, did not arrive in Washington until after 14 October, and some are still coming in . Many of them came in late October .
 Since the moment of Castro s triumphal march into Havana, the Intelligence Community had been flooded with reports of Soviet weapons shipments and missile installations in Cuba .
 There were several reports, claiming the presence of everything from .^mall arms to ICBMs, before August 1960, i.e. before the USSR had supplied Cuba with any weapons at all . i.E. i.i.e., before the Soviet Union had supplied
 "All of these were either totally false or misinterpretations by the observer of other kinds of activity," says the author .
 CIA analysts had naturally come to view all sucn reports with a high degree of suspicion . CIA analysts were skeptical of the reports . CIA had come to see all reports with high suspicion .
 The establishment of Opa Locka coincided with a sharp drop in reports of missile activity received in Washington . The establishment coincided with the drop in missile activity reported in Washington, Washington .
 CIA had been checking information obtained from refugee, defector, and agent sources with NPIC whenever it was apparent that the information was of a kind that could be verified or negated by aerial reconnaissance . For the better part of two years, CIA has been checking info obtained from refugees,
 When the first indications of build-up began to come in in August,^ these procedures were further tightened .^ These procedures were tightened in August after first indications began to appear in August .
 An example of its procedures is the handling of targets in the Sagua La Grande' area .
 Readout of the 29 August coverage showed an SA-2 site near Saigua La Grande which apparently was the. -basis for the reported activity there, and the target card was changed to show a confirmed . site . The target card now shows a confirmed SA.2 site
 It should be noted that knowledge that this site was in the area could have led analysts to misinterpret any subsequent reports . of MRBM activity as part of the SAM development .
 By September, the volume of agent and re-fugee report had become very large indeed . The U.S. government says it is investigating the situation .
 During the month, reports on internal activities in Cuba were disseminated, exclusive of telegraphic dissemination . During this month reports were published on Cuba's internal activities .
 A substantial proportion of these deals dealt with the deployment of defensive missiles and related activities . A substantial TOP SECnBT |l 36.7% of the total number of missiles deployed was deployed .
 Untrained observers tended to throw a sort of smoke-screen, around the Soviet offensive deployment when it finally began .
 CIA analytic' apparatus, .however, recognized the first authentic reports of MRBM equipment ever received in Washington, and took action upon them . The CIA analytic apparatus recognized -and correlated -and . correlated the first reports of . MRBM . equipment ever to be received . in Washington
 Photographs targeted the San Cristobal area, not as' another location where alleged missile activity should be negated by photography, but as a suspect SS-4 site .
 This process took about three weeks, from the date when the first observation was made on the ground in Cuba to the preparation of the target card .
 An observation in Havana on 12 September of a convoy, carrying; long canvas-covered objects which the source identified under interrogation as resembling SS-4s . The source identified the objects as resembling . long canvas covered objects .
 CIA disseminated CIA report on 21 September . Report contained sufficient accurate detail to alert intelligence analysts, CIA said . Report was disseminated by CIA on September 21 .
 An observation on 17 September of a convoy moving toward the San Cristobal area . An observation of the convoy .
 The arrival of the second report led CIA analysts to a tentative conclusion that the two observers had in fact seen the same convoy . CIA analysts concluded that there was a possibility of the SS-4 .'identification .
 Another report, too general to be used in the process described above, is nevertheless of interest as the first good information on the Sovi^^oifensive build-up .