 The New Nuclear Arms Race: The Outlook for Avoiding Avoiding the Catastophe Report: A New Vision: Gender. The New nuclear Arms Race .
 Slick back your hair, grab a scotch, and don’t forget to triple check that route to the nearest Fallout Shelter . Slick your hair back, grab some of the best Fallout Shelter photos .
 October is October when the U.S. and the Soviet Union came closer to nuclear war than any other time in history . The United States and the USSR came closer together than ever other time .
 The nation held its breath as President John F Kennedy faced off with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in waters just offshore of Cuba . President Kennedy and Soviet leader faced off in waters off the coast of Cuba.
 Earlier in the month, a U-2 spy plane over Cuba captured images of nuclear missile sites being built by the Soviets .
 President Kennedy knew that he could not let this stand . Given the proximity to the U.S. and the already looming threat of the Soviet Union, he knew he couldn't let it stand . President Kennedy was not happy with the situation .
 After secretly conferring with a group of advisors, Kennedy announced the establishment of a naval blockade on all further armament shipments to Cuba . The blockade was imposed on Cuba .
 Kennedy called for the removal of missiles already in Cuba and the destruction of all launch sites . In a speech to the nation on October 22, he called for removal of the missiles already .
 Soviet ships carrying weapons to Cuba were locked in a stalemate with U.S. warships in the Caribbean . Over the next week, the United States and the Soviet Union locked in an impasse over weapons .
 Faced with the very real possibility of nuclear war, Kennedy decided to approach Khrushchev with a deal to end the standoff peacefully . Kennedy approached the Soviet Union leader with a plan to end nuclear war .
 Publically, Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba if the Soviets withdrew their missiles . Kennedy promised to do so if they withdrew missiles from Cuba if they did .
 Kennedy promised to withdraw U.S. nuclear missiles from Turkey within six months . Privately, Kennedy promised that he would withdraw the missiles .
 Khrushchev accepted the offer and called back Soviet ships . Thirteen days after the start of the crisis, the crisis was over .
 Don Draper and company were dancing to the Monster Mash . But others were beginning to see that the situation in Cuba was more intense than even President Kennedy was aware .
 After declassification of top-secret information and years of analysis by scholars and government officials, the reality of how close the world actually came to nuclear war is startling . The reality is startling.
 On October 27, American destroyers forced a Soviet submarine to surface near the quarantine line using depth charges . U.S. destroyers used depth charges on October 27 to force a Soviet sub to surface using depth charge .
 Unbeknownst to the Americans, the sub was carrying a nuclear-tipped torpedo . The sub had been carrying a submarine with a nuclear bomb .
 The Soviet commander believed that war had started and prepared to fire . The commander of the Soviet Union was prepared to shoot .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended sinking a United States ship and blaming the Cubans in order to create national support for a U.S. invasion of Cuba . The Joint Chiefs' recommendation was to sink the ship and blame the Cuban government .
 The JCS sent Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara a list of possible courses of action to garner support for an invasion of Cuba entitled Operation Northwoods . The Northwoods list was compiled by the Joint Chiefs of Defense and the Joint Staff .
 These recommendations were for planning purposes, intended to provide a guide for crafting a single plan .
 Previous actions toward Cuba by the U.S. government played a big role in creating the crisis . Previous actions by the United States government contributed to the Crisis .
 Events outside of the immediate crisis had more of a driving effect than previously realized . Events outside the crisis had a greater impact than previously thought, CNN says .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 and Operation Mongoose led the Soviets to believe that Kennedy was determined to get rid of Castro . The Soviets believed Kennedy was trying to kill Castro in order to get him out .
 Khrushchev decided to send nuclear weapons to Cuba in part as a way to protect an ally . In part as part of the plan to protect the U.S. from Cuba, he sent nuclear weapons there .
 In the early morning hours of October 27, the Soviets deployed nuclear cruise missiles within 15 miles of the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay . The Soviets deployed the missiles 15 miles from the base .
 A United States spy plane accidentally entered Soviet airspace during the Crisis creating potential for the use of nuclear air-to-air missiles . A U.S. spy plane inadvertently entered .
 On October 27, a U-2 spy plane took a wrong turn and entered Soviet airspace . The plane entered the Soviet Union in Soviet airspace on October 27 . It was the first time the plane had entered Russian airspace .
 MiG fighters were sent to shoot the plane down . Nuclear-armed United States fighter-interceptors were also sent to escort the spy plane home .
 President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara were not informed until an hour and a half into the event . President Kennedy was not informed of the event until about an hour after it began .
 Whether luck, or smart diplomacy by world leaders, we were able to head off nuclear destruction, we can head off nuke war . Whether through luck, the U.S. was able to avoid nuclear war, it was smart diplomacy .
 This blog post was authored by Ploughshares Fund intern Jessica Sleight . The Ploughsares Fund is raising funds for the Ploughshare Fund .