 The case study allows scholars to derive a greater sense of the importance of a detached and specialised Foreign Office in a political system .
 Historians have been able to only speculate about Britain's role and involvement in the Cuban missile crisis for 30 years . Historians are now trying to find out what happened in Cuba .
 So far Britain's participation has been accorded either only a brief mention, or has been relegated to a footnote . Admittedly there is already an enormous library of volumes dedicated to describing, assessing and reassessing the cold war .
 Dino Brugioni's 1991 re-telling of the Cuban missile crisis' is critical of suggestions that Harold Macmillan and President Kennedy did not merely consult with one another, but actually engaged in substantial dialogue . For example .
 Brugioni: Macmillan disliked the way the President handled the crisis . He says he purposefully downgraded the missile threat, and privately expressed his anger that Kennedy had not consulted him more .
 The author also acknowledges the assistance of his colleague at Nottingham, Dr Richard Aldrich . Dr Aldrich is the author of this article .
 His account must be approached with a degree of caution, but is nevertheless useful as a balance to Alistair Home's reproduction of the crisis and, of course, to Macmillan's own memoirs . The book is published in the UK and is published by the British Library of
 The intention of this article is to reappraise the so-called 'special relationship' between the U.S. and Britain by scrutinising Britain's involvement in the Cuban missile crisis . It will focus on Britain's role in the missile crisis in Cuba .
 Britain's attitude towards the missile crisis suggests that Suez was not the watershed in foreign policy that it is often claimed to have been . The illusion of Britain's power had not yet been shattered, and the perception that Britain could still be a major player on the world's stage .
 This study is of course not intended to be the definitive last word on the subject . It is intended to provide an overview of the study of the human body .
 It is hoped that this discussion will be the opening salvo in what is expected to be an extremely exciting debate once all the details of the research have been published .
 The Anglo-American relationship is described in the most cordial of terms . It is perhaps important to begin with the traditional version of events .
 Harold Macmillan enjoyed first with President Eisenhower,5 then with Kennedy, is often regarded as the epitome of the special relationship . The often personal relationship between President Eisenhower and President Kennedy is often seen as the most personal .
 Any damage which had been suffered during the Suez crisis was soon repaired . Future of co-operation was certain, especially in the military sphere .
 Britain's role in the missile crisis seems to have been guaranteed by a close personal relationship . The United States, of course, would readily defer to Britain's international maturity . In this way, the U.S. would easily defer to the British maturity .
 President informed Macmillan that 'We shall have to act more closely together together' MacMillan told the President of the UK and the UK to work together .
 Macmillan suggested that he and Kennedy should 'concert their policy' over the crisis as soon as Khrushchev's reaction to the broadcast was known . The President hoped that in the further development of the crisis the United States and United Kingdom Governments would act closely together .
 Leaders' informal telephone conversations are said to have been 'valuable' The two leaders have reportedly discussed the phone calls .
 Britain's Foreign Secretary congratulates Rusk on the way he handled the crisis in 1962 .
 Britain's involvement in the missile crisis was extensive . Rusk knew that 'the President shared this view', Rusk said .
 Ormsby-Gore was an active participant in advising the President sometimes, it seems, his only adviser . Ambassador's numerous reports to the Foreign Office suggest that Britain was regularly consulted and its advice received .
 Americans seem to have been prepared to sustain Britain's self-deception in order to further their own foreign policy interests in other areas, such as Europe, where British co-operation was crucial .
 Rusk's reply to Home's message is likely to have been intended as a diplomatic formality . It was likely to be a nicety expressed to America's old Atlantic partner .
 Kennedy completely dismissed Macmillan's reservations about the action taken by the U.S. in a letter to the Prime Minister dated 21 October . This was again merely a formal observance of diplomatic procedure . Kennedy also confirmed that he did receive advance warning of his intentions .
 Ormsby-Gore stated his preference for a blockade of Cuba rather than a military strike . He said he would prefer a blockade rather than military strikes .
 "Personal alliances are never that close, especially in times of crisis," says Obama . "I'm not going to be alone. Personal alliances are not that close," he says .
 Even Ormsby-Gore's role in influencing the President to release the photographs of the missiles must be challenged .
 The version of the story provided by the ambassador himself that he suggested releasing the photos to the President at a dinner party held on 23 October is simply incompatible with the chronology of events . The photos were shown on the BBC news that same evening, even though Britain is five hours ahead of
 Kennedy agreed to Macmillan's suggestion that the photos be released but without specifying a definite time for doing so . According to Brugioni, Kennedy said to have agreed to release the photos .
 Macmillan apparently assumed that their release would be immediate . He told the American ambassador in London of the President's 'decision' and permitted the British press to be fully briefed .
 A reading of the transcripts of these conversations suggests that this special relationship was based on nothing more substantial than the relay of information from Washington to London, with the Prime Minister serving purely as a sounding board for Kennedy's rambling thoughts . Yet a reading of these transcripts suggests that the special relationship
 There is little evidence of Kennedy genuinely asking Macmillan for advice, except on the so-called '$64,000 question' on whether to take military action against Cuba .
 Kennedy knew that such a course of action would have significant implications for European stability, and was anxious to seek Macmillan's opinion and support .
 The dialogue between the two leaders was indecisive. Yet this one exception notwithstanding, the dialogue between them is indecisive . The U.S. President Barack Obama and Mrs. Barack Obama met in Washington DC.
 Macmillan's memoirs also reveal that he too acknowledged their limits . Apparently he 'felt all the time intimately informed of each changing aspect of these terrible days', according to his memoir .
 The reality would in all probability be that the President had already taken his decision to act . The reality is that the decision would be made by President Obama .
 At that time it would be likely to be too late for any other initiative, it would have been too late to take action .
 If the Prime Minister were to ask for more time in order for instance to summon a meeting of Heads of State, the result could hardly change things at this stage .
 It would only have the consequence that the President would conclude that when it came to the crunch Britain had wanted to chicken out. It would be only the consequence of the President concluding that the . President would concluded that when . came to . the . crunch Britain . wanted to . chicken out
 If this is right we would not have been able to alter events and we would have done lasting damage to our relations with the U.S. If this was right it would have caused lasting damage, he said . He added: "If this was the right we wouldn't have been
 The perception which the U.S. retained of Britain was of more central concern than whether Britain should, or could, actively become involved in seeking a settlement to the crisis .
 Preoccupation with the psychological ramifications of any move continued to dominate discussion . In fact such preoccupation continued to occupy discussion .
 The problem is that we are presently in no position to judge Soviet actions and calculations in this incident until the Russian archives have been thoroughly trawled and analysed in the detailed way they require . We are not in any position to assess Soviet actions or calculations until the archives are fully analysed .
 Frank Roberts's reminiscences are themselves extremely vague on such an important issue . But Frank Roberts' own reminics are themselves very vague on the issue . Roberts' reminials are themselves a vague on what happened .
 In fact there is little on the crisis in his memoirs at all except an explicit declaration that the Soviet leadership did not expect the situation to get so out-of-control . In fact, he says he didn't expect the crisis to get out of control .
 Foreign Office instructed their representative in the United Nations, Sir Patrick Dean, to announce that Britain would respond favourably to any request made by the Secretary-General for the immobilisation of Thor missiles in the UK if it would ease the situation .
 This was intended as only a temporary measure, but had nevertheless been offered as a genuine response to Khrushchev's wish to trade the missiles in Cuba for the Jupiter's in Turkey . The move was intended to be a response to the desire to trade in Cuba with Turkey .
 Britain's hopes of implementing an 'independent initiative' based on its own diplomacy were subdued by overriding American interests . The Americans were unable to envisage that there might be 'any advantage' in putting forward the suggestion about Thor missiles in the United Kingdom .
 Foreign Office seems to have offered a much more realistic assessment of both the situation and the British response to the crisis than the government . The Foreign Office was completely absorbed in maintaining its own prestige .
 Concern with America's handling of Cuba was longstanding, predating the missile crisis itself . Concerns with U.S. handling of the situation have been longstanding, long before the crisis began .
 Foreign Office had voiced forceful criticism of America's almost personal vendetta against Castro . U.S. was sustained by a most obsessive campaign of incitement and propaganda .
 Britain's ambassador to Cuba, Herbert Marchant, was equally less concerned with sustaining the special relationship by becoming too involved .
 He doubted the effectiveness of economic sanctions against Cuba, and appreciated the Foreign Office's averred reluctance to participate .
 Britain should be discreet in order to placate American opinion, he said . However, he did suggest that if Britain was to become involved, it should be as discreet as possible . Only those who still believe in miracles can imagine that will fall down of its own accord .
 Foreign Office was acutely aware of the possible spillover effects that the missile crisis might precipitate in Europe . Kennedy's Executive Committee had already discussed the likelihood that the blockade of Cuba might provoke the Soviets to again attempt a blockade of Berlin .
 The blockade was initially offered on the premise that the blockade would be confined to ships carrying arms,42 . But then the Americans expressed their intention to include oil tankers .
 Foreign Office was persistent that oil could not be 'regarded as an offensive military weapon' and was worried that it would strike at the moral basis of the American action .
 Macmillan described the position of shipping as 'fairly satisfactory' while the blockade is limited to weapons which they would not be carrying .
 There is no evidence to suggest that Dean or any other member of the Foreign Office made any positive contribution to this decision . There is however no evidence that Dean made any contribution to the decision .
 Foreign Office concerned draft resolution contains 'no express authority for the continuation of the American measures' Draft resolution places 'heavy reliance on the legality of what has been done', Foreign Office says .
 Dean was told to vote for the resolution regardless of whether the Americans accepted these proposals or not . Dean said he would vote for it regardless of the resolution .
 He was instructed, if questioned, to say that the United States had acted correctly by approaching the Security Council, thus inferring that they had been justified in taking immediate emergency action .
 This may appear that despite the reservations, Britain was providing a blanket endorsement of America's proposals . Britain may appear to be providing an endorsement of the proposals .
 The British were anxious that any action against Cuba be legitimated within the framework of the United Nations, which was a striking change in attitude given their own dismal record of involving the UN during the Suez crisis .
 Problems hinged upon the preservation of the legal rights that the British shipping industry presently enjoyed and expected to continue .
 A second draft was written to be delivered by the Foreign Secretary to the Trades Union Congress . The government was quite prepared to hedge around the most salient issues which concerned them in private, but would accept and endorse the American position .
 On the legality of the blockade, for example, Vallet drafted a skilful speech for Home which allowed him to avoid the issue . Vallet was able to dodge the issue of whether the blockade is illegal .
 'One has to consider the legality of this action, in the light of the United Nations Charter', draft draft says . 'The United Nations charter preserves the right of self defence and of the general principles of international law'
 The question is whether the action by the United States is within that right and those principles . The U.S. has a right to free speech in the U.K. to speak to the world's First Lady .
 I don't much like serving written notice on the U.S. now but I am more concerned about what is said in the House of Lords . I don’t much like . serving written notices on the United States now, but I’m more concerned . I�
 I should have thought it would be impossible for the Lord Chancellor to refuse to give an opinion if he is directly challenged to do so, says Lord Chancellor . The Lord Chancellor should not have refused to give his opinion if challenged, he says .
 Cuba was not threatened by any external source, thus ignoring the sustained anti-Castro campaign waged by the United States, rendering any such argument about 'sovereignty' worthless . He was advised to avoid the issue and . avoided the issue .
 Whether the Foreign Office genuinely believed these sentiments is uncertain, and they were written despite the fact that Joseph Godber had earlier recorded his belief that 'No one would insult the United States by thinking that Cuba represents a military threat against her'
 British foreign policy is said to have inhabited three interlocking circles the alliance with the U.S., Europe, and the Empire and Commonwealth .
 Of the three, the so-called special relationship has endured the longest . The relationship between the U.S. and Canada has endured longest .
 The Suez crisis was the prime example of how fragile the Anglo-American relationship could be . It was a time when sovereignty and national interest conflicted with conventions of international behaviour .
 Britain's role during the missile crisis reinforces the notion of a delicate special relationship governed by the dictates of a national interest .
 Despite facing the greatest challenge to the status quo to that time, the British Foreign Office still looked upon the crisis as exclusively an American problem . Despite facing facing the challenge, the Foreign Office looked at it as exclusively a problem .
 A similar, though more forceful, line was taken over Vietnam when the British refused American requests for military support . The British refused U.S. military support in Vietnam .
 For the British, Cuba and Vietnam were considered to be 'out of area operations' which the Americans believed would have benefited from the multilateral legitimacy that the British support would have provided .
 Germany may well have been chosen for the testing of a new quid pro quo relationship between the superpowers . The crisis may have been an area chosen to test a new relationship between superpowers.
 Britain adopted such a realist and calculating posture as the crisis abated and thoughts inevitably turned to securing the best results . It is evident that the realist posture is evident as the immediate crisis abates and the best result is achieved .
 Sir David Ormsby-Gore suggested taking advantage of the outcome to ensure that Berlin was granted a more favourable status . He said no offensive weapons would be located in Berlin and this would be subject to verification by the United Nations .
 According to Ormsby-Gore, this would give Britain full value for Cuba as a pawn which is at our mercy .
 It gives increased security for West Berlin as the Soviets would be put on notice that any undue pressure on us there would result in the disappearance of the Castro regime within a matter of hours .
 It would introduce United Nations observers into West Berlin in an unobjectionable role . It would constitute an additional embarrassment to the Soviets if they wanted to move against our position in the city .
 Britain was willing to maximise its special relationship with the U.S. It also illustrates how the British realised that this might entail applying diplomatic pressure on the Soviets and the Cubans .
 Britain's ambassador to Moscow, Sir Frank Roberts, approached the resolution of the crisis from an alternative perspective . Sir Frank said the Russian crisis will be resolved with the help of Vladimir Putin .
 It was in the resolution of these issues that the power and prestige of the Anglo-American relationship would be most valuable, says President Obama . "It's in the interest of the British people," he says .
 The declassification of relevant material by the PRO has still not provided the clarification which one would have hoped for or expected . As for the special relationship itself, the declassification has not provided any clarification .
 Cabinet minutes record how Macmillan was in regular contact with Kennedy . The Foreign Office cables filed by David Ormsby-Gore corroborate this .
 Cabinet was concerned that the details of this informal consultation should not be made public on the grounds that it might embarrass the President .
 The Cabinet minutes themselves are ambiguous and do not record the particulars of consultations . Macmillan's own accounts are useful but leave many gaps, and are of course constructed in order to present the British in a more active and influential light than they actually warrant .
 Macmillan sustained the illusion of British power and predominance, perpetuated the myth that the U.S. had benefited from his advice, and he was enraged by any suggestion to the contrary .
 In turn the Americans were granted at least one ally of proven democratic worth at a time when their sponsorship of tyrannical antiCommunist regimes in Dominica and Vietnam was proving troublesome .
 Britain's primary function during the crisis seems to have been in leading European and Commonwealth support for the U.S. In short Britain's role was to support the United States, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Foreign Office adopted a more measured and realistic attitude to the missile crisis . The Suez crisis had dealt a savage blow to foreign policy, restricting Britain's capacity for unilateral action .
 The myth of British power and influence was important to keep the myth alive . However, for the politician, driven by ambition and reputation, it was essential to keep it alive .
 The Anglo-American alliance provided the ideal vehicle for this, since British foreign policy had taken a severe beating in other areas in Europe . Britain was engaged in negotiations for membership of the EEC, while at the same time struggling to ensure that the interests of the United States were tied to
 Cabinet minutes and memoirs of the participants on the one hand, and the opinions recorded by the Foreign Office on the other. Hence the contradiction between the Cabinet minutes .
 The Cuban missile crisis demonstrates the value of a specialised Foreign Service given the idiosyncrasies of elected government, writes Andrew Hammond .
 States within the international arena are essentially interdependent; thus a facade of unity between states within the alliance despite reservations being made in private may be maintained . An arrangement for consultation and dialogue between the partners might be structured .
 The U.S. will act as an independent power, with its interests overriding international law if necessary . But in the final analysis the issue at stake will determine that a state, in this case the United States, will act independently .
 In turn this determined the extent of Britain's involvement which diminished if the issue was of only marginal importance for Britain . In turn, Britain's interference decided to be limited to the issue of only a marginal importance .
 Foreign Office were more aware of the implications of the Cuban missile crisis than the crisis itself . The Foreign Office was more concerned about the implications than the missile crisis itself, says David Cameron .
 Suez had not challenged Britain's traditional perception of its own power . Even by the end of the Cuban missile crisis, the special relationship was helping sustain it for particular ends .
 The Anglo-American alliance operated at the most critical moments in recent history . Thus we can gain a clearer understanding of how the alliance operated in the United States .
 Macmillan's biographer, Alistair Horne, is a keen advocate of the idea that the communications extended beyond consultation .
 Eisenhower's biographer, Stephen Ambrose, describes Macmillan as being among the President's close circle of friends .
 Italy's President attacked Gore 'with anger and some venom' at the negative attitude adopted by many in Britain, especially the press .
 An announcement had been made in August 1962 that the Thors would be removed in 1963 . The Thors were removed from the U.S. Army in 1962 .
 International inspection of missile sites for purposes of verification were never met by Castro . The conditions that would have brought such an undertaking into play were not met, Roberts says .
 The precarious and vague situation was made clearer only in 1970 when the U.S. accepted mutual commitments regarding Cuba after the Soviets began constructing submarine bases on the island . The United States finally accepted mutual .
 Macmillan sent messages seeking support to de Gaulle, Adenauer, Aminore Fanfani, Menzies in Australia, Nehru and Nehru .