 Evgenia Plotnikova-Doumerc has a question over a certain period of the Cold War Cuban Missile crisis .
 Once when still being in International School of Toulouse, I had to write a test that conatined a question on ''seriousness'' of the Cuban Missile crisis . The test was about the seriousness of the crisis .
 I argued that despite during this crisis the war seemed more likely than ever, the crisis was not as serious as it seemed at the time . I argued during this . time that despite . during this war . seemed more . likely than now, the war was not more serious than ever .
 Kennedy was advised to take immediate action, but he decided to try peace talks with Krushchev . This can be proved by the fact that when American U-2 spy plane was shot down while flying over Cuba, Kennedy decided to take action .
 Another U-2 flew over Soviet region, and Kennedy apologised publicly . In additon, when the accident was almost repeated another U-1 flew over the region .
 Sources say that the orginal aim of Krushchev was to remove the missiles from Turkey, which means that he would not let the crisis to come down to war, but will try to bargain as he actually did with the telegrams .
 He agreed to remove missiles even though the conditions outlined in his 2d telegramme were accepted by Kennedy only in private . It proves that he at this point he would not risk the war . The conditions were accepted in private only .
 History teacher, Mr Jones-Nerzic, told me that he would argue the opposite . However, after it, after . it, he said he would say the opposite.
 With time my opinion also changed a bit to the point, where I am not very sure which position to take. With time, I'm now unsure which position I want to take, and I'm not sure which .
 'I would really love to hear other opinions as that will help me shape my own. That is why I would really want to hear others opinions,' she says .
 Photographs taken in October 1962 revealed that the Soviet Union was placing long range missiles in Cuba .
 Robert S McNamara, Secretary of State for Defence, suggested the formation of the Executive Committee .
 During discussions they considered several different strategies for dealing with the crisis . During their discussions they discussed several different approaches .
 Use the United States Navy to stop military equipment reaching Cuba from the Soviet Union . Use the U.S. Navy to prevent military equipment from reaching Cuba .
 President Kennedy and his advisers had to take into consideration how the Soviet Union and Cuba would react to decisions made by the U.S. President Kennedy's Cuba policy .
 If Kennedy had accepted this advice it would probably have led to an all-out nuclear war . Kennedy would have accepted the advice, which led to a nuclear war, he says .
 JFK decided to wait and instead called for another meeting to take place that evening . Remembering the poor advice the CIA had provided before the Bay of Pigs invasion, JFK chose to wait .
 On October 24, President JFK was informed that Soviet ships had stopped just before they reached the United States ships blockading Cuba . JFK was told by the Soviets that the ships were stopped before reaching Cuba .
 One has to wonder what would have happened if the USA and the Soviet Union were not being led at the time by two men willing to negotiate an agreement .
 Soviets brought about this crisis in order to get U.S. nuclear missile removed from Turkey, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the crisis was to get the United States nukes removed .
 The logical thing for the Russians to do would be to move into Cuba which they had already done, and to take over, which they would do by a mutual security pact . The Russians would do the same by moving into Cuba and taking over by mutual security .
 Earl E Smith: That is a speech I made in February. You are not suggesting… You're not suggesting that . You were not suggesting... You were suggesting that. You were saying that. That is what I said in February .
 Evgenia Plotnikova-Doumerc . John, thank you very much for this answer . John said: "I am very happy with this answer"
 Please, correct me if I am wrong; perhaps, perhaps, I just do not understand this part of the crisis well . Please, please, please correct me .
 In my school in Tolouse we were doing an activity of ''advising'' the President which decision he could take and offering all kinds of solutions, as if we were part of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council .
 When we discussed all the solutions to the crisis I would advise negotiation with the USSR, as I thought that option had the least risk of war . When we . discussed all of the solutions, I . thought that I . would advise negotiations with the . USSR, he said .
 I wondered if there was a lot of members in the Committee who suggested this option . So, I wondered whether there were any members of the committee who suggested it .
 The leadership of both U.S. and the Soviet Union knew that they could not go to war with each other . The leaders of the two countries knew they couldn't go on to war .
 The trick was to pretend you was willing to go to war in order to gain your political objectives . Therefore, the trick was pretending to be willing to fight in order for political gain .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev both believed the other would be unlikely to launch the first nuclear attack . Kennedy: "I'm sure we're not going to be the first to launch a nuclear attack"
 Kennedy had been elected on a policy of being tougher on the Soviets than Nixon and the Republicans . Kennedy was elected to be tougher on Russia than the Republicans and Nixon .
 His reputation as a Cold War warrior was badly damaged by the Bay of Pigs operation . His reputation was ruined by the operation in Cuba .
 Khrushchev's secret deal with the Soviet Union involved missile bases in Turkey and Italy . Publicly he talked tough but in secret it was doing a deal with Khruschev over missile bases .
 Justin Q Olmstead is a history teacher currently working on his masters degree .
 I have also created an on-line American History course for my school district . I have created a course for American History for my district .
 I have always been very interested in the 1860's to 1990's time period in European history . While I currently teach about lthe United States Constitution, American History and Middle Eastern Studies .
 Man Utd and Reading fans but follow European football as a general rule . In this respect I am a huge ManU and Reading fan . I am also a huge Manchester United fan .
 Leaders on both sides that felt that war was inevitable, says John .
 Some believe that the second letter that Krushchev wrote shows a power struggle within the Kremlin . In fact some believe the letter was a sign of a struggle within Russia .
 The danger that this represents is that if the Chairman's position was unstable it could produce an even more militaristic Soviet Union that is willing to go to war to defeat the West .
 He did not want to go to war but the politics of the time forces him to have to balance his political needs against what he believed was right . He did want to avoid going to war .
 He was attempting to use diplomacy to defuse the situation in Cuba . While he was getting pressure to use military force against the Soviets in Cuba, he was using diplomacy . In Cuba, the Cuban government was under pressure to confront the Soviets .
 Some here call it shotgun diplomacy...either you do as I say or we will shoot you . Some here have called it "shooze diplomacy"
 People in the United States who were alive at the time they recall how terrified they were that a war was going to break out . Talking to people in the U.S. who were . alive at . the time of the . time they . recall how they were terrified they . were
 "People talk about going to bed not knowing if they would wake up tomorrow," says CNN.com's John Sutter . People talk about not knowing what they would do tomorrow, he says .
 Tornado sirens were not tested because of the fear that people would mistake it for an air raid alert and panic . People would mistake the sirens for air raid alerts and panic, officials said .
 ExComm based some of its decisions on inadequate intelligence . People didn't always behave rationally during the Cold War . ExComm made some decisions based on insufficient intelligence .
 McNamara says they didn't know that the Soviet Union had many operative missiles in Cuba at the time of the crisis . McNamara: The Soviet Union also had tactical weapons in Cuba .
 There is other evidence that the Soviet commander had approval to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a U.S. invasion without needing to consult further with Moscow .
 ExComm came close to ordering a land invasion of Cuba bassed on inaccurate evidence . So you can see that ExComm . ExComm may have ordered an invasion on Cuba .
 They would be able to rely on the MAD doctrine which would stop any Soviet ""first use"" - they would use massive force to invade Cuba quickly and crush Castro . They would then sit back and hope Khruschev didn't respond .
 JFK's turning back the momentum toward war that had been building since the nuclear age began represents, IMO, his single greatest contribution . JFK turned back momentum toward nuclear war in the 1950s .
 This misconception grew out of a mutual deception by Khrushchev and Eisenhower, who both knew that the United States was overflying the Soviet Union with the top secret U-2 .
 For Khrushchev, the boasts were an integral part of his blustery campaign to bolster Soviet prestige throughout the Third World and in China . The boasts were part of a campaign to boost Soviet prestige in China and in the United States .
 The impression that the Soviet Union was equal or superior to the U.S. in terms of intercontinental ballistic missiles was essential to both his domestic and international standing, he says .
 This deception by the two leaders was the most tightly held secret within both superpower governments . This deception was most tightly kept secret within the two superpower governments.
 Eisenhower told his CIA director to emphasize the fact of the U.S.’ commanding military superiority . Allen Dulles was sent to brief Kennedy during the election to emphasize military superiority, Eisenhower said .
 Dulles said he could not be sure of the true status of the missile gap until the U.S. had full satellite coverage of the Soviet Union . Dulles decided on his own to tell the candidate that he could .
 Richard Nixon would later assert that the CIA, and Dulles in particular, had deliberately held back the truth in order to provide Kennedy with a powerful campaign issue . Richard Nixon later asserted that the truth had been intentionally held back .
 Nixon may well have been correct given the fact that the CIA was better informed on the issue than even the Air Force as a result of its own U-2 reconnaissance overflights .
 The Bay of Pigs, however, would quickly dispel the notion that Kennedy would be a more favorable friend to have in the White House . Kennedy would have been a better friend to the CIA, but he was assassinated .
 Only three weeks after the Inauguration, Secretary of Defense McNamara told a group of reporters in a casual briefing that there actually was no missile gap .
 He had quickly concluded that “the CIA was right and the Air Force was wrong.” He had concluded that the CIA had been right and wrong.
 President Kennedy told Bob Kennedy to apologize and offer his resignation, "Oh come on, Bob, forget it. Forget it," he said . President Kennedy said, "Come on, Robert ... forget it"
 We’re in a helluva mess, but we all put our foot in our mouth once in a while . We all put their foot in the mouth once or a while. We're in a mess but we're not sure what's going on here .
 The construction of the missile gap fears was not so easily dismissed for the public or the military bureaucracy . It was not easy to dismiss the fears of the military or the public .
 When the Kennedy administration had come to power it quickly became apparent that Kennedy could not match his predecessor’s military credentials .
 By the autumn of 1961, the Soviets were threatening to seize West Berlin . West Berlin was threatened by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Kennedy feared that the Soviets might seek to exploit his perceived weakness . After refusing to commit American forces at the Bay of Pigs, and then being beaten in debate with Khrushchev in Vienna, he refused to commit forces .
 Corona satellite had revealed the location and provided for the targeting of all Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles . However, information from the new Corona satellite did not reveal the location .
 Kennedy knew that the few Soviet ICBMs that actually existed were suddenly obsolete . Kennedy knew he was going to have to deal with the problem . Kennedy's decision to use the ICBM was made in the wake of the Cold War .
 Khrushchev expected that if the U.S. revealed the Soviet inferiority would be dissuaded from pursuing his risky policy on West Berlin . He expected the United States would dissuade him from pursuing the risky policy .
 Khrushchev did not anticipate that pressing his agenda on West Berlin would result in Kennedy being forced to reveal the degree of the Soviet ICBM inferiority . In hindsight, it can be surmised that it can't surmise that Khrushche did not .
 The strain such a buildup would have placed on an already beleaguered economy, the impatience of the hard-line Soviet generals, and the potential loss of face with the Chinese and the Third World, were all elements that demanded an immediate solution . The strain would have put on an
 The constructions of political spectacles and impressions management had come to result in the deployment of medium and intermediate range missiles to Cuba . The most dangerous confrontation in the history of the world, he says .
 The Russian’s promises “to obliterate Western Europe” and to “bury” capitalism , accompanied by the quiet complicity of Eisenhower, resulted in a deeply rooted misperception . Eisenhower, however, was complicit in the promise to obliterate western Europe, writes
 With the demise of the Soviet Union, a wealth of new information has emerged, exposing more clearly than ever before before the methods and motives of Soviet command and control structures . The Soviet Union is no longer a viable state of origin .
 Recent oral history conferences involving both American and Soviet participants have generated startling revelations about the nature and degree of the threat represented by the Crisis .
 The absurdity of an unknown, unannounced deterrent had actually been in place in Cuba in 1962, revealing the illegitimacy of the doctrine itself . Analysts would learn that the absurdity of the deterrence doctrine had been revealed .
 A former Soviet general has revealed that his country intalled more than medium and intermediate range missiles in Cuba during those dangerous days . Former Soviet general reveals that more than 300 missiles were installed in Cuba .
 Soviet field commanders also had six mobile launchers and nine Luna tactical missiles with nuclear warheads . The weapons were also equipped with mobile launchers, launchers and tactical missiles .
 The officers were pre-authorized to use the missiles at their discretion to repel a U.S. invasion, which the Soviets believed to be imminent . The missiles were used in the event of an invasion of the United States .
 Kennedy was in Washington lobbying and stalling ExComm from its demands to invade . It is entirely possible that failing in these efforts, he would have had no choice but to give his generals the go-ahead .
 Had the invasion taken place, it is likely that at least one of the tactical nukes would have been used against U.S. forces .
 McNamara has said that the resulting pressure for the U.S. to launch a nuclear counterstrike at Cuba or the Soviet Union would have been irresistible . McNamara: The resulting pressure was irresistible .
 The question raised by the gauntlet thrown down by Khrushchev seemed to be whether Kennedy would choose holocaust or humiliation . Kennedy would have to choose between humiliation or holocaust .
 As he agreed to remove missiles even though the conditions outlined in his 2d telegramme were accepted by Kennedy only in private, it proves that he at this point he would not risk the war . It proves that . at this . point he at least . would not . risk the
 It was therefore only right that the Soviet Union should be allowed to place missiles in Cuba . Negotiate. negotiate. It was only right to allow missiles to be placed there .
 In return for the Soviet Union dismantling her missiles in Cuba, the United States would withdraw her nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy . The U.S. would withdraw its nuclear missile bases in Turkey, Italy and Turkey .
 Send United States troops to Cuba to overthrow Castro\u0027s government. Send U.S. troops to Cuban government .
 The missiles could then be put out of action and the Soviet Union could no longer use Cuba as a military base . The missiles were then put out .
 Use the United States Navy to stop military equipment reaching Cuba from the Soviet Union . Use the U.S. Navy to prevent military equipment from reaching Cuba . Bomb Missile Bases and bomb missile bases .
 Carry out conventional air-strikes against missiles and other military targets in Cuba . Use conventional air strikes against missiles in Cuba, carry out conventional strikes .
 Use nuclear weapons against Cuba and/or the Soviet Union . When discussing these strategies, use the phrase "Use nuclear weapons"
 President Kennedy and his advisers had to take into consideration how the Soviet Union and Cuba would react to decisions made by the United States . At the first meeting of the Executive Committee, the CIA and other military advisers explained the situation .
 If Kennedy had accepted this advice it would probably have led to an all-out nuclear war . JFK decided to wait and instead called for another meeting to take place that evening .
 Executive Committee of the National Security Council argued amongst themselves for the next two days . The committee was now so divided that a firm decision could not be made .
 The majority of the committee gradually began to favour a naval blockade of Cuba . Kennedy accepted their decision and instructed Theodore Sorensen to write a speech explaining it .
 Public opinion poll revealed that three out of five people expected fighting to break out between the two sides . President JFK was informed that Soviet ships had stopped just before they reached the United States ships blockading Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote a letter demanding that the U.S. remove their nuclear bases in Turkey . The next day news came through that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba .
 Kennedy refused and instead sent a letter to Khrushchev accepting the terms of his first letter . Khushchev agreed and gave orders for the missiles to be dismantled . Kennedy refused .
 Earl E Smith: It would mean a great deal to them if we got out of Turkey . Yes. Yes. It would be great for them to get out of the country .
 Please, correct me if I am wrong; perhaps, perhaps, I just do not understand this part of the crisis well . I also have got another question. Please, please tell me if you know what happened .
 In my school in Tolouse we were doing an activity of advising the President which decision he could take and offering all kinds of solutions , as if we were part of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . In his school, he said: "In my school we were . doing
 Kennedy had been elected on a policy of being tougher on the Soviets than Nixon and the Republicans . However, both could not be completely sure of this .
 The danger is that if the Chairman\u0027s position was unstable it could produce an even more militaristic Soviet Union that is willing to go to war to defeat the West .
 Some here call it shotgun diplomacy...either you do as I say or we will shoot you . The U.S. was terrified that a war was going to break out at the time .
 McNamara says they didn't know that the Soviet Union had many operative missiles in Cuba at the time of the crisis . McNamara: They didn’t know they didn\u0027t know that many operative Soviet missiles were there .
 ExComm came close to ordering a land invasion of Cuba bassed on inaccurate evidence . There is other evidence which indicates that the Soviet commander had approval to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a U.S. invasion .
 They would be able to rely on the MAD doctrine which would stop any Soviet use of MAD doctrine . They would use massive force to invade Cuba quickly and crush Castro . Then they would sit back and hope Khruschev didn't respond .
 Only three weeks after the Inauguration, Secretary of Defense McNamara said there actually was no missile gap . The Bay of Pigs would quickly dispel the notion that Kennedy would be a more favorable friend to have in the White House .
 As soon as he had entered the Pentagon he had made it his first order of business to . measure the size of the gap and the remedial action required to close it . He was so na\u00efve at that point that he had misunderstood the difference between . the record
 We\u2019re in a helluva mess, but we all put our foot in the mouth once in a while . We all put their foot in our mouth once or a while. We're in a mess but we're not in it a long time. We don't
 The construction of the missile gap fears was not so easily dismissed for the public or the military bureaucracy . It\u2019ll blow over. It’s not easy to dismiss, but it won’t be easy to do so again. It was a disaster for the military
 When Kennedy administration had come to power it quickly became apparent that Kennedy could not match his predecessor's military credentials . Kennedy's administration quickly became an embarrassment .
 Kennedy arranged for the Soviets to learn the true situation . Khrushchev did not anticipate that pressing his agenda on West Berlin would result in Kennedy being forced to reveal the degree of the Soviet ICBM inferiority .
 The Russian\u2019s promises to obliterate Western Europe have led to a deeply rooted misperception . Eisenhower's quiet complicity with Eisenhower resulted in the quiet complicity of Eisenhower .
 With the demise of the Soviet Union, a wealth of new information has emerged, exposing more clearly than ever before before the methods and motives of Soviet command and control structures . The public necessity generated by this misperception severely limited the range of options available to Kennedy .
 There was a popular culture depiction of what Robert McNamara has now described as the most dangerous element of the entire episode . Analysts would learn that the absurdity of an unannounced deterrent had actually been in place in Cuba in 1962 .
 Had the invasion taken place, it is likely that at least one of the tactical nukes would have been used against United States forces . The resulting pressure for the U.S. to launch a nuclear counterstrike at Cuba or the Soviet Union would be irresistible .
 In hindsight it can be seen that the apocalypse would have been initiated by a head of state in consultation with his best informed and thoughtful aides, but by some panicked colonel in fatigues on a beleaguered island .