 Duplication of this document for the purpose of resale or other distribution is prohibited . Duplication is not permitted .
 eText Classroom fo R Editions are designed to allow you to post individual readings, study guides, graphic organizers, and handouts to a learning management system or other password protected site . Editions include eText Books, Study Guides, Graphic Organizers and Handouts .
 If you would like to use V material from a Choices unit in your own work, please contact us for permission . If you want to use this article in the U.S. copy of this week's Daily Mail .
 Considering Its Place in Cold War tr W International Education Intern History was developed by the Choices for the 21st Century Susannah Bechtel Education Program .
 Course materials place special emphasis on the importance of educating students in their participatory role as citizens . Course materials focus on students' role in their role as citizen .
 Considering Its Place in Cold War History is part of a continuing series on international public policy issues . This week's series focuses on international diplomacy and international relations .
 New units are published each academic year and all units are updated regularly . New units were published each year .
 Choices was established to help citizens think constructively about foreign policy issues . Choices aims to improve participatory citizenship skills, and encourage public judgement on issues .
 Known as the Bay of Pigs invasion, it was a siles capable of carrying nuclear weapons on disastrous failure . the island of Cuba, just ninety miles from the U.S.
 Tensions between the Soviet Union and the U.S. had been high since the late two nuclear powers, but with little success . Nikita Khrushchev the previous year in fo R .
 For every U.S. president since Harry Khrushchev, convinced that the Soviet Union E S Truman, this ideological standoff had shaped foreign and vances in Soviet rocket technology, saw little domestic policy .
 Khrushchev had promised Berlin and in Southeast Asia, but Cuba was not to do anything that might affect the upmuch closer to home . D I months about Soviet intentions toward West were about .
 President Obama promised not to place offensive weapons in U.S. in minutes . He said missiles could hit the United States in minutes.
 Kennedy wondered what Khrushto was doing and how he should respond . Kennedy wondered how to respond to the situation and how to deal with it .
 Cuba presented a thorny problem for the president . In these readings, you will explore the president's relationship with Cuba .
 Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, had recircumstances that brought the United States ib cently aligned himself with the Soviet Union, to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 .
 Fition was a rejection of the United States effort to bring nally to the island . The island had become a flashpoint for U.S. since the U.N. has learned from the island crisis . Fition is a response to U.K. decision to try and
 Day One 3 Retracing the Path to October 1962 Objectives: 2. Considering TRB Its Place in Cold War History Day One . 3. Retraced TRB in October 1962 . 4.4.5.6.5 .
 Ask U.S.-Soviet-Cuban relations that contributed to the Cuban missile crisis . Identify the tensions in have answered the discussion questions . Share their responses with the entire the Cuban Missile Crisis class .
 Students should read “October 1962: The ut States, Cuba, or the Soviet Union. Assign to each group the role of the United Students . Students should also assign to each other the role they were playing .