 The next two months would be devoted to President John F Kennedy trying to get Communism, Khrushchev, and the missiles out of Cuba .
 This event showed that the U.S. may be able to place missiles around the world to threaten their enemies . The United States may now have missiles to threaten its enemies, CNN's John Sutter says .
 The United States had installed missiles in Turkey, just across the Black Sea from Russia . The U.S. had installed missile installations in Turkey . The missiles were installed in Turkey across the . Black Sea .
 It took Soviet Missiles located in Russia nearly twenty-five minutes to hit the United States. These missiles could strike Soviet soil in ten minutes, whereas it took Soviet missiles located in the U.S. to strike .
 Khrushchev and Malinovsky discussed threat of U.S. missiles in Turkey . The threat was discussed in a conversation between the two Soviet leaders . The conversation took place in the early 1950s .
 Khrushchev thought they should place missiles closer to the U.S. Malinovsky brought up the idea that they should put them in Cuba . The missile missiles were then placed in Cuba, and the missiles were placed in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev told his colleagues and to the First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan . He told his plan to his colleagues, and to First Deputy PM Anastasia Mikoyans .
 Mr Phileas Fogg bet twenty thousand pounds that he could make it around the world in eighty ... ... the Carribean .
 "The United States stated that the United States was in danger if we did not react. The United States said that the U.S. was in ... in danger," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "We are not going to react. We are going
 The invasion failed, this opened a window of opportunity for the Soviet Union to change the global power balance towards the Soviet. The Soviet. Union was able to take advantage of this opportunity .
 President Kennedy had to do something to halt the growing number of missile sites in Cuba . President Kennedy was forced to act after the Cuban government began sending missiles to Cuba .
 If missiles were launched from Cuba they would take just 17 minutes to hit their targets .
 The greatest crises between the U.S. and the Soviet Union occured in October of 1962 . The Soviet Union and the United States faced one of the greatest crises .
 The Soviets secretly put nuclear missiles in Cuba, while saying repeatedly that they never would . The Soviets said they never planned to put them in Cuba . The Soviet Union said it never would do so .
 Nikita Khrushchev began to supply Cuba with nuclear missiles, which would put the U.S. within range of an attack . The U.K. would have to defend itself from attack .
 In the religious aspect, Aztecs believed in signs and ... signs . Water sources in the area near the Mayan cities were found .
 Scientific climatic modelling, tree ring data and ... and become men so quickly .