 "Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe"
 The 1960s were in many ways both the best and the worst of times . John F Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961 .
 At the same time, racial strife, a controversial war in Vietnam, and student radicalism started to tear the country apart . The country was torn apart by racial strife and Vietnam War .
 The proud superpower began to learn its limits both in the jungles of Vietnam and on the streets at home . The proud country's proud superpower is learning its limits .
 The decade began with an election that proved symbolic of the changes that were to come . John F Kennedy's New Frontier was the beginning of the decade .
 President Eisenhower had not been able to transfer his popularity to other Republicans . Democrats retained control of Congress through Eisen­ hower's last two years .
 The Republicans unanimously nominated Richard Nixon for president at their 1960 convention . Nixon was nominated at their convention in 1960 .
 During his eight years as Eisenhower's vice presi­ dent, Nixon had gained a reputation as a statesman in his diplomatic travels to Europe and South America . Nixon had a reputation for his diplomatic career .
 In a visit to Moscow, he stood up to Nikita Khrushchev in the so-called kitchen debate (which took place in a model of an American kitchen) over the merits of capitalism and communism .
 Still young at 47, Nixon was known to be a tough and seasoned campaigner . Nixon was still young at the age of 47 at the time .
 Early in 1960, several Democrats believed they had a chance at the nomination . Kennedy was the Democratic presidential candidate in 1960 .
 Lyndon B Johnson of Texas was the Senate majority leader of Texas . He was a member of the Texas Senate majority .
 In the primaries, John F Kennedy, a charismatic, wealthy, and youthful 43-year-old senator from Mas­ sachusetts, defeated his rivals . Kennedy defeated his opponents in the primaries in Massachusetts .
 Going into the convention, he had just enough delegates behind him to win the nomination . He had just about enough delegates to win .
 Lyndon B Johnson chose a Texan to be his vice presidential running mate . The choice proved critical in carrying southern states in the November election .
 The new medium of television was perhaps the most decisive factor in the close race between Nixon and Ken­ nedy. Campaign .
 In the first of four televised debates-the first such debates in campaign history-Kennedy appeared on-screen as more vigorous and comfortable than Nixon . The first such debate was the first such a debate in history .
 On the issues, Kennedy attacked the Eisenhower administration for the recent recession and for permitting the Soviets to take the lead in the arms race . Kennedy also attacked the Soviet Union for allowing the Soviet arms race to lead the lead .
 In reality, what Kennedy called a ""missile gap"" was actually in the United States favor . Kennedy's charges seemed plausible after Sputnik . In reality the gap was actually a U.S. favor .
 Kennedy is the first Catholic presidential candidate since Al Smith . Kennedy's Catholicism has become an issue in the minds of some voters .
 Religious loyalties helped Nixon in rural Protestant areas but helped Kennedy in the large cities . Kennedy in large cities helped him win support in rural areas .
 At 43, Kennedy was the youngest candidate ever to be elected president . Kennedy was 43 when he was elected president in 1964 .
 In his inau­ gural address, Kennedy spoke of ""the torch being passed to a new generation"" and promised to lead the nation into a New Frontier .
 The Democratic president surrounded himself with both business executives such as Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and academics such as economist John Kenneth Galbraith .
 The president chose his younger brother, Robert, for the position of attorney general . Robert is the brother of President Barack Obama . Robert will be the attorney general for the nation's first time .
 John Kennedy and his wife, Jacqueline, brought style, glamour, and an appreciation of the arts to the White House . Kennedy and Jacqueline Kennedy were the first couple to be married to the president .
 The press loved Kennedy's news conferences, and some later likened his administration to the mythical kingdom of Camelot and the court of King Arthur, the subject of a Broadway musical .
 The promises of the New Frontier proved proved dif­ ficult to keep . New Frontier Programs are a series of programs aimed at young innovators .
 Kennedy called for aid to education, federal support for health care, urban renewal, and civil rights . His domestic programs languished in Congress, but his domestic programs were stalled .
 Few of Kennedy's proposals became law during his thousand­ day administration . Most of his proposals were passed later under President Johnson . Most were passed under President Kennedy .
 He faced down big steel executives over a price increase he charged was inflationary and achieved a price rollback . The president of the United States has a history of negotiating with steel executives .
 In 1961, he set up the Peace Corps, which recruited young American volunteers to give technical aid to developing countries . With his domestic programs often blocked, Kennedy increasingly turned his attention to foreign policy issues .
 In 1961 he organized the Alliance for Progress, which promoted land reform and economic development in Latin America . Also in 1961, he organized a land reform movement in Latin American countries .
 Kennedy did persuade Congress to pass the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 . It authorized tariff reductions with the recently formed European Eco­ nomic Community of Western European nations . Kennedy did .
 Kennedy made a major blunder shortly after entering office . Bay of Pigs Invasion was a major mistake for Kennedy .
 Eisenhower approved a Central Intelligence Agency scheme to use Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro's regime in Cuba . He approved a scheme planned under the Eisenhower administration . The scheme was intended to overthrow Castro's government in Cuba.
 The CIA-trained force of Cubans landed at the Bay of Pigs failed to set off a general uprising as planned . The anti-Castro Cubans had little choice but to surrender after Kennedy rejected the idea of using United States forces to save them .
 Castro used the failed invasion to get even more aid from the Soviet Union . Castro used it to strengthen his grip on power . The failed invasion was used as a way to get more Soviet aid from Russia .
 JFK agreed to meet Khrushchev in Vienna in the summer of 1961 . Kennedy agreed to shake off the embarrassment of the Bay of Pigs defeat in the fall of the year .
 In August, the East Germans, with Soviet backing, built a wall around West Berlin . Khrushchev seized the opportunity to threaten the president by renewing demands that the U.S. pull its troops out of Berlin .
 As the wall was being built, Soviet and United States tanks faced off in Berlin . Its purpose was to stop East Germans from fleeing to West Germany .
 Kennedy called up the reserves, but he made no move to stop the completion of the wall . Kennedy calls up the . reserves but he did not make a move to halt the completion .
 Berlin Wall stood as a gloomy symbol of the Cold War until it was torn down by rebellious East Germans in 1989 . The Berlin Wall was a symbol of East Germany's anti-West Berlin unity .
 U.S. reconnaissance planes discovered that the Russians were building underground sites in Cuba for the launching of offen­ sive missiles . The missiles could reach the United States in minutes .
 In exchange for Kennedy's pledge not to invade the island nation, he agreed to remove some U.S. missiles from Turkey . In exchange, the United States removed some missiles and removed some of the missiles .
 A telecommunications hotline was established between Washington and Moscow to make it possible for the leaders of the two countries to talk directly during a crisis . Soon after­ ward, a telecommunications hotline, was established .
 This first step in controlling the testing of nuclear arms was offset by a new round in the arms race for develop­ ing missile and warhead superiority . The arms race will continue to grow in the coming years .
 A different Cold War challenge were the many ""brush­ fire wars" in Africa and Southeast Asia, in which insurgent forces were often aided by Soviet arms and training .
 Such conflicts in the Congo (later renamed Zaire) in Africa and in Laos and Vietnam in Southeast Asia convinced the Ken­ nedy administration to adopt a policy of flexible response . Such conflicts were in Africa, Vietnam and Laos .
 Kennedy and McNamara increased spending on conventional arms and mobile military forces . Move away from Dulles' idea of massive retaliation and reliance on nuclear weapons . The two presidents spent more on conventional weapons and mobile forces .
 The flexible-response policy reduces the risk of using nuclear weapons . It also increases the temptation to send elite special forces such as the Green Berets into combat .
 Millions of stunned Americans were fixed to their tele­ visions for days after Kennedy's murder . Even witnessed the killing of the alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, two days after the president's death .
 The Warren Commis­ sion, headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren, concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin . Oswald was found to have killed President Lincoln Lincoln in 1917 .
 For many Americans, the tragedy in Dallas and doubts about the Warren Commission marked the beginning of a loss of credibility in government . The Warren Commission is now in charge of the White House .
 His belligerent Cold War rhetoric has drawn criticism from some historians . However, more recently, some historians have criticized him for his rhetoric .
 Lyndon Johnson took the oath of office aboard a plane at the Dallas airport . Two hours after the Kennedy assassination, he took the presidential oath aboard the plane . Johnson's Great Society was the first president of the White House .
 As a native of rural west Texas and a graduate of a little-known teacher's college, he seemed very unsophisticated compared to the wealthy, Harvard-educated Kennedy . On the one hand, as a . native of . rural Texas .
 Johnson was a skilled politician who had started his career as a devoted Roosevelt Democrat during the Great Depression . On the other hand, Johnson was skilled politician .
 As the new president, Johnson was determined to expand the social reforms of the New Deal . Johnson was the first president of the White House to be elected .
 During his almost 30 years in Congress, he had learned how to get things done . He says he had to learn how to do things like getting things done.
 Johnson persuaded Congress to pass an expanded version of Kennedy's civil rights bill . Kennedy's proposal for an income tax cut also included a tax cut .
 The measure sparked an increase in jobs, consumer spending, and a long period of economic expansion in the sixties . The latter measure led to an increased in jobs and consumer spending .
 Michael Harrington's best-selling book, The Other America, helped to focus national attention on poverty . The War on Poverty: 40 million Americans still live in poverty .
 The Democratic Congress gave the president almost everything he asked for by creating the Office of Economic Opportunity . The agency is given a billion-dollar budget .
 The OEO spon­ sored a wide variety of self-help programs for the poor . Head Start for preschoolers, the Job Corps for vocational education, literacy programs, and legal services .
 The controversial Community Action Program allowed the poor to run antipoverty programs in their own neighborhoods . The program was created by the poor and the poor .
 Some of Johnson's programs produced results, while others did not . Like the New Deal, some of his programs did not produce results .
 The War on Poverty did significantly reduce the number of American families living in poverty . It was cut back to pay for the more costly Vietnam War . Nevertheless, before being cut back, it was the most successful war ever .
 President Johnson and his running mate, Senator Hubert Humphrey, went into the 1964 election with a clearly liberal agenda . The Election of 1964 was the first time President Johnson had been elected to the presidency .
 Republicans nominated a staunch conservative, Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, who advocated ending the welfare state, including TVA and Social Security . In contrast, the GOP nominated a conservative, conservative, who called TVA a welfare state .
 A TV ad by the Democrats pictured Goldwater as a dangerous extremist, who would be quick to involve the U.S. in nuclear war . Goldwater would have been quick to include the United States in a nuclear war, Democrats say .
 The doomed Goldwater cam­ paign did energize young conservatives and introduced new conservative voices, such as former film actor and TV host Ronald Reagan of California .
 Johnson won the election by a landslide, taking 61 percent of the popular vote . FDR's landslide of 1936 was a higher figure than FDR's of 1936 .
 Democrats now control both houses of Congress by better than a two-thirds margin . In addition, Democrats now controlled both houses in Congress by more than 2,000 votes .
 A Demo­ cratic president and Congress were in a position to pass the economic and social reforms originally proposed by President Truman in the 1940s . President Truman proposed the reforms in the late 1940s, but they were never passed .
 Johnson's list of legislative achievements from 1963 to 1966 is long and includes new programs that would have lasting effects on U.S. society . Great Society Reforms Reforms were Johnson's first legislative achievements .
 Congress passed regulations of the automobile industry that would save hundreds of thousands of lives in the following years . Congress passed the regulations in response to Ralph Nader's book Unsafe at Any Speed .
 Lady Bird Johnson contributed to improving the environment with her Beautify America campaign . The Highway Beautification Act that removed billboards from federal roads was passed by LBJ's wife .
 Critics have attacked Johnson's Great Society for making unrealistic promises to eliminate poverty . Critics say it was inefficient and very costly .
 The programs gave vitally needed assistance to millions of Americans who had previously been forgotten or ignored . The poor, the disabled, and the elderly were among those who had been forgotten .
 Johnson himself would jeopardize the Demo­ crat's vast domestic achievements by escalating the war in Vietnam-a war that resulted in higher taxes and inflation . Johnson's war resulted from higher taxes, inflation and higher taxes .
 Southern president succeeded in persuading Congress to enact the most important civil rights laws since Reconstruction . Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965 were enacted in 1965 and 1965 .
 Johnson managed to persuade both a majority of Democrats and some Republicans in Congress to pass the 1964 Civil Rights Act . The act made segre­ gation illegal in all public facilities, including hotels and restaurants, illegal in public facilities .
 This act set up the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to end discrimi­ nation in employment on the basis of race, religion, sex, or national origin . This act also set up a commission to end discrimination in employment .
 It abolished the practice of collecting a poll tax, one of the measures that, for decades, had discouraged poor people from voting .
 President John­ son persuaded Congress to pass the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . The following year, after the killings and brutality in Selma, Alabama, against the voting rights marches led by Martin Luther King Jr., President John] King Jr. The act was passed by Congress .
 This act ended literacy tests and provided federal registrars in areas where blacks were kept from voting . This act also provided federal registry for areas where black were kept out of voting .
 The impact was most dramatic in the Deep South, where African Americans could vote for the first time since Reconstruction . African Americans were able to vote in the first place since the Reconstruction era .
 The civil rights movement gained momentum during the Kennedy and Johnson presidencies . Civil Rights and Conflict is the subject of this week's Daily Documentary .
 A very close election in 1960 influenced President Kennedy not to press the issue of civil rights, lest he alienate white voters . President Kennedy did not push the issue in the wake of the 1960s .
 Civil rights activists and freedom riders were met with beatings, bombings, and murder by white extremists . Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was the leader of the civil rights movement in the South .
 Martin Luther King Jr. remained committed to nonviolent protests against segregation . King and others were jailed in Birmingham, Alabama, for what local authorities judged to be an illegal march .
 King's letter moved President Kennedy to support a tougher civil rights bill . King wrote that he wanted to pass a tougher bill on civil rights . King was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi in 1968 .
 The national outrage moved President Johnson to send federal troops to protect King and other marchers . King and others were trying to petition the state government . President Johnson sent federal troops in order to protect them .
 Young African Americans are losing patience with the slow progress toward equality and the continued violence against their people by white extremists . Nevertheless, young African Amer­ icans were losing patience .
 Elijah Muhammad preached black nationalism, separatism, and self­improvement . Malcolm X was a leader of the Black Muslim movement . He preached a new cultural identity based on Africa and Islam .
 The movement had already attracted thousands of followers by the time a young man became a convert while serving in prison . The young man is a convert to the movement while he is serving time .
 Malcolm X left prison in 1952, acquired a reputa­ tion as the movement's most controversial voice . He adopted the name Malcolm X . Malcolm X was a member of the X movement .
 He criticized King as ""an Uncle Tom"" and advocated self-defense-using black violence to counter white violence . He also called King an "Uncle Tom" and said black violence was necessary to counter the violence of whites .
 He eventually left the Black Muslims and moved away from defending violence . But he was assassinated by black opponents in 1965 .
 The Autobiography of Malcolm X remains an engaging testimony to one man's development from a petty criminal into a major leader . Malcolm X is an engaging autobiography .
 SNCC chairman, Stokely Carmichael, repudiated nonviolence and advocated "black power" and racial separatism . Carmichael was the chairman of SNCC, the leader of the SNCC .
 In 1966, Huey Newton, Bobby Seale and other militants organized the Black Pan­ thers as a revolutionary socialist movement advocating self-rule for U.S. blacks . The Black Pan-thers were organized by Huey . Newton, Seale, and others .
 Race riots continued to erupt each summer in black neighborhoods of major cities through 1968 with increasing casualties and destruction of property .
 Whites suspect that black extremists and revolutionaries are behind the violence . Rioters shouting slogans-""Bum baby, bum"" and ""Get whitey""-made whites suspect black extremists .
 There was little evidence that the small Black Power movement was responsible for the violence . Little evidence, however, that the violence was linked to the small movement .
 By the mid-1960s, civil rights had spread far beyond de Jure segregation practiced under the law in the South . Now included the de facto segregation and discrimination caused by racist attitudes in the North and West .
 His effort to use peaceful marches in urban centers of the North, such as Chicago, met with little success . His efforts in the North were unsuccessful .
 King also broke with President Johnson over the Vietnam War because that war was beginning to drain money from social programs . King broke with Johnson over that war because it was draining money from programs .
 In April 1968, the nation went into shock over the news that King, while standing on a motel balcony in Memphis, Tennessee, had been shot and killed by a white man . King was standing on the balcony of a motel when he was killed .
 The violence did not reflect the ide­ als of the murdered leader, but it did reveal the anger and frustrations among African Americans in both the North and the South .
 Violence fed a growing ""white backlash,"" especially among white blue-collar voters, to the civil rights movement, which was soon reflected in election results . Violence feeds a growing "white backlash" to the 'white backlash' to the movement .
 Earl Warren had an impact on the nation comparable to that of John Marshall in the early 1800s . As chief justice of the Supreme Court from 1953 to 1969, Warren had impact comparable to Marshall's in the 1800s.
 Warren's decision in the desegregation case of Brown Board of Education of Topeka was by far the most important case of the 20th century involving race relations . Warren: "Brown Board of Eds. Brown Board is by far most important in the history of race relations"
 The Warren Court made a series of decisions that profoundly affected the criminal justice system, state political systems, and the definition of individual rights . Then in the 1960s, the Warren Court ruled that individual rights can be defined by the law .
 Before Warren's tenure as chief justice, the Supreme Court had concentrated on protecting property rights . Before Warren, the high court had focused on property rights, the court had been focusing on property .
 During and after his tenure, the Court focused more on protecting individual rights . The Court was more focused on individual rights than in the 1980s .
 Several decisions of the Warren Court concerned a defendant's rights . The Warren Court made several decisions concerning defendant rights .
 Before 1962, many states had districts that strongly favored rural areas to the disadvan­ tage of cities . Many states included at least one house of its legislature (usually the senate) that had districts strongly favoring rural areas . The state legislature was reapportioned in 1962 .
 In the landmark case of Baker Carr , the Warren Court declared this practice unconstitutional . Baker Carr was declared unconstitutional in Baker Carr case .
 In Baker and later cases, the Court established the principle of ""one man, one vote,"" meaning that election dis­ tricts would have to be redrawn to provide equal representation for all citizens .
 Warren Court's defense of the rights of unpopular individuals, including people accused of crimes, provoked a storm of controversy . The Warren Court defended the right of unpopular people, including those accused of crime .
 Both supporters and critics agreed that the Warren Court prof oundly changed the interpretation of constitutional rights . The Warren Court has been criticized for its interpretation of the Constitution .
 In the early and midl 960s, various liberal groups began to identify with blacks' struggle against oppressive controls and laws . Social Revolutions and Cultural Movements were social movements .
 First group to rebel against established authority were college and university students . First such group were college students .
 In 1962, a newly formed radical student organization called Students for a Democratic Society held a meeting in Port Huron, Michigan . Students for the Democratic Society was founded by students at the time .
 Follow­ ing the leadership of Tom Hayden, the group issued a declaration of purposes known as the Port Huron Statement . The group is known for its anti-war efforts .
 It called for university decisions to be made through participatory democracy . Students would have a voice in decisions affecting their lives, it said .
 Activists who supported Hayden's ideas became known as the New Left . Activists and intellectuals who supported his ideas later became known known as 'New Left'
 Berkeley students demanded an end to university restrictions on student politi­ cal activities . Calling their cause the Free Speech Movement, Berkeley students called it the "Free Speech Movement" Students called for an end of university restrictions .
 By the mid-l 960s, students across the country were protesting a variety of university rules, including those against drinking and dorm visits by members of the opposite sex . Students across the U.S. were protesting against drinking, dorm visits and dorms .
 They also demanded a greater voice in the government of the university . The students are demanding greater voices in government .
 Student demonstrations grew with the escalation of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . Demonstrations grew in response to the escalation in the war .
 Hundreds of campuses were disrupted or closed down by antiwar protests . Antiwar protests were held on campuses across the world .
 The most radical fringe of the SDS, known as the Weathermen, embraced violence and vandalism in their attacks on American institutions . The Weathermen were known for their violent and violent attacks on U.S. institutions .
 In the eyes of most Americans, the Weathermen's extremist acts and language discredited the early idealism of the New Left . Most Americans believe the Weatherman's extremism discredited the idealism that led to their radicalism .
 The political protests of the New Left went hand in hand with a new coun­ terculture that was expressed by young people in rebellious styles of dress, music, drug use, and, for some, communal living .
 The apparent dress code of the ""hippies"" and ""flower children"" of the 1960s included long hair, beards, beads, and jeans . The 'flower children' dress code was long hair and beards .
 The folk music of Joan Baez and Bob Dylan gave voice to the younger generation . The rock music of the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, and Jim Morrison provided the beat and lyrics for the counterculture .
 As a result of experimenting with hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD or becoming addicted to various other drugs, some young people destroyed their lives . Some young people became addicted to LSD or become addicted to other drugs . However, as a result, many young people have lost their lives.
 The counterculture's excesses and the economic uncertainties of the times led to its demise in the 1970s . The counter-culture was the subject of numerous scandals .
 In Retrospect: The baby boomers believed fervently in the ideals of a democratic society . The generation that came of age in the 1960s believed strongly in democratic society. The generation of baby boomeros believed fervent in the ideal of democracy .
 They hoped to slay the dragons of unresponsive authority, poverty, racism, and war . They hoped they hoped they would slay the dragon .
 The impatience of some activists with change, the use of violence, and the spread of self-destructive behavior discredited their cause in the eyes of others, particularly older Americans . How­ ever, some activists' impatience with change and violence has discredited them, especially older Americans,
 Many Americans' attitudes toward sexual expression continued beyond the 1960s . The counterculture was a major part of the counterculture that continued beyond that era .
 Traditional beliefs about sexual conduct had originally been challenged in the late 1940s and 1950s by the pioneering surveys of sexual practice conducted by Alfred Kinsey . Kinsey's survey of sexual conduct was conducted by Kinsey in the 1950s .
 His research indicated that premarital sex, marital infidelity, and homosexual­­ ity were more common than anyone had suspected . The research was conducted by researchers at the University of San Francisco .
 Medicine (antibiotics for venereal disease) and science also contributed to changing attitudes about engaging in casual sex with a num­ ber of partners .
 Sex appeared to be just one more consumer product, according to the study . The study found that overtly sexual themes in advertisements, magazines, and movies made sex appear to be a consumer product .
 How deeply the so-called sexual revolution changed the behavior of the majority of Americans is open to question . How deeply it changed the way Americans think about sex is open question .
 There is little doubt, however, that premarital sex, contraception, abortion, and homosexuality became practiced more openly . There is also little doubt that contraception and abortion became more openly in the 1960s .
 Betty Friedan's book The Feminine Mys­ tique gave the movement a new direction . She encouraged middle-class women to seek fulfillment in professional careers in addition to filling roles of wife, mother, and homemaker .
 In 1966, Friedan helped found the National Organization for Women . Friedan adopted the activist tactics of other civil rights movements to secure equal treatment of women .
 These measures prohibited discrimination in employment and compensation on the basis of gender, but had been poorly enforced . These measures were meant to protect people from discrimination, but were not properly enforced .
 NOW and other groups campaigned hard for the ratification of the ERA . The ERA just missed acceptance by the required 38 states .
 Conservatives feared the movement threatened the traditional roles of women . It was defeated in part because of a growing reaction against feminism .
 Even without the ERA, the women's movement had changed attitudes and hiring practices . Even without it, the movement had made fundamental changes in attitudes .
 American society at the beginning of the 21st century was less a man's world . Although women still experienced the ""glass ceiling"" in the corporate world, American society was less and less a men's world at the start of the century .
 The Vietnam War to 1969 was the most divisive issue in the 1960s . None of the divisive issues in the '60s was as tragic as the war in Vietnam .
 Some 2. million Americans served in the Vietnam War . 58,000 died in a failed effort to prevent the takeover of South Vietnam by communist North Vietnam .
 Vietnam hardly mentioned in the election debates of 1960 between Nixon and Kennedy . Vietnam was hardly mentioned during the 1960 presidential election debates . Vietnam is now a major topic of discussion .
 U.S. involvement was minimal at that time, but every year there­ after, it loomed larger . Every year, there­after, the United States involvement loomed bigger and larger . It eventually dominated the presidency of Lyndon Johnson and the nation .
 President Kennedy adopted Eisenhower's domino theory that, if Communist forces overthrew South Vietnam's govern­ment, they would quickly overrun other countries of Southeast Asia-Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia .
 ADVANCED PLACEMENT® EXAM guarded weapons and facilities . Pre-departmentalized facilities and facilities are guarded by armed forces .
 By 1963, there were more than 16,000 U.S. troops in South Vietnam in support, not combat, roles . By that time, more than 15,000 troops were in support of Vietnam's government .
 U.S. ally in South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem, was not popular with the United States in Vietnam . Diem was not a popular leader in Vietnam, and was assassinated in 1968 .
 Buddhist monks set themselves on fire in the streets to protest Diem's policies . Diem and his government steadily lost the support of peasants in the countryside .
 Kennedy began to question whether the South Vietnamese could win ""their war"" against Communist insurgents . Kennedy was skeptical of the South Vietnam's ability to win their war against Communists .
 Just two weeks before Kennedy himself was assassinated in Dallas, Diem was over­ thrown and killed by South Vietnamese generals . Diem's death came just weeks before JFK's assassination .
 Historians learned that the generals acted with the knowledge of the Kennedy administration . Historians later learned that Kennedy administration knew of the actions .
 Lyndon Johnson became president just as things began to fall apart in South Vietnam . The Tonkin Gulf Resolution was approved by the U.S. Senate in 1964 .
 In August 1964, President Johnson and Congress took a fateful turn in policy . President Johnson took office in August 1964 .
 Johnson made use of a naval incident in the Gulf of Tonkin to secure congressional authorization for U.S. forces going into combat . Johnson secured congressional authorization to go into combat in Vietnam .
 North Vietnamese gunboats had fired on U.S. warships in the Gulf of Tonkin . Alleg­ edly, North Vietnam gunboats fired on United States warships . Alleged incident occurred in the early 1950s .
 The president persuaded Congress that this aggressive act was suf­ ficient reason for a military response by the U.S. President Obama persuaded Congress to act .
 Congress voted its approval of the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, which basically gave the president, as commander in chief, a blank check to take "all necessary measures" to protect U.S. interests in Vietnam . Congress voted in favor of the resolution, giving the president the power to take
 Critics later called the full-scale use of U.S. forces in Vietnam an ille­ gal war . The war was not declared by Congress, as the Constitution requires . Critics called the war an 'ille­gal war'
 Congress, however, did not have this concern and did not withdraw its resolution . Congress will continue to vote on the issue of the bill .
 Most Americans supported the effort to contain com­ munism in Southeast Asia . Until 1968, most Americans supported efforts to contain the region .
 Johnson was caught in a political dilemma to which there was no good solution . Johnson faced no good solutions to the problem .
 In 1965, the United States military and most of the president's foreign policy advisers recommended expanding operations in Vietnam to save the Saigon government . The U.S. military says the war should have been allowed to be expanded .
 Operation Rolling Thunder was a prolonged air attack using B-52 bombers against targets in North Vietnam . After a Vietcong attack on a U.S. base at Pleiku in 1965, Johnson authorized the attack . The operation was a response to an attack on the United States base in Ple
 In April, the president decided to use U.S. combat troops for the first time to fight the Vietcong . President Barack Obama made the decision to use combat troops in Vietnam .
 By the end of 1965, over 184,000 U.S. troops were in Vietnam, and most were engaged in a combat role . Most of the troops were involved in combat .
 Johnson continued a step-by-step escalation of U.S. involvement in the war . Johnson continued to escalate the war in Afghanistan .
 By the end of 1967, the U.S. had over 485,000 troops in Vietnam . 16,000 Americans had already died in the conflict . Over 48,000 American troops had already been deployed to Vietnam in 1967 .
 Misinformation from military and civilian leaders combined with Johnson's reluctance to speak frankly with the American people about the scope and the costs of the war created what the media called a credibility gap .
 Johnson always hoped that more military pressure would bring the North Vietnamese to the peace table . Johnson hoped that a little more pressure would have helped bring the peace talks to an end .
 The most damaging knowledge gap, however, may have been within the inner circles of government . The gap may be due to the lack of knowledge in government circles .
 Robert McNamara in his memoirs concluded that the leaders in Washington had failed to understand both the enemy and the nature of the war .
 The supporters of the war, the ""hawks,"" believed that the war was an act of Soviet-backed Communist aggression against South Vietnam and that it was part of a master plan to conquer all of Southeast Asia . The "hawks" believe that the Vietnam War was an attempt to conquer
 The opponents of the war, the ""doves,"" viewed the conflict as a civil war fought by Vietnamese nationalists and some Communists . They wanted to unite their country by overthrowing a corrupt Saigon government .
 Some Americans opposed the war because of its costs in lives and money . Some Americans oppose the war due to its costs .
 They believed the billions spent in Vietnam could be better spent on the cities and the poor in the U.S. They said the billions could be spent instead on the poor and the cities .
 Students on college campuses opposed draft draft draft-eligible students . Vietnam draft students would be drafted into the military and shipped off to Vietnam . Students opposed draft students being drafted .
 In Novem­ ber 1967, Senator Eugene F McCarthy of Minnesota became the first antiwar advocate to challenge Johnson for the 1968 Democratic presidential nomination . McCarthy was the first candidate to challenge President Johnson in 1968 .
 The Vietcong launched an all-out surprise attack on almost every pro­ vincial capital and American base in South Vietnam in 1968 . The Tet Offensive took place on the occasion of their Lunar New Year in January 1968 .
 The U.S. military counterattacked, inflicted much heavier losses on the Vietcong, and recovered the lost territory . Although the attack took a fearful toll in the cities, the United States . The United States suffered heavy losses in the attack .
 The American military victory proved irrelevant to the way the Tet Offensive was interpreted at home . Even so, in political terms, the U.S. military victory was irrelevant .
 The destruction viewed by millions on the TV news appeared as a colossal setback for Johnson's Vietnam policy . The destruction was viewed as a huge setback for the Vietnam War .
 For the Vietcong and North Vietnamese, Tet was a tremendous political victory in demoralizing the American public . The Tet victory was a huge political victory for the North Vietnamese .
 In the New Hampshire primary in February, McCarthy took 42 percent of the vote against Johnson . McCarthy won the primary in New Hampshire in February .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff responded to Tet by re­ questing for 200,000 more troops to win the war . LBJ ended the war with a troop surge of more than 100,000 .
 By this time, the group of experienced Cold War diplomats who advised Johnson had turned against further escalation of the war .
 On March 31, 1968, President Johnson told the American people that he would limit the bombing of North Vietnam and negotiate peace . President Johnson went on television to say he would reduce the bombing and talk peace talks .
 He then surprised everyone by announcing that he would not run again for president . He then announced he would never run again .
 In May 1968, peace talks between North Vietnam, South Vietnam, and the United States started in Paris . The talks were quickly deadlocked over minor issues .
 The escala­ tion of the number of U.S. troops in Vietnam had stopped, but under the next administration it would be reversed . Under the next president it will be reversed, the president said .
 Few years in U.S. history were as troubled or violent as 1968 . 1968 was one of the most troubled years in American history .
 The Tet offensive and the withdrawal of Johnson from the presidential race were followed by the senseless murder of Martin Luther King Jr. and destructive riots in cities across the country . The Vietnam War was the first major war of its kind in Vietnam .
 As the year unfolded, Americans wondered if their nation was coming apart from internal conflicts . The war issue, the race issue, and the generation gap between the baby boomers and their parents were among the issues Americans faced .
 Four years later, he decided to enter the presidential race after McCarthy's strong showing in New Hampshire . McCarthy won the New Hampshire primary in 2004 .
 Bobby Kennedy was more effective than McCarthy in mobilizing the traditional Democratic blue-collar and minority vote . Kennedy was a popular figure in the Democratic Party in the 1960s and '60s .
 On June 5, 1968, he won a major victory in California's primary . Immediately after his victory speech, he was shot and killed by a young Arab nationalist who opposed Kennedy's support for Israel .
 After Robert Kennedy's death, the election of 1968 turned into a three-way race between two conservatives-George Wallace and Richard Nixonand one liberal, Vice President Hubert Humphrey . The election was held in 1968 .
 Hubert Humphrey had enough delegates to win the nomination at the Democratic Convention in Chicago . Humphrey won the nomination in 1964 .
 As vice president, he had loyally supported Johnson's domestic and foreign policies . He had been a staunch supporter of Johnson .
 He controlled the convention, but the antiwar demonstrators were determined to control the streets . The anti-war demonstrators controlled the streets, and the convention .
 Early polls showed Humphrey was a clear underdog in a nation sick of disorder and protest . Humphrey left the con­ vention as the nominee of a badly divided Democratic party .
 Growing hostility to desegregation, antiwar protests, and race riots was tapped by Governor George Wallace of Alabama . Wallace tapped the growing hostility of many whites to federal desEGregation . Wallace was governor of Alabama during the 1960s .
 Wallace was the first politician of late-20th-century America to marshal the general resentment against the Washington establishment and the two-party system . Wallace was also the first person to take on the two parties in a national political system .
 He ran for president as the self-nominated candidate of the American Independent party . He hoped to win enough electoral votes to throw the election into the House of Representatives .
 Many observers thought Richard Nixon's political career had ended in 1962 after unsuccessful run for governor of California . Nixon ran for governor in California in 1962, but was re-elected to the presidency .
 In 1968, Nixon announced his candidacy and soon became the front-runner in the Republican primaries . Nixon was a new, more confident and less negative Nixon . He was a more confident, less negative candidate .
 The favorite of the party regulars, he had little trouble securing his nomination at the Republican convention . He was a favorite of party regulars .
 For his running mate, he selected Governor Spiro Agnew of Maryland, whose rhetoric was similar to that of George Wallace . Governor Agnew's rhetoric was reminiscent of that of Wallace .
 Wallace and Nixon started strong, but Democrats began to catch up, especially in northern urban centers . Humphrey preached to the faithful of the old New Deal coalition . Wallace won the White House in 1968 .
 On election night, Nixon defeated Humphrey by a very close popular vote but took a substantial majority of the electoral vote . The three-candidate election would end up in the House of Representatives . Nixon's victory over Humphrey ended any threat that the House would be in the U.
 The significance of the 1968 election is clear in the combined total of Nixon's and Wallace's popular vote of almost 57 percent . Wallace's victory over Nixon was the first time Wallace won a presidential election in 1968 .
 Apparently, most Americans wanted a time out to heal the wounds inflicted on the national psyche by the upheavals of the 1960s . The 1960s were a time for a time to heal .
 Supporters of Nixon and Wallace had had enough of protest, violence, permissiveness, the counterculture, drugs, and federal intervention in social institutions . They were tired of protest .
 Elections in the 1970s and 1980s would confirm that the tide was turning against New Deal liberalism in favor of the conservatives . The tide was changing in the 70s and 80s and 70s .
 Marked by failures in both political and military leadership, the war initiated a period of widespread distrust of the government . The war was marked by failures by both political, military leadership .
 Critics of the war argued that the U.S. failed in Vietnam because neither the government nor the military understood the nature of the conflict . Critics said the United States failed in the war because the government and the military failed to understand the war's nature .
 Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon viewed the conflict strictly in Cold War terms as an act of aggression by the Communist ""monolith"" to take over another part of the world . Instead of a civil war in which a former colony was trying to gain its independence from Western colo
 The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam , laments that members of the Johnson administration lacked Asian experts to advise them on the formulation of Vietnam policy . Johnson administration lacks Asian experts .
 General William Westmoreland and other military lead­ ers of the era blamed the civilian government for placing restrictions on the conduct of the war that prevented the military from winning it . In contrast, General William Wartley and other .
 In their view, the war could have been won if only the United States military had been permitted to take the offensive and bring the war to a swift conclu­ sion .
 The generals blamed the media for turning the U.S. people against the war . The media has been blamed for leading the opposition to the war.
 Westmoreland and others argued that the telecasts of the Tet Offensive forced a change in the conduct of the war, just at the point that the U.S. military was beginning to win it . The telecasts changed the way the war was conducted .
 Many observers have attempted to extract lessons from Vietnam, hoping that the mistakes of the past can be avoided in the future . Vietnam is one of the most important countries in the world .
 Critics say the most important mistake was imposing an unsatisfactory regime on a country . The U.S. should not go into a war if no vital national interests are at stake, they say .
 Critics concluded that a president and Congress should not lead the nation into future war unless they are confident that they can rally and sustain the support of the American people behind the effort over time .
 To yield to force in Vietnam would weaken confidence, undermine independence of many lands, and would whet the appetite of aggression . To yield would weaken that confidence, would undermine the independence of some lands .
 Johnson: "We would have to fight in one land, then another in another- or abandon much of Asia to the domina­ tion of Communists" Johnson: We would have been better off leaving Asia to Communist China .
 The foreign policy position for Vietnam explained in the excerpt is most directly based on the practice of brinkmanship the process of decolonization . The belief in the domino theory the principle of mutually assured destruction 2.
 He used United States troops in a combat role in Vietnam . He attempted to negotiate with North Vietnam He limited the number of troops sent to Vietnam He turned over all decision making to the generals .
 Selma to Montgomery march, 1965, Bruce Davidson/Magnum Photo/Library of Congress . 4.5 million people marched in Selma, Alabama, on March 4, 1965 .
 There was white backlash against blacks for demanding too much . Race riots sparked in cities across the nation . Congress passed the most effective voting rights legislation since Reconstruction .
 Preparation for the ADVANCED PLACEMENT® EXAM . Questions 6-8 refer to the excerpt below .
 Equal Rights Constitutional Amendment Enforce Law Banning Sex Discrimination in Employment . Maternity Leave Rights in Employment and in Social Security Benefits . Equal and Unsegregated Education Equal Job training Opportunities and Allowances for Women in Poverty Rights of Women to Control Their Reproductive Lives .
 Child care Empowerment of wives is key to women's empowerment . Reproduction rights and child care are important issues for women in the community .
 Greater assistance with child care New employment opportunities . Passage of the Equal Rights Amendment increased reproductive rights .
 Women should avoid the male-dominated business world by cooper­­ ating with other businesswomen . Women should not avoid male dominated world by avoiding male dominated business .
 Women should have separate finances to protect themselves from the rising divorce rate . Women should be able to keep separate finances from each other to protect their marriage .
 Women should seek fulfillment in professional careers in addition to their roles as wives and mothers, says author . Women should also seek a career as a professional wife and mother-in-law .
 Using the excerpt, explain ONE way the Great Society attacked poverty . Briefly explain ONE of Johnson's health care programs that had a lasting impact on U.S. society . Use the excerpt to answer a, b, c, c and c questions about Johnson .
 Answer a, b, and a) Briefly explain ONE way the Warren Court expanded the rights of defendants in the criminal justice system . Briefly analyze the impact of the ""one man, one vote"" ruling on American politics .
 "We shall have to wait and see." -William E Leuchtenburg, historian, A Troubled Feast, 1973 . 4.
 Using the excerpt, explain how the younger generation challenged the higher education authorities during the 1960s . Briefly explain how they challenged the government during the Vietnam War . Use the excerpt to help students understand today's current trends in education .
 Strong essays use words that express the writer's ideas clearly with carefully chosen words rather than bland, general words . Strong essays should be written with careful choice of words, not bland or vague . Essays are written with carefully selected words .
 In each pair of sentences below, chose the sentence that uses the most precise words . Choose the words that use the most exact words . Use the words in the sentences to express your thoughts .
 Lyndon Johnson A. Johnson had spent many years in Congress trying to pass laws . Lyndon Johnson had been in Congress for decades .
 George Wallace opposed things that were happening . George Wallace was a tough guy who opposed things happening . Wallace died in 1968 at the age of 92 .