 He would establish the first communist state in the western hemisphere . The Soviet Union would be the first state of communist state .
 For many years, Batista, supported by the United States, led a corrupt and repressive regime . Batista's regime was known as one of the most repressive regimes in the world .
 He was an ally of many American corporations that were involved in sugar, mining and utilities, even casinos . But he was also a foe of many corporations involved in mining, mining, utilities, and casinos .
 As soon as he took over, he began to reduce American influence in the economy, taking over American-dominated industries, he said . He said. "As soon as [Obama] took over," he said, "He began to . reduce American."
 During my early military career, two events took place in Cuba that have remained firmly in my mind . During his early career, I was involved in the Cuban Revolution .
 As early as 1960, President Eisenhower authorized the Central Intelligence Agency to recruit some 1,400 Cuban exiles living in Miami . President Dwight Eisenhower was intent on overthrowing Castro, as early as 1959 .
 These exiles were funded and trained by the CIA in preparation for an invasion scheduled for April 1961 . The CIA funded the exiles and trained them to prepare for the invasion .
 The site chosen for the landing was an isolated spot on the southern part of the island, known as the Bay of Pigs . The landing site was a remote spot on an isolated stretch of the coast known as The Bay of Pig .
 Cuban intelligence was well-informed of what was to take place, Cuban officials say . Apparently, Cuban intelligence had been informed of what to do .
 The invaders were pinned down on the beach and with no air support, Castro's forces easily defeated the exile group . Castro forces were able to defeat the invaders without air support from the air .
 It was reported that Filipino experts in guerilla warfare, among them Col. Col. Arsenia, were among them . It was also reported that the charismatic Col. Raul Reyes was a key figure in the guerillas .
 Napoleon Valeriano, took part in the planning and staging of the invasion . Napoleon was a member of the French army who was involved in the invasion of France .
 Valeriano, a member of Philippine Constabulary Academy, Class 1937, had built up quite a reputation in the fight against communist insurgents in the Philippines . Valerano, a Filipino national, was killed in a battle with communist insurgents .
 As head of the famed 7th Battalion Combat Team of the Philippine Army, he carved out an outstanding reputation as a field commander . He operated in the Southern Tagalog and Central Luzon provinces of the Philippines .
 Pedro Q Molina, Philippine Air Force; and Commodore Juan Magluyan, Philippine Navy . Pedro Molina is the Air Force's first female air force commander . Juan Molina was the first female commander in the Philippine Navy.
 Valeriano later served in South Vietnam where he became romantically involved with a prominent Manila socialite . The affair ended his career in the Philippine military .
 In October 1962, an American U-2 spy plane, flying over Cuba, took photos of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles being assembled for installation . The U.S. spy plane flew over Cuba in October 1962 to take photos of the missiles .
 The nuclear threat just 90 miles from the United States mainland would change the complexion of the rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The United States and Russia would have a nuclear war .
 The crisis would last for 13 days, and for awhile it appeared that the world was on the brink of nuclear warfare . It would be the first time the world had seen nuclear war .
 President Kennedy decided on a naval blockade of the island, followed by an ultimatum demanding that the existing missiles be removed . President John F Kennedy decided to take measured approach to the island .
 President Obama made the announcement in a dramatic television address to the American people . He revealed the presence of the missiles in Cuba and his decision to institute quarantine proceedings .
 In the face of enormous tensions, a compromise was reached after days of delicate and secret negotiations . A compromise has been reached after a series of days of tension .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles in exchange for a promise by the U.S. not to invade Cuba . Nikita was prime minister of Soviet Union in 1960s and 1961s .
 The United States also agreed to remove intermediate nuclear missiles located in Turkey, close to the Soviet Union . The U.S. also privately agreed that the missiles would be removed from Turkey .
 During the crisis, I was stationed at Clark Air Base performing duties at their Air Defense Command Center, along with other Philippine Air Force officers detailed with the 13th Air Force .
 The Americans at Clark were on full, heightened alert during the 13-day standoff . The Americans were at Clark during the standoff .
 One could sense the tension in the air as they prepared for what could have been the beginning of a nuclear holocaust, signaling the start of a third world war . The tension was palpable as the world prepared for a third war .
 Health and education have greatly improved under generous State entitlements . State of England's health and education has greatly improved since 1996 .
 According to Wikipedia, Cuba has universal healthcare and no shortage of medical personnel . According to a Wikipedia report, there is no shortage in medical personnel in Cuba .
 It has the highest doctor-to-population ratio in the world, and sends thousands of doctors to more than 40 countries all over the world . Thousands of doctors are sent to work in 40 countries around the globe .
 Its literacy is the 10th highest globally due to the provision of free education at every level . The country has the highest literacy in the world and is ranked 10th in literacy .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union, Cuba's main benefactor, greatly affected the island's economy . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the collapse of its Soviet Union .
 The continuing U.S. trade embargo has imposed spartan living conditions on the people . This, coupled with the continuing United States trade embargo, has . This . coupled with . the continuing trade embargo on the country, has imposed . living conditions .
 Among the most famous exports are some of the best baseball players in the U.S. Baseball players in America .