 Throughout history Poland a corridor of attack on Russia so Stalin wanted a Communist gov. Security USSR invaded from west twice . USSR invaded Poland twice in the early 1950s and 1960s . Poland was a corridor for Soviet invasion of Poland .
 West thought Stalin's motives were political to spread Communism and expand Soviet empire throughout Europe . Soviets freed most of E.Europe from Nazis, but stayed in occupation of countries and established Communist governments . Stalin wanted a BUFFER ZONE of soviet/friendly states .
 Communists lost heavily in general election but continued Guerilla war with help of close communists . Britian provided troops and money to greece and turkey, but ran out in early 1947 .
 Gave aid to all war-torn european countries to help them reequip their factories, revive agriculture and trade . Announced by U.S. seceratry of state, General George Marshall, in June 1947 .
 Stalin blockaded all routes by land and rail into West Berlin sparked first major crisis and worsened relations between Superpowers . U.S. and British zones merge Bizonia and French zone to make Trizonia . Soviets walk out of ACC complaining Western attitudes -unworkable .
 In reality he feared a strong democratic and reunited Germany on the borders of the USSR would spread ideas to East Berlin . In reality, he feared that a strong democracy and a united Germany would bring ideas to the East Berlin border .
 Only way into Berlin was by air so Allies decided on airlift which would not lead to war . Airlift began 28 June 1948 and ended May 1949 . If western allies gave in Stalin would take over Berlin .
 As a warning to USSR Truman ordered B-29 Atom Bombers to UK within bombing range of Berlin . Stalin organised Soviet fly overs and awkwardly positioned weather ballons to hinder airlift . British nicknamed it 'Operation Plainfare'
 During airlift, Berliners supplied with everything from food and clothing to oil and building materials, but there was still a great shortage . On 12th May 1949, Stalin called off blockade. Didnt work. Did not work.
 Soviet Atom Bomb 1949 earlier than expected started ARMS RACE . Nikita Khrushchev became new USSR leader within a year he denounced Stalin . Also began peaceful coexistence with West Detente .
 Rakoski succeded by Erno Gero. Feb 1956 . Feb 1956Khrushchev secret speech . February 1956 .
 October 1956 student demonstrations 24 of 62 Key Features of Hungarian Uprising . Khrushchev sends in troops and tanks to restore peace . October 1956 students demonstrate in Budapest .
 Gero forced to resign and Nagy takes over on 26th Nagy holds talks with USSR to get tanks withdrawn . Nagy released political prisoners and published reforms that included withdrawal from Warsaw Pact .
 Soviet troops and tanks invaded Ceasefire decided on 10 November 1956, Janos Kadar new leader, Nagy shot in 1958 . Political parties banned under rakoski reappeared and Nagy made coalition government .
 Eisenhower in presidential elections did not want to commit U.S. and loose power 6. Eisenhower did want to . Eisenhower did not . Eisenhower in . presidential elections . Eisenhower was elected president of the United States in 1953 .
 USSR wanted to remove Allies because it was area of prosperity, military strenth and Western success within communist territory Berlin was a gap in the Iron Curtain . Berlin was the place of prosperity and military strength in communist territory .
 Brain Drain: More educated proffesionals and skilled craftsmen fled to West Berlin . Lots of educated professionals fled to East Berlin .
 East Germany's labour drain of labour and economic output threatened to ruin East Germany 3 . East Germany suffered from a drain on labour and output from East Germany .
 USSR thought Allies used West Berlin for Espionage . Soviets argued that they needed to control movement and access into Berlin to combat spying .
 Khrushchev fixed conference with yung, new U.S. president Kennedy thinking he could push him around Vienna Summit . Had joined NATO and European Economic Community Brain Drain . Brain Drain rapidlly increasing amount of refugees .
 CIA believed Cubans would help exiles, but they supported popular Castro . Castro knew about invasion form exiles in Miami . La Brigada's ships sunk, and army heavily out numbered. Castro's position strengthened.
 Khrushchev sends Kennedy a letter saying he would remove missiles if USA removed blockade and didn't invade Cuba . Kennedy on TV 24 October: 18 USSR ships turn around to avoid confrontation . Kennedy chooses 1st Letter to remove missiles .
 Brezhnev meets with Dubcek a few days later who agrees to remain in Warsaw pact if his reforms are allowed . Tito given enthusiastic reception in Czechoslovakia in 1968 .
 Brezhnev Doctrine redefined Communism as one party system . All members of Warsaw Pact were part of one party party system and made all members part of the Warsaw Pact . The doctrine redefined the Soviet Union as a single party system in order to win power .
 Temporarily worsened relations between East and West, but Detente continued after a slight gap . Detente continues after slight gap in relations .
 President Carter keen to link Human Rights to Arms Limitations to put pressure on USSR . USSR accept existence of West Germany CO-operation call for closer economic, social and cultural links .
 They complained with Carter in 1975 of violations embarressed Brezhnev, but Arms limitations carried on . Arms limitations continued to be imposed in the 1970s and '80s . Arms restrictions were imposed by the Soviet government .
 Thousands of Afghan Muslims join mujahideen guerrilla movement on holy mission for Allah and want to overthrow Amin gov. so declare a jihad on Amin supporters . Soviet Military assistance programme, started i n1978, increased and Amin dependent on USSR military and equipment .
 50,000 Soviet troops sent to Afghanistan to restore order and protect PDPA from mujahideen . UUSR saw fudamentalism as a great threat... 50 of 62 Invasion of Afghanistan .
 Amin was shot and replaced by Babrak Kamal, who was in exile in Moscow . Amin was acting on 1978 Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Good Neighbourliness former President Taraki had signed .
 Carter already under pressure in November 1979 after U.S. embassy staff held hostage in Iran . Carter was under pressure after United States embassy staff taken hostage in 1979 .
 Carter proposed creation of quick strike force plus draft of 1820 year olds and CIA increase of intelligence gathering activities . Carter proposes creation of a rapid strike force and draft of young people to draft 1820 years old .
 Also wanted to eradicate Vietnam War, hostages and loss of prestige to USSR in Africa + Central America embarrassments . Also wanted the eradication of Vietnam War and hostages . "Also wanted to eradicating Vietnam War"
 USA to place cruise missiles in Western Europe to combat USSR missiles in western Soviet Union . U.S. placed cruise missiles on Western Europe in response to Soviet missile threat .
 Reagan prepared to discuss arms limitations was in a position of strength November 1981 'zero option' cancel deployment of missiles if USSR do same . November 1981 ‘zero option’ cancels deployment of missile deployment if USSR does same . Both countries accept MAD theory . Reagan was in position of
 USA decided to give secret assistance to Polish Worker's Trade Union movement Solidarność known as Star Wars Programme SDI / STAR Wars programme SDI . USA gave secret assistance .
 President Reagan announced SDI plan for a ground adn spacebased, laser armed, anti ballistic missile system, which would create a shield for United States land based missiles . Andropov accused USA of preparing a firststrike attack on USSR and Reagan inventing new plans for Nuclear War .
 Olympics USA see it as a retaliation of Moscow games USSR held Friendship Games . U.S. saw it as retaliation for Moscow games that Moscow games had been held in 1950s . Olympics seen as retaliation against Moscow games .
 Gorbachev decided to call off Cold War unilaterally . Prepared to adopt drastic policies to improve relations with Superpower relations .
 His abandonment of Brezhnev doctrine caugth West and USA off guard, and was clearly a radical change . He did it because Cold War was draining USSR's wealth .
 Gorbachev wanted to maintain Soviet's role as a super power. Stopped USSR interference in Eastern European sattelite states . Stopped Russia's influence in Eastern Europe's satselites .
 He knew he had to win over the Soviet people and show the world that he would not threaten World Peace . He knew it had to do so to show that he wouldn't threaten the world .
 He released dissidents from jail, published banned books and lifted censorship . He also lifted censorship in order to lift censorship .
 Glasnost led to people demanding more radical changes and criticised Gorbachev . But glasnst lead to more radical reforms and criticism of the reforms . In the 1980s, the Soviet Union was overthrown by the West .
 Treaty eliminated nuclear and convential groundlaunched ballistic and cruise missiles . Treaty eliminated ground-launched missiles and banned nuclear and conventional weapons . Treaty also eliminated nuclear, conventional and conventional missile launches .
 By treaty deadline, 1 June 1991, over 2500 weapons had been destroyed . Also, both nations allowed to inspect other country. Also, Both nations allowed inspection other country .
 Both leaders stress INF was only first step to more radical agreements regarding long range nuclear weapons . Both leaders stressed INF was not first step toward more radical agreement .
 At Moscow summit, there were more arms control talsks and more troop reductions in Europe in 1989 . It was evident that the wives of Reagan and Gorbachev had played a role in pushing the two leaders together .
 Gorbachev's promise to withdraw troops from Afghanistan showed peaceful intentions, says CNN.com's John Defterios . Also Gorbias' promise of withdrawal from Afghanistan shows peaceful intentions .
 Moscow summit led to Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty . Treaty was signed by NATO and Warsaw Pact reprisentatives in November 1990 . NATO signed treaty with Warsaw Pact in 1990; Warsaw Pact also signed .
 Agreement to reduce number of tanks, missiles, aircraft and other forms of nonnuclear military hardware held by signatory states . Signatory states have agreed to reduce the number of non-nuclear weapons held .
 New United States president George Bush Senior and Gorbachev announced end of Cold War at a summit in Malta in 1989 . New U.S. President George Bush senior and Gorgachev . Bush Senior .
 When Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwaiot in 1990, the two super powers acted closely and followed directives of the United Nations and formed a co-alition force . At Washington summit of 31 MAy 3 June 1990, Bush and Gorbachev discussed Strategic Arms Reductions .
 Hungary's decision to open it's border with Austria in May of 1989 was key to changes in Eastern Europe in 1989 . Hungary opened the border in May that year to Austria .
 This meant a hole in the Iron curtain, and a way for East Germans to move to West Germany . East Germans were allowed to leave the country to join West Germany in the 1950s .
 Demonstrations in Germany in 1989 and calls for change to system of government . Demonstrators in Germany called for change of government in 1989 .
 Gorbachev visited East Germany in October 1989 and informed political leaders that Soviet Union would not get involved in Germany's political affairs . Gorbiachev told leaders in East Germany not to get involved with the country's affairs .
 Demonstrations continued and, 4 November, the largest demostration in East Germany's history, over 1 million people in E Berlin demanded democracy and free elections . Demonstrators continued and the largest demonstration in East German history was held 4 November .
 On 9 November, E German government announced opening of border crossings into West Germany . The opening of the border crossings was announced on 9 November .
 Events in Eastern Europe had a catastrophic impact on the Soviet Union . New Germany joined NATO and Warsaw Pact dissolved in 1991 .
 Many nationalities and ethnic groups saw how satellite states were able to break away from Moscow . Russia's satellite states saw how they broke away from the Soviet Union .
 In 1990 Baltic states declared themselves independent and led to demands for independence within Soviet Union . In 1990, Baltic states became independent . Baltic states are now part of the Baltic nations .
 There were fears that the country was about to disintergrate, and Gorbachev found that he was opposed to most by most sections of Soviet society . There were also fears that he would be opposed by some sections of society .
 There was an attempted coup d'etat in August 1991 which was defeated by Boris Yeltsin . Though Gorbachev was restored he had lost authority . The attempted coup was defeated and Gorbama was restored .
 Gorbachev resigned in December 1991, and the Soviet Union split into several independent states . The Soviet Union was one of the most powerful economies in the world .
 Gorbachev and Reagan became personal friends and made significant agreements . Gorbama and Reagan were personal friends .
 Aspects of International Relations 1945-2004 » Cold War » Henry VIII . Henry VIII is Henry VIII of England's first monarch . Henry VII is Henry VII of England .