 A Brush With Armageddon THE CU3AN MISSILE CRISIS REVISITED . A Brush with Armageddon . A brush With Armageddon . The CU3an Mideast Crisis is a re-imagination of the Cold War .
 Those “thirteen days in October” had indeed brought the world to the brink of atomic holocaust . The world was brought to a near-collapse by the ‘13th days’ in October .
 Until this year, we lacked adequate knowledge of how the crisis had come about, how it was resolved, and what it meant in terms of superpower relations . Until now, we have not been able to understand how it came to be resolved .
 The main conclusion one draws from this documentation is that the situation was even scarier than we had ever imagined on our side of the confrontation . The situation was 'even scarier' than we'd ever imagined, according to the document .
 Nikita Khrushchev had equipped his 42,000-man expeditionary force in Cuba with tactical battlefield nuclear weapons . He had given Soviet commanders on the island the discretionary authority to use them against American troops in the event of an invasion .
 Kennedy was totally unaware of this fact as he planned his responses during the crisis . He was in the dark about Castro's appeal to Khrushchev to launch a preemptive nuclear strike on the mainland to forestall an invasion .
 Khrushchev did not know Castro’s urgings had the effect of convincing him that his gamble was getting lethally out of hand and that he should accept the secret deal with Kennedy .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro had misunderstood or misinterpreted one another’s motives, intentions and actions . Kennedy and Castro triggered the whole crisis by requesting Soviet protection against the U.S.
 Castro interviewed Castro about the missile crisis in Havana in 1984 and 1985 . subordinates began doing their own thing, accidentally or deliberately .
 Khrushchev had not realized that his commanders in Cuba had shot down an American U-2 spy plane without orders from Moscow . Nearly provoking Kennedy into ordering a massive air strike against the island .
 The president discovered with horror that another U-2 had penetrated Soviet air space above Alaska and that jet fighters armed with nuclear weapons had scrambled to protect it . And that in the middle of the crisis the Air Force had inexplicably launched a test missile, alerting the Soviets to the possibility
 Under the circumstances, it was something of a miracle that we were spared a nuclear war . The U.S. was spared a nuke war by the circumstances of the circumstances .
 What the new data teaches us about crisis management in 1962 crucially applies to the crises we are certain to face in the aftermath of the Cold War . The new data will be published in the U.S. National Security Council next week .
 Nuclear perils still exist, with strategic weapons deployed in Russia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan . Hardline military plotters may grab power there to reassert the world clout of the former Soviet empire .
 China too possesses nuclear weapons, and may be passing bomb technology to Iran . Iran may have passed on nuclear technology to China, which has nuclear weapons .
 U.S. policy challenges loom in the Balkans, the eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East . The United States faces challenges in the region, including the Balkans .
 The ""New World Order"" announced by George Bush isn’t all that much of an improvement over the old one . George Bush’s new world order is not much better than the old .
 The book is fully up-to-date on all the newly released materials, and several of the authors have participated in conferences on the subject in the U.S., Moscow and Havana .
 Nathan compendium throws significant new light on Kennedy’s decision-making processes . It is based on transcripts of top-secret presidential deliberations, Kennedy-Khrushchev letters, Central Intelligence Agency reports and collateral materials .
 Kennedy held firm against insistence by the United States military on air strikes and invasion . Khrushchev ignored Castro and Soviet military chiefs in his decision to repatriate the missiles .
 Bernstein and most of his colleagues conclude that Kennedy was a weakling dishonestly playing electoral politics . Bernstein and others conclude that both views are exaggerated .
 Bernstein's analysis shows that final decisions were made by ‘weary men’ in the Oval Office led by the president and his brother Robert . Bernstein: “Wearing men” in the White House made final decisions by “weary” men .
 The victory, of course, was the removal of the Soviet missiles . Kennedy’s agreement to phase out our Jupiter missiles from Turkey and a vague pledge not to invade Cuba . The “compromise” was Kennedy”s agreement .
 Khrushchev moved secretly to place his missiles in Cuba to counter the open installation of the Jupiters by the Eisenhower administration . Castro's real fears of an American invasion after the fiasco of the 1961 Bay of Pigs enterprise became the pretext for doing it .
 Most specialists agree that Castro's fear of a U.S. invasion was greatly motivated by the Kennedy administration’s covert operations to dislodge (or assassinate) him . This particular episode in the CubanAmencan saga forms part of the overall history of the missile crisis .
 The CIA-Mafia War Against Castro and the Assassination of JFK was written by Warren Hinckle and William Turner . JFK's assassination was the result of a CIA operation against the Mafia in Cuba .