 The date was October 1962, 53 years ago, and a part of American history unfolded between the two superpowers of the world . The United States led by President John F Kennedy, and the Soviet Union led by their chairman Nikita Khrushchev .
 Fidel Castro took power in 1959 by overthrowing the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista . The island of Cuba was led by Fidel Castro, who took over in 1959 . Fidel Castro is now the leader of Cuba .
 We are talking about nuclear war, what many reporters called a game of “nuclear chicken” played by Kennedy and Khrushchev . They had the power to turn planet Earth into a nuclear wasteland . You don't hear about it often anymore, but I do believe it’
 Khrushchev was secretly building missile bases on Cuba . The Soviet army had already secretly deployed short range nuclear missiles into East Germany .
 JFK was told of the missile threat by the National Security Council in 1962 . But American military intelligence aircraft operated at an altitude of 70,000 feet had photographic evidence of their deceptions .
 For the next week, the President and his advisors worked long hours going over all available actions and possible reactions from the Soviet Union . The next week they spent a week looking at all available options .
 Kennedy told the U.S. people of the crisis and his action plan . The military prepared for war, and Kennedy told them of the situation .
 The threat of war was very real when the President went on national TV and told Americans he planned a Naval blockade of Cuba . Most people thought we were headed for nuclear war .
 Kennedy did the right thing not to let on to Khrushchev that the U.S. knew what was going on in Cuba until he had a plan of action . Kennedy's crisis team began final preparations to defend the decision to answer the nuclear initiative with a naval blockade of Cuba .
 Kennedy summoned a special congressional delegation of eight senators and seven senior congressmen to the cabinet at the White House and informed them of the situation . Kennedy summoned the delegation .
 Khrushchev at the Kremlin assembled the members of the Presidium . The sole agenda item was determining further actions with Cuba or Berlin . The only agenda item on the agenda was to determine further actions .
 The Kremlin was still confused over which Cold War crisis was about to erupt . The Kremlin still confused about which crisis was coming .