 The following extract outlines the USSR president's reasons for sending missiles to Cuba . The USSR president, Nikita Khrushchev, explains why he sent the missiles .
 Khrushchev suddenly realised a way to solve his international problems . During a vacation on the Black Sea in April he realised a solution to his international woes .
 Khrushchev decided to station similar missiles in Cuba . Thinking of American nuclear missiles pointing at him from NATO member Turkey, he decided to put them there .
 Nuclear missiles in Cuba would not only keep the U.S. from attacking the communist island but would teach the Americans what it was like to be surrounded by close-range enemy nuclear weapons .
 It was appealing plan and the Soviet leader moved quickly to implement it . It was an appealing plan, and it was quickly implemented .
 Khrushchev decided it was essential to keep the project completely secret . The project was never publicly revealed until after the war .
 When Cuba was fully armed it would be too late for the U.S. to react . The United States would not be able to react when Cuba was armed with weapons .
 He refused to consider alternate plans of action if the U.S. discovered the missiles before they were fully operational . Certain of success, he said .
 These are newspaper headlines that appeared around the world on 23 October 1962 . Read the world's top 10 news stories in the morning's featured news stories . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 President Kennedy imposed a blockade on Soviet missiles that were entering Cuba . It was after president Kennedy imposed the blockade . The blockade was imposed in response to the threat of Soviet missiles .
 The days of the crisis were the scariest many people had ever lived through. Many people had never lived through the crisis . The days were the worst many people have ever seen .
 Grocery store shelves were swept clean, as people stocked up on food and other things needed to survive in case the bombs fell . Grocery stores are swept clean as people stock up .
 Government civil-defence activities included daily air-raid drills in schools and elsewhere . Children and adults taught how to 'duck and cover' in case of nuclear blast .
 Every evening of the week after president Kennedy's speech, people watched Walter Cronkite . The legendary CBS anchor man was the voice of nightly news for generations of Americans . He was a voice of the nightly news .
 Audiences watched live coverage as the Soviet ships came to the quarantine line . Audiences were watching live coverage of the event in Moscow .
 Cronkite wondered along with his viewers what was going to happen out at sea, as the blockade continued . The blockade of the Strait of Africa was the first time the U.S. Navy had been involved in the war .
 Russian freighter was heading for a collision with a U.S. freighter in the Atlantic Ocean on Monday morning . The freighter is believed to have been on a collision course with a cargo ship .
 Going to the supermarket with my parents, they carried that list from the newspaper of the things you needed to have in the basement if there was a nuclear war . My parents carried a list of things they needed to be prepared if a war broke out, he says .
 Parents set up battery radio and cots and sleeping bags in basement, things to store water and canned food . Then they set up a battery radio, cots, sleeping bags and a lot of canned food.
 During the crisis, many people went to bed wondering whether they would live to see the next sunrise . Many people went into bed wondering if they would survive the next day .
 The following extract is a response by president Kennedy to president Khrushchev's letter dated 27 October 1962 . SOURCE 1C The letter was written to president Kennedy . Kennedy responded to the letter with a response to a request for information .
 I have read your letter of October 26th with great care and welcome the statement of your desire to seek a prompt solution to the problem . I have also welcomed the statement that you want to seek the best possible solution to this problem .
 The first ingredient, let me emphasise, is the cessation of work on missile sites in Cuba and measures to render such weapons inoperable under effective international guarantees .
 Julius Nyerere's address to the National Assembly of Tanzania, 6 July 1970 . The address was part of a speech by the then-President of Tanzania .
 The Arusha Declaration was and is a statement about both politics and economics . It was a statement of both political and economic principles . It is the first declaration of independence from Tanzania .
 These two aspects are equally important and cannot be separated from each other, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Declaration is about the way in which we shall make a reality of human equality in this country, and how our citizens will achieve full control over their own affairs .
 Since the Arusha Declaration three years ago, our practical emphasis has been on the necessities for public ownership and control over the economy . We are committed to public ownership, control of the economy, says the president .
 It was this aspect which required immediate action because it involved considerable changes in the institutions which existed before 1967 . It was a major change in the institution which existed in the 1960s .
 The nationalisation of the banks, of commerce, of food manufacturing plants and of the wholesale export and import trade, only makes the country socialist if the nation is governed by the people themselves through their freely elected representatives .
 Julius Nyerere appeared on the cover of Time magazine, 13 March 1964 . He was the first African African leader to appear on the magazine's cover .
 Julius Nyerere has tried to bridge the economic and social gap between the urban minorities and the vast rural majority since independence in December 1961 .
 His government made various attempts to begin to regroup the rural population into villages to facilitate the introduction of technical progress and modern necessities such as potable water and electricity .
 The main impetus for the program came in 1967, when the government adopted a policy of socialism based on hard work, self-reliance and the development of agriculture . The government party adopted a socialist policy of hard work and self reliance .
 There are said to be some 1,5 million small private farmers on scattered holdings who in most cases still work along traditional lines .
 The government and the party have waged an aggressive campaign to spread the ujamaa spirit .
 The movement seems to have caught on, and every day some group announces that it has created a village . Every day some groups announces that they have created villages .
 The policy was not successful in economic terms for a number of reasons . But it was not as successful as the policy was supposed to be, say experts .
 The majority of the people did not want to work on communal farms because they had traditionally worked on their own farms owned by themselves or by individual families . The majority wanted to stay at home and work for themselves .
 The people did not work hard in ujamaa villages as much as they did on their own farms because they did not feel that the farms belonged to them but to the community . The people didn't feel that they worked hard in their villages because they didn't work hard .
 There were no incentives to production in ujamaa villages one would expect to have when working on one's own farm . No incentives were given to those working on their own farms .
 "As long as they did not get profit for themselves from their labour investments, they were not going to work hard. As long . They did not want to get profit from themselves from . themselves from labour investments," they said. "They did not work hard," they added .
 In fact, millions resented being resettled in ujamaa villages . Violent confrontations with the authorities in many cases when people refused to be moved into those settlements .
 The Civil Rights Movement chose the tactic of non-violence as a tool to dismantle institutionalised racial segregation, discrimination and inequality . This source outlines the non-violent philosophy that the Civil Rights movement used in the USA .
 Martin Luther King Jr. followed King's guiding principles of nonviolence and passive resistance, says CNN.com .
 Civil rights leaders had long understood that segregationists would go to any length to maintain their power and control over blacks .
 They believed some changes might be made if enough people outside the South witnessed the violence blacks had experienced for decades . Consequently, they believed some . people outside of the South . saw some changes .
 Bob Moses and other civil rights activists hoped to show the world that the primary reason blacks remained in such a subordinate position in the South was because of widespread violence directed against them .
 This source focuses on the sit-ins that civil rights activists adopted in the USA during the 1960s . SOURCE 3B This article includes a look at the history of civil rights activism in the United States .
 The basic plan of the sit-ins was that a group of students would go to a lunch counter and ask to be served . Students would then go to the counter to ask for a meal .
 CL Harris, manager of the store, said of the students, 'They can just sit there. They can just sat there'
 Civil rights organisations began to spread the word to other college campuses . Wire services picked up the story after a group of students returned the next day .
 Ella Baker of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference contacted students on many college campuses . Baker contacted students at many colleges across the U.S.
 In two weeks, students in eleven cities held sit-ins at Woolworths' and SH Kress stores . Students in 11 cities, primarily Woolworth's and Kress' stores, were held .
 On 2 January 1965, Dr King ... announced that a new, and more militant, phase of his civil rights campaign would be initiated in Selma, Alabama . Dr King announced that he would be launching a more militant phase of the civil rights movement .
 From its inception, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference sought to secure both social and political rights for black Americans . The conference was founded in 1950s .
 Dr King called for a march from Selma to Montgomery in order to carry the campaign for voting rights to the steps of the state capitol . On 6 March, Dr King held a march to Montgomery to carry out the campaign .
 This source consists of a written and visual source on the Selma to Montgomery March . A Testament of Hope – The Essential Writings And Speeches Of Martin Luther King, Jr. by JM Washington]
 Selma was notorious for its brutally racist sheriff, Jim Clark . Only 2,4% of Selma's blacks were registered to vote and the town's notorious sheriff was Jim Clark.
 King's restraint probably helped president Johnson push through the Voting Rights Bill in 1965 . It annoyed some of the more radical black activists but helped push through .
 This is an aerial view of the civil rights activists crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge during the march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama .
 Thousands of civil rights activists are seen crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge . Thousands of activists were crossing the bridge .
 The following source comprises two extracts on the philosophy of Black Consciousness . SOURCE 4A The following . source comprises . two extracts .
 This extract focuses on the emergence of the philosophy of Black Consciousness . This extract is an extract of an interview with Dr. Martin Luther Luther King Jr.
 In the conditions of harsh repression following the banning of the ANC, a vacuum had come to exist in the sphere of organised resistance to white domination . The ANC was banned in South Africa in 1994 and banned in 1994 .
 Exponents of Black Consciousness stressed the need for psychological liberation . Exponents said that psychological liberation is necessary for liberation .
 The years of subjugation had caused black people to lose confidence in themselves and develop feelings of inferiority, they said . They said .
 They insisted that blacks should not work in the same political, social and cultural organisations as whites . They insisted they should not be allowed to work in same organisations as white people .
 Blacks should develop their own organisations, they said, with an exclusively black leadership and membership, free from the suffocating influence of white liberals who tended to dominate multi-racial organisations . They said the organisations should be exclusively black .
 This is a positive contribution that we must recognise and to which we must pay tribute . This is the first time we have been able to pay tribute to the father-of-one .
 We should also recognise the significant input that the BCM made towards further uniting the black oppressed masses of our country, by emphasising the commonness of their oppression and their shared destiny .
 These views were built on political positions that our movement had long canvassed and fought for. These views are built on the positions that we had fought for, says the author .
 "I was able to see the contrast, the differences and all that raised questions in my mind," says author . "I'm able to go into town, I was able ... to see ... the contrast," she says .
 Amongst us, we began to develop a keen sense for wanting to discover more ideas about struggles, not only in this country, but also about what happened in other areas .
 There was always a list published of books that were banned and for us, it meant that whatever the government banned must be something good . It was part of our adventure as youngsters to actually go out to actively look for those books .
 The 1970s were not long after the major student uprisings in Europe, France, and the Civil Rights Movement and the Black Power Movement in the U.S. The Portuguese defeat in Mozambique and Angola had a major boost on us, he says .
 This source outlines the reasons for the students' march to Orlando Stadium, Soweto, in June 1976 .
 The imposition of Afrikaans as a medium of instruction came at an unstable time, as the 'centre of gravity' in black student politics had shifted dramatically in the mid-1970s . The imposition came at a time of unstable time .
 The emerging Black Consciousness philosophy was transforming the way young black people thought, and it boosted their self-esteem . The emerging philosophy was changing the way black people think, and boosting their self esteem .
 For this generation of black students, Afrikaans was the language of the police and their employers, and an instrument for giving orders . For many of them black students it was the way police and employers used it to speak .
 They believed that the imposition of Afrikaans was designed to train them for servitude . They said they believed that it was a way of training them for service . The South Africans believed that they were being trained to be slaves .
 Maths, Science and other subjects were taught in English . This was because for many years Maths and Science was taught in England . Maths are now being taught in Latin America .
 The sudden shift to Afrikaans gave rise to difficulties in the student's understanding of jargon and technical terms .
 Kennedy, R 1969. Soweto – Black Revolt White Reaction (Ravan Press, Johannesburg) Kennedy,R 1969. Kennedy wrote about the South African city of Sowet .
 Tanzania Under Mwalimu Nyerere – Reflections On An African Statesman, Nyereerere, J. 1970.
 Martin Luther King, Jr. A Testament of Hope – The Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther Luther King Jr. Dr. Martin Martin Martin was assassinated in 1968 at the hands of the Klan in Atlanta, Georgia .