 A victory is the interpretation given by uninformed tourists who sympathize with the Castro’s revolution, and who wear Che Guevara T-shirts . A victory in Cuba is the result of the Castro's revolution, says CNN.com .
 The U.S. launched the ill-fated invasion at the Bay of Pigs, Cuba, on April 17, 1961 . Wednesday marks the 52nd anniversary since the attack .
 Rather than preparing a long discourse on this incident, I’ve decided to proceed on a different and more personal track . Rather than prepare a lengthy discourse, I've decided to focus on my own personal issue .
 History books are available for those interested in reading the finer details of what really happened . History books have been available to those who want to know more about the story .
 I, on the other hand, am interested in recounting what the invasion meant to me, and the life lessons that it taught me . I am not interested in the invasion .
 Birthdays symbolize gifts, money, and a party where one got to be the center of attention . Birthday parties symbolize parties, gifts, and parties where one gets to be a center .
 "I was the darling of the crowd, and, at least for one day, I could do no wrong," says the author of the book . "I could do nothing wrong. I was the dazzling of the crowds," she says .
 When my parents told me that I would have a scaled down celebration in 1961, I was not a happy camper . So, when my parents informed me that he would have had a scaled-down celebration, I would not be happy . He was not happy when he was told he
 Cuba Libre is a post-Castro Cuba Libre . The country is now a free state of Cuba . The island nation is now free of persecution .
 For the United States, the Bay of Pigs represented a public embarrassment in the eyes of the world community . For the U.S., the Bay was an embarrassment for the world . The United States is proud of its efforts to defeat the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy got another chance to handle a 3:00 AM crisis call . Soon after, he was back in the office .
 In the fall of 1962, the Soviet leadership believed, based on an analysis of Kennedy’s lack of confidence during the Bay of Pigs Invasion, that he would avoid confrontation and accept the missiles as a fact of life .
 In October 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union came as close as they’ve ever been to nuclear war over the offensive missiles stationed in Cuba . The U.S. and Russia came close to a nuclear war .
 Historians have treated Kennedy lightly over his handling of the Bay of Pigs Invasion . Some historians have said Kennedy should not have been treated lightly .
 They claim that it happened just three month after he got elected, and that he was still learning the ropes of governing . They say that it was just three months after he was elected .
 The job of President of the U.S. has no room for on-the-job training, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The job of president of the United States has no time for training"
 It requires a rigorous screening process during the campaign season . The winner is expected to hit the ground running .
 There is simply no excuse for Kennedy’s lack of leadership on that fateful day in 1961 . Kennedy was not in charge of the White House, but he should have been .
 It became a day of infamy for Cubans, for Cuban-Americans, for Americans, and for all freedom-loving people around the globe . The day of the attack on Cuba became infamy .
 President Kennedy promised those Cubans who participated in the invasion that he would provide them with air support – a promise that he reneged on . Kennedy promised to provide air support for the invasion of Cuba, but he later abandoned the promise .
 If he had changed his mind before launching the invasion, some people would have accepted it in the long run . Some people may have disliked his decision, but they would've accepted it long run, he says .
 For him to have changed his plans after members of the U.S.-backed Brigade 2506 had landed on Cuban soil, it was unconscionable . However, for him to change his plans, he should not have been in harm's way, he said .
 This was a monumental betrayal that Cubans and Cuban-Americans will never forget, nor forgive, says Cuban-American leader Ruben Navarrette . "This was a massive betrayal," he says . "Cubans and Cubans will never forgive," he adds .
 They were driven by a desire to restore freedom and democracy to their homeland . The group was driven to the streets of their homeland to fight for democracy .
 They fervently believed that with U.S. backing, victory was a sure thing . "With United States backing," they said. "We fervently believe that with United States backed, victory is a sure sure thing"
 They failed because of the lack of the promised air support, and because they fell short of ammunition, they failed to get air support . They failed due to lack of air support and lack of ammunition .
 President Kennedy’s performance at the Bay of Pigs is better labeled as a Profile in Fear and Indecision . President Kennedy's performance was better labeled ‘a Profile in Courage’ rather than a Profile of Courage, Kennedy said .
 Members of the 2506 Brigade answered the question posed by the enemies of a Free Cuba that rather than fighting, Cubans voted with their feet by emigrating to the United States . They, the members of the . members of . the . 2506 brigade, they say .
 Over 1,400 Cuban exiles fought bravely against an enemy made up of 51,000 Castro troops . On April 17, 1961, a bunch of exiles battled bravely to defeat the enemy .
 The Soviet-trained army suffered losses of 20 to 1 against the British army . And yet, they inflicted losses of more than 20 per cent to the Russian-trained forces .
 They restored the manhood to the Cuban cause, and silenced those who questioned it . The Cuban government has restored the country's "manhood"
 President Kennedy tried to diffuse responsibility for its failure by shifting the blame on former President Eisenhower . President Kennedy said Eisenhower was responsible for the failure of the Eisenhower administration .
 President Eisenhower was but a phone call away from President Kennedy . President Kennedy made the final decision . President Eisenhower made the decision to make the decision .
 President Kennedy blew a gasket by saying that all the military experts and the CIA had assured him that the plans for the Bay of Pigs would succeed . Former President Hoover offered him a reality check . Hoover: "All the experts, the CIA and the U.S. had assured"
 Failure and humiliation would not have been viable options for President Hoover . Hoover would have been humiliated or humiliated .
 President Kennedy said that he changed the plans for the Bay of Pigs invasion after the Joint Chiefs had signed off on it . He scaled down the previously promised air cover because he wanted to hide the U.S. role .
 Eisenhower countered by indicating success mattered more than secrecy . Former President Eisenhower said secrecy was important to secrecy in order to achieve success .
 President Kennedy offered a brutal rebuttal of President Kennedy’s secrecy argument . Then, he offered a brutally harsh rebuttal .
 These are all logic-101 questions that President Kennedy should have considered . Kennedy should also consider the possibility of changing the law .
 Some Bay of Pigs veterans never lost faith in the exceptionalism of the United States . Despite being let down by a U.S. Administration, some Bay Of Pigs veterans say they never lost their faith .
 Some became officers in the U.S. Army in Vietnam – including 6 colonels, 19 lieutenant colonels and 9 majors, and 29 captains . Some of the soldiers became officers .
 Second in command of the Bay of Pigs freedom fighters, Erneido Oliva, rose to rank of Major General in the D.C. Army National Guard in 1992 .
 These brave men paid back many times over the debt that they owed this country for taking them out of the Cuban Gulag . They paid back their debts to the U.S. for their services .
 They learned that to succeed in the future, they could only rely on themselves . They learned to rely on each other to succeed .
 Fidel took away all their personal belongings when many emigrated to the U.S. Fidel took them away from the United States . Fidel took many of the personal belongings of many emigrants to the US .
 He declared them enemies of the Cuban Revolution, and punished them by letting them carry only the clothes on their backs . The Cuban Revolution was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Fidel was not able to take away the family cohesiveness, work ethic, and core values that allowed these Cubans to overcome all odds and succeed in the land of freedom and opportunities . They were not allowed to bring even a cent to the United States .
 The Cubans considered the hard times in the beginning as a temporary nuisance . The hard times were considered the start of the Cuban revolution as temporary .
 Through hard work, most looked adversity straight in the eyes and came out winners . Most of the world's most famous people came out on their own .
 Cuban-Americans hold the majority of crucial positions in Miami, Florida . Nowadays, Cuban Americans hold the most crucial positions . Cuban-American-Americans are in Miami .
 Some have served as secretaries of cabinet-level federal agencies, others as United States Representatives and United States Senators . One received the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and another for Drama . One was the CEO of Coca-Cola .
 "They have learned to be self-reliant and to be in control of their own destinies," says CNN.com senior author .
 Many asked if the U.S. would support a future insurrection in Cuba . Many asked whether the United States would support such an uprising . The United States has not responded to the question .
 No one can be sure what the final outcome would be, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It depends on many factors, and no one can't be sure of what will happen" Sutter says .
 There is an opportunity currently for the U.S. to support an invasion to topple the Cuban regime, says CNN's John Sutter .
 After the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, Fidel Castro refused to repay Russia the approximate $28 billion lent to Cuba by the former Soviet Union . After the break-up of the USSR, the Cuban government refused to pay Russia the money .
 Fidel’s reasoning was that the money was owed to a country that no longer existed . Fidel said the money owed to the country no longer exists . Fidel's reasoning: "The money is owed to an old country that didn't exist"
 The agreement not to invade Cuba was agreed to by President Kennedy and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev . The agreement was also agreed to not invade Cuba in the 1960s .
 By using Fidel’s logic, this agreement is no longer binding on the U.S. as it was made with a country that no longer exists . The United States was not bound to sign the agreement, but it is now binding on Cuba . The agreement was made by a
 Many failed to grasp the lesson on April 17, 1961, many did afterwards . If some didn't grasp it, they did afterwards, it was a lesson .
 For Cuba to be free again, Cubans in Cuba will have to be their own agents of change . For Cuba's freedom, Cuba must be its own agent of change, Cuban president says . Cuba has been a source of change for decades .
 For Cuban-Americans, the lesson was that they can only control the now, the present . The lesson is that they must control the present, not the future .
 Educational achievements, on-the-job experience, and the well-being of their immediate family are the tools to a rewarding life . Educational achievements and on the job experience are the keys to a successful life .
 On April 17, 2013, let us give thanks in our own ways to the fallen and the living members of the 2506 Brigade .
 Cuba Libre with authentic Cuban Bacardi rum, and say a prayer to my God for giving us such titans . I will wear a Cuba lapel pin, drink a Cuba Libre, and pray for God .
 It was as if the fact he'd managed to get into the White House had magically turned him into Superman . But no, it was Golden Boy to the rescue, Mr Wonderful, as if he’d managed to . The White House is now a very special place in the world
 For millions of people, this Superman was no match for the bad guys, and tragically for him and his ambitions, his failure ultimately led to his assassination . Tragically, for many people, for millions of those people, the Superman was .
 JFK helped keep Castro in power, even long after his death, due to the Kennedy-Khrushchev pact . Kennedy didn’t put Castro into power, but he surely helped keep him there, even after he died .
 A classic idol with feet of clay, and a classic case of the triumph of image and wishful fantasy over substance and reality–and how disastrous that can be, and was. A classic image and fantasy over-imagination is a case of how disastrous it can be .