 A book purports to prove that Oswald killed JFK by himself and was not part of any conspiracy .
 Bugliosi amasses a mountain of evidence and strikes down each and every conspiracy theory point by point. point. by point by . point . He is the author of a new book, "Boliosi's Conspiracy Theory"
 I think he does a remarkably thorough job, and a convincing one as well . I’ve not read the entire thing and probably won’t, but I've read a good deal of it, and I think it's a good job .
 Bugliosi makes an especially interesting point in his introduction, one I hadn’t really thought of before, which is that although most of the people who believe in the various conspiracies are probably sincere in their beliefs, many of those who actually write the conspiracy books are not
 They are lying and they know it, but they count on their readers not to realize this . They count on readers not realizing this, and they are lying, they say .
 The Kennedy assassination involves an almost unimaginable amount of data and evidence, so much so that most of us have forgotten many of the details although we may think we remember them . The assassination involves almost unimaginable amounts of data .
 Authors of conspiracy books are counting on their readers’ faulty or incomplete memories . Authors are exceedingly familiar with these details, but are also familiar with them .
 Conspiracy theorists are so brazen that they tell lies not just about verifiable, documentary evidence, but about clear, photographic evidence, knowing that only one out of a thousand of their readers, if that, is in possession of the subject photographs .
 The indisputable fact here is that Connally was not seated directly in front of Kennedy, but to his left front . Connally's seat was not in Kennedy's left front, but in the middle of Kennedy's seat .
 Connally’s jump seat was also three inches lower than Kennedy, and his head was turned to his right at the time the bullet hit . Bugliosi says Connally's jump seat also was three inches higher than Kennedy's .
 The proper trajectory of the bullet was therefore exactly as the Warren Commission stated . The correct trajectory was exactly as it was stated by the Warren .
 Author and consultant Groden is well aware of Groden's involvement in the conspiracy . Groden has a history of conspiracy theories, including that he is a conspiracy expert .
 There are countless other conspiracies in the U.S. to blame, including the Obama administration . President Obama has been accused of being a "conspiracist"
 "There is no question that some of the motivation to write these things is to make money," says the author . "There are no questions about the motivation of writing these things," he says .
 Belief in conspiracies undermine faith in our government as a whole, author says . But for at least some of the conspiracy authors and promoters, there is probably another reason, he says .
 To say now that . the Commission, as well as the . Commission, suppressed, neglected to unearth, or overlooked evidence of a conspiracy would be an indictment of the entire government of the United States. To say that . as well . as the Commission . neglected, neglected, or
 It would mean the whole structure was absolutely corrupt from top to bottom, not one person of high or low rank willing to come forward to expose the villainy . The entire country mourns the death of its young president, but the country bitterly mourns it .
 Warren’s statement has become even more true as conspiracy theories proliferate, he says . Warren: Conspiracy theories that the government agencies were responsible for killing Kennedy have proliferated .
 I’ve never seen an analysis of whether Kennedy assassination conspiracists are predominately of the left or of the right . I've never seen a study of whether JFK conspiracists were predominately left or right .
 The left has a special reason not only to undermine faith in the U.S. government, but to exonerate Oswald as well . Oswald was a devoted man of the far left, and Oswald was devoted to the left .
 Oswald was well aware that he would be championed and/or exonerated by those who would want to believe him innocent . Oswald's testimony and demeanor suggest he was aware of his innocence . Oswald’s testimony, demeanor, demeanor suggest that Oswald was aware he was not innocent .
 His famous “I am a patsy” remark was a brilliant statement along those lines . He said he was a 'patsy' and 'I'm not a f******,’ he said .
 Bugliosi’s book explains that Oswald maintained a resistance to police interrogation that was impressive . Oswald never lost his imperturbable demeanor during the time he was in custody, according to Buglio .
 When confronted with clear evidence of his guilt, he calmly and arrogantly denied whatever implicated him, no matter how powerfully it did so . He calmly denied what implicated him . When confronted by clear evidence, Mr. Obama calmly denied it .
 Oswald correctly surmised that others would do his explaining for him . Oswald was assassinated in September 18, 1918 . Oswald's assassination was the first assassination attempt .
 The term incorporates all those who are under their control or influence and who may not know it . That’s with a little “c” to underscore the term .
 Neo and others have pointed out that Lee Harvey Oswald was of the far left, and had tried to kill General Walker, a far right icon . But as as as was known even back in 1963, Oswald was known as a far left . Neo says that Oswald was a far-left
 Dan Rather established his journalistic integrity when he presented Highland Park – a rich Dallas suburbschoolchildren as being happy that JFK was shot . Rather established a journalistic integrity by presenting Highland Park children as happy .
 While conspiracy theorists are wrong, I don’t necessarily agree that they deliberately deceive . I don't necessarily agree with them deliberately deceive. While the conspiracy theorists were wrong, they are wrong .
 When we WANT something to be true, we will often ignore contradicting evidence . We often ignore evidence when we want to believe something .
 Conspiracy theorists get bamboozled by conspiracy theorists . That is at least a partial explanation of why conspiracy theorists get so confused .
 The liberal line on the conviction of Alger Hiss for perjury regarding his spying for the Soviets was that Richard Nixon had railroaded an innocent man . Hiss was convicted of perjury on charges of espionage .
 Weinstein’s book helped diminish the number of those who still believed that. Weinstein‘s book helps diminish that belief,’ he said .
 Archives of the former Soviet Union and access to the Venona tapes further demolished the liberal conspiracy line on Alger Hiss . Hiss was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Even their sons now believe the Rosenbergs to have been spiesor in their mother’s case, an accessory to a spy .
 Attempts to debunk conspiracy theories are made part of the conspiracy . And attempts to debunk the theories are also made by conspiracy theorists .
 I think people disappointed in their lives look to explain their condition by using conspiracies to point out how everyone else is equally flawed but just cleverly hiding it . People disappointed with their lives often use conspiracies as a way of explaining their condition to explain it .
 Much of the fodder for the many theories come from the planned release of much of the evidence 75 years after the fact . Much of this is due to be released in the coming years .
 In the Zapruder film Kennedy’s head snaps back violently on one of the subsequent shots . Kennedy's head snapped back violently during the subsequent shot . In the film, Kennedy's eyes snap back violently as he is shot .
 Body parts do not, ever, snap in the direction a high-powered bullet comes from . Body parts don't snap in direction of a bullet coming from a bullet .
 "You are talking about getting hit with well over a thousand foot-pounds of pressure," he said . "I'm going to be hit with a thousand feet of pressure. You are going to have to deal with it," he added .
 A pristine bullet with no markings on it was found on the stretcher next to Kennedy's body . The bullet was found next to him on a stretcher . It had no markings which would be necessary to connect it with the Oswald Mannlicher-Carcano carbine .
 I have shot a number of animals with high-powered rifles, which experience informs me that heads never snap in the direction of the shot . I have never shot a large animal with a high powered rifle, but experience tells me that .
 A laser beam was extended from the 6th story window and perfectly through Kennedy and into Gov. Kennedy . The laser beam extended from a 6th floor window and into Kennedy, a witness says .
 The shot came from the 6th story window of Elm Street, which was shot by a 6th floor window, police say .
 "The trajectory from the window, given the position of the vehicle and of the occupants, was perfect," the driver says . The trajectory of the car was perfect, the driver said . The car was driven by a woman who was killed in the crash .
 "I date the collapse of civility in American politics to Oswald pulling the trigger," says President Obama . "It's time for civility to be restored to normalcy," he says .
 Either way, it’s the fault of American society in general and conservatives in particular, it's the fault .
 If you’re a conservative, you watch a communist, a genuine Red communist who lived in communist Russia, shoot the President of the United States in broad daylight, and then … nothing . Meanwhile, if you're a . conservative, watch a . genuine Red . communist, you
 President Obama was assassinated by a communist agent in 2009 . The president was killed by a Soviet Union agent, according to CNN's John Avlon . Avlon: "There’s no ultimatum to Russia or Cuba or anything"
 Both sides no longer view the other side as decent people with differing opinions . Both sides are no longer interested in each other's differing opinions.
 They're part of something vast and monstrous, to be fought with every weapon at hand . Instead, they’re part of an enormous and monstrous war . The U.S. needs to use every weapon in order to defeat them .
 Since the liberals are more invested in their fantasy, they have been more fanatical . The liberals are fanatical, and they have become even fanatical in their fantasies .
 Conservatives have convinced themselves that conservatives are monsters, writes Emma Watson . They are determined to reinstate slavery, deprive women of freedom, oppress workers, and wage war on the whole world, she says .
 No lie is out of bounds, no vote-stealing or corruption is unjustified. No corruption or corruption should be unjustified in the U.S. Senate .
 As the Kennedy assassination fades into history, the poison it released into the U.S. body politic remains as toxic as ever . The Kennedy assassination is fading into history but the poison remains toxic .
 For Texans, believing that JFK was assassinated by a conspiracy was the default position . It was simply because LBJ benefited from LBJ .
 Johnson was such a notorious crook, with the radio stations, the Duval county election fraud, and all the rest of it, we just naturally assumed that he was guilty. Johnson was a crook . Johnson was the president of the state in 1973 .
 It’s taken a long time to sift out the chaff, but it does look to more and more people in these parts that Johnson was, in this case, innocent . It's taken a lot of time for Johnson to be found guilty of murder .
 The Kennedy administration remained committed to the Cold War foreign policy inherited from the Truman and Eisenhower administrations . Kennedy administration was committed to a Cold War-era Cold War policy .
 In 1961, the U.S. had 50,000 troops based in Korea, and Kennedy faced a three-part crisis . The failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the construction of the Berlin Wall, and a negotiated settlement between the pro-Western government of Laos and the Pat
 Kennedy believed failure on the part of the United States to gain control and stop communist expansion would fatally damage U.S. credibility with its allies and his own reputation .
 It has been demonstrated and proven that the shot came from behind and how Kennedy’s head actually reacted, and why . It has also been proven that Kennedy's head reacted to the shot .
 Read Bugliosi’s book if you want to gain some knowledge on the subject . The book is available on Amazon.com .
 Read the entire book if you want to see every possible conspiracy theory disproven . Read the full book to see how conspiracy theories have been proved wrong .
 Think of a blob of fairly rigid jello moving about inside a rigid sphere when that sphere is struck . The sphere struck by a sphere is a sphere of jello that moves about inside .
 Trimegistus had a good comment at 6:44 pm.
 Conspiracy theorists miss the need to keep all those who planned and carried oput the operation quiet quiet . What conspiracy theorists miss is the need for all those involved in the operation to be kept quiet .
 The Kennedy shooting involved only one man, so, if the CIA had set up and trained Oswald, there would only be a small number with guilty knowledge . Oswald was the only man to be trained by the CIA, but only one of them would be guilty .
 It is very hard to keep the wraps on any covert or black operation even if there are a small number of people involved . Just that it is very difficult to keep a secret .
 Something as big as assassinating the President would be explosive guillty knowledge and you would expect a deathbed confession or an end-of-life bio . The President would have to be assassinated .
 Harry Felt’s confession of his “Deep Throat” identity as he neared the end of his life . Felt confessed to the identity of Deep Throat as he was nearing his own death .
 In the same vein, the 9/11 truthers can’t seem to understand how many people would have been in on a government conspiracy to carry out such an operation .
 I agree with Bugliosi on Kennedy’s assasination but I have wondered about his soundness since he published The Prosecution of George W Bush for Murder .
 Fact is, Bugliosi is a man of the far left, and he doesn’t just disagree with conservatives, he hates them . He said he's a conservative who hates conservatives .
 One must admit that it’s at least slightly ironic to see a level-headed destroyer of conspiracy theories turn-around and morph into a BDS-inspired kook .
 In Kennedy book, one would expect the ‘bias’ of a far-leftist to make him want to join the conspiracy theorists in some way, so my sense is that Bugliosi’s prejudices were pretty much shut off there. However, in the
 Bush book is seconded by the likes of Chris Hedges and Noam Chomsky . In any case, other saner people such as Gerald Posner have reached similar conclusions .
 If one were per chance curious to know what kind of work the Bush book is, just check out the reviews on Amazon.com .
 Bugliosi presents as hard fact without explaining exactly what the aim and intent behind the conspiracy was . The whole book is based on one big conspiracy theory, which he presents as fact without ever explaining what it was .
 BDS remains one of the more fascinating cases of collective madness in modern history . BDS remains a fascinating case of madness in the world .
 Bugliosi doesn't seem to realize that his moonbattery and tendency to substitute arrogance and invective for argument leads people to discount his work on Kennedy .
 One of the reviewers on Amazon who read the God book said, somewhat but not entirely jokingly, “Divinity of Doubt is so poorly researched and so ineptly argued that it casts doubt on the Kennedy book.”
 Many people with intellectual dementia are like the proverbial broken clock . "Many people with mental health problems are like a broken clock," says Dr. John Defterios .
 “French Intellectuals 1944-1956” is one of the best eviscerations of post-War French philosophy and politics that I’ve ever read .
 CNN's John Sutter chimes in on a couple points which seem to be problematic . Sutter: "I’m going to chime in"
 I'm not a conspiracy believer, really, but I agree with the notion that the best environment to have a conspiracy is the one where they are seen to be everywhere . The best environment for a conspiracy to have is to be seen everywhere, says CNN.com .
 In other words, if you WERE going to have a conspiracy about ANYTHING, now is one of the best times and conditions in which to execute it . Now is the best time and conditions to execute a conspiracy .
 Gerald Posner: Oswald went hunting with friends/coworkers in Russia while in Russia . Posner writes in “Case Closed’s” that he went hunting in Russia with friends .
 I repeat, a shotgun — The friends alleged that he was hopelessly inept with that . He was alleged to have been hopelessly incompetent with that. He was also said to be 'hopelessly inept'
 The Manlicher-Carcano that Oswald used was hardly a state-of-the-art rifle even in the 60s . Yet, despite being too inept to hunt with a shotgun, Oswald managed to pull of a supposedly impressive shooting job .
 Posner is NOT a supporter of conspiracy theories . His book was written specifically to challenge the stuff in Stone’s movie .
 "It always struck me as very, very strange that he never, ever actually made the connection between those two facts," he says .
 There’s nothing to put together in his book, despite the fact that it seems pretty significant, to me, to be inept with a shotgun .
 George Hickey and William Greer are the two SS agents that have been named as likely accidental shooters . The two agents are believed to be likely to have been involved in the shooting .
 I haven't read the books in question so I have no idea how well they make their case . I haven’t read them in question .
 I'm just saying that this DOES offer an explanation for a coverup without there being some widespread eeeeevil conspiracy going on . I’m just saying . I'm not sure if there's a widespread conspiracy going for the coverup .
 After Kennedy got shot, the nation was in shock, and one can EASILY accept the idea that it was a frigging dumbass stupid random-chance accident that killed “a god” like Kennedy . America would not be able to accept that notion, or, perhaps
 I’m sorry, I can SEE that discussion occurring without presupposing some massive, well-planned and intricate conspiracy that created the situation . I'm sorry. I can’t SEE that . discussion occurring . without presuppositioning some massive conspiracy . That’s not
 Oswald’s marksmanship and his rifle were the subject of the Bugliosi book, including this excerpt . Please read this excerpt from Buglioi's book on Oswald's marksmanship .
 A ballistics expert testified to the Warren Commission that all of these fragments “produced a profile highly characteristic” of the type of ammunition Oswald used in his Mannlicher-Carcano rifle . The fragments were found to all be from one bullet, the expert testified at the Warren
 Some fragments of Kennedy's brain fragments were found in his brain . The theory that they came from a Secret Service agent doesn't wash . Unless the agents were carrying Carcano rifles at the time, the theory doesn't work .
 In fact, every single conspiracy theory has flaws you can drive a Mack truck through, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "In fact, the truth is that every conspiracy theory is flawed"
 The evidence in Bugliosi’s book that Oswald did this alone is simply overwhelming . Once again, I will state that the evidence is overwhelming . The evidence is "simply overwhelming" for Oswald .
 The book is 1600 pages long, with a CD-ROM containing 1600 pages of footnotes . The book was published in 2000 .
 There is a search function to find where the book deals with topics you want to read about . There is also a function to help you find the book's topics .
 I also recommend highly the first two hundred pages, a timeline of the assassination . The book is also highly recommended for readers .
 John Sutter's book about the Manson case, Helter Skelter, is quite good, he says . For example, he wrote about the case of the Manson family .
 He is great at amassing evidence in a systematic way and prosecuting a crime . That's what he’s known for, after all .
 You completely ignore — and I do mean . — what I said in favor of a straw man argument that I didn’t make though plenty of others have. You completely ignored what I . said, and I . do mean completely ignore . What I said? "I didn�
 If you're ANY good with a gun, you’re going to be able to use a flinkin’ shotgun . I’m sorry, if you're any good with . a gun . You’ve never been to the gun shop .
 The government is claiming that Oswald was officially a “good shot”, yet people who knew him and went hunting with him said he couldn’t hit a barn door at 50 paces with a shotgun .
 There's so much crap that makes you go “Hmmmmm…” it strains credibility all around . That’s the biggest problem with the whole JFK thing — there's sooooo much crap . The biggest problem is that there's too much crap to make you go "
 On the one hand, there is a lot to the whole ‘conspiracies don’t work’ which I concur with . On the other hand, it's not clear if conspiracy theories don't work, but it does .
 OTOH, there’s a lot of stuff that jars in its overall improbability, coincidence, and absurdity that really doesn’t fit the idea that NO ONE is futzing with the facts on the “Oswald was alone” side .
 The best environment for a conspiracy is the one where everyone believes in conspiracies, the author says . "A huge percentage of the claims of conspiracy are false," he says .
 "One tends to throw the baby out with the bathwater and not even notice, too. But in this scenario, one tends to be thrown out of the water and not noticed, too," she said .
 "To be good with a rifle, as one would be in the service, does not mean good with shotgun," he says . He says. To be a good rifleman, as well as a good shooter, doesn't mean good shotgun .
 In comparison to today’s political standards, it seems to me JFK would easily be a republican . JFK would have easily been a republican.
 Oswald's friends/coworkers with whom Oswald was hunting in Soviet Union were obviosly KGB operatives, they could say only what KGB want you to believe . Oswald's KGB friends/co-workers could say what KGB wants you to think .
 Neo, you and the others have allowed yourselves to be focused on one conspiracy; that’s what they want you to do, so you ignore the older and much bigger conspiracy . Neo says Neo and others are focused on the older conspiracy, but ignore the larger and much larger conspiracy
 Since the assassination of William McKinley over one hundred million Americans have died…and many under mysterious or unexplained circumstances . Many of the deaths have been unexplained or unexplained .
 The left ascribes the Kennedy assassination to a “right-wing climate of hate,” but the “They” who killed Kennedy also killed Bobby Kennedy . Note that the left not only ascribes RFK assassination to “Right-wing hate” The left
 Neo linked to the time line of Neo's Nov 22nd portion of what he linked to is fascinating reading . The time line is a time line from Neo's time on Nov. 22nd .
 Top secret messages from the source warn that that the Soviets are unable to remove the mentally unstable Khrushchev from office while he has the support of his Army . The source says that that that . the . Soviets are . unable to . remove the . mentally unstable leader from office . while
 The only conspiracy that took place in Dallas on November 22, 1963 was perpetrated by the President himself . President Richard Nixon was the only person to blame for the shooting .
 Twenty years ago I moved back to Dallas and was asked by a writer to go through some files that were kept by one of the top detectives in the police department .
 There were several hundred copies of all sorts of little bits and pieces the police were following, lots and lots of trivia . Not one smoking gun we thought we might find, police say .
 There were copies of the interviews with Oswald and the FBI involvement with Oswald both before the Kennedy shooting and after . Oswald was the prime suspect in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 A lot of the information was also about Jack Ruby and where each police officer was at the time he shot Oswald . Jack Ruby was also known for his role in the assassination .
 At the time of the shooting it never entered the mind of the cops that someone would be nuts enough to do what Ruby did . Ruby was shot in the head by police officers .
 Jack Ruby was not surprised at all that he could and would shoot Oswald . Ruby was a well-known member of the Ruby gang in the early days of the Second World War .
 Oswald was a Marine and he was good with a rifle and to make the shot he did you did not have to be great, only good . To make a shot like Oswald's, you didn't have to have a great shot - only good, says CNN.com .
 Oswald had rented a room to be closer to his work and he was not living with his family . Oswald rented the room in November of 1963 to stay closer to work . Oswald was not allowed to see his family for the first time .
 I surmise that he sat in his rented room night after night working the bolt on his rifle until the action was smooth as butter and he had his muscle memory perfected . He sat in a rented room for night and night and worked the bolt for hours .
 As far as the gun is concerned, it was an old Italian made gun that shoots a small diameter bullet that is longer than most . The bullet is said to have a very long and narrow bullet .
 In full metal jacket the bullet does real goofy things when it hits and if it does not impact bone, it can come out pristine . If it hits bone, the bullet comes out pristine.
 It takes hundreds and hundreds of rounds to use a shotgun with a decent level of skill . As for shotguns and rifles, I am a shot gunner and it takes hundreds of hundreds to use .
 The rifle shot is a static shot with concentration while the shotgun is used with a sweeping fluid motion . The shotgun shot is used in a more fluid motion than the rifle .
 "I am convinced that the smoking gun we were looking for twenty years just is not there. I have had some contact with people who were in law enforcement and others in here in Dallas at the time," says D.C. Rep. John Sutter .
 Guns had not been smoking for about 70 years at the time of the shooting . The grassy knoll was a grassed knoll where the shooting occurred .
 One sorry, goofy guy who had already screwed up trying to shoot General Edwin Walker months before created a perfect storm that we all wish never happened, but it did . The shooting happened in Dallas, Texas, last month .
 I have a pistol, a rifle, and a shotgun . I have not read Bugliosi’s book .
 "I’ve shot them a little at a nearby indoor range, but I haven’t practiced nearly enough," he says . He says he’s not practiced enough to shoot them at indoor ranges .
 "I’m better with the pistol than with either the rifle or the shotgun," he says . But for what it's worth, he says, he’s better with pistol than rifle or shotgun .
 Rifles are for long distance shooting, and I don't have an outdoor range near me so I haven’t shot it much . Rifles were for long-distance shooting, so I've shot them much. I've never shot a rifle .
 The indoor range I've used allows shotguns, but I’m simply more accurate and more confident with the pistol . I'm simply more confident and more accurate .
 The shotgun is loud as hell even with ear protection, and kicks like a mule . The shotgun kicks like mule. It's loud even if you're wearing ear protection or ear protection .
 A person might be good with a shotgun but that takes extra evidence, not merely the fact that he was in a military service . The man was found dead in a house firefight with a rifle .
 A shotgun is considered the “ideal” household gun protection for someone not interested in investing the time to be vaguely good with a handgun . The description used was pretty much that he was hopeless I’m sorry, the reason a shotgun is .
 Oswald the “pretty decent marksman” couldn’t do this, according to Oswald . Oswald was a "pretty decent" marksman, but apparently Oswald couldn't do this . Oswald has a history of being shot at least once or twice .
 In metal jacket the bullet does real goofy things when it hits and if it does not impact bone, it can come out pristine . Nice try, but you show ignorance here .
 This bullet — and only this bullet — had to be the one which shattered Connolly’s wrist, along with battering through both Kennedy's AND Connolly's bodies . This bullet HAD to be one which smashed Connolly and Kennedy's wrist .
 I failed to state it clearly in my 10:54 comment, but I have actually missed the paper target altogether with the shotgun, even though I can easily get close to the bull’s eye with the pistol .
 I'm not taking issue with anything else you said; I'm pretty much an agnostic on this subject . I’m pretty much agnostic about this subject, but I don’t think it’s OK, he says. He says he's not taking issues
 I note that you are smart enough to know this but pretend it’s another issue altogether; home defense. I say that you’re smart enough, know this. But pretend it's a different issue altogether.
 The cries against Kennedy conspiracy become more shrill as time passes . President Obama has been accused of lying about his son's assassination .
 IGotBupkis: I’m going out in a couple of minutes and only have a moment or two to tend to the blog right now . I got out in the next few minutes and I'm going to go to bed .
 John Sutter: Bugliosi’s book tells me that you’d rather traffic in distortions than facts on this topic . That tells me a great deal, Sutter says . Also, while I’ve not read his book, he says he’
 "Nearly everything you’ve written is incorrect—simply does not conform to the facts," writes CNN.com's John Sutter . "Because nearly everything you've written ... is incorrect," he writes .
 "I took the time and trouble to give you links to passages from the Bugliosi book that specifically answered the charges you made and refuted them," he writes .
 CNN.com: "If you did, you would see that the shotgun business you report from Russia are refuted handily and specifically. If you did," you would have seen that .
 igot: If you’re good with a rifle, you must necessarily be good at a shotgun . igot also says you must be good enough with a shotgun to shoot .
 Ability to recognize and correct one’s biases, that is, to be objective, is the rarest of all intellectual virtues . To be objective is a rarest intellectual virtue, says the author .
 "It takes years of serios effort to aquire, and still almost never is perfect," says the author .
 This is the real reason why conspiracy theories are so successful among untrained minds . Conspiracy theories are often successful among the untrained, say experts .
 When I was in basic training, they taught us to hit moving targets by shooting at metal discs, about the size of a half dollar, with a bb gun . I was taught to hit targets with metal discs .
 An instructor would flip the disc into the air, like someone flipping a coin, and the trainee would try to hit it with a snap shot from a bb gun . An instructor standing a few feet in front would flip it in the air . The instructor would then try it with
 'It sounds impossible, and when it was explained what we were going to be doing, I couldn’t believe it. It sounds impossible,' he said . 'I couldn't believe it,' he added .
 A basketball could be considerably farther away, and still not be all that hard to hit . So, a basketball could still be hit by a basketball .
 I became convinced a long time about that most of the conspiracy theory kooks are that way because they don’t want to admit that a leftist killed the sainted Kennedy . Most of the kooks don't like to admit they killed Kennedy, the author says .
 Common sense reason why I believe it could not have been a conspiracy boils down to one simple question: "What do you think it could be a conspiracy?"
 A super secret conspiracy that would have taken weeks if not months of planning would have been derailed by the vagaries of the weather . The weather would have derailed the plans for the super secret operation .
 The president's car's top may be down, but the weather could make it harder for planners to get a rifle from a building window . The president was killed by a high powered rifle fired from a window in a building .
 I can't imagine why the weapon of choice for a well planned but ill conceived assassination attempt would be a bolt action rifle . I can’t imagine why a well-planned but ill-conceived assassination attempt uses a rifle .
 Compound that with the increased difficulty created by using a bolt action rifle rather than an automatic rifle, it's more difficult to shoot . Compound the difficulty of using a rifle with a bolt-action rifle is more difficult than automatic rifles .
 From a common sense perspective, none of it makes sense to be a conspiracy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's not a conspiracy. It's just a mystery"
 From the choice of weapon, to the reliance on weather, the need to keep co-conspirators quiet . From the . choice of . weapon, . to the . reliance on . weather, and the . need to . keep . co-operation quiet .
 The key to hitting the slug, or, as the instructors did it, is to knock the wad of paper out of the hole in the slug . The key is to wait until the slug is motionless .
 Oswald was awful at marksmanship on a range at a fixed target . Oswald was not covered in his Marine training . Oswald's shooting skills were not covered by Marine training, he says .
 If he couldn't hit a bird with a snap shot, he couldn’t hit a guy at 90 yards moving slowly and diagonally away, making the lead little or zilch . The lead in the race for the PGA Tour had little or nothing to do with
 That he could surmount challenges that most of us can't and couldn’t, has little to do with it, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 Straight line stock, heavy barrel, bipod, and, of course, it was also illegal for civilian use . It's also illegal to use civilian use.
 Getting one for a nutcase shooter would be a clear signal there were some Big Shots involved . But getting one for one would signal that there were Big Shots .
 Listing the actions completed by working a bolt sort of stretches the thing out in the mind of the unwary–just a coincidence, I'm sure .
 Owner of a pre-war Enfield .303, it’s “whackety-whack” just about as fast as you can say it. Fact is, and I say this as the owner of a .303 .
 If you have the rifle in some kind of rest, if it’s done right, leaning against something, resting on something, your normal return from the recoil brings you back very close to the sight line . If you’re doing it right, resting against something brings you
 The NRA had been offering M1 carbines for $20 if you joined, which I did, to find I was behind about forty-leven million other carbine lusters .
 Oswald had access to a number of weapons which people not Oswald might think superior to his Carcano . Oswald's Carcano was a weapon that some people might think was superior to the Carcano.
 Oswald had owned the gun for more than a decade . He's not sure how long he'd owned it, how many rounds he'd shot with it, and how many times he'd sat around cycling it empty .
 He may just have thought this was the best weapon because it was familiar to him . It may just be because he may just think this is the best .
 Oswald purchased his rifle in March of 1963 thru a mail order ad for $14.95, if I recall correctly . Oswald purchased the rifle in 1963 via mail-order ad .
 He tried to shoot General Walker through a window in his house in April and he was not successful . General Walker tried to kill him in April but was unsuccessful .
 Carcano was made in Italy in 1940, it was an old design that was still very good . Carcano made in . 1940, made in Italian in Italy .
 At the time it occured I was in college but I had shot the same model rifle in 1962 . In high school, I was working in a hardware store where we sold all types of used guns that I would clean up and test fire .
 A rifle that cost next to nothing could turn us all upside down, but it did . That was a sad sorry day for the whole world when a rifle that costs nothing, but turned us upside down . The world was turned upside down when the rifle was used in the shooting .
 Conspiracy theories about major world events are popular because they are comforting . Conspiracy theories are comforting because of the comforting nature of the events .
 'Major' things have a huge impact on the public consciousness because of their scale and/or the degree of media attention that is given to them . Not necessarily the things that the judgement of history will find to be the most important . I mean ‘major’ in the sense
 They assume that we are living in an orderly world where everything is planned, and that the planners are familiar Western politicians . But they are wrong, they say they are planning for the future, and the world is planned .
 They assume that the ordinary citizen can buy a book and learn the SECRET TRUTH of the world yet not live in fear of being disappeared . They assume they can learn the truth of the World yet not be disappeared .
 They appeal to wishful thinking and give the believers a pretext to feel that they are bravely facing the truth instead of running away from it . So they appeal to wishingful thinking, they say, and give a pretext .
 Conspiracy theories are to history what Agatha Christie novels are to murder . Conspiracy theories have been to history as much as murder theories .
 A modified M-14 in semi-auto mode only was barred by Los Federales from civilian access in 1965 . A modified version of the gun was also barred by the federal government from civilian use .
 Oswald having a mil-only rifle in 1963 would have been prima-facie evidence of conspiracy . Oswald had mil-Only rifle, which would have led to conspiracy theory .
 The Cherry Coke then splattered on my mouse and then changed velocity heading toward my monitor . It then, somehow defying the laws of physics, dripped down the backside of the monitor . The Coke then went on to splatter on the mouse .
 I nearly choked, as an almost infintesimal, yet adequate amount of Cherry Coke proceeded to go “down the wrong chute” as they say . Also, I nearly choke, as a almost infinesimal amount of . yet adequate . amount of cherry Coke
 "Kindly refreain from making such comments again or I may have to bill you the price of replacement components," he said .
 Conspiracy theories persist because conspiracies are real, and they happen all the time . Conspiracy theories are real. They are real . They are very real, they are real and very real .
 Political assassinations have been carried out by conspiracists from time immemorial . Political assassination is a form of assassination carried out in the world of conspiracy theories .
 Julius Caesar, Abraham Lincoln, and Archduke Franz Ferdinand were all assassinated by conspiracies . Julius Caesar and Abraham Lincoln were assassinated by conspiracy conspiracies.
 The 19 hijackers didn't just wake up one morning and spontaneously decide to do the same thing at the same time . The hijackers were not just randomly hijacking, they were hijacking the plane .
 Scoped, based on Wiki photo of weapon ‘from National Archives’.
 Oswald’s buddy simply noticed the package Oswald was carrying into work was a gun and not curtain rods . I find it fascinating that world events could have been drastically altered had Oswald's buddy had simply noticed he was carrying a gun . Oswald's friend thought the curtain rods were curtain rods
 The “lone nut” assassin might be a peculiarly American phenomenon, says author . He says he's often thought that the ‘lone nuts’ assassin is an American phenomenon .
 I haven’t exhaustively researched assassinations in foreign countries, so I could be completely wrong about that . I’m not sure how many assassinations have taken place in the world .
 Maybe it's an unfortunate side effect of our traditional culture of individual liberty and self-determination . Maybe it’s an unfortunate result of our tradition of individual freedom and selfdetermination .
 Oswald’s skill at rapid fire in the Corps. I do note, however, that there is some talk about his skill . Oswald's skill in rapid fire is not mentioned in the book .
 With iron sights, with some kind of rest, or if you’re really good at what we called stockweld–cheek to stock–you come back down from the recoil very, very close to being right on target . You can also get a lot of success with
 I could cycle my Enfield rapidly, although I didn’t live fire it that fast, and keep a fixed hold on the weapon . He could cycle rapidly, but he didn't live fire that fast .
 The left hand pulls it in against the shoulder while the right hand operates the bolt . You learn to operate the bolt without pulling the rifle around . You also learn to use the left hand to pull the rifle in and out .
 "Not saying it couldn’t be done, as it obviously was by a number of guys," he says . "I’m not saying it’s done, but it was done by a lot of guys. Not saying it could be done"
 Just that Oswald was good at firing the M1 fast is a weak connection to his Dallas shooting . Just that saying Oswald was . good at . firing the . M1 was a weak link to the Dallas shooting. Just that .
 JFK assassination mystery: William Wayne Whaley parked his cab at the Greyhound station to get a pack of cigarettes . "On Nov. 1963, 1963, sirens were already screaming across downtown Dallas when . Whaley was already in downtown Dallas .
 "He knew who would be a chatter and who would try to ride all day without paying a dime," he said . He knew who was going to be a chaperone and who was trying to ride without paying .
 That afternoon, he saw a fare walking down Lamar Street whom he took to be a wino . He took the fare on Lamar Street to see a man who he thought was a man with a beard . The wino was a win, he said, "a wino"
 Oswald had gotten off a bus two blocks north of his destination . The driver didn't know that minutes earlier, Oswald had left the bus . Oswald had been two blocks away from the bus when he was killed .
 He had hoped it would take him out of downtown but instead had gotten snarled in traffic near Dealey Plaza . Traffic was snarling near the downtown area of downtown .
 Oswald had perched in a building overlooking the same plaza and shot President John F Kennedy in the head . A few minutes before that, of course, Oswald had shot President Kennedy . An old woman came up to the car and stuck her head through Oswald's window .
 Richard Aubrey: Oswald's shooting record as a Marine is not to say it’s an exact correspondence, but to show that conspiracy theorists who bring it up and say it indicates he was a bad shot are wrong . He says the point of bringing up the record is to show
 From which it follows that he would have felt familiar with it and confident with it, it follows . From which he would've felt familiar and confident, it's not surprising that he'd felt familiar .
 Most guys, with Marine training behind them, could buy a rifle, run maybe hundred rounds through it to get used to it . Then just keep it clean, presuming correctly, they’d be almost as good as in the Old Days . Most guys with Marine . training behind
 Prinzip was on the wrong street, but the guys on the right street either choked or had some kind of problem . Prinzip had a problem with Prinzip, but it's not clear what caused the problem .
 Bruce: Oswald was so relaxed that he killed Officer Tippit in cold blood on a Dallas street in the middle of the day with a whole bunch of witnesses looking on, and just because he stopped him .
 Prinzip was on the wrong street, but the guys on the right street either choked or had a problem .
 From reading Barbara Tuchmann’s account in The Guns of August, it was practically a comedy of errors . From reading her account, it's practically a failure to get the story right .
 Dan Rather established his journalistic integrity when he presented Highland Park — a rich Dallas suburbschoolchildren as being happy that JFK was shot . Rather's journalistic integrity was established in this case, he said .
 At our school that day in Dallas, we were allowed an excused absence to go downtown to see the motorcade . We were allowed to go to see it, but were not allowed to leave school .
 Tina Towner's video footage has had her video footage shown in many stories of that day . Towner was one of her classmates to share her video with the world .
 Tippet was killed by Oswald in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas that day . Oswald killed Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in August .
 The History Channel recreated the Kennedy assassination using mannequins built by an Australian company that tests the destructive power of weapons such as landmines . The History channel recreated Kennedy's assassination using the mannequin .
 The mannequins are comprised of ballistic-gel flesh and organs, resin bones, and chamois skin . They are made of resin bones and chameois skin, and ballistic gel flesh, respectively .
 A marksman fired the same rifle that Oswald used, from the same height, distance, and angle, and all the injuries to Kennedy and Connally caused by the “magic bullet” were recreated .
 An 86-year-old retired doctor fired three on-target shots in the same time period as Oswald, with the same rifle . He also saw a documentary years ago in which a retired doctor shot three shots .
 Apparently this doctor had demonstrated this ability on multiple occasions . Apparently he had demonstrated it multiple times before .
 Oswald took a cab home after offering the Tippit to someone else . Oswald took it home after giving it to him in a cab . Oswald offered it to another person, but it was not Oswald .
 There is no way to definitively prove all of these years later that NOBODY else was involved in the Kennedy assassination .
 The perpetrator is dead, may of the witnesses are dead, and some of the evidence went missing . Yes, you can dispel the more absurd conspiracy theories to a point, but you can also dispel some of them .
 Nobody knows his every move and every person he may have spoken with in the months or years leading up to the assassination . Nobody knows what happened before the assassination of President Kennedy .
 As to the point about the government knowing there was more to the story and perhaps covering it up, they wouldn’t have had to cover anything up . They could have just blown the investigation, they could have blown the probe, he says .
 There were doubts but figured it would be irresponsible to voice them without absolute proof . Perhaps there were a few who harbored doubts but didn't want to voice it .
 If they did suspect the Russians, I can certainly see why they wouldn’t want to reveal that . The Russians are suspected of being involved in the bombing of the U.S.
 "It basically would have put us back into a potential nuclear standoff situation with them," he said . "We would have had a nuclear standoff with them"
 If Bugliosi’s intent was to establish that Oswald was the only person who actually shot at Kennedy, then bully for him . Oswald was only one of the people who shot at JFK, the author says .
 You should listen to some of the speeches that Bugliosi gave on C-SPAN’s video site, Youtube and FORA.tv .
 "I’ve been in situations like that, but I was 14 and skipping school early morning to catch a bus to go see the Two Towers," he says . He says he was 14 when he skipped school to see the Towers .
 There was almost successful attempt to assassinate Brezhnev by a lone nut . A lone nut attempted to kill the Soviet leader by attempting to assassinate him .
 Dressed in police uniform, armed with two handguns in the sleeves of his trenchcoat, he mixed with police officers standing in Kremlin along the path of limos carring Brezhnev and cosmonauts . Police officers stood in Kremlin on path of the limos carrying Brezh
 He opened fire from point-blank distance from both hands and killed the driver of a limo . The gunman opened fire on the limo driver, killing him in a hail of bullets .
 He was arrested, found legally insane and spent 18 years in a special prison for mentally ill criminals . He was found guilty of being legally insane . He spent the time in prison for 18 years .
 Neo continues to misattributate comments to me that are VASTLY more absolute that ANYTHING I’ve made. You know, Neo, Neo . Neo, you keep misattattributing comments to him that are more absolute than ANYTHING he’s made
 Please make an effort to actually STOP AND READ what I’ve said, instead of forming some knee-jerk extreme reaction to it .
 I concede the “discovery location” as being on the stretcher and not the floor of the car . I concede that the ‘discovery . location’ was on the . stretcher, not the . floor, of the . car .
 I don’t believe this has a substantial impact on my doubts, as, it says very little about the real issues. I don't believe this . It doesn't say much about the 'real issues' of the government .
 Having flown as it is claimed to, it is not unlikely that it should have passed out through the floor .
 This is what more typically happens to bullets, and yeah, I’m more than open to the idea that there may be reasons it didn’t happen that way . This is more likely to happen to bullets than anything else, he says .
 A bullet which does ALL THAT — smashes into/through four bodies and TWO bones comes out looking far less like the above “fired bullet” shots (or this, or this and instead like that fairly unaffected bullet from the wiki piece .
 The bullet came through with so little obvious damage when bullets generally expand on impact into the first solid thing they encounter . Crap happens, things happen, things are not always as we expect… but it just seems really odd that the bullet came .
 The problems we get are manifest, here — 1) This single bullet has to have done a LOT of damage, yet come through it comparatively unscathed . 2) This one bullet has been done a lot of damage yet to come through unscathed. The problems are manifest here, here
 Oswald had to have fired at a very precise moment at a precise angle . The very body positions of the people involved have to be different from what they were only moments before the shot which “did the damage” had to be fired .
 I just says that, when faced with two explanations, the simpler of the two is more often right than wrong . "I just say that, in fact, I'm often more often wrong than wrong," he says .
 This situation, a very important one, hinges on very specific movements, actions, and decisions on the part of literally dozens, if not hundreds, of individuals to act in a manner which, in many cases, is against training and/or common practice .
 A bullet could be accidental misfire by one of two SS agents and which WAS covered up by multiple government agents/agencies after the fact, which is, really, not that improbable to believe . Or we can assume that there was another person .
 The worst part is that no one appears to have since come forth to fess up on their deathbed . No one has since come forward to admit to the crime .
 Maybe the government made some deal that somewhere, there’s a set of large payments being made out to the family of each of those ‘in the know” for fifty years after their death . If and only if they don’t speak, they might get paid
 It's possible to bury enough that there are maybe only a couple people, if anyone, left on earth who actually know . That would do it, and it's possible that only a few people would know .
 "That would explain it sufficiently, and sufficiently reasonably, that that objection melts away," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The reaction so far is NOT “Well, actually, xxx deals with that in book yyy, he says that these people said that, and these experts concur.” It's instead, “Mischaracterization x of your statement, ergo ‘y
 People respond to requests for light with plenty of heat, but very little light . And that’s the problem with the whole issue — people respond to the request for light, but little light, he says .
 That’s the response of the converted evangelical to an assault on faith, not the rational thinker on a subject of curiosity . That's not the response to an attack on faith . That is the response .
 "Stop answering the question you THINK you’re hearing instead of the exact words I am applying," she says . Stop answering the questions you THKE you're hearing .
 If I say “ALMOST” pristine that most emphatically DOES NOT mean the same thing as “PRISTINE” When I wrote that I had those EXACT PICTURES of the bullet in *my* head. When I said “almost”
 There is NO sign of any mushrooming at all, just a noticeable amount of axial flattening . I consider those to fit the bill of “almost” as there is no sign of mushroomming .
 CNN's John Sutter says he has no experience with fired bullets . That does not jibe with his own admittedly far from substantial experience with firing bullets .
 Point me to THAT rather than to something largely, if not totally UNrelated to it, and then yell at me as though I didn’t even look at what you pointed me to AND THEN expressly TOLD YOU that it DIDN’T match up with my query .
 Occam’s Razor is cutting both ways . I claim no position on the matter, just that, he says, Occam's Razor is both way .
 The latter isn’t even conceding the point, it’s just saying you believe you recall the question being asked and that it was answered sufficient for your opinion to remain firm . But have better things to do with your time than to hunt down the exact location of it
 So far, though, your responses have been far more evangelical than rational . Your responses have far more, as I note above, than rational than rational.
 Quote me accurately please, please, and in any response assume that any words I used were used with substantial precision . Please quote me accurately .
 Nobody is dumb enough to believe it, yet he presumes somebody can be fooled with the planted axiom . He presumes that somebody can't be fooled by the plant axiom, yet nobody can't believe it .
 "Despite this illiteracy, ... I still find things I never said. And who somehow can ... read BETWEEN THE lines to find things ... I never ... said. Who somehow can, despite this . illiteracy . read?
 Shotguns are recommended WEAPONS for household protection for people who don’t want to actually BOTHER to take the time to learn how to shoot . Shotguns can be used to protect your family from gun violence .
 The reason for this is that, for short ranges, a shotgun is, with its expanding field of fire, not that easy to MISS with . For short ranges it's not easy to Miss with. The reason is that for short . ranges, the shotgun is not easy . to MISS
 CNN.com's John Sutter says he's ready to hear arguments about shotgun hunting . Sutter: "You want to argue, from experience, or via some expert’s statement, that this says nothing about using a shotgun for hunting, I’m . Now,
 Neo seems doubtful, but I’m listening, which is FAR more than anyone else supporting Neo appears to be doing . Neo seems to be listening to Neo, but he's not sure if it's true .
 If you can’t aim a shotgun, which does NOT require much accuracy, that that is likely to be relevant to how well you aim a rifle, which DOES require some accuracy . And yes, I believe that, lacking any expert’s claim to the contrary, that
 It's amazing how many times and just how precisely specific I'm having to actually state them to get the point across in this forum to get someone to actually attempt a reply to THEM, and not some near-question which isn’t the same at all . But they are RE
 The same ones who have a vested interest in our believing him to be a good shot. Oh, right, the same ones .
 "That doesn’t mean he was NOT a good shot. That does not mean he wasn't a good shooter. And, since I’m SURE you’re about to mischaracterize the above, THAT DOES NOT CLAIM HE WAS NOT a bad shot
 Oswald was a good shot, for which the sole evidence is the people who have an interest in your believing that . It says there are two sets of claimed facts I find in opposition — 1) That Oswald was good shot. 1) that Oswald was not a bad shot. 2)
 Scott @3:31 Your arguments have merit, but they don’t apply to the other suggestion I’ve pointed to, which is that there WAS a coverup, but only after the fact, and that a lot of the problems of the magic bullet, etc.,
 If there was any conspiracy, then this one seems far more likely to fill the bill than a vasssst eeeevil cabal’s intricate plan . If you think there is a conspiracy, it seems more likely than a conspiracy .
 It is reasonable that the bullet was found on the floor of the car or on Connolly’s stretcher, it is said . Having punched through four things, it was reasonable to find the bullet in Connolly's stretcher or car .
 I find issue with the lack of mushrooming more than anything else, here, and that’s hardly a conclusive statement on my part . Just one of a stack of ‘little things” that provide justification for doubt, he says .
 Some time spent at examining spent bullets while target practicing with a rifle will reveal that not all bullets react the same . Some bullets react differently to each bullet .
 Oswald was carrying ten Canadian quarters in his pants pocket . Oswald's oddity was most misfortunate for conspiracy buffs in the same way had Oswald been carrying 10 Canadian quarters . Oswald had been carrying ten quarters .
 Igot introduces a new subject not covered in the whole enchilada, home defense and shotguns . Home defense is the subject of this week's edition of the show .
 Shotguns for home defense are not the same as those for bird shooting . Matter of fact, shotguns for home shooting are not as different as bird shooting shotguns .
 Most guys aren’t going to get two, one with a long barrel and a choke for birds . One with a short barrel to be handy in a house. Another with a . short barrel for a . house .
 One shotgun for home defense with the various characteristics you want and don't bother bird shooting . So one will do for both, or you get one for one use and something else for the other .
 There is no necessary connection between being good bird hunting and being good with a rifle except being used to the recoil . Point is, the home defense distraction aside, there is no need to be good at bird hunting or good at rifle .
 Jacketed military bullets which don’t hit bone are less likely to suffer deformation passing through soft tissue than hunting rounds .
 There was some lefty agitation against the M16 round with its reduced rifling and designed propensity to tumble in the flesh . Indeed, bullets expressly designed to deform in soft tissue are illegal .
 The copper-jacketed lead slug is not only the legal bullet for most combat uses, it is handy . It is also legal in the U.S. to use the bullet in the military .
 Nicely pointed and will penetrate thin-skinned vehicles and some structures and retains its shape in brush .
 These characteristics make it less likely to deform than a hunting round . These characteristics mean it is less likely than a rifle round .
 Whether there were communists behind Oswald in the sense that they arranged for him to assassinate Kennedy or not has, afaik, not been seriously addressed, not least for lack of smoking guns, so to speak .
 There is certainly no reason to think that Oswal wasn’t motivated by the communist ideals he had, and possibly encouraged, by the communists, to take some pains with his life to be able to do this .
 The Marines went into WW II with the bolt-action Springfield ’03 . Strikes me that the Marines went . into WW I with the . bolt action Springfield ‘03 . Strike me that . the Marines . went into . WW II .
 I wonder if there were any ’03s still around and perhaps some of the Old Corps insisted on everybody putting a few rounds down range . Maybe as a sniper rifle, maybe as a . sniper rifle. I wonder .
 Long range accuracy was not the issue, but from watching the way the rifle was held steady, hundred-yard hits might have been pretty likely . The rifle is held steady enough to hold it steady enough .
 Only civilians think Oswald had a tough shot . Only soldiers think Oswald shot was a good shot .
 Bulgiosi wrote that George Bush should be prosecuted for first degree murder because of his decision to overthrow Saddam Hussein . He also claimed that Bush's overthrow of Saddam Hussein was a crime . Bulgioi himself committed this act with his book .
 The White House has been accused of lying about why it intervened in Syria . President Barack Obama's intervention in Syria was a lie, Obama says .
 I had a great deal of respect for Mr Bugliosi before he wrote that last book . I had great deal, indeed enormous, respect for him before his last book, he says .
 It's possible that he was somehow manipulated into commiting his crimes but the evidence that he did it is overwhelming . Now it’s possible that . He was somehow . manipulated into committing his crimes .
 If you want to believe that JFK was killed by a lone nut assassin, JFK was up to his eyeballs in organized crime contacts, you can't believe that he was a nutty nut .
 Take a look at the youtube short…”secret service stand down”…and then tell me there was no conspiracy. Tell me there is no conspiracy against the government .
 Warren Commission Report, Gerald Posner and Bugliosi’s 1,000 pages vs….a YouTube video . Take a look at the youtube short…”secret service stand down”…and then tell me there was no conspiracy .
 A Marine sniper shot a man in an open car moving directly and continuously within the range of his gun sights . Yes, an avowed Marxist who scored well as a sniper shot the man in open car .
 Many find comfort in the notion that their lives are rigged, controlled by some shadowy cabal, ultimately relieving them of responsibility for their lot in life . Many others find comfort with the idea that their life is controlled by shadowy cabal .
 There comes a time when it’s clear you just don’t want to hear the answers to questions .
 JFK ordered the SS not to ride along because he believed that it was limiting his contact with the public . JFK believed that the SS ride along would limit his public contact with them .
 This was after a previous trip where they did ride along on the boards . This was the first time the team had been able to ride on the board .
 He stated numerous times that if someone wanted to kill him and didn’t care what happened to themselves, that there was nothing that could be done to stop them . He said he would not be able to stop someone from killing him .
 If there was a conspiracy to kill JFK, then JFK himself was at the center of it . JFK was assassinated in 1968 . He was assassinated by the White House at the time .
 JFK did not order the secret service off of his car…that order came from the Secret Service itself . JFK ordered the service to be removed from his car after JFK ordered it off .
 I've read so many books about the assassination…both pro and con conspiracy I can’t remember which one got to the bottom of that particular story . Problem is I’m trying to find out which one did .
 As long as they looked the other way while he had private time with his women, they looked other way . "They looked other ways to look other way," he said of the women .
 Bugliosi’s book on Iraq sounds pretty awful, although I haven’t read it . SteveMG: I agree, but I’ve not read it.
 Bugliosi’s strength is criminal law prosecutions . But, as I wrote in an earlier comment, he is a strong advocate for the prosecution of criminal law .
 It dealt with the points you were supposedly making, and demolished them as well . Because it dealt with those points, it was also demolished as well, as well. Because of that, it also dealt with that point .
 The main point made is that it is well documented that Kennedy himself was on record as not wanting Secret Service agents to the right and left REAR bumper of the presidential limo . Kennedy was well known for not wanting agents to be in the left and right of the limo bumper .
 Secret Service agents could overrule this if they thought it especially necessary to have agents stationed there, in certain circumstances . The Secret Service could also override this decision if they think it especially needed .
 Four days before the assassination, agents mounted the rear of Kennedy's limo in Tampa, Florida . Kennedy told the agent stationed in the front seat of the limo to have them get off and return to the follow-up car .
 In Dallas, agents were following his general orders and oft-expressed desires . They could have overruled him if they saw an exceptionally special reason to do so .
 Increase Mather, your namesake in Puritan times sat in on the judging of the Salem Witch Trials . Increase IncreaseMather sat in the judging during the Salem witch trials .
 Oswald’s firing angle would not have been much of an obstacle anyway, i don’t believe agents on the rear bumper would be much of a obstacle anyway . From what i’ve seen of Oswald's firing angle, i.’m not sure if agents
 If a bullet would have went through an agent before Kennedy and Connelly we could pretty much hang it up on combatting conspiracist at that point . And if a bullet went through Kennedy or Connelly, we could have hung it up .
 Dear IgotBupkis, Not only do you still blabble about bupkis you are blathering about bukkis . You are blabbing about gotbups, but you are still gotbupkish .
 Re your comment today at 6:35 AM, you are confusing several comments of mine with each other . Re your comments of the day: Share your comments with us .
 When I wrote, “I took the time and trouble to give you links to passages from the Bugliosi book that specifically answered the charges you made and refuted them,” I was referring back to this comment of mine, which at the time was my only previous comment
 In it, I did what I said—I provided links to excerpts from the Bugliosi book that were in response to points you had attempted to make earlier . In the book, I provide links to the book that I provided . I also provided links from the book to the
 Oswald’s marksmanship and the rifle is the subject of this article . Oswald's marksmanship was a hallmark of his marksmanship . Oswald was shot in the head with a rifle and a rifle .
 The first question was whether the first shot was an easy one or was actually the most difficult . The second asked if the first one was the easiest one or the hardest one .
 The theory had to do with the theory about Secret Service agents firing the kill shot accidentally . I had trouble with a link for the third, so I summarized it .
 The fourth excerpt concerned the reports from Russia about Oswald’s skill with a shotgun . Oswald was reportedly skilled in shooting . Oswald's skill was reportedly a gun expert in Russia .
 The bullet was “almost pristine and pretty clean, with very little deformity of any kind,” the bullet that did the damage to both Kennedy and Connally . Whether you had used the term “pristine” or ‘almost pristine” you were making
 JFK was the one who ordered the Secret Service not to ride along on the limousine . The Secret Service was ordered to stay away from the limo .
 The head of the SS that day in Dallas was passing along the orders that JFK gave earlier . JFK gave the orders to the SS in Dallas .
 JFK told the secret service after a trip in Miami that he didn’t want them riding on the car . JFK said he didn't want the secret services to ride on his car .
 Oswald was an unstable character and everyone who came into contact with him knew it, says Bugliosi . Oswald was unstable and everyone came to contact him with him, he says .
 No conspirators with financial resources would choose that particular gun as the murder weapon . Strange conspiracy that would rest on his being in the right place and the right time .
 An avowed Marxist takes a shot at the President during the height of the Cold War . President George W. Bush was elected to the White House .
 If all it is is encouragement, there’s no connection and the logistics can’t be managed by the loose cannon himself . If all is is encouraging, there's no connection .
 The Reds had explained to Oswald Oswald that the Italians made really good stuff . I agree that financial resources may have limited Oswald’s choices, but suppose he'd been explained to him by the Reds .
 Oswald or me were paying eight or nine hours of minimum wage labor for our weapons . Either of us were paying 8 or 9 hours a day for weapons, Oswald says .
 My weapon and Oswald’s, or more accurately, the clones in the millions, had already killed millions, he says . Oswald's weapon and his clone's clone, he writes, was already killing millions . "My weapon and my clone, Oswald's," he writes .
 Oswald was savvy enough to know when more was needed, not more . Oswald was smart enough to be savvy enough, perhaps not more, to know more than more .
 Oswald wanted to prove he was the superior mind on top of being a superior marksman . Oswald was determined to prove himself as a superior mind and a superior shooter .
 He relished the game of interrogation he was playing with detectives for those two days . "He relished playing the game he played with detectives," he said .
 The doctrine for reds was to insist on innocence if caught in United States jurisdiction and use the trial to both attempt to be acquitted and to discredit United States justice, says Rebecca West .
 It’s not just enough that he said he didn’t do it and they had the wrong guy. It's not just about saying he didn't do it, it's just that they had wrong guy, he said it .
 Richard Aubrey: The Soviets themselves, in their own files tried to steer clear of Oswald . The Soviets tried to avoid Oswald in their files .
 It is very unlikely they would have recruited him for any sort of assassination, or even suggested it to him . It is not likely the government would have been behind the assassination .
 If they'd wanted to do Kennedy in, they would have used more trusted people. If they’d wanted to kill him, they'd have used trusted people,’s spokesman said .
 Oswald was actually under psychiatric observation at a hospital in the USSR in 1959 . Oswald was so unstable he had tried slashed his wrist there after his application for citizenship was denied . Oswald had tried to slit his wrist after being denied citizenship in Russia .
 He kept a diary in the USSR that detailed his disillusion with how he was being treated by the Soviets . He kept it in a diary that detailed how he felt treated .
 It stretches credulity to imagine he was recruited by the CIA, not that they were above trying to assassinate Kennedy and using an agent . It's not clear if they were behind the assassination of Kennedy .
 Russian secret services never employ anybody with mental instability, any capacity, says Russian official . Russian secret service never employ people with mental illness, he says .
 Putting a bug in his ear, metaphorically speaking and not talking about electronic thingies, would cost nobody anything . But, if you have him on hand, putting a bug into his ear is a good idea .
 Perhaps, instead, they told him about how bad the capitalist system was, most especially the far right, and let him think about doing something . Perhaps, perhaps, instead of telling him how bad it was, perhaps he should have been told about it .
 Bomb bombs could be a good idea if there were complete deniability and zero actual resources expended . But planting bombs which might or might not go off and cause disruption might be a bad idea .
 The only positive reason not to kill JFK was if the Sovs thought JFK was better than the alternative . JFK was JFK's first president, and his father was assassinated .
 If half a dozen notable figures, mostly on the far right, had been killed in the space of a couple of years, along with some important dems, some by nutcases, it might have provided the Sovs an advantage . The resulting disorganization of the country might have
 This is speculation based on the claim of ‘patsy’ as a tactic and what I’d have done in the KGB’s shoes. This is based on what I would have done if I had been in my own shoes, he says .
 I figure it must have been Madison Square Garden, because you had to have the entire Presidential Detail of the Secret Service, the entire Dallas Police Force, all of the doctors and nurses on the ER staff at Parkland Hospital . Earl Warren, Arlen Specter, the United States Marine
 The first one you ask will beat you to a bloody pulp, then drag you to the nearest FBI office . The first time you ask is the first one, you will be beaten to a pulp .
 I’d get loose cannons back home, unless they looked stable enough for a work camp, with suggestions that they could make a Big Difference wherever they were, for the cause, by wrecking stuff .