 Their hostility was based on the placement of nuclear missile heads in Cuba . The U.S. government says the Cuban missile heads were placed in the Cuban territory .
 The conflict began shortly after the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs Invasion . The conflict was triggered by the failed invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Nervous about another American attack, Cuba turned to the Soviet Union . Cuba was worried about another attack by the U.S. in the early 1950s .
 In July 1962, Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro reached an arrangement in which ballistic missiles were placed in Cuba in order to prevent American aggression . The deal was reached in July 1962 .
 The U.S. government denies allegations that it had been paying no heed to the placement of nuclear missiles 90 miles away from Florida .
 American U-2 plane captured aerial photographs of various launch sites . U.2 plane was sent to Cuba to confirm that the Soviet Union and Cuba were indeed a threat .
 As a response, the United States established a military blockade around Cuba . The U.S. established a response to the blockade . The blockade was imposed in response to a Cuban uprising .
 The tactic was used to stop the Soviet Union from bringing nuclear missiles into Cuba . This tactic was also used in Cuba to stop nuclear missiles being brought into the country .
 The United States wanted the Soviet Union to disassemble the current weapons and send them back home . The U.S. also wanted the Soviets to send the weapons back to the United States .
 After several excruciating days of negotiating, Khrushchev and President John F Kennedy came to a decision . The decision was made in a decision by President Kennedy after several days of negotiations .
 The Soviets would remove ballistic missile heads from Cuba in exchange for the United States promising to never invade Cuba . The U.S. would remove the missile heads in return for a promise never to invade Cuba.
 The U.S. would remove weapons they had placed in Italy and Turkey . In addition, the United States would also remove weapons from Italy, Turkey and Italy .
 Analyze each document carefully, and answer the question or questions that follow . Analyze your document carefully to answer the questions or questions you follow .
 This is an open threat to the peace and security of all of the Americas. This is a serious threat to peace in the Americas, says President Obama .
 "Our objective must be to prevent the use of these missiles against this or any other country," he said . "We will not be able to use these missiles," he added .
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this secret and reckless threat to world peace . We must secure their withdrawal from the Western Hemisphere… We need to secure their withdraw from the . Western Hemisphere, he writes .
 Cuba lies at distance of ninety miles across the sea from the shores of the United States . Cuba worries you because it lies 90 miles from the U.S. shores, you say .
 In response to the bombing of these bases, the Soviet government will undoubtedly respond with the same against us, somewhere in Europe . But in the course of which Soviet specialists might suffer, the Russian government will probably respond to the same .
 Robert Kennedy’s view of destroying the nuclear missile bases in Cuba . Summarize Robert Kennedy's view on destroying the missile bases . Kennedy: "I want to destroy the bases"