 Kennedy wanted Khrushchev to cooperate with his future plans, this letter was not responded to or was anything done in making progress with Kennedy's plans . Kennedy wanted this letter to be made into a joint letter .
 In February 1962, the United States participated in an embargo against Cuba . General Edward Lansdale presented a 26-page timetable to plan the overthrow of the Cuban Government . Infact later on Kennedy sent another letter to Khrushchev .
 The Cuban government did not respond positively and this drew them closer to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union responded positively to the Cuban government's response .
 On this day, Fidel Castro made a speech entitled the Second Declaration of Havana . The speech was made by Fidel Castro .
 Castro told of the abuse Cuba and other Latin American nations had been subjected to at the hands of the United States, Spain, and other capitalist powers . In his speech Castro said the abuse was the result of the U.S. and Spain .
 Castro accused these powers of seeking only economic gain, despite their pretense of protecting less powerful nations . Castro swore that the United States was slowly encroaching upon its own failure .
 Soviet Union Naval Plans in Support of Operation Anadyr . Document outlines naval plan to send ships loaded with cargo to Cuba .
 Cuban troops are protecting Cuban island from invasion of U.S. forces . Their main goal is to protect the island from the invasion of the United States forces .
 Andrei Gromyko told president Kennedy that the Soviet Union is aiding Cuba only for defense . Kennedy visited by Andrei in October 1962 .
 Kennedy met with members of EXCOMM and other top advisors regarding the remaning solutions to the missile crisis . Kennedy meets with top advisors on missile crisis solutions .
 A full scale invasion was not the administration's first option, but they did support the naval blockade and agreed that something had to be done . The blockade was not their first option but they agreed that it was necessary .
 Soviets had multiple Foxtrot and Zulu class submarines all over the Atlantic from areas around Bermuda, the Bahamas, the Azores islands and the windwar island chain .
 This is when Krushchev told Kennedy that the Soviet Union won't cooperate the United States asking to pull the missiles out of Cuba . This is very important to the Cuban missile crisis because this is when .
 Letter from Castro to Khrushchev stated that Cuba would like the USSR's support in the possible USA invasion of Cuba . Letter was signed by Castro on October 26, 1962 .
 This could determine the fate of the USA, Cuba, and the USSR by initiating a nuclear war . The US, Cuba and USSR could be at risk by initiating nuclear war, says author .
 A proposal for the removal of missiles from both Cuba and Turkey was made by Nitika Khrushchev . The Soviets would remove their missles in Cuba if the Americans remove their missiles from Turkey . The proposal was made in a letter from Nitika .
 Khrushchev pointed out the hypocracy of the U.S. freaking out about Russia's misslies based in Cuba . The United States had missiles based in Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union, that were much closer .
 Khrushchev also urged the U.S. to solve the crisis quickly and quietly . The former Soviet leader urged the United States to solve it quickly and privately .
 Castro told Khrushehehev his opinion about the situation . In this letter Castro said his opinion would be expressed in the letter .
 Khrushehehev ended up removing the weapons from Cuba, lessenign the chance of war . Castro told him that the Soviets need to be more ready for war, however, however .
 Kennedy sent a letter to Khrushchev promoting his ideas . Kennedy expressed his excitement about the ideas they had come up with . The ideas were mainly taking weapons out of Cuba, and establishing security throughout Cuba .
 This letter was sent the day before the missile crisis ended, meaning these ideas had followed through and worked . It was sent by the president of South Korea the day after the crisis ended .
 Fidel Castro Fears of an attack against Cuba was imminent . Castro wrote to the leader of the Soviet Union, that he was almost certain an attack was imminent. Castro feared an attack would be imminent .
 He is seeking the support of the Soveit Union to help in defending Cuba against anyone who attacks it . Cuba is seeking support from the union to help defend Cuba against attacks .
 The Soviet Union responds saying that they pledge their support to Cuba, and will help them if they are indeed attacked . Cuba is attacked by the Soviet Union, but is not attacked by Russia .
 Nikita Khrushchev to Fidel Castro is a soltuion to prevent Cuba from invasion of the United States . Nikita wrote letter to Fidel to prevent U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Khrushchev explains to Castro that he should remain patient and not do anything his enmies could use against him . Castro says he should be patient and remain firm and patient . Castro: "I am not going to be afraid of anything I do"
 Was sent the day when tensions started to ease about the Cuban missle crisis . Was sent to the U.S. during the Cuban crisis .
 Agreement made between U.S. and Russia about the nuclear weapons in Cuba . Agreement included removal of weapons from Cuba and removal of missiles from Turkey .
 It's significant because this was in the middle of the Cold War and removing weapons in both places showed that the two countries were working towards a more stable relationship . The weapons were removed from both places in a bid to make the country more secure .
 Fidel Castro wrote to Nikita Khrushchev regarding defending Cuban air space . The Soviet Union was shooting down American planes . Fidel Castro was responding to a letter from Fidel Castro .
 Fidel Casrto sent a letter to Nikita Khrushchev asking to take part in the shooting down of U.S. planes . The letter was signed by Casrato, who was in charge of the shoot-down campaign .
 Kennedy sent a letter to Khrushchev saying that he should not use nuclear missiles and if he does he should be much more careful . instead of just launching them they should do test bombings so that they know what they are doing .
 Khrushehehev said that the Soviets would dismantle the missiles and return them to the Soviet Union . The Soviets also asked the U.S. stop flying over Russia adn Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev sends a letter to Fidel Castro, resonding to a letter that Castro had sent saying that the Soviet Union will support Cuba . His letter was significant because it led to the agreement that was made between the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 Meeting was significant because it was directley after the missle crisis . They say that Cuba should be thankful that the Soviet Union has helped them . This meeting was significant .
 Fidel summarizes the whole crisis from Cubas perspective and states the Cuban people's frustration in the removal of the weapons . Fidel: The Cuban people are frustrated with the removal .
 Fidel continuously states his dissapointment and anger towards the russians as well as the United States . Fidel also notes that even after the weapons were removed, not much changed in regardidng the US' involvment in Cuba .
 This is the last day of the 13 days of the Cuban Missle Crisis . Nov 28, 1962 The Actual Deal is published on CNN .
 Missles in Cuba would be dismantled and returned to the USSR in exchange for an American promise not to invae the island . U.S. promised not to invade Cuba in return for a promise of not invading Cuba .
 The Soviet Union responds saying that they pledge their support to Cuba, and will help them if they are indeed attacked . Cuba would like the USSR&#39;s support in the possible USA invasion of Cuba .
 Meeting was significant because it was directley after the missle crisis . They say that Cuba should be thankful that the Soviet Union has helped them .
 A proposal for the removal of missiles from both Cuba and Turkey was made by Nitika Khrushchev . The Soviets would remove their missles in Cuba if the Americans remove their missiles from Turkey .
 The letter from Kennedy was sent expressing his plans on what to do with Cuba without enflaming the international atmosphere . The letter led to the agreement that was made between the United States and the Soviet Union .
 This all showed how little the Soviets cared about Cuban input . This is the last day of the 13 days of the Cuban Missle Crisis .
 Kennedy met with members of EXCOMM and other top advisors regarding the remaning solutions to the missile crisis . Kennedy: "Not as a threat to the United States"