 The essential fault of both state leaders which created the inevitable crisis was miscommunication . However, the essential fault is that both leaders failed to communicate properly . The state of India and the state of South Africa is in a state of crisis .
 Actions taken by both states during the crisis as consistent with a realist point of view . Today we recognise actions taken by the two countries during the . crisis .
 Realism holds great emphasise on the obstacles enforced by human nature and the non-attendance of an international government . Realism emphasises the obstacles of human nature, and the lack of a government .
 Creating international politics is an area focused on power and state-interest . Creating international . politics an area of power .
 Historical context of the crisis creates an understanding of how power was obtained, whilst the crisis itself fixates on the struggle to retain and gain power .
 Castro was not the normative corrupt Latin-American dictator of the times . Castro was the normality of Latin American dictators . He was not always the normally corrupt Latin American dictator .
 Cuban leader's communist identity soon created ties with the Soviet Union . The threat of communism spread to Cuba, a state merely 90 miles from America .
 In accordance with the realist proposition that states pursue self-interest and relative-gain, America refused to cede its power of intervention . The U.S. refused to give up its power to intervene in Syria .
 This eventually led to the nationalisation of all foreign owned property and businesses’ in Cuba, including Americas, further deteriorating US-Cuban relations . This led to a further deterioration of US and Cuba relations .
 President Eisenhower's answer to Castro’s actions was a strict trade sanction . The embargo was imposed on Cuba in 1953 .
 Trade sanctions, which are still in effect today, were imposed to maintain an upper hand . Trade sanctions were imposed in order to maintain the upper hand in the Middle East .
 It left 95% of Cuban sugar buyer-less, driving Cuba directly into the arms of the communist Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was responsible for the loss of the Cuban sugar .
 Americas unawareness of the USSRs intentions and inability to communicate frankly, were partly to blame for the development of the security dilemma between the two superpowers .
 Americas failed attempt to remove Castro from power in the Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961 inevitably furthered the Soviet Union’s force in Latin America . Americas failed to remove Cuba's leader from power .
 Due to the United States actions and miscommunications, Soviet-nuclear testing restarted in 1961 . The United States took responsibility for the restarting of nuclear testing .
 American nuclear test closely challenged by rapid accumulation of military support in order to safe guard the United States interests . With the constant production of nuclear weapons by both superpowers, the need to one-up each other increased . This was closely challenged .
 Khrushchev decided to construct nuclear-capable launch sites in Cuba as a check on American power . This eventually led to the construction of the sites as a 'check on U.S. power'
 An argument can be made as to whether Khrushchev’s actions were necessary for the protection of state or whether the motivator was his personal campaign to accumulate power . An argument is made whether the motivation was to protect the state .
 Khrushchev’s perhaps drastic movements were merely in response to the actions of the U.S. in 1959 . However, they were only in reaction to the United States' actions in 1959.
 The placing of ballistic missiles in firing distance from Moscow reflects America’s social status as a powerful state with many allies . Britain, Italy, Turkey and Turkey were among the countries to test missile technology .
 It seems America is not accustomed to the notion of communication perhaps due to its stubborn leaders or sheer power, perhaps .
 Thomas Hobbes forms his account of politics in the book ‘Leviathan’, on human nature . Hobbes was an early advocate of the state of the nation . The book was published in 17th century .
 Hobbes implies that the greatest evil is the fear of a violent death, which a political grouping may form itself around . Hobbes: The greatest evil in Hobbes' work is fear of violent death .
 Hobbesian view on realism follows the core realist propositions and describes the international system as anarchic . Hobbes' view is that international system is anarchic and anarchic, Hobbes says .
 An undiplomatic realm, in which un-checked violence is a common threat, solidifies the realist belief that conflict is inevitable . The world is now in a state of war, but it's not clear whether it will be peaceful or peaceful .
 The United States identifies itself as a liberal-democracy following the ideology of liberalism . However in 1962 the U.S. portrayed many characteristics of realism .
 Realism and liberalism both agree that the international system is anarchic, with no sovereignty or system of leadership . Realist and liberalism agree that an anarchic world has no sovereignty, leadership or sovereignty .
 Hobbes argues that the absence of a ‘Leviathan’ in the international system leaves the dealings of inter-state relations in the hands of government officials . Hobbes: The absence of an international “Levyathan” in the system leaves dealings of international relations
 In this scenario, it is implied that realist states will fail to co-operate as a characteristic of realism describes the state as one of a self-interested unitary state . Realist states are expected to fail to cooperate as a result of this .
 An anarchic international system also creates a constant security dilemma between states . The world's anarchic system creates a security dilemma, says the author .
 In the theology of realism, there is no hierarchy above world powers to instil rules and provide state protection . In reality, this is not the case of the world's world powers, but the real power is the state .
 This lack of security provided by an overruling power encourages states to seek security for themselves . It is not the only solution to a state's security crisis that can be solved .
 This often causes states to compete for power in order to maintain protection . States often compete to maintain power for the sake of protecting themselves .
 Article 1-26 of the Treaty of Versailles outlines the creation of the League of Nations . The League was created after the destruction of World War I . Article was part of the treaty that ended the war .
 This was an attempt at creating an international government to which all states would answer to . This was a failed attempt to create a world of nations to answer to. This was the first attempt .
 The League of Nations relied on the willingness of world powers to cede a degree of power to the League . A realism regime would not allow a realism regime to allow such a power transfer .
 The United States created their own security in the form of a naval blockade . After the United Nations failed to protect its members, the U.S. created its own own security .
 Kennedy told Khrushchev to tread carefully . A letter was sent by Kennedy to the USSR . Kennedy also warned the USSR to tread lightly .
 His reply stated that the Soviet Union would ignore the naval blockade . His reply was that he would ignore a naval blockade.
 The United States holds no power over the Soviet Union and the USSR will not surrender power . Meaning that the U.S. holds no sway over the USSR . The USSR will never surrender power.
 The realist proposition of anarchy in the international system is somewhat contradictory in present day, says the author of the book "Anarchy"
 After the effects of World War II many safeguards were put in place so as to ensure a degree of state security . Many safeguards were made in place after the war .
 The United Nations is undoubtedly the international systems greatest enforcer of international law and security . Using the ideology of collective security, the UN maintains a peace-keeping role on the international scale .
 When you become part of the UN you become a part of collective security, meaning you must cede an amount of state power to the UN in order to share in the security of other states . The UN is a member of the world's most powerful body of state powers .
 UN is founded on principals of state co-operation and equality, which opposes the realist ideology of a unitary, self-interested state . A realist state does not fit into this regime, writes David Cameron .
 In a realist point of view, this effectively makes the UN obsolete, as it relies on the cession of state power, which a true realist state would not consider . The UN relies on state power and would not have to cede it to the UN .
 During the time of the Cold War, the UN was still very young and did not hold the power and resources that it does today . The UN was not as powerful as it is today and has more resources today .
 Realistic realism was a more common ideology during the Cold war, as the international system was more anarchic than it is today . Perhaps this is why realism was more common than realism .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were faced with the question of whether to create this security risk through war, or to better communicate and agree on a compromise of power . Kennedy faced the choice between creating a security risk by war or avoiding it .
 During the crisis, opportunities were given to the Soviets to cease quarrelling . During the war, the Soviets were given opportunities to stop fighting .
 Khrushchev’s letter to Kennedy: “If you have done this as the first step to unleashing war...then nothing remains for us to do but accept your challenge.” Khrushchchev wrote to Kennedy that the USSR was on the road to war .
 It was not until the last days of the crisis that President Khrushchev seemed to somewhat abandon his realist characteristics, says historian . "Krushchev's 'realist characteristics' was evident during the crisis .
 He attempted to avoid the inevitability of conflict which realism suggests suggests . He said that realism suggests that conflict is inevitable, but realism is not .
 Khruschchev submitted an offer to the U.S. however it appeared seemingly influenced by realism . Through diplomatic negotiations and compromise, the offer was accepted .
 The offer to remove Soviet nuclear weapons from Cuba in Cuba in return for the removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey highlights a realist vantage point .
 The USSR’s want to be in control seems impossible at this time, they will accept an equal-footing scenario with the United States . This can only be achieved through the cession of military power in these allied countries . The USSR's want to control the situation seems impossible
 The U.S. acceptance of the Soviets terms emphases their liberal ability to compromise . The United States accepted the terms of the Soviet Union .
 If it were possible for a state to completely follow a single ideology, International Relations would become far more predictable . International relations would become more predictable if a state were to follow its own ideology .
 The United Sates is ultimately a liberal democracy because they identify most with the ideology of liberalism . The U.S. is ultimately an open society because of its liberalism .
 The U.S. channels both liberalism and realism, clarifying that it is possible to follow two philosophical theories . However, as portrayed in the crisis, the United States channels both .
 It was ultimately the United States and USSRs realist qualities of secrecy and the inability to communicate with other each other that created this perhaps needless crisis .