 In October 1962, an American spy plane captured images of Soviet-installed nuclear missile sites in Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy was determined not to let the Soviet Union get away with installing nuclear weapons just 90 miles off the coast of American soil .
 Confrontations between the two superpowers brought the world almost to the brink of nuclear war . The world almost went on the verge of a nuclear war in the 1950s and 1960s .
 For 13 days, the world was the closest it had ever been to nuclear annihilation . Negotiations finally brought the crisis to an end, but for 13 days it was the worst .
 Relations between America and the Soviet Union were tense at the turn of the decade . The United States had experienced a significant blow at the time of the 1980s .
 At the end of 1959, Fidel Castro had successfully led his guerrilla army in a revolt against General Fulgencio Batista, Cuba's anti-communist, pro-US president . Fidel Castro led the guerrilla army against General Batista .
 Batista had allowed U.S. companies mostly free reign over their operations in Cuba . Batista allowed United States companies to operate in Cuba without oversight .
 Castro believed Cubans should have more control over their own interests . He resented American corporations' heavy involvement in the nation . However, Castro believed Cuban citizens should have control of their interests .
 Castro immediately nationalized formerly US-controlled industries and began opening up relations with the Soviet Union . Castro began nationalizing formerly U.S.-controlled industries .
 By 1960, Castro had officially declared himself a communist and a formal ally of the Soviet Union . Castro declared himself to be a communist in 1960 .
 Eisenhower supported attempts to overthrow Castro in Cuba . Eisenhower supported the overthrow of President Batista . The U.S. government under Eisenhower supported Castro .
 The failed Bay of Pigs invasion was one of Kennedy's first priorities to oust Fidel Castro .
 In February 1961, Kennedy authorized a planned invasion that had been conceived under the Eisenhower administration . Kennedy authorized the planned invasion in February 1961 .
 1,400 American-trained and armed Cuban exiles were dropped into a remote area on the southwestern coast of Cuba called the Bay of Pigs . The CIA had devised a plan to drop them into the area where they would start an uprising and overthrow Castro .
 The plan relied on the destruction of Castro's air force, which would prevent him from mobilizing a response to the invasion . The plan's success relied in part on destroying the Cuban air force .
 The initial plan called for a squadron to conduct two air strikes on Castro's air bases in World War II-era B-26 bombers that had been painted black to look like Cuban planes, per the JFK presidential library .
 The first strike missed its mark, leaving Castro's air force intact . The strike alerted the Cubans to the United States' involvement in the plan . However, the first strike did not miss its mark and left Castro's forces intact .
 On April 17, a brigade of Cuban exiles came ashore at the secluded landing site along the Bay of Pigs . The site is a secluded, secluded secluded spot along the bay .
 Almost immediately, they were overwhelmed and outnumbered by Castro's forces . Castro forces arrived in Cuba in 1961 .
 Cuban planes dominated the skies, sinking ships and shooting down back-up planes that were sent to assist the brigade . Cuba's air force still up and running, with Cuba's planes dominating the skies .
 The invasion was crushed in less than 24 hours . The failed Bay of Pigs disaster would remain an embarrassing mark on Kennedy administration .
 After the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union became more determined to support the Castro regime . Operation Anadyr was the first attempt to invade Cuba in Cuba .
 It greatly benefited them to have another communist government ally, especially one that was located so close to the U.S. The United States. The U.N. was a major ally of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 The Soviets wanted to offer protection if the U.S. attempted another invasion like the Bay of Pigs in the future . Nikita Khrushchev also saw an opportunity to counter America's lead in nuclear capabilities .
 Khrushchev saw arming Cuba as an opportunity to gain leverage against the U.S. for having deployed Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Most importantly, it was a chance to get leverage against having deployed JPs .
 A delegation of Soviet troops began covertly deploying nuclear weapons to Cuba . Under the guise of promoting a civilian agricultural development program, the weapons were deployed .
 Beginning in July of 1962, the Soviets deployed weapons, supplies, and 41,902 Soviet soldiers to the island .
 A U-2 spy plane discovers the missile sites . The Soviets successfully deployed a motorized rifle division to Cuba in the summer of 1962 .
 Just 90 miles off the coast of Florida, the nuclear weapons were well within reach of the American mainland . The U.S. mainland is 90 miles from Florida .
 The Soviet Union's goal was to keep the operation a secret from the United States until it was too late for them to interfere . They remained undiscovered until October 14th, 1962, when they were discovered .
 Major Richard Heyser was piloting a U-2 spy plane over Cuba when he captured photographs of Soviet missile sites . Major Richard captured photos of Soviet ballistic missile sites at San Cristobal . Major Heysers captured the images of the missile sites in Cuba .
 The images clearly showed the construction of medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles sites . The images were clearly shown to be the work of construction of missile sites .
 The existence of the nuclear missiles was confirmed by information collected by a CIA spy . Colonel Oleg Penkovsky collected the information by the CIA .
 The Soviets deployed nuclear missiles within easy reach of the eastern US, ramping up the nuclear arms race and escalating Cold War tensions to dangerously unprecedented levels . The Soviets had deployed nuclear missile launchers within easy reach of the eastern United States .
 President Kennedy was made aware of the existence of the missiles on October 15th, 1962 . ExComm convenes with President Kennedy .
 Faced with an imminent nuclear crisis, he immediately called together an executive committee of trusted advisors and officials . President Barack Obama called together a committee to prepare for a nuclear crisis .
 Among the group were all the Joint Chiefs of Staff, National Security Council participants . Kennedy's speechwriter, White House counsel Theodore Sorensen, former ambassador to Soviet Union, Robert F. Kennedy .
 The president's team began debating what the U.S. government's next steps should be . Known as ExComm, ExComm is a group that debates what the United States government should do next .
 ExComm members almost unanimously proposed the quick and decisive use of military force . During the first day of the debates, ExComm proposed the use of force .
 Kennedy's Joint Chiefs of Staff declared the most effective course of action to be an immediate air strike on the missile sites, followed by a full-on invasion of Cuba . The most effective option was an immediate strike on missile sites .
 Kennedy feared that an aggressive response would lead to nuclear escalation . Kennedy, however, feared that such a response could lead to a nuclear war .
 The debates went on for almost a full week, but by the third day, cooler heads were beginning to prevail . The debates were almost a week long and lasted almost three days .
 George Ball, the undersecretary of state, declared an invasion of Cuba to be ""like Pearl Harbor" Cuba . George Ball declared the invasion to be like Pearl Harbor .
 He would impose what was essentially a naval blockade on Cuba, which would prevent Soviet ships from bringing any more supplies onto the island . The blockade was essentially an essentially naval blockade .
 A naval blockade would be considered an act of war, so Kennedy was careful to call it a naval ""quarantine"" instead . A naval "quarantine" would have been considered a war-ravaged blockade .
 Kennedy sent his first in a series of letters to Khrushchev alerting him to the quarantine . Kennedy demanded he dismantle the missile sites and remove all nuclear weapons from Cuba . Kennedy also demanded he remove the nuclear weapons and remove them .
 Via a television broadcast, he alerted the world to the existence of nuclear weapons in Cuba . Via a TV broadcast, the world was alerted to Cuba's existence of the nuclear weapons .
 He explained the planned naval quarantine, making it clear that military retaliation would be the next option if the Soviet Union refused to comply . He said military retaliation was next option .
 "This secret, swift, extraordinary buildup of Communist missiles ... is a deliberately provocative and unjustified change in the status quo which cannot be accepted by this country,"" via American Rhetoric . "If our courage and our commitments are ever to be trusted again by either friend or foe
 The American public anxiously awaited the Soviet's response to this ultimatum . The U.S. was anxiously awaiting the Soviet response to the American public .
 Some people were convinced nuclear war was imminent, and began hoarding food, gas, and supplies in preparation for a nuclear winter .
 On October 24th, Khrushchev responded to Kennedy's letter by telling him the naval quarantine was understood to be a blockade, and therefore the Soviet Union saw it as an ""act of aggression,"" according to the Office of the Historian . The Soviet Union responded by telling Kennedy
 Khrushchev also said he had ordered his ships to continue through the blockade to Cuba as planned . He said his ships would continue to carry out the blockade as planned.
 If the Soviet ships breached the quarantine, Kennedy would be forced to back up his speech with force . The result of this was likely to be an all-out escalation to nuclear war .
 Despite Khrushchev's tough talk, most Soviet ships did actually turn back around . Most Soviet ships turned back around, despite the tough talk . Most of the ships did not turn around .
 Those that did run up to the quarantine line were stopped by United States naval forces . U.S. naval forces determined they did not pose a threat to the public .
 Because they were not carrying weapons, the U.S. Navy permitted them to pass through the blockade . The United States Navy allowed the blockade because they were carrying no weapons .
 Dino A Brugioni collection/Wikipedia . However, another drama was unfolding just below the surface of the water .
 A Soviet B-59 submarine, equipped with a T-5 nuclear-tipped torpedo, had received no communication from above for several days, so they had no idea the blockade had begun . The submarine was equipped with no communications from above .
 The Atomic Heritage Foundation says tensions were rising on board the doomed aircraft . They had no air conditioning, their battery was failing, and their air conditioning was failing .
 The American ships began dropping practice depth bombs around the B-59 . The bombs were dropped by American ships during the war .
 The ship's captain, Valentin Savitsky, believed that war between the U.S. and Soviet Union had already begun . They were intended to serve as a warning .
 We will die, but we will sink them all—we will not become the shame of the fleet,"" via National Geographic .
 All three senior officers on board the submarine were required to agree before the torpedo could be launched . The torpedo was launched by a submarine in the early hours of the day .
 He insisted they wait until they emerged and received orders from Moscow before they deployed the weapons .
 His level head and calm reasoning swayed the rest of the crew, and the weapons were never launched, thus saving the world from nuclear disaster .
 While most Soviet ships had not attempted to breach the quarantine line, one vessel, the tanker Bucharest, refused to back down on October 24th . Bucharest was the first ship to breach quarantine line .
 On October 25, two U.S. naval vessels attempted to intercept Bucharest, Romania . The USS Essex and USS Gearing attempted to stop Bucharest . The Essex and Gearing were the two vessels involved in the incident .
 U.N. Secretary-General U. Thant pleaded with both Kennedy and Khrushchev to "refrain from any action that may aggravate the situation" via History.com .
 Kennedy held off from taking immediate action, but he was becoming more convinced that the diplomatic route would fail . Kennedy: "I'm not going to take any further action, I'm going to make a decision to take action"
 He feared the only way to remove the missiles from Cuba was to do it through military force . He feared it was possible to remove them from Cuba using military force.
 The next day, October 26, the U.S. learned that, in defiance of the demands, construction was continuing on nuclear missile bases in Cuba, per History . The United States government learned that the next day that the bases were under construction .
 The United States military then raised their readiness level to DEFCON 2, the highest state of military preparedness the United States ever reached during the Cold War . The U.S. military raised the level of readiness level .
 United States forces in Florida prepare for an immediate invasion of Cuba . U.S. forces in Cuba were preparing for an invasion of the island .
 American B-52 bombers went on continuous airborne alert . Fully equipped B-47 medium bombers were strategically stationed across a variety of military and civilian airfields .
 The United States had been sending U-2 spy planes to conduct low-level photo-reconnaissance missions over Cuba . The U.S. had been preparing for a possible air strike .
 Major Rudy Anderson, a U-2 spy pilot, departed McCoy Air Force Base in Florida just after 9 am to conduct a reconnaissance flight over the eastern part of Cuba .
 Soviet deputy commander, General Stepan Grechko, began tracking his movements as soon as his plane entered Cuban airspace . However, the Soviet Deputy commander began tracking the plane's movements . The plane was tracked down by Soviet forces in Cuba .
 At 11:19m., a surface-to-air missile struck the aircraft, and the plane went down . The plane was shot down by a missile strike at 11:20m .
 Despite pressure from his military advisers to retaliate, Kennedy decided once again to refrain from military action . Kennedy decided not to take action again .
 Khrushchev promised to remove missile bases if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . Kennedy received a letter from the Soviet Union on October 26th, 1962 .
 Khrushchev made a public announcement on Radio Moscow, claiming the Soviet Union would be willing to dismantle their bases if America agreed to pull their nuclear missile sites out of Turkey .
 Kennedy refused to officially acknowledge the terms of Khrushchev's second declaration . Not wanting to appear publicly weak, Kennedy did not want to be seen as weak .
 Robert Kennedy arranged for clandestine meeting between Robert Kennedy and Anatoly Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was assassinated by the Soviet Union in March 1968 .
 The attorney general agreed to remove the missiles from Turkey within five months, but only on the condition that that part of the agreement remain secret . The agreement was reached on a condition that the part of it remained secret .
 Because Turkey was a member of NATO, the U.S. didn't want to be seen undermining their alliance . Turkey is a NATO member, but the United States wanted to avoid being seen undermining NATO .
 Within a day of making the agreement, the Soviets began pulling their missiles out of Cuba . The Soviets pulled their missiles from Cuba within a day .
 In a public statement, Kennedy expressed his hope that governments of the world can, with a solution of the Cuban crisis, turn their attention to the need to end the arms race and reducing world tensions .
 A nuclear armageddon had been averted, but the nuclear arms race was far from over . A nuclear war was averted but the arms race is still raging .
 The Cold War would drag on for almost another 30 years, but the world never again came as close to full-scale nuclear war as it had during those 13 harrowing days . The world would never again come close to nuclear war again .