 His expertise includes Robert F Kennedy; the 1960s; political history; presidential politics and war powers; social movements of the 20th century; the 1980s; and the history of U.S. foreign policy .
 Professor Palermo's most recent academic article appears in A Companion to John F Kennedy edited by Marc Selverstone titled Robert F Kennedy . Professor Palersmo's latest academic article is published in the book Robert Kennedy's Companion to Kennedy .
 The unrepentant neo-cons and backbenchers on Mitt Romney's foreign policy team always advise their candidate to attack signs of "weakness" coming from President Obama .
 Iran remains a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . The treaty has safeguards and allowances for civilian uses of nuclear power . George W Bush's calamitous policies in the region do nothing to dissuade the Ayatollahs .
 There has never been an adequate acknowledgement that the United States was responsible for propping up a dictatorship under the Shah for 25 years . The U.S. helped set the stage for the 1979 revolution that brought the clerics to power in the first place .
 Imposing a U.S. Navy ""quarantine"" of Soviet ships heading for Cuba was the least pugnacious of the military options . It bought time for negotiations .
 Robert F Kennedy was sent as his brother's emissary to privately talk to the Kremlin-connected journalist, Georgi Bolshakov, and to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Robert F. Kennedy was the brother of the late Senator Robert Kennedy .
 Kennedy was willing to make substantial concessions and push against the Cold War orthodoxy of the period that took as gospel that the Soviets only respected threats of massive violence . The last thing this country needs is to blunder itself into another misguided war, writes Julian Zelizer .
 We mustn't allow their shrill, politicized whining about diplomatic overtures drown out the crucial need for a peaceful resolution of the conflict . But we need to be careful not to allow the shrillness of the whining to drown out a peaceful solution .
 Ex-Ambassador Sondland says he was a 'Doofus' about Rudy Giuliani's Ukraine plot . Donald Trump Tries to sell his Skeptical Supporters on Dr. Greg Abbott .
 Americans 'Addicted' to certain outcomes from court, says Dr. Oz . Mike Pompeo Raises Fears about Dual Citizen Americans . Dr. O. Oz: Americans are 'addicted'
 Judge Dismisses Trump's attempt to have permanent Twitter ban Lifted . Judge dismisses the president's bid to have his Twitter ban lifted .