 Mr Bundy spoke to Frank Sieverts in State regarding State's comprehensive history of the Cuba situation . Mr Bundy was interviewed by Frank Sievert in State .
 Mr Sieverts is pulling together contributions from State, Defense and CIA . He expects to have his history pulled together by the end of next week .
 ExCom meeting notes: "I had planned to talk to you when he had all the material pulled together" ExCom notes: He had planned on talking to you about the material .
 In light of the above, it would seem advisable to hold off on the appointment of a White House historian, at least until we have a chance to look at Mr Sieverts' work .
 History of the Cuban Missile Crisis . Frank Sieverts has written a history of Cuban missile crisis .
 It is based on documents available in the State Department and additional material provided by the Department of Defense, the White House and the Central Intelligence Agency . The report includes personal interviews and private notes .
 The entire history should be handled on a Top Secret Eyes Only basis . Some of the sources are highly classified, and the entire history is sensitive .
 When you have had a chance to read it, we should discuss what further disposition, if any, should be made of it .
 The decision to pursue this course of action -unprecedented in the nation that looks to Lenin for policy guidance -was taken early in 1962 .
 The Soviet Union and Cuba signed a trade protocol for 1962, providing for a ""considerable increase" in trade between the two countries . On January 10 of that year the Soviet news agency, TASS, announced that the two nations had signed the protocol .
 At his inauguration, Marinello declared that all students at the university would be requested to study Marxist -Leninist principles . Marinello declares that students would be required to study Marxism-Leninism .
 The Castro government also made public plans to launch a nationwide network of ""Revolutionary Instruction Schools" for instruction in MarxismLeninism . Castro government planned to launch the schools .
 On March 26, 1962, Castro denounced Anibal Escalante, a longtime Cuban Communist leader who symbolized the oldline hard-core group . The hard-line group had maintained close ties with Moscow for years .
 The significance of this action by Castro was to show Khrushchev and his associates that there remained little chance that the traditional Communists in Cuba would come to power . Castro's actions showed that the Cuban Communist Party was unlikely to win power .
 Castro had already placed himself in the Marxist -Leninist camp . F i FT^rr 1 ^ ^"" -3 .
 The attack on Escalante convinced Soviet leaders that there was no longer any reason to postpone a majoi investment in the Castro regime . While the Soviet leaders may have retained doubts about his reliability .
 The initiative for the emplacement of offensive missiles and bombers in Cuba came from Castro or the Kremlin . It is not known whether the initiative came from the Kremlin or Castro .
 The Soviets claimed to have brought down a high-flying U-2 photo reconnaissance plane over Russian territory in the spring of 1960 . It may have started as a request by Castro for ground-to-air anti-aircraft missiles .
 It now appears more probable that these weapons were supplied to Cuba by the Soviets primarily to provide anti-aircraft protection for the medium range and intermediate range missiles .
 All the IRBM and MRBM sites, both those constructed and those contemplated, were of the unhardened type, suitable only for first-strike use .
 The missiles would make Cuba a prime target for pre-emptive U.S. military attack in any crisis anywhere in which use of the missiles seemed likely . They thus would make the missiles a prime U.K. target . The missiles could also be used in any attack on Cuba
 Castro offered territory to Soviet IRBM's and MRBM's capable of delivering nuclear warheads to targets in the U.S. The Castro regime placed its own country and people in nuclear jeopardy .
 Establishing a Soviet offensive striking force in Cuba was a logistic exercise of great scope . It was conducted under conditions of drum-tight security under strict conditions .
 The missiles, bombers, and related systems had to be brought to secure ' :-> r~~ /•». r-\ < — r KP C C CnCTuLu U H L7 — -5Sir ports .
 Security measures within the Soviet Union appear to have been completely effective . Personnel to operate the missiles and to perform the many other functions connected with an effort of this size and character on a Spanishspeaking island thousands of miles away had to be assembled .
 The arms were under tight Soviet military supervision, first in the Soviet Union itself and aboard Soviet ships . Then in Cuba, where the offensive missiles and other weapons systems were unloaded by Soviet personnel in secure ports .
 In addition, the Soviets sought to divert attention from missiles by frequently assuring us over a period of some months that there would be no offensive weapons in Cuba . In addition to the threat of missiles, the Soviet Union also said there would not be offensive weapons .
 The missiles arrived in Cuba and had to be transported in trucks and other conveyances to their destined launch sites . Reports on them began to reach U.S. intelligence agencies in Cuba .
 From that moment on, knowledge in the U.S. government about what might be happening in Cuba began to become abreast of events . The United States government became aware of what might happen in Cuba .
 It is thought by some that no nuclear explosives were ever landed in Cuba . Some believe no nuclear weapons have ever been landed there .
 A ship suspected of transporting such warheads was en route to Cuba at the time of the Proclamation of Interdiction . The ship was believed to be carrying warheads .
 It was one of those which turned around and returned to the Soviet Union . It is one of many of those who turned around to return to the USSR .
 No indication as such that any TOP SCCRETto. 7, were actually brought to Cuba . To be sure, nuclear warheads could be carried by air .
 From an American perspective, the Cuban crisis begins with the intelligence gathering procedures which made it possible to discover the existence of the offensive missiles and other Soviet arms shortly after their arrival in Cuba .
 In late 1961 the intelligence community was instructed to increase its efforts to gather information about developments in Cuba . The Cuban government was told to increase efforts to obtain information .
 Until these steps were taken, the intelligence community and other high Government officials recognized that . The intelligence community . expected that the measures adopted would provide significantly mare information by July .
 It was this series of measures placed the intelligence community in a position of readiness when the Soviet build-up began in late July and early August .
 ' These had to be carefully sifted and evaluated but did yield some useful information .
 A few scattered reports referring to missiles were received as early as 1961 . The missiles were sent to the U.S. by any other means, including missile launches .
 The evidence on conventional Soviet weaponry going to Cuba — such as tanks, artillery, and aircraft — was entirely — TOP 3ECRET rKTF S 0NIY S{r 10. consistent with other information available on arms shipments .
 From mid1962 on, a large volume of intelligence data was being received . From mid-1962, the CIA received large amounts of intelligence .
 Beginning in August, a small but growing percentage of the total was concerned about the secret influx of conventional weapons and related activities .
 A smaller but more rapidlygrowing portion proved when checked when checked to refer to the introduction of defensive missiles . A smaller part of the problem was found to be a result of the missile introduction .
 It was not until after mid-September that some bits of information were suggestive of Soviet offensive missiles . The missiles were not evaluated as such when first received .
 The first offensive missiles — MRBM's — probably did not arrive in Cuba until about September 8 .
 Until midSeptember there were no signs of this or of the Soviets intentions . Until midOctober, there had been no sign of this .
 The speed of dissemination of information within the Government was high, the speed of disseminating of information was high .
 Government restrictions on dissemination of information about Soviet weapons in Cuba . In early September there were some restrictions on disseminating information .
 These did not affect the flow of raw data to the analysts or to decision-making officials at the highest level . The data flow was not affected by these changes .
 No information on offensive missiles available until October 15 was hard enough to permit writing of a credible item for dissemination . Quite apart from the restrictions, no information was available until Oct 15 .
 The restrictions on dissemination were the result of an instruction from the Director of Central Intelligence . All reports relating to a possible Soviet arms build-up in Cuba should be subjected to the greatest possible extent .
 Reports on this subject should not be ""published"" and thus brought to the attention of the normal recipients of intelligence data circulated within the Government unless they had been so verified . This was interpreted to mean that reports on the subject should . not be published .
 On August 31, the President ordered that there be no publication within the intelligence community of this information until our course of policy was determined . The information continued to be available to intelligence analysts and a small number of top decision-makers .
 On September 4 the President publicly announced the presence of a missile defense system in Cuba . The system was publicly announced on September 4 .
 SECRETE S ONLY 16. on SAMs was disseminated in intelligence community publications . The intelligence community disseminated the information .
 In early October, firm evidence of a shipment of IL-28s going into Cuba was obtained . Firm evidence of the shipment was obtained by the U.S. government .
 Because of the bomber's offensive capability, White Hous2 permission was needed to publish information on it within the intelligence community . The bomber is believed to be capable of carrying out an offensive capability .
 At the time this permission was granted, the President directed the Director of Central Intelligence to put into effect a system of rigid control of information on offensive weapons .
 This system stayed in effect until after after the President's speech on October 22 .
 Intelligence Board principals limited raw information on offensive weapons in Cuba to U.S. analysts working directly on the problem . Intelligence board principals and analysts worked directly on Cuba's offensive weapons .
 The intelligence community produced Estimates on Cuba in January, March, August, and September . The estimates were produced by the intelligence community on Cuba .
 Each considered possibility of Soviet use of Cuba as strategic base . Each concluded the risk of U.S. retaliation too great .
 Cuba would run risks of losing Cuba or chance of war . ClGRlT ra * *
 The Soviets hoped to win victory for communism by other means, including military means . This policy would be impaired by establishment of a strategic base on Cuba . Cuba would be a key part of the Soviet policy .
 The September 19 Estimate viewed the/military build-up as being to strengthen the Cuban regime against presumed U.S. attempts to overthrow It . The Soviet military build up as known to us before September 19, 1962, appeared consls tent with these policies .
 Air defense and coastal defenses increased Castro's security, thus his strength at home, and so permitted him to carry on more aggressive revolutionary activity In Latin America . Air defense also increased his strength in Latin America, allowing him to continue aggressive revolutionary activities .
 Estimate said that the Soviets might add weapons like submarines and light bombers of a more ""offensive"" character . The Estimate also said that they might add submarines to their arsenal .
 It also stated that the Soviets could derive military advantage from placing medium or intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba, or from a submarine base .
 It considered the latter more likely, but considered both incompatible with Soviet practice to date . It considered both more likely and not more likely .
 Latin Americans would fear and resent Soviet military intrusion into the Hemisphere . Most Latin American governments would expect the U.S. to eliminate it by whatever means necessary .
 TOP SECRET ife s obly Sir TOP GlCRLT k ™ nf mr TOP SECERT . EYES OHM 29. "Eyes OHM"
 The mission authorized at the October 9 meeting TOP SECRET Ems oittt 32. The mission was approved at the Oct. 9 meeting . Top Secret Ems meeting was the first to authorize the mission .
 Scontained unmistakable evidence of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba . T O r-CrcnCT'^"" ■ "" ■ »» — The First Days By late afternoon, on October 15» skilled analysts at S.E. S.CrimnCT’s
 The information was made available to high officials of the Departments of State and Defense, the intelligence community, and the White House, officials say .
 State Department Director of Research and Intelligence Roger Hilsman; Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone; his Deputy, General Marshall S Carter, and his . Deputy Under Secretary of State Alexis Johnson .
 Secretary Rusk took the call at a phone outside the formal dining room in the State Department . He was host at a dinner for German Foreign Minister Schroeder .
 Assistant Secretary Martin was informed by telephone at the National Press Club . He was speaking to the Washington Chapter of Sigma Delta Chi on the Cuban situation .
 Several were informed at a private dinner at the Fort McNair quarters of General Taylor . Several were told of the events at the private dinner .
 The photo interpreters continued to work through the evening, examining their JCP SECRET^ n roc .
 During the night they prepared a written report on what had been learned, for presentation to the Presjdat first thing the next morning .
 Early the next morning there were meetings of intelligence officers and high policy officials at the Defense and State Departments . The meetings were held early next morning .
 At 9m., McGeorge Bundy presented the evidence to tile President in his bedroom . Bundy presented evidence at 9m. ET . Bundy was in the bedroom at the time .
 He straightaway ordered that a meeting be convened at the White House at ll:M-5. President Obama ordered that the meeting be held in the Oval Office .
 Those attending included most of the individuals who hadteaa informed the previous evening . Vice President, Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and Presidential aide Theodore G Sorenson .
 It was the first meeting of the group that came to be known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or informally, Excomm .
 General Carter, Deputy Director of the CIA, gave a iCr cECRiiThYE s only 35. General Carter gave the speech . General Carter was the CIA's Deputy Director .
 The evidence of the presence of offensive missiles on the island, while unmistakable, was fragmentary, he said . He said that the evidence is fragmentary and that it is not clear that the missiles are there .
 It is not known how extensive a deployment had been made, or how near to operational the missiles might be .
 It was agreed that increased to obtain comprehensive coverage of Cuba as quickly as possible . The Cuban government agreed to increase coverage of the country .
 Every morning at 8:30 the U.S. Intelligence Board met to draw together all intelligence strands . That afternoon and thereafter every morning every morning the board met .
 On the afternoon of the 16 th it directed the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee to prepare an immediate evaluation of the missile system .
 The GMAIC evaluation concluded that the missiles were clearly under Soviet control . There was no evidence that nuclear warheads were present in Cuba in Cuba .
 It also noted that the missile installations that had been identified did not yet appear to be operational . The missile installations are not yet operational, the Pentagon said .
 The close relation between policy planning and intelligence information can be noted . Already at this early moment the close relation to policy planning is noted .
 The timing of the U.S. response and the actions initiated were closely related to intelligence indications of what was happening in Cuba, officials say . Secretary Rusk and others have observed that both the timing of our response and our actions were closely linked to the intelligence .
 Meetings and conferences took place through the rest of the day in intelligence community and the Departments of State and Defense .
 Ambassadors Bohlen and Thompson, both formerly ambassadors to the Soviet Union, attended the meeting . U.N. Ambassador Stevenson was also in attendance .
 A late meeting at the State Department concluded in the Secretary's office after 11m. The meeting was held at 11:30am .
 Wednesday, October 17, was a ""blur of meetings"" for the main policy group, located mainly in Under Secretary Ball's Conference Room at the State Department .
 John McCone had returned from California by this time and took part in the discussions . Ambassador Thompson, Ambassador Thompson and Deputy Under Secretary of State Alexis Johnson also took part .
 The President departed for Connecticut in the afternoon to keep a campaign commitment . The President left the White House on Sunday afternoon .
 It was a day of ""full and free discussion,"" according to one of the participants, with no rigid positions, no ""departmental"" points of view . The event was held in New York City, New York, on Thursday .
 The next meeting with the President would not take place until the next morning . Additional information on the missiles was being gathered to gather information on missiles .
 This was a day of thought and analysis, for the weighing of alternatives, for interpretation and conjecture . This, therefore, was the day of analysis and analysis .
 Most of the group considered the missile deployment an effort to establish a major Soviet base, not primarily to support Castrol . The solution to the ""mistake"" was to erase it — by an extremely limited air strike .
 It was necessary to assume that nuclear warheads were at hand, near the three MEBM sites that had been spotted . Many ships were en route from the Soviet Union, and it must be assumed that they carried additional weapons .
 Khrushchev was preparing for a series of showdowns --on.on. on.on . Another discussant stated the view that by his missile venture Khrush.chev was . preparing for . an attack on the Soviet Union in the 1960s . Another discussedant said Khrush
 Successful establishment of an offensive base on Cuba would give the Soviet leader the best chance of coming out ahead . The Soviet leader's best chance is to establish a base in Cuba .
 The discovery of the missiles very shortly after their arrival in Cuba and before they were operational jumped the gun on Khrushchev . The discovery was made shortly after they arrived in Cuba, the discovery of them jumped the .
 Several believed that Khrushchev would not be able to maintain his grip on power if he failed to respond strongly to any U.S. action .
 The least he would do, it was felt, would be to exert pressure on or move against Jupiter missile top sccncT EYES ONLY .
 Suggestions that Castro, not Khrushchev, should be held responsible . Emissary should be sent to Castro demanding withdrawal of missiles, suggestions suggested .
 There was recognition that a political approach to Castro or Khrushchev would inhibit military action . Any political approach would be effective only if backed by the threat of military force, he says .
 Preliminary discussions of an air strike centered on the number of sorties and bombs that would be required to knock out Soviet weapons . point was also made that offensive weapons were our sole target in Cuba .
 Preliminary discussions of a blockade saw the advantage that this action would permit the crisis then be put into a political context . Preliminary discussion of a blockage saw the advantages of this action . This action would allow the crisis to be put in political context, say experts .
 A . blockade was the policy most likely to cause difficulties and divisions among the western allies . On the other hand, it was argued that a ES ONLY ^.cnzT EYES ONLY sSlr ^5.5. blockade would most likely cause difficulties .
 Before the day closed there was also some discussion of calling Congress into session . It was either to recognize a state of war or to emphasise the difference between the action to be taken and war .
 The President returned late the previous evening from his campaign trip to Connecticut . The President had returned late last night from a campaign trip .
 Intelligence estimate suggests MRBM's could be launched within 18 hours . Intelligence estimate put together jointly by the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee . MRBM could launch in 18 hours, estimate says .
 At 11m. the main policy group met with the President at the White Hmse. At 11:30 p.m.
 It would have the advantage of not killing any Russians, and would permit the issue to be placed subsequently on a political track . It would be the first time the issue has been put on the political track of a political issue .
 Whatever course was to be followed, the more time there was to plan it in detail, the better it was likely to work . Whatever course of action was to follow, the most likely it would work .
 Each passing hour increased the chance of a security leak and gave the Soviets additional time to perfect their own plans and operations . The Soviets were given more time to develop their own operations .
 The President listened, asked questions, probed replies — and gave directions . "The President listened and probed answers," he said. "He listened and asked questions and gave answers"
 One participant observed that at the close of a session the President issued orders firmly . One participant said at the end of the session he issued orders strongly .
 Soviet MRBM's in Cuba could not be accepted — for both military and political reasons . One firm decision was made at the close of that meeting was that operational Soviet MRMBs in Cuba .
 Former Presidents Eisenhower and Truman had been apprised of the situation, and had made their views known to the President, who in turn communicated them to planners . This decision was the basis for further discussion among the main policy group, without the President .
 Of the various options only one, the pure political track, could be implemented without notifying our allies . The political track would be the only way to get around the world without knowing allies, he says .
 Non-military action of sending private letters to Castro and Khrushchev was considered to be of doubtful value . The option of then going to the UN was considered doubtful value.
 One participant characterized the political approach as ""going down with a whimper,"" and thought it better to risk a bang . One participant said he thought it was better than going down with "a whimper"
 It was not enough to knock out 16 missiles if in the course of doing so ve lost three countries . It's not enough if the missiles were knocked out of the system .
 "Retaliation against the Guantanamo Naval Base was a possibility that could not be ignored," says President Obama . Retaliation against Guantanamo could be a possibility, he says .
 There was discussion of the analogies between the U.S. bases in Europe and the Soviet penetration into the Caribbean . There were analogies of the bases of Europe and Cuba .
 Some thought Khrushchev would try to make the removal of his missiles from Cuba a qiij d pro quo for our withdrawal from Europe . Some thought it would be a way to make it easier for us to pull out of Europe .
 The possibility of a UN team being sent to all the world's missile installations was mentioned, as was the possibility of major negotiations . Khrushchev on all foreign bases was also mentioned .
 It was generally agreed that te basis of our presence in Europe is significantly different from the Soviet intrusion into this hemisphere . It was agreed that the basis of Europe's presence in the region was significantly different .
 Five main lines of action had been considered, separably and in various combinations . Essentially five main lines were considered, separated and combinations .
 Diplomatic pressure, but no military action, on the thesis that the weapons in Cuba did not change the overall military equation . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Cuba .
 A limited surprise air strike against just the offensive missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads would be limited to just a limited surprise strike . The strike would target only offensive missiles with nuclear warheads . The U.S. has not been able to use nuclear weapons in the past .
 A massive airstrike against missile sites as well as bombers, SAM 'si,. and everything else in Cuba of an offensive nature . A massive strike on missile sites and bombers .
 Vice President Johnson had termed a blockade an ""act of war"" in a speech as recently as October 6 . Vice President Lyndon Johnson had called a blockade of Cuba an 'acts of war' in October 6.
 Stopping, seizing, and searching a Russian ship on the high seas might have grave consequences . Stopping stopping, seizing and searching the ship could have serious consequences .
 A limited air 3trike precisely targetted on the missiles could perhaps be pulled off without a major power confrontation . On the other hand, a limited air strike could perhaps pull off without major power .
 Possibly it could be treated as the i960 U-2 episode should have been -in effect to pretend it hadn't happened . Possibly the episode could have been treated as an i960 episode . Possibly it was treated as a 'i960 episode' to pretend to have happened .
 We would assume the y_ \ missiles were in Cuba '♦by mistake;"" wiping them out with a few non-nuclear bombs would correct the mistake . We would . assume the missiles were . in Cuba . by mistake; "" wiping . out with . a few . non-
 An air strike of a few minutes duration could destroy all the offensive missiles in Cuba, with little damage to surrounding areas and negligible loss of life . On the basis of the I I it was thought that an air strike could destroy .
 Most of the group favored this course of action in the first hours of discussion, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 An air strike to destroy all the offensive missiles would be a major effort, not an affair of a few bombs and a few minutes . This more detailed intelligence made it plain that an air strike would not be a few bomb bombs and minutes .
 Both the diplomatic and military implications of such an operation loomed large . The operation is expected to take place in the Middle East .
 Human beings, ^'' ULQ ' L USo OffiV both Russians and Cubans, would undoubtedly be killed . Human beings would undoubtedly have been killed. Human beings .
 U.S. responsibility for the bombing could not possibly be concealed or evaded to any significant extent . United States responsibility could not be concealed, evaded, according to the United States .
 Retaliation by the Soviets, or conceivably even the Castro regime, could take unpredictable and catastrophic forms . Retaliation for the loss of the Soviet Union could be unpredictable .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko was scheduled to see the President Thursday evening . The Meeting wi th n-nn^y^ was scheduled for the President .
 The meeting was a remarkable confrontation, both for what was said and what was left unsaid . It was both a remarkable meeting and a remarkable moment of silence .
 The President conferred with Secretary Rusk and Ambassador Thompson shortly before Gromyko' s arrival . President Rusk conferring with secretary Rusk .
 The possibility of handling the Cuban Missile situation by diplomacy alone had been discarded by this time . Diplomatic diplomacy alone was discarded by the time of the crisis .
 Although the JBBffl^RHp5vidence was detailed and irrefutable, it was decided not to present it to the Foreign Minister or in any other way to tip our hand .
 Sovjeb diplomat opened the conversation with some routine phrases on the desirability of working for the elimination of differences between the two great countries .
 He remarked that it was unfortunate there had been no progress on Berlin . He expressed the ""sincere hope"" of his country for a settlement of the German question .
 The President interjected that the Soviet proposal on Berlin contained nothing new and provided no guarantee of security for the city . President: The proposal was nothing new, provided no guarantees of security .
 The President said he'd be glad to i w UL/JfluT^ uuf see Khrushchev if he came to the U.S. The President also said he would be happy to see him in the United States .
 He charged that the United -States was ""pestering"" a small country, interfering in its internal affairs . The United States was interfering in the country's internal affairs, he said .
 As for Soviet assistance, Gromyko said he was instructed to make clear that such aid was solely for the purpose of contributing to the defensive capability of Cuba . Cuba is not a threat, he said; it is a baby compared to the giant U.S.
 If it were otherwise, the Soviet Union would never have become involved in rendering such assistance . The Soviet Union has never been involved in providing such assistance.
 The basic principle of Soviet foreign policy, he reiterated, was to alleviate tensions, eliminate outstanding problems, and resolve them peacefully . He reiterated that the basic principle was to eliminate tensions and eliminate problems .
 The President replied that there was no threat of a U.S. invasion of Cuba, and that he would have been glad to give TOP SECRET*^ 0NTiY ~ assurances to that effect had Khrushchev asked . The President said he would be happy to give Top
 President Obama's administration was having a "profound impact on the American people and the Congress," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "It was ... having a profound impact" on the U.S. and Congress .
 The President cut in that he'd already told Khrushchev that was a mistake, and the he would have given assurances that there would be no further invasion, attempt . The President then said that he had already told the Soviet leader that it was an invasion .
 But since July when arms shipments started the situation had changed, the situation has changed . "Since July when July when the arms shipments had started, there had been no problems," the official says . "But since July, since July the situation changed"
 Gromyko reiterated that the Soviet specialists in Cuba were giving training in handling certain kinds of defensive arms . He wished to stress the word "defensive"
 The conversation turned to an extended discussion of the nuclear test ban issue . It then broadened to cover the prospects for coexistence of the two ideologies .
 The President agreed that theirs were two great countries with respect for peace -so it was all the more inexplicable that the Soviets should be sending arms to Cuba . The President. agreed that they were two . great countries .
 At 8:00m. he was the guest of honor at a dinner hosted by Rusk in the 8th floor dining room at the State Department .
 Dinner was exchange followed by a long, detailed, and technical on Berlin, which turned into an acrimonious but general discussion of which side was responsible for the tensions of the Cold War .
 Rusk TOP SCCRCTmb aa Jfir 5S. returned to his office for a brief discussion with Thompson, Ball, and Johnson . They brought him up to date on the policy group thinking during the evening .
 President asked former Secretary of Defense Robert A Lovett to see him . He did so shortly after Gromyko left the White House . Lovett was a former President of State Department .
 Main subject was how a blockade would operate and what its consequences might be . The main subject of the discussion was how the blockade might operate .
 George Ball met separately with Martin, Johnson, Thompson, and the Acting Legal Advisor of the State Department, Leonard C Meeker . Meeker was asked by Secretary Rusk earlier in the day to prepare a legal analysis of a blockade of Cuba under the circumstances .
 The Soviet Union was to be held accountable for the missiles . Cuba was seen as a pawn, a useful piece of geography for the Soviets . The Soviets were to hold the blame for the missile attacks .
 It was recognized that the United States must act, but that we have ""too much self-respect to respond by an act of aggression,"" as one participant put it . The U.S. has too much self respect to respond to aggression, one participant said .
 There was risk in any course, but it was deemed better to take the risks of action than inaction . There was also a risk in taking action, but there was also risk of inaction, says the PM .
 A blockade won wide approval on the ground that it permitted better control of events and the exercise of subsequent options . A blockade was approved by the U.S. government on the basis that it allowed better control .
 The President made a tentative decision to impose a blockade and to announce it Monday night . The President announced the decision on Twitter .
 He directed that detailed planning be started to carry out this decision . The decision will be made in a bid to save the lives of people across the globe .
 Six RC-121 early warning and control aircraft with specialized aerial radar and surveillance equipment to McCoy Air Force Base . Six F-106's from Langley Air Force . Base to be kept at Key West Naval Air Station . A detachment of ten naval all-weather fighters, F4D
 Tyndall Air Force Base in Florida was also alerted for possible use as augmentation forces . The Air Force also alerted to possible use of augmented forces .
 The President was scheduled to leave on a campaign swing on the 19th, and to avoid arousing suspicions he did not cancel out . The President did cancel out the trip to Washington .
 All members of the Excomm agreed he should go, recognizing that if and when additional intelligence was available, he could be called back to Washington at short notice .
 Meetings of principals were held through much of the day, beginning at 11:00m.
 A detailed ""Joint Evaluation"" by GMAIC and JAEIC was presented to the group . The group was presented with a joint evaluation of the project . A joint evaluation was also presented to them .
 It concluded that there was a Soviet MRBM regiment at San Cristobal and one at Sagua la Grande . The Soviets intended to develop Cuba into a prime strategic base .
 Some of the political and legal aspects of a blockade were discussed . Then some of the legal and political aspects of the blockade were also discussed .
 The basis of the blockade was self defense; its legality would be secure if it received the approval of the Organization of American States, where the votes of at least 14 countries would be needed . The blockade was not disapproved by the Security Council .
 Former Secretary of State Dean G Acheson argued that a mere quarantine meant little . Former Secretary-of-State said security of the country should not be risked for the sake of legal formalities .
 Any who wanted to would understand the necessity for whatever action was required to eliminate the missiles, he says .
 President had made a tentative decision the previous evening to follow the blockade track and to announce it Monday . The air strike possibility occupied the group for some time .
 Both courses of action, blockade or air strike, were made on both practical and moral grounds . Both of the options were made in the aftermath of the fall of the Soviet Union .
 An air strike would have to be very large to be effective, it was pointed out . It was also pointed out that in the light of the additional intelligence on the numbers of missiles in Cuba an air strike could be quite large, it has been suggested .
 In the end the blockade approach commanded the broadest support in part because it was the first step which permitted the widest range of future steps, Including the possibility of a subsequent air strike .
 It was decided to keep both alternatives under active consideration by having detailed staff work done on them so as not to limit the President's range of choice the next day .
 It is not wholly clear how long there remained a possibility that the course of action to be followed might be different from that actually selected .
 By Friday, it was apparent to most of the insiders that a ""rolling consensus"" was moving towards the notification defensive quarantine track .
 For one thing, there remained the chance that new intelligence information would sharply alter previous calculations . New intelligence information could sharply alter calculations .
 A security leak or a sudden, unexpected move by the Soviets might also occur . The Soviets may also have a sudden move or security leak .
 Some members of the Excomm considered that there was a hedge on the decision against an air strike until Sunday morning .
 The purpose and modalities of the blockade were examined in the Excomm during the afternoon . It was examined in a session of the ExComm during the day .
 Some thought that the blockade would not In itself achieve the removal, and that other steps would have to be taken to get them out of the country . Some thought the blockade might not In . itself achieve . the removal .
 The blockade would of course prevent the arrival of additional missiles . The blockade of the region would also prevent additional missiles from arriving .
 If nuclear components are not yet physically present in Cuba, the blockade would help keep them out . They could be flown in by air transport, though they could be brought in via air transport .
 The conviction was expressed that the blockade should continue until the missiles were out . The conviction is expressed that it should continue to continue until missiles are out .
 There was discussion of the effect of a blockade on the Western alliance . There was also a discussion of how the blockade would affect the relationship with Russia .
 The possibility of strain was noted but it was felt the alliance would hold . The most serious difficulties might arise over any attempts by the Ti ""s r H:""' ; -""T Tris only .
 The intelligence estimates were seen by most of the main policy planners and the President shortly after they were completed, on the same day .
 Some of the group did not see them as promptly, and they were usually discussed as the first item of business at the next Excomm meeting, which might not take place until the next morning . The next day's meeting might not be the next day .
 Liaison within the intelligence community had been strengthened by this time by placing officers from the State Department on the Watch Committee of the National Indications Center at the Pentagon .
 William Bundy prepared an analysis of United States overseas bases with particular reference to the Jupiters in Turkey and Italy . Bundy is the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs .
 The memorandum pointed out that these installations were rapidly approaching obsolescence, that they were an unhardened ""first strike"" type weapon . Plans were already in train to replace them with missile-bearing submarines .
 Many of our air and naval bases in other parts of the world were of substantially greater utility . Losing them would incur a higher security cost than removing the Jupiters, he said .
 From a purely military point of view, some bases could be abandoned without serious consequences to the national defense, the memo says . The memo says some bases can be abandoned with no serious consequences . Some bases could still be abandoned, the memorandum says .
 Secretary Rusk cancelled a trip scheduled for Friday evening to Hot Springs, Virginia, where he was to address the Business top srCRET ,EY3rs 0NLY Council .
 The Director ottne Arms Control and Disarmament Sir Ttffi . SECRET pieo ohm — 70. The Director of Arms Control .
 Our ambassadors to Latin American countries who were in the U.S. were ordered to return to their posts that evening . The ambassador to Latin America was ordered back to his posts in the United States .
 Ambassador to Mexico Thomas Mann did not depart for his post until Saturday night . Mann was the U.S. ambassador to Mexico . Mann left for Mexico on Saturday evening .
 Until then he was held in readiness as a possible envoy for a face-to-face talk with Castro in Havana . Until then, he had been held as possible envoy to the Cuban leader .
 Ambassador Bell did not go to Peru; our embassy in Lima was headed by the Charge throughout the crisis . Ambassador Bell was not in Peru during the crisis, but the Charge of Charge was in charge of the embassy .
 A complete scenario for each of the scenarios was worked out, covering a wide range of contingencies and Soviet responses . The scenario was based on a range of scenarios, including the Soviet response .
 In all the planning it was recognized that the Soviets were at a tactical 71.5% disadvantage in Cuba and would likely take countermeasures elsewhere . In Cuba, the Soviet Union would be likely to take counter measures elsewhere .
 The United States could dominate the air and sea over and around the island if non-nuclear combat takes place . The U.S. could control the air, sea and air over the island .
 There were obvious advantages to the Soviets in retaliating elsewhere, such as Berlin or the Jupiter sites in Turkey or Italy .
 They could attack by air, invade, or blockade these critical spots which were located closer to their homeland . They could also attack by . air or invade these critical . spots which are located . closer to the homeland .
 President asked Ambassador Thompson to write a paper on how the Soviet government viewed the situation . Ambassador Thompson wrote the paper on what their likely responses to various proposals might be .
 Atlantic and Carribean commands had been alerted against possible air attack on Panama Canal . Ramey Air Force Base and Naval Station, Roosevelt Roads, were requested to prepare recommendations to strengthen air defenses .
 Hawk Battalions were directed to Increase their Tf O r-CPnCT EYEO QITLY top sccnnw cm* — 71a. Hawk battalions are directed to . Increase their . Tf . O r - CPnCT .
 The Pentagon has no information indicating the presence of offensive weapons in Cuba, a spokesman said . Further, the spokesman said, the Pentagon does not have any indication that offensive weapons are available in Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff advised military commanders-in-chief that a state of tension with regard to Cuba could lead to military action . Saturday, October 20, the Joint Chiefs advised the military commanders in-chief to consider military action against Cuba .
 During the morning the planning group met in the Secretary of State's Conference Room .
 A detailed scenario had been prepared by U Alexis Johnson charting the expected course of action . The scenario was charted by Johnson's team .
 Messages, letters, draft telegrams of instruction, and contingency papers were prepared at the State Department . The State Department was prepared to send them to the White House .
 The Chief legal officers of the Departments of State, Defense, and Justice drafted the quarantine proclamation . Meanwhile, /series of ship, air, and troop movements were going on around the country .
 The timing of this exercise was fortunate; it provided an almost ideal ""cover"" for military preparations related to the Cuban crisis . The timing was fortunate .
 More than forty ships involved in the exercise got underway October 15 . For example, more than 40 ships involved got underway .
 Commandant David M Shoup said that ""one of the greatest assault teams in American history"" was assembled for a possible invasion of Cuba . In his annual ""State of the Corps"" message delivered January 3, 1963, Shoup .
 The answers were not strictly speaking incorrect until 11:07 am on Saturday, when CINCLANT was directed to suspend PHIBRIGLEX 62 . PhibRigleX 62 was suspended on Saturday morning .
 The President flew to Andrews Air Force Base from Chicago, then took a helicopter to the South Lawn of the White House, landing at 1:37 pm .
 At 2--30 he met with the planning group ^ of principals in the Oval Room . At 2 --30 he held a meeting with a group of principals .
 The full group was there, including Ambassadors Stevenson and Thompson and Robert Lovett .
 The ^5,000 marines awaiting their Government's decision on invasion, and the 100,000 more ready to back them up, knew all the answers . The marines were waiting for their government's decision to invade .
 Only mobile, fast to set up; it could take as little as 18 hours to make them operational . "I saw it in their eyes. . . I saw it . in their . eyes. "IOP SECffFf ML I EYES ONLY mobile"
 An airstrike would have to be big, it was pointed out, and would almost certainly have to have been accompanied by an invasion . An invasion of Syria would be likely to be accompanied by a big airstrike .
 It is hardly conceivable that the Soviets would not respond militarily to the threat posed posed by the West .
 The President commented that the air strike plan as presented was ""not surgical,"" but was ""apt to grab" and require a massive commitment of U.S. strength .
 He directed attention be concentrated on the track of action whose main feature was the defensive quarantine enforced by the U.S. Navy .
 This he said was the only course of action compatible with our principles . This is the only way to protect our principles, he said . He said: 'This is only way of protecting our principles'
 D QrPDCT sin lljI! :_ ■* SYBJ 0K51 K 75 _ TCP crcnCTui-i wj. — sw at the same time it was a substantial initiative which permitted the subsequent exercise of other options .
 The question of extending the quarantine to airplanes flying to Cuba was raised . The question was raised to extend the quarantine .
 It was recommended that they be shot down if there was good reason to think they carried nuclear warheads . It was also recommended that if there were good reason they were carrying nuclear warheads it was shot down .
 The President said that there would be no bargains over our bases in Turkey and Italy . President Obama said there would not be any bargains with Turkey or Italy .
 The thrust of our response would be directed at the offensive missiles, he said . He also noted that the bombers in Cuba were less of a problem than the bombers .
 The objective of the blockade was to achieve the removal of the missiles . The blockade was aimed at removing the missiles from the region . The objective was to remove the missiles and remove them .
 A distinction would be made between the missile threat and the Castro problem . The Castro problem would be different from the threat of a missile threat, the president says .
 If after several days there was a continuation of missile site construction an airstrice might be necessary against a minimum number of targets to eliminate the main nuclear threat . An airstrip may be necessary in the case of several days to eliminate a nuclear threat.
 It was held unlikely that the Soviets would retaliate, especially since the Strategic Air Command would be in a full alert condition . The Soviets would be unlikely to retaliate .
 An airstrike might not be 100 per cent effective, and could provoke retaliation . An airstrike may not always be 100% effective, but it could prompt retaliation .
 No matter what track was chosen, the Soviets might retaliate in Berlin or elsewhere . The Soviets might retaliate in Berlin, or elsewhere, in the wake of the attack .
 If the missiles were left in Cuba, both Khrushchev and Castro would be able to do what they pleased . But if the missiles are left, they would have to do whatever they wanted .
 The President ordered a defensive quarantine as quickly as possible, taking into account the need to notify allies and to make the necessary military preparations .
 We would also take the invitiative in the U.N. Security Council . We would take the initiative in the United Nations Security Council.
 The ""scenario"" for the full TOftSECnCT * iib 'MM 77TCj'' SCCnCTEYiroNiy— operation — covering diplomatic steps, ship movements, public statements, etc — was reviewed and approved .
 President's television address was set for Monday at 7:00 pm, designated ""P Hour,"" with the possibility of acting sooner if a security breach occurred . The President's TV address is scheduled to be shown on Monday night .
 At the Defense Department, the Navy and the other services went forward with preparations to carry out the defensive quarantine .
 U.S. Information Agency takes steps to link up American medium wave stations with Voice of America to broadcast the President's speech . 24-hour s-a-day transmission in Spanish is planned .
 In the early evening the President called the British Ambassador, Sir David Ormsby-Gore to the White House and talked to him privately for a short time .
 Late that night, the President spoke with Prime Minister Macmillan by trans-atlantic telephone . The President and Prime Minister spoke with each other late that night .
 Up to Sunday morning there remained a possiblity that our opening move would be a limited air strike at the missiles, as had been advocated by some members of the Excomm. Some members had suggested that a limited strike would be launched .
 At 10:00m. the President met with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, and after a brief discussion gave final approval to the plan . The plan that was to be followed was approved by the White House . The President gave approval of the plan, both as to substance and
 Revisions in the scenario were proposed, and in . some cases accepted, right up to the moment of the President's speech, and afterwards too, on points of timing and detail . as well as policy .
 The Navy sought clarification of policy for dealing with various contingencies that might arise in connection with the blockade . The Navy is seeking clarification of how to deal with contingencies .
 The coordination of military and diplomatic moves was kept under careful view . The coordination between the two countries was kept in place .
 In a few instances, ambassadors had suggestions concerning approaches to the governments to which they were accredited . Ambassador: "In some cases, ambassadors suggested approaches to governments"
 There was also a proposal that the thrust of the President's speech be altered to pin responsibility for the missiles on Castro as well as the Soviets .
 This would have the advantage of laying the groundwork for dealing with Castro after the missiles were out and, depending on events, demanding Castro's removal as part of our price . This would also lay the groundwork to deal with Castro .
 The determination of the United States to compel withdrawal of the missiles, by use of force if necessary, would be made clear in any case . The U.S. would be making clear of the U.K. decision to withdraw missiles, he says .
 Spreading blame more widely might also have the incidental benefit of giving the Soviets a face-saving route out . Spreading the blame more broadly might also give the Soviets the chance to get the blame .
 If the initial challenge to Castro and the Kremlin did not achieve the desired results, the full thrust of the U.S. demand could be escalated and concentrated on the Soviel&Jnion . The full thrust could be concentrated on Russia, the Kremlin and the rest of the world
 The disadvantage of this proposal was that to be effective, the blockade would have to cover additional items other than arms in order to put pressure on the Cubans as well .
 The view received serious attention, but it did not make its way into the President's speech . It was not discussed because of the difficulties posed by starting the blockade at a higher point on the scale, he said .
 All day the Departments of State and Defense, normally somnolent on a Sunday, hummed with activity . Behind a tightly-maintained security curtain, the State, Defense and State Departments hummed behind the scenes .
 Staff personnel were summoned to both Departments by telephone calls Saturday evening and Sunday morning . Staff personnel from both departments were summoned by phone calls Saturday .
 Once the policy had been determined, the chief task was to see that it was carried out, with due attention given to every facet, with maximum effectiveness, with proper attention .
 At the Defense Department the Office of the Joint Chiefs, the War Room, and the War Rooms were focal points . The War Room was a focal point at the Pentagon .
 Work at the State Department involved the Operations Center, the Secretariat, several regional Bureaus, the International Organization Bureau, the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, and the Legal Advisor's office . The Operations Center was tied directly to the War Room and the Situation Room .
 Livingston Merchant arrived in Ottawa to brief Prime Minister Diefenbaker . Merchant arrived at the end of the day to prepare for his mission .
 Ambassador Dowling was called back from Georgia where he had been visiting his mother who was ill . Acheson was briefed for his mission to Europe, and Dowling returned .
 Work on drafts of resolutions for the OAS Council and the Security Council is underway .
 The Board of National Estimates stated that the Soviets would be cautious in the face of U.S. determination, but would probably continue the build-up if the United States position was ambiguous . During the day the board of national estimates stated that .
 It concluded that the Soviets would not make major military retaliation if the United States sank a Soviet ship while enforcing the blockade . The U.S. would not have to sink the Soviet ship if it did so, the report concluded .
 Joint Evaluation that day concluded that there would be at least five Soviet offensive missile regiments in Cuba with a salvo potential of about one-half the current intercontinental ballistic missile threat from the Soviet Union .
 At 2:30m. the President convened a formal meeting of the National Security Council . The meeting took place in Washington DC at 2.30pm .
 Admiral George Anderson, Chief of Naval Operations, and Don Wilson, Acting Director, USIA, attended the event . Admiral Anderson and USIA Director Don Wilson also attended .
 Discussion centered on the third draft of the President's speech and progress reports on preparations for the speech .
 Admiral Anderson raised questions on how the first intercept should be made . Admiral Anderson raises questions about how the intercepts should be handled .
 President stated that our first objective was to block further shipments of offensive military equipment to Cuba, and that our aim was also to see that the Soviet missiles were removed from Cuba under UN supervision and inspection .
 White House aide Larry O'Brien prepared a list of Congressional leaders and with General Godfrey McHugh arranged for military jets to bring them to Washington for a 5:00m. visit .
 The State Department sent top secret telegrams in code describing the proposed actions to our Ambassadors . That night the State Dept. sent top Secret telegraments in code . The State. Department .
 The text of the President's speech with a covering letter to Khrushchev was sent to our Embassy in Moscow for delivery to the Soviet Foreign Office one hour before the speech . The text was sent with a cover letter to the Foreign Office .
 Letters from the President to Macmillan, de Gaulle, Adenauer, Nehru, Diefenbaker, Fanfani, Mayor Brandt and others were sent in code to our Embassies .
 Individual letters from the President were sent to M-3 Heads of Government . Individual letters were sent from President Obama to heads of government . President Obama was in attendance at the ceremony .
 During that week-end the State Department transmitted 15 separate Presidential letters or *.-""V-nr-T 2YSS oiiiri Sir 83" The State Department also sent 15 separate letters or "Oiiiri" letters .
 D.C. press corps seethed with curiousity, not all of it ill-informed or idle . Meanwhile, Washington's press corps is seething with curiosity . The White House has a history of scandal .
 He was given a partial briefing with a request that in the interests of national security the story not be printed . The story was given to him by the White House .
 The President called Orville Dryfoos, President of the Times and enlisted his cooperation . The president called the Times president of the times on Sunday .
 Washington Post speculates on late-hour comings and goings at White House, Pentagon, State Department . Most likely focus of activity was Cuba, but presence of Martin J Hillenbrand, head of the Berlin Task Force, at one White House meeting prompted the reporter to write that
 The State Department logged some 60 telephone calls at home Saturday night . Lincoln White, a spokesman for the State Department, logged 60 calls Saturday night and Sunday .
 At 9:00m. the ""go"" signal was sent ""in the clear"" (that is, not in cipher) to all the posts with action responsibilities, which included most NATO and Latin American capitals . At 9 a.m. NATO sent the signal to all posts with
 By then, ships were moving, troops were being readied, diplomatic preparations were in train, public affairs staffs were gearing up for action . Security mechanisms of the United Nations and Organization of American States were well under way .
 All these activities were in line with the basic ""scenario"" setting forth the anticipated track of U.S. policy hour by hour and minute by minute for the next two days .
 The scenario was subject to constant revision on points of detail and timing . It went through a large number of drafts up to the 85th draft of the scenario .
 President's speech in the light of the unfolding situation. as pages 86, 86a, 87 & 87a. read . as pages . read: "President's speech" in light of unfolding situation .
 The main thrust of U.S. policy was set, and the hundreds of pieces of action going on in Washington and around the globe that day were designed to give it effect .
 The news office and public affairs bureaus at State and Defense also were besieged with queries . The U.S. State Department's news office was inundated with questions .
 With the exception of the Post story, no newspaper accounts of the crisis appeared until Monday, and none were 'hard 1' until after the President's speech .
 In the morning the Atlantic Fleet was given its orders in the form of a planning directive for the quarantine .
 At 12:37m. the Tactical Air Command was instructed to put into effect a partial airborne alert and to execute a pre-arranged force dispersal plan . At 12.37m, the tactical Air Command put in effect an airborne alert .
 Embassies in London and Ottawa asked the British and Canadian governments to suspend temporarily all transit facilities and overflight clearances for bloc aircraft destined to Cuba .
 At 10.55 Washington time a special ""go"" signal was sent to all Latin SECfiTT ^ 89 . At 10:55 Washington Washington Time, a special "go" signal was also sent to Latin America .
 The President said that it was important to think about procedure as much as policy . President Obama said it is important to look at procedure and not policy .
 Personal messages should be sent to commanders of Jupiter installations in Italy and Turkey asking them to take special precautions, he said .
 There was discussion of possible problems arising out of the lack of notification of the NATO allies . NATO allies were not notified of the potential problems .
 The reason for the omission, it was agreed, was the obvious one of lack of time . It was agreed that the omission was due to the time it had been given .
 "Fairly substantial explanations would have to be made, it was recognized, to all the NATO allies," it was said . The U.S. government said .
 State Department would be useful, and the missions of Dean Acheson, Livingston Merchant, and Walter Dov/ling were also viewed as key elements .
 The United States was determined to act and would do so, says President Obama . The U.S. will act on the issue, he says .
 The correct course of action, properly executed, would probably bolster the Alliance while impressing the Soviets with the strength of our determination . It was hoped, it would also impress the Soviets, but it was hoped it would impress them .
 Much of the activity Monday concerned the question of how much information could be released in/briefings of ambassadors and the press scheduled for that evening .
 U.S. releases data to show extent and character of Soviet build-up in Cuba . U.N. says it's essential that enough data be released to make clear the extent of the Soviet build up in Cuba to audiences .
 The USI3 meeting that morning, several meetings at the State arid Defense Departments and the CIA, as well as one with the President, dealt with this issue . On the other hand, we did not want to divulge the full extent of our T '""•■
 At 11:45m. there was a meeting at State attended by Hilsman and others from the Intelligence and Research Bureau . There was discussion of what would be told the ambassadors and the press .
 In the end it was decided to exhibit a selection of blow-ups to the ambassadors and the press, but not to release them for publication or general circulation .
 The briefers heading for London, Paris, and Bonn were authorized to show the photographs to keypeople within each government, but not to release them .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko was planning to make an important statement at 2:00m. There was some nervousness around noon around noon in the White House and elsewhere .
 Arrangements were made to monitor his statement, and proceed at once if necessary with an announcement of the Quarantine . Arrangments were made, and to continue monitoring his statement .
 He merely said a few words of farewell suitable TOP SECRET Sir Top Secret-^ mx 93 to the occasion of his departure .
 Additional steps to link the key action centers in the government were taken . Additional steps were taken to link them with key government action centers .
 State Department detailed three officers full time to the Battle Staff Roster at the Pentagon to facilitate communications with the Defense Department . The State Department has detailed three full-time officers to the Pentagon .
 These officers were taken from the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs and Bureau of European Affairs . They were replaced by staff from the Operations Center on Tuesday .
 At the State Department, work continued on the two proposed O.A.S. resolutions . One converting the Council into an Organ of Consultation, the other seeking support for the course of TOP SECRET-^ ^ — s(r 94)
 At 12 noon Monday, October 22, the crisis for the first time became visible though not yet in substance . The crisis began at 12 noon on October 22 . The first time the crisis has been visible is not in substance yet .
 At that hour Pierre Salinger, the White House news secretary, announced that the President would make an important statement at 7:00 m.m. at that hour . The White House press secretary said that the statement would be made at the same time .
 He also requested air time for the President's speech from the radio and television networks, which was promptly granted .
 The only person previously absent that this brought into the picture was Edward A McDermott, head of the Office of Emergency Planning, who was previously 95 .
 The other members of the N.S.C. were all on the Exhoth Excomm, the informal working group that had been meeting night and had day for nearly a week . The group has been meeting nights and days a week and has been in the air for a week
 During the N.S.C. meeting the President formally established the Excomm and asked it to meet with him daily at 10:00m. The Excomm was established by the President of the United States .
 He reviewed again the chief arguments against the air strike — the Pearl Harbor analogy and the chance that it was not certain that all the missiles could be erased in one operation . He reviewed the arguments again and again .
 He also reminded his associates that it might yet be necessary to invade or take other action, and raised theuestion of what should be done if .
 The course adopted was to be viewed as the consensus which all had helped reach. It was viewed as a consensus which had all helped reach .
 Discussion also covered the chain of reasoning behind not having acted sooner . Discussion also included the reasons for not acting sooner .
 97 missiles were not sufficient' to commit the U.S. to a major initiative in the Cold War, author says . 97.6 missile launches were 'not sufficient' for the United States .
 It would have been impossible to win support for our action from the O.S.A. or our NATO allies, it was remarked . Some thought the United States had a ""fixation"" about Cuba .
 Expert Sovietologists had been unanimous in the opinion that . introduction by the Soviets of offensive missiles into Cuba was highly improbable .
 This was seen as a problem of public affairs, not policy, and the types of arguments and responses which would be most appropriate were reviewed . The types of responses were reviewed to ensure the most appropriate responses were most appropriate .
 A few had returned to Washington at near-3uper-sonic speeds in the military Jets laid on by General McHugh .
 The President conducted the briefing with the assistance of Secretary Rusk and an Intelligence officer . The briefing was conducted by the President and the Secretary of State .
 Aerial photographs were displayed and explained, and the President outlined what he planned to do . Aerial photos were displayed .
 Congressional leaders expressed support, though some thought he would have to go beyond the act of quarantine to an air strike or invasion . Some thought that would require a quarantine to be extended beyond that .
 The President listened to their comments but did not change his position . President Obama listened to the comments but didn't change his stance .
 During the afternoon each U.S. Ambassador in Latin America, having been cued by the ""go"" signal, called on the Foreign Minister to whom he was accredited, to tell him there was a likelihood of Communist demonstrations that evening . The alert tingency has been made for
 The State Department asked the American Telephone and Telegraph company to give top priority to calls between the O.A.S. and their Presidents and Foreign Ministers in Latin American capitals . The company will be given top priority calls between Washington and Latin American leaders .
 Extraordinary steps had to be taken to brief the President of Mexico, Lopez Mateos, who with his Foreign Minister was in an airplane high above the Pacific .
 A full set of briefing materials was sent to our embassy in the Philippines and to CINCPAC, for transmittal to the Presidential party . He had been in Manila and was scheduled to stop in Hawaii, so a full set .
 CINCPAC i U w-CJoEj EYfl0 0NL¥ I UJ I I I i i i I i . i i 101 got the documents to him well before the President's speech .
 The United States Information Agency and the Voice of America had been preparing since late Friday to provide facilities for relaying the President's speech around the globe .
 The Acting Director of USIA, Donald M Wilson had been briefed on the crisis Friday night by high State Department officers . The acting director of the USIA was briefed on Friday night .
 At that time George Ball instructed him to make plans to broadcast the President's speech to Cuba when it was delivered Sunday or Monday evening . The speech will be delivered to Cuba on either Monday or Tuesday .
 It was decided that the most effective way to reach Cuba would be to link up a number of American medium wave stations with the Voice when the President spoke .
 The Voice would then stay on the air 24 hours a day in Spanish, commencing with the speech . Medium wave stations would be urged to stay on VOA network during crisis period .
 Direct telephone lines to the stations from the White House were readied . Direct telephone calls were made from White House stations .
 Pierre Salinger telephoned the heads of the nine stations to request their cooperation, which was readily given . Salinger asked for cooperation from nine stations .
 Loomls called the station again to advise on the technical arrangements that had been made for the telephone lines . Salinger received each approval of each approval, Looml said .
 By 6:30m. the hook-ups had been completed, and at 7:00m. all the stations were on the air . By 7 a.m. they had all the radio stations on air .
 In addition to the Voice transmissions, USIA put the speech and subsequent statements on its worldwide Wireless Pile, often in several languages . USIA puts the speech on its wireless Pile .
 They also made use of their fast shipping facilities to send photographs, tapes, and films of President's speech to all parts of the world .
 Telephone calls were placed ""in the clear"" to key Embassies in Europe . J_ Telephone calls placed ""In the clear" to key embassies in Europe. J_
 In guarded language Washington verified that the messages had indeed gotten through and that preparations for P Hour were going as planned . Washington confirmed that P Hour had indeed been successful .
 Last-minute changes in the speech and in the instructions for delivering it were radioed to posts during the afternoon .
 The radio relay station in Nicosia, Cyprus had encountered atmospheric conditions which blocked transmissions to some embassies in Africa .
 Official notice of what the U.S. proposed to do was given to those nations through their embassies in Washington . By the time this was discovered it was too late to do anything about it, so official notice was given .
 Dean Ache son Tr-rs r-r\~\r~r \$\j* 104.7 .
 Iui f Ji'JuRliUrao oitiy , — called ok President de Gaulle' at the Elysee Palace to Inform him of what the United States proposed to do to the U.S.
 Acheson was accompanied by an intelligence briefer, who displayed severa the French President .
 De Gaulle paid close attention to Acheson' s briefing and expressed support for the U.S. policy . Aideson's briefing was the first time the French president was in France .
 President Kennedy was entirely right to make a firm response to the Soviet move, he said . He assured Acheson of France's cooperation with him .
 At about the same time Ambassador Bruce briefed Prime Minister MacMillan and Ambassador Dowling in Bonn briefed Chancellor Adenauer . Ambassador Bruce in London briefed PM MacMillans .
 Both heads of government expressed support for what the President proposed to do . The President's proposal is expected to be approved by the next week .
 Later that evening Acheson appeared before a special session of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Council to explain the reasons for the U.S. action . He said the United States had not been able to consult fully in advance .
 He was given a courteous reception and received expressions of support from the allies . He was greeted with a warm welcome by the British Prime Minister .
 At 6:26 a.m. the State Department logged receipt of a letter to President Kennedy from Prime Minister MacMillan . The State Department logged receipt of the letter .
 We must rest not so much on precedent as on the unprecedented condition of the modern world in a nuclear age . However, we must rest on precedent .
 He may try to escort his ships into the Caribbean and force you to attack them, he says . He says. He may . try to . force them to . attack them .
 The President did not see the letter until after his speech . Berlin ... pressure on the weaker parts of the Free World defense systemi'
 Later that evening a reply responding to each point in the letter was sent from Kennedy to Macallan . Kennedy responded to the letter by sending a reply .
 Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin was ushered into the State Department's 7th floor office at the State Dept. State Department . The ambassador's blue-carpeted office is located on the State.gov.com .
 Adlai Stevenson called on the U.N. Secretary General to inform him of the President's speech and of the impending United States request that a meeting of the Security Council be convened . Stevenson called upon the United Nations Secretary General .
 At 6:15 the Ambassadors In Washington from NATO, SEATO, and CENTO countries were given a detailed background briefing . Forty-six ambassadors and charges* attended the briefing .
 Aerial photographs showing the erected missile launchers and missile site constructions . at several locations in Cuba . were shown . Aerial photographs were taken of Cuba .
 A television set had been placed on the front rostrum, and most of the ambassadors remained to watch the President's speech .
 Ambassador Poy Kohler, only recently arrived in Moscow, delivered a letter from President Kennedy and text of the speech . Ambassador Kohler is only recently in Moscow .
 He did not see any Soviet officials of high rank, and there was no immediate Soviet Response .
 His voice and image/ carried on all the major networks and on a large majority of the nation's broadcasting stations . His image and voice were carried by all major networks .
 Nine stations, under arrangements made by the White House and USIA, broadcast the speech on commercial frequencies to Latin America .
 At the same hour the Defense Department ordered a worldwide alert status designated DEFCON 3 . It had the effect of signalling all United States military elements to assume ami increased state of readiness .
 Assistant Secretary Mar-tin conducted a further closed-door briefing for Latin American Ambassadors in the Under Secretary's Conference room . The briefing was held in Latin American ambassadors' rooms .
 Ambassador Stevenson called on Valerian A Zorin, chief Soviet delegate to the UN, in his capacity as President of the Security Council for the month of October, and gave him a letter requesting that he summon an urgent meeting of the Council .
 Stevenson also transmitted the text of a draft resolution for the Security Council calling on the Soviet Union to dismantle and withdraw the missiles under UN verification . Stevenson: The Soviet Union should dismantle the missiles and withdraw them .
 Secretary Rusk spokrs to a meeting of all other Ambassadors in Washington, and a background briefing .
 This briefing was conducted by George Ball, was flanked by U Alexis Johnson, Legal Advisor Abram Chayes, who Intelligence and Research Director Roger Hilsman, and Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Robert J Manning .
 A similar briefing for reporters was held by Secretary McNamara at 8:00 a.m. ET .
 A special concert commemorating the 17th anniversary of the Pounding of the United Nations took place that evening in the State Department auditorium . The State Department held a special concert celebrating the anniversary .
 Some of the top-level guests, among them Secretary Rusk, were absent from the audience .
 Assistant Secretary Martin bearded two ambassadors from Ecuador and Guatemala during intermission . He managed to beard two ambassadors .
 mobilization planning was reviewed and preparations were ordered for a possible call-up of reserves . During the evening at the Pentagon mobilization plans were reviewed and reviewed .
 Secretary McNamara ordered an acceleration of the TGP ZZCM\ ^ UilLi Sir no. induction and training of Cuban nationals . McNamara also ordered an accelerated training program for Cubans .
 That night United States dependents from the Guantanamo naval base began to arrive in the United States that night . That evening the public affairs bureaus at State and the Pentagon went on a 24-hour schedule .
 At least one principal officer was on duty in the two bureaus at all times . The incident occurred at least once a day in the building .
 Throughout both Departments, and in the White House, key personnel remained on call through the nights .
 George Ball and Alexis Johnson had been alternating IQE-SFrRFT i(H k,1k.i> Utiht 111 on the night shift since Friday . At State, Ball and Johnson have alternated night shifts .
 Intelligence officers did much of their' work at night, so as to have reports completed for early morning briefings and meetings of the Excomm. Intelligence officers . Intelligence officers worked at night so that their reports could be completed .
 Lord Bertrand Russell sent telegrams to Kennedy, Khrushchev, Macmillan, Galtskell, and U Thant . Russell was unable to sleep after hearing the President's speech .
 Provided oral briefings to 95 foreign Ambassadors and an unknown number of American newsmen . Also briefed to 95 international Ambassadors .
 Some senior officials say the move represents a certain victory . That in itself, in the eyes of some senior officials, was a victory . The U.S. Supreme Court is expected to hold a hearing next week .
 The chance that hot-headed Cubans might have responded to the President's speech by seizing the missiles was never out of anyone's mind . The possibility that the Soviets themselves might have taken precipitate action, or that the U.S. might have seized the missiles, never was out
 The northern hemisphere might have been well on its way to incineration . With United States nuclear forces in a fully alert status, ready to respond if ordered, it's possible .
 The Soviets had not closed the autobahn leading from West Germany to Berlin . It was not closed from the west to Berlin, but from the east .
 They had not made a conventional or nuclear bombing attack on the Jupiters in Italy and Turkey . The U.S. did not make a conventional bombing attack in Italy or Turkey .
 Most important, they had not as of that' moment perceptibly accelerated the construction of missile launchers in Cuba . Most important is that the Cuban government had not yet accelerated the build-up of the missiles .
 None of the weapons appeared to be ready to fire, and no rapid preparations to make them so seemed to have occurred . No rapid preparations were made to make the weapons .
 Secretary Rusk made the main speech advocating that the Council transform itself into an organ of consultation under the immediate emergency provisions of the Charter of the UK .
 The two most important countries which hesitated before committing themselves to support the United States proposal were Brazil and Mexico . Many of the delegates were in need of instructions from their home governments .
 Both governments felt a general hesitancy about moving so fast and also raised the constitutional question about the authority of the Council to transform itself into an organ of consultation .
 The real motives standing behind these legalisms are undoubtedly related to domestic politics . The real motive for the legalisms is domestic politics, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Both Presidents had been elected with the support of left-leaning elements who tended to view Castro as an authentic Latin folk hero . Both Presidents were elected with support of the left, including Castro .
 They did not want to commit their governments to . actions which would alienate these groups, which might provoke demonstrations and riots, they said .
 He also telephoned our ambassadors in Rio de Janeiro and Mexico City to coordinate efforts to apply maximum pressure . He also called our ambassadors to coordinate our efforts .
 Secretary Rusk called the Mexican foreign minister by telephone at his hotel in Honolulu . Rusk was in Honolulu when he called the foreign minister . The Mexican minister was in the U.S.
 Brazil abstained on one point relating to invasion . In the end, both countries cast their votes for the Resolutions, though Brazil abstain .
 Bolivia was absenting itself from the O.A.S. in connection with a dispute with Chile . At the time Bolivia was in the midst of a dispute between Chile and Bolivia . Bolivian was absent from the world's most important meeting with the United States .
 The Bolivian Ambassador, Emilio Sarmiento Carruncho, attended the meetings anyway and cast his country's vote for the resolutions . The ambassador joked that he might soon be needing a job .
 Uruguayan delegate, Emilio Oribe, unable to get instructions from his government in time for the vote . Oribe's government was unable to provide instructions from Oribe .
 A nine-man council who had to be unanimous before any action could be taken could not be taken . The council had to have a unanimous vote before taking action .
 Uruguay recorded its affirmative vote the next day, making it a unanimous 20-0 . Uruguay recorded the affirmative vote next day . The next day it recorded its second straight straight vote of the World Cup .
 The unanimity of the council, due in considerable part to shrewd diplomacy by State Department officials, was viewed by many as an important factor in blunting a possible Soviet propaganda response .
 Adlai Stevenson delivered his opening statement to the Security Council . He delivered the opening statement at a specially-convened meeting of the council .
 Introduced two parallel letters to the President of the Security Council also requesting an urgent meeting of the Council in a desperate attempt to alter the focus of the issue . Introduced two separate letters .
 They alleged that the United States count ermeasures and ""aggressive action against Cuba"" were the real threat to peace in the Caribbean . They said that the U.S. count ermeasures and "aggressive action" against Cuba were real threat .
 Stevenson charged that the Soviet Union had converted Cuba into a bridgehead and staging area in the Western Hemisphere . He urged the Council to call for the immediate withdrawal of missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba .
 He traced the ""vast plan of piecemeal aggression' 1 and ""the basic drive to abolish the world of the Charter"" which had characterized Soviet policy in the post-war years .
 Stevenson was speaking at the end of his speech . A note was passed to him by Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Harlan Cleveland . The secretary of state was not present at the event .
 U.S. President Barack Obama has called for the U.K. to be stripped of the right to vote in favor of a U.N. resolution on the matter .
 Stevenson promptly read the note to the Security Council, a scene observed by millions on television . Stevenson then read it to the council .
 He denounced the U.S. quarantine action as an ""act of war"" and declared that the Cuban people had answered the armed attack with general mobilization .
 He decared that the United States charges were ""completely false"" and ""a clumsy attempt to cover up aggressive actions"" in Cuba . He decried that the U.S. charges were "completely false"
 The statement declared that the Soviet Government will do ""everything in its power to frustrate the aggressive design s of United States imperialistic circles,"" and appealed to all Governments and peoples to raise their voices in protest against the ""aggressive acts"" of the United States .
 Ambassador Zorin attempted to associate neutrals with his cause by quoting earlier statements by a number of countries in support of Cuba .
 The Soviet resolution insisted that the United States ""repeal its decision on the control of ships of other states going towards the shores of Cuba" and called upon the US, Cuba, and USSR ""to establish contacts and enter into negotiations for the purpose of normalizing the situation and thereby removing
 At the State Department special instructions to our Ambassadors in Venezuela and Chile were being readied . Meanwhile, at the State Dept. special instructions were also readied.
 These two countries were especially important because of their membership on the Security Council . The two countries are important because they are members of the United Nations .
 Ambassadors were told to talk to the Presidents and Foreign Ministers in a special effort to make sure they would support the U.S. position, which they did .
 The Excomm met with the President at 10:00m. and again at 6:30m. While this overt activity in the U.N. and O.A.S. was in motion, the Excomm was in the United States .
 In the morning the President approved the final test and issuance of the Proclamation of Interdiction . The President also approved the decision to deploy the troops in the country .
 He also signed an Executive Order authorizing extension of tours of duty for certain members of the armed forces . The Order was signed by President Obama on behalf of the president .
 Walt W Rostow was formally designated to head the advance planning group . Walt Rostow has been formally designated as head of the group . Rostow will be the president of the National Institute of American Studies .
 President's Science Advisor was asked to direct the group examining the government's world wide communications capability . Jerome Wiesner, the President's science Advisor, is the group's science advisor .
 President asked Paul Nitze to head a committee to think about problems of inter-allied relationships . Nitze will head a panel to look at problems of international relations . The President also asked Nitze for a committee of experts on inter-relationship .
 It was considered essential to find out if work on the missiles was continuing . It was thought to be essential to know if the missiles were continuing .
 The President ordered a sharp increase in lowlevel reconnaissance over the known sites . President Obama has ordered an increase in the operation .
 The read-out on the pictures they took became available late that evening and early the next morning .
 A meeting of the 'Ambassadorial Group,' which normally discusses Berlin, took place at the State Department during the day .
 Question of possible U.S. action against SAM sites in Cuba was also raised .
 These matters were discussed in Mr Nitze's committee later in the day or the next day .
 During the day Secretary Rusk transmitted to the White House a memorandum prepared by Assistant Secretary for European Affairs William Tyler . The memorandum was prepared by William Tyler, assistant Secretary for Near Eastern iV .
 The Germans, Italians, Belgians, Turks, and Canadians have favored such a step . The Germans and Italians would probably respond with a strong show of interest . The Turks, Turks and Europeans would probably also be interested .
 The memorandum took account of European concern about Soviet MRBM's threatening their home territories . The memorandum was interesting in part for its relevance to future discussions of nuclear sharing and the multi-lateral force .
 The Cuban crisis was designed to show Europeans that the U.S. is not diverting from its positive long term policies in Europe, it said .
 The initial costs of a modest force could be shared by the United States and the participating European nations . The U.S., as a transitional measure, could keep custody of the nuclear warheads .
 The multilateral concept had aroused great interest in the North Atlantic Council, memo says . It would help stave off pressure for bilateral sharing with France, it says .
 If the policy was adopted it could have the effect of closing out the crisis before mounting public pressures and possible incidents in the blockade might result in increased risks of war and divisive pressures within the alliance .
 Dean Acheson went to Bonn to talk to Chancellor Adenauer and German Defease Minister Franz Joseph Strauss . It would also permit us to draw positive advantage from the crisis in pursuing our own positive goals in Europe .
 Both gave Acheson a cordial reception and expressed full support for the President's action . Both gave a warm welcome to the former British ambassador .
 Britain expresses "deep concern at the provocative action of the Soviet Union ing in placing offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba" The British government declares its support for the United States position .
 Moscow time — thirteen hours after the President's speech — began transmitting a Soviet Government statement . TASS, the Soviet news agency, began transmitting the statement . Moscow time: Moscow time .
 Because of delays in transmission, the letter was not received in Washington until 11:56m. , nearly four hours after it was handed to Kohler . The letter was sent from Kohler's office in Washington, D.C. because of delays .
 The letter reflected the tone of the public statement, ^^^^accused the United States of piracy, violation of international law, and provocative acts that might lead to nuclear war . The letter was written in response to the U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Neither the letter nor the statement denied the truth of the United States charge that Soviet intermediate and medium range missiles had been Tp-3 ^ r ^P^J TfTiS QNLY — r-t-j '\i i'^rT 130 .
 At 7*00m. the President signed the Proclamation of Interdiction in a ceremony at the White House . The President signed it at the same time .
 "Cinclant was promptly directed to enforce the quarantine in accord with instructions previously drafted," he said .
 Secretary McNamara held a press conference at which he announced that action had been taken to deploy our forces to make effective the quarantine by 10:00m. the next morning .
 McNamara said that 25 Soviet ships were enroute to Cuba, their course unchanged in the past 2khours. McNamara: 25 Soviet vessels were en route to Cuba . McNamara also said that the Soviet ships are en route .
 He indicated he had given orders to interdict these and all other ships headed for Cuba, starting 10:00m. the next day .
 Before the night was out messages from the President were sent to Mayor Brandt, Chancellor Adenauer, and President de Gaulle .
 At 1:00m. aerial reconnaissance photos of the Soviet missile installations in Cuba were released to the U.S. press . The photos were taken at the time of the attack .
 By morning, newspaper readers and television viewers were given this visual proof of the missile build-up . The missile launch was the first of its kind in North Korea .
 At 9:00 a.m. the Security Council met and heard the representatives of Venezuela, Sr. The United Nations Holds the Stage at 9:30 a.M. The U.N. Security Council held a meeting with Venezuela's representatives of the Venezuelan government .
 Sosa Rodriguez, associate the Latin American nations with the U.S. stand . Sosa . Rodriguez: "I'm not sure what kind of things I'm going to do"
 The weapons in Cuba, he emphasized, were no longer defensive but offensive . They were of a magnitude that might wipe out any of the American republics and drag the world Into the holocaust of nuclear war .
 Cuban subversive activities, including the introduction of agents, propaganda, and weapons . He described the apprehension felt throughout the continent at subversive activities .
 Sosa Rodriguez declared that he was speaking for the entire continent . He asked the Security Council to take measures to stop nuclear weapons from arriving in Cuba .
 A nuclear missile with a range of 2,200 miles in Cuba could not be called defensive . Sir Patrick Dean, Representative of the UK, noted that by no stretch even of the Soviet imagination could a . Soviet imagination . could a nuclear missile . with a . range of . 2,
 Plans were being given, plans laid and preparations being made for the supply of missiles to Cuba, he said . While the Soviet Government were acting their lie, he stated .
 The speech by the Representative of Rumania, Mr Malitza, was an exercise in pealty which supported the position of the Soviet Union and called for condemnation of the United States and immediate annulment of naval blockade .
 The Irish Representative, Mr Aiken, underlined world concern with the growth of the Soviet intervention in Cuba .
 In both cases, contacts and negotiations were suggested as the first step in a wider scheme of proposals . But he warned that only through negotiation at the start could agreement come .
 Mr Aiken's speech adumbrated the anxiety of the smaller powers . The smaller powers are grasping for some compromise formula to defuse the crisis .
 The Security Council reconvened that afternoon several mediation efforts were floated in the halls of the UN, most of which were prescriptions for restraint and negotiation . Before the Security Council .
 Many neutrals were urging the SYG to intervene, confer with the parties, and make a ""balanced appeal"" to both sides to refrain from aggravating action . Many have urged the government to intervene .
 The first versions were tentatively advanced for a standstill formula compounded of a Soviet pledge not to introduce any more offensive military equipment in exchange for lifting the quarantine, along with the stationing of UN observers in Cuba .
 The pictures were of high quality, and it was decided to release them later in the day . It was decided not to release the pictures because of the quality of the pictures .
 Secretary McNamara reported on the increased state of readiness in our military forces . Secretary of State McNamara said the increased readiness in the military forces was a priority .
 There was also a discussion of communications . There were also a discussions of communications.
 State Department background briefing wa3 held for delegates of the European Broadcasting Union . Background briefing was held at 11:00 a.m. EST .
 Prank Stanton, President of CBS, and other prominent U.S. television officials attended . The event was held in New York City .
 Twelve types of information were listed as vital to national security and not releasable . Twelve types' of information was listed as important to the nation's national security . None of the information was classified as 'relevant'
 The White House press secretary requested information media exercise discretion in publishing information relating to national security . White House asked media to exercise discretion .
 At a press briefing at 4:00, Sylvester announced that there were 8-10 missile installations in Cuba, with about & 4 launches per base . At least thirty missiles and more *"" 20 IL-28 jet fighter bombers, as well as 5000 Soviet personnel in Cuba .
 At 7:35 four of the low-level reconnaissance photos discussed were discussed that morning in the Excomm 139 . Four of the photos discussed that day were shown to the public at 7:30 p.m.
 That evening TASS released the exchange of telegrams between Bertrand Russell and Khrushchev . The exchange was the first time the two men had exchanged messages . Russell was the prime minister of the Soviet Union .
 At 9:24m. Khrushchev's letter to the President was received at the State Department . The letter was sent to the White House from the Soviet Union at 9:30am .
 The Soviet leader's letter was on the whole a repeat of the previous letter and broadcast statement . The letter was repeated in the same way as the previous statement .
 The President's reply was sent 4£hours later, at 1:59m., and was hand carried to the Soviet Embassy in Washington . The reply was hand-carried at that hour .
 Highlights of the meeting were the satement of Chile, the UAR Ghana ""restraint"" resolution, and the first public intervention by the Acting Secretary Generajr. Secretary General .
 The Representative of Chile endorsed the security measures of the regional system . Chile also expressed support for the U.S draft resolution .
 U.S. draft resolution gave the Acting Secretary General to dispatch saying that an observer corps to Cuba,/ Unfortunately, the representative of Cuba yesterday rejected this idea .
 Secret E ^ ™ty TOP SlCRET EYLn onY I 141. contrary to international law and likely to increase world tension . contrary to International law and . likely to . increase world tensions .
 Dorticos had told the General Assembly that the weapons Cuba had acquired were ""defensive in nature"" and called for normalization of relations between Cuba and the United States . Ghana representative QuaisonSackay took a similar position, adding that he had no 'incont
 The formula proposed by the so-called unaligned countries was limited to a general appeal for mediation by the Secretary General . The formula provided neither for the suspension of the Soviet offensive buildup nor for UN involvement in inspection and verification .
 At the close of the meeting the Acting Secretary General addressed an urgent appeal to President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev . His message asked that all concerned refrain from any action that may aggravate the situation .
 JHP ?::»pr] ""s YS<5 nNTiY all arms shipments to Cuba, and also the voluntary suspension of the quarantine measures involving the searching of ships bound for Cuba, has been suspended .
 U Thant had already sent a private appeal to Kennedy and Khrushchev at 2 o'clock that afternoon . Unbeknownst to the Security Council, the U.S. had already already sent the appeal to them .
 It expressed a similar hope that the two great powers would avoid any confrontations that would risk general war . The U.S. hopes the two countries avoid any confrontation .
 He said he hoped that a peaceful solution to the crisis will soon be found which will make It possible ""to move to a wider field of negotiation,"" but added that in these grave matters we cannot rest upon mere words and promises .
 It a then seemed to many of us ... that in the struggle of Wills between the Soviet Union and the Western powers, primarily the U.S., the world might be coming to the brink of war . The war of the Cold War may have been in the 1980s, says
 He went on to say that during the crisis week the Soviet government ""were doing TOO 1-n Dr. 147" Dr. Dr. was critical of the government's handling of the crisis in the Soviet Union during the time .
 Ivanov said that the Soviet Government looked to the United Kingdom as their one hope of conciliation .
 I think that my Honourable Friend was one of Mr Ward's patients that Ivanov had been to see him to give a somewhat similar story and to ask for some indication that the British Government were considering working towards negotiations . Sir Hugh Stephenson, then Deputy-Under-Secretary of the Foreign
 Lord Arran agreed and Ivanov and Mr ward came to see him on 27th October . Arran said Ivanov, ward and ward were invited to visit him .
 Ivanov again stated that he wished to get a message to the British Government by indirect means asking them to call a Summit Conference in London forthwith . Ivanov said he wished for a summit conference with the British government .
 Lord Arran repeated this initiative at the time both to my Office and to the Foreign Office . He later sent in a full report to Foreign Office and later sent it in full report .
 Ivanov' s approaches were ... only a small piece of the jigsaw; they were a natural part of the Soviet attempt to weaken our resolution . Ivanov: 'Ivanov's approach was ... only ... only part of our resolution. It was part of a Soviet attempt
 The first intercept of a Soviet ship took place Thursday, October 25, at 7:15m., when the USS Essex made contact with the soviet tanker Bucharest . The USS Essex intercepted the Bucharest tanker .
 Aerial photographs were quickly taken and processed, and by 10:00 it was possible to confirm there was no deck cargo of any interest on the F6f '^ rj'c .
 U.S. ships contained to trail the tanker until early evening . It was plainly an ordinary tanker .
 The Sxcomm met at 10:00 and opened with a report on the military situation . The meeting was followed by a report from the SxComm .
 There was discussion of whfch Soviet on ships to intercept and board, and/procedures to govern the boarding and inspection process . There was also discussion of how to enforce the boarding process of a ship .
 Don Wilson of USIA was given responsibility for preparing a leaflet and making arrangements for the event . Don Wilson was tasked with preparing the leaflet for the public .
 Later in the day a draft text was checked and cleared personally by the President . A draft text of the text was also checked and approved by the president .
 At least a dozen Soviet vessels had turned back, apparently because they were carrying offensive weapons . At a Defense Department news conference at 11:50m., Sylvester said .
 At noon the Secretary of State gave a background briefing for U.S. correspondents, followed by a 2:00m. briefing for foreign press . At 2:30m. the foreign press will be given a second round of briefings .
 Three ships carrying 2146 dependents of tj.s. personnel at Guantanamo arrived at Norfolk, Virginia . There was extensive discussion during the morning between the Pentagon, State, and the white House, concerning the selection of the first ship to be boarded .
 It was decided to board a non-Soviet ship first, one that was proceeding through the quarantine zone, carrying j chartered bjr the Soviets, anj drty cargo . The ship was registered in a neutral, not allied, nation .
 Wrj T.TM WIT directly engaging the Soviet Union . "",he Lebanese freighter Marucla fulfilled all these requirements . Shortly after noon the decision was made to intercept and board this ship .
 The USS Kennedy and USS Pierce headed in her direction throughout the afternoon . USS Kennedy was the first ship to arrive in the U.S.
 The actual boarding took place without incident at 7:50 the next morning . The actual boarding took place at 7.50 the morning .
 East German passenger ship Volkerfruend with 20 students bound for Havana was cleared through the quarantine . At 8:35m. ET the ship was cleared .
 The British ship Suiaco headed for Kingston, Jamaica, and a Polish ship bound for New Orleans were allowed to proceed without inspection . In addition, the British and Polish ships were able to proceed .
 Strategic Air Command — which -rr-.r) rmnrr Otr 152. had assumed chargep^^^^ffi^^^^^^^| on October 12 . Strategic air command directed to keep CINCLANT and the Navy's air headquarters I land to asdst under CIN
 Second message was sent to Kennedy and Khrushchev, again asking that they avoid direct confrontations of Soviet and American ships . SCCnET^ o^ Y
 He noted that some representatives in the Council said did / they/ not know whether the Soviet Union has in fact built in Cuba installations capable of firing nuclear missiles .
 If further doubt remained on this score, the United States would gladly exhibit photographic evidence to the doubtful, the U.S. would gladly show photographic evidence .
 Ambassador Stevenson demolished Communist arguments and replied to neutral misgivings . Ambassador Stevenson said: "One by one Ambassador Stevenson demolishes Communist arguments" Ambassador Stevenson responded to Communist arguments with neutral answers .
 The one action in the last few days which had of the United States and its allies the strengthened the peace was the determination/ to stop further spread of weapons in this hemisphere . U.S. and allies are determined to stop the spread of further weapons in the hemisphere .
 Soviet representative — unaware of the fact that history would soon call his bluff — chose to concentrate his speech on a challenge to the ""incorirovertible facts"" concerning the offensive 1 Jf ^luiiul fes5 Oil Tly"""" 157. — — "" ;
 The ""kernel of the matter" lay ""in the aggressive intentions of the United States with respect to Cuba," says the president .
 Stevenson and Zorin met at the end of October 25 . Stevenson's famous encounter occurred early in the evening of that evening . Stevenson and the Russian were the last to meet in the Soviet Union .
 "We do have the evidence. Well, let me say something to you, Mr Ambassador: We do have evidence," she said . She said .
 We came here today to indicate our willingness to discuss U Thant's proposals -and that is the only change that has taken place . We came to the U.S. to indicate we are willing to discuss the proposals . We are happy to discuss proposals, but that is only change
 President Obama: "There has been a change. You, the Soviet Union, have sent these weapons to Cuba" President Obama says the U.S. has changed its approach to Cuba .
 Soviet Union has created this new danger -faot the United States . U.S. did we not deny the existence of these weapons .
 But today -again, If I heard you correctly -you say that they do not exist, or that we have not proved they exist -and you say this with another fine flood of rhetorical scorn. But today, if I heard . If I . heard . correctly - you say that
 "I am not in an American courtroom, sir, and therefore I do not wish to answer a question that is put to me in the fashion in which a prosecutor puts questions," she says . She says she is not in a courtroom, "I do not want to answer that question
 I am prepared to wait for my answer until Hell freezes over, if that is your decision . I'm not sure what I will do next, but I'll wait for your answer .
 i Up ocAjRETsyss umr 160. I am also prepared to present the evidence in this room. I'm prepared to give evidence in the room . I am prepared to show the evidence .
 The photographs were then made available to members for detailed examination in the Trusteeship Room following the meeting .
 TOP .^rrRAi -^ut,., stated, was his answer to the question of the United States representative. TOP . ^ . .
 It had become clear that Security Council action was impossible since no resolution could escape a veto . Security Council vote was impossible due to no resolution that could escape veto . It was also impossible for Security Council to take action against Syria .
 Mr Quaison-Sackey of Ghana recalled that the SYG's appeal to the U.S. and USSR had been made at the request of some fifty members of the organization .
 U.S., Cuba and Soviet Union offered assistance to facilitate negotiations on the immediate steps to remove the existing threat to peace and to normalize the situation .
 V>n r y EyTTCf mr . and to adjourn the meeting was adopted by the Security Council without objection . The Security Council adopted the meeting's decision to adjourn it without objection.
 The Security Council adjourned sine die but remained ""seized"" of the problem while the parties negotiated . Security Council remained "seized" of the issue .
 Planning subcommittee, with members from Defense, State, Justice, CIA, USIA, and White House, met for the first time on the 24th, and thereafter every day .
 A large number of memos on these and related subjects flowed from the subcommittee to the Secretary of State, the Excomm, and the President . The subcommittee is responsible for many of the memos .
 The prohibition on surface-to-surface missiles covers missile propellants and other chemical compounds to power missiles . The order was issued by the Defense Department .
 All U.S. embassies were instructed to inform foreign . ministries and mariners of this notice .
 The Defense Department also issued a notice covering procedure for surfacing and identification of submarines . The notice was relayed to all appropriate countries .
 Though the ship was chartered to the Soviet Union, its cargo proved to be innocent and she was permitted to continue on her way . The ship was allowed to continue its way to the USSR .
 The intelligence briefing was based largely on the low-level reconnaissance flights . It conveyed the somber fact that construction work on the missiles continued unabated .
 The Soviets appeared to be seeking full operational capability as rapidly as possible . The Soviets wanted to be able to launch their first aircraft carriers in the Soviet Union .
 There was discussion of the ship interceptions, the quarantine and the line of response to U Thant's proposal to the proposal .
 The President said that our determination to get the missiles out of Cuba remained firm . President Obama said the U.S. will continue to work to remove missiles from Cuba .
 Their conduct up to that time, it was felt, amounted to delaying actions and public bluster, accompanied by a few probes and feelers — mostly directed at our allies — aimed at searching out soft spot3 in our position . It was felt that the conduct of the U.S
 The President directed that low-level reconnaissance flights be maintained on a once every two-hour schedule day and night .
 A new photograph was selected from the most recent batch of photographs . It provided unmistak able evidence of the missiles in Cuba .
 The President directed Pierre Salinger to make a public statement on the continuation of missile site construction in Cuba . The President also directed him to make public statement .
 The Commander of the Atlantic Fleet, Admiral Robert L Dennison, said Guantanamo could be defended in case of an attack . The Commander told reporters that Guantanamo could not be defended .
 Later in the afternoon again the Collangatta, was intercepted by the USS Perry and/allowed to proceed . The ship was intercepted and allowed to proceed by the ship . tightened security measures were put in place at the Pentagon .
 Salinger's statement on the continuing missile construction activity was read to reporters at 6:15m . Salinger said the missile construction was continuing at the time .
 The development of ballistic missile sites in Cuba continues at a rapid pace . The missile sites are expected to be used in Cuba's missile defense .
 Defense buildups in missile sites continued as of Thursday, Oct. 31, Pentagon says . More evidence has been acquired, says Pentagon .
 The activity at these sites apparently is directed at achieving a full operational capability as soon as possible . The activity is apparently aimed at achieving the full capability .
 There is evidence that as of yesterday, Oct. Oct., considerable construction activity was being engaged in at the intermediate range ballistic missile sites . There is also evidence that there is also construction activity .
 Bulldozers and cranes were observed as late as Thursday actively clearing new areas within the sites and improving the approach roads to the launch pad .
 Since Tuesday, October, mi ssle -related activities have continued at the medium range ballistic missile sites resulting in progressive refinements at these facilities . The U.S. military says it will continue to work on missile technology .
 Surveillance on Oct. 31 revealed that some of these same missiles have now moved from their original parked positions . Surveillance video shows some of the missiles now move from their positions .
 Cabling can be seen running from missile -ready tent3 to powered generators near-by . Cabling runs from missile-ready tent to powered generator generators .
 There is no evidence to date indicating that there is any intention to dismantle or discontinue work on these missile sites . In summary, there is no indication that there are any plans to dismantle the sites .
 The letter to Khrushchev was sent on the 25th; the parallel letter to Kennedy was sent the morning of the 26th . The letter was sent to Kennedy on the same day, the day after the letter was made .
 The President's letter of reply was hedged to keep the ball in the other court . The President of the United States has responded to the letter .
 Soviet ships are still proceeding toward Cuba and the interception area, says President Obama . "I must inform you, however, that this is a matter of great urgency," he says .
 I share your hope that Chairman Khrushchev will also heed your appeal and that we can then proceed urgently to meet the requirements that these offensive military systems in Cuba be withdrawn, in order to end their threat .
 I must point out to you that present work on these systems is still continuing. I must . point out that present . work on . these systems are still continuing .
 U Thant also served as the channel to Castro, the odd man out in this drama . Castro was the odd-man out of the show .
 Castro's reply came the next day and proved to be a hedged T;~^ ^rrncT Sir \\ji OUu'iiui E YE S 0KL y acceptance . Castro replied: "Yes"
 Castro was saying that he would consider suspension only at the price of ending quarantine . Castro said he would only consider suspension at the cost of ending the quarantine .
 Aleksander Fomin, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Washington, from time to time had lunch with John Scali, ABC correspondent assigned 26th to the State Department . Fomin and Scali met regularly at the embassy .
 The morning of the/Fomin phoned Scali and urgently requested an appointment for lunch . Scali was the first person to ask for lunch at Scali's request to meet him .
 The Cuban delegate in the Security Council had previously asked for such noinvasioi assurances in return for dismantling, but had received no reply, he said .
 Scali hastens to the State Department where he met with Roger Hilsman and Secretary Rusk . Scali also met with Hilsmen and Rusk at the State Dept.
 The closest to what Fomin had in mind appeared to be the statement by Sr. Fomin . Fomin: "I'm not sure what I'm doing here, but I'm sure I'm going to do it"
 A response to Fomin 's offer was prepared by State and cleared at the White House . State prepared a response to the offer . A response was also cleared at White House.
 Fomin asked several times if this came from high sources and Scali replied that it came from very high sources . Scali told Fomin that the information came from a very high source . Fomin also asked if this information had come from sources in the U.S.
 Fomin asked whether it would be possible to have UN inspectors also check American military bases in Florida and surrounding Caribbean countries . Fomin: UN inspectors could also check U.S. bases in the Caribbean .
 Scali replied that this was a new element and he had no official information . Scali said he was not sure if he had official information on the matter .
 Scali said he felt it would raise a terrible complication for President Kennedy in a period when time was of the essence . Scali: It would raise the issue of time for Kennedy .
 Fomin said that this information would be communicated to the highest Soviet sources and simultaneously to Zorin, whereupon Fomin left in obvious haste . Fomin then left the scene .
 At six that evening the State Department telegraph center logged receipt of the first take of a long letter from Khrushchev to the President . At six p.m. ET, the State Dept. telegraph Center logged receipt . The letter was the first to be taken of Khrush
 It had been translated by the United States Embassy staff in Moscow before transmittal .
 During the next several hours three additional sections of the letter arrived, making fou r takes in all . The letter was signed by the president of the United States .
 It was this letter, which has never been published, contained the particulars of the Soviet offer that made possible a settlement of the crisis . It was never published, but contained the details of the Russian offer .
 The letter was long and like all Khrushchev's correspondence, it was argumentative . It was signed by the then-Krushchev family of Soviet Union leaders .
 It repeated the Soviet stock phrases accusing the United States of criminal acts and piracy, and _^ rrr^CX Eras rv.TT.y 176/ TOP SECRET toe oi 1Li — upheld the oft-reiterated Soviet thesis that the missiles in Cuba
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has spoken out strongly against Russia's anti-Putin rhetoric . Putin's comments have been interpreted as a response to the crisis in Russia . The Kremlin has been accused of using the language of anti-Russian propaganda .
 The U.S. was willing to accept the terms of a resolution to the crisis, but they were liable to interpretation that they constituted an offer to settle the crisis on terms which the United States would accept .
 As the letter came in it was given intent scrutiny by Excomm members at State and Defense and by the President . The letter was sent to the White House .
 There were long sections of the letter in which Khrushchev's attitudes did not seem to have deflected from his previous utterances . The letter was published in Moscow in 1964 .
 He did not spell out clearly and concretely an offer to dismantle and/or remove the missiles from Cuba .
 He raised the consideration that Castro's consent would be needed to remove the weapons . Castro would have to consent to remove weapons, he said .
 As a condition of the settlement he asked that the U.S. in effect guarantee the security of the Castro regime, he asked . The condition is certain to cause political difficulties domestically, at least in the long run .
 U.S. bases, or Jupiters in Italy and Turkey, could be eliminated . U.N. bases in Turkey, Italy, Turkey, and Italy could be destroyed .
 A consensus was reached that a reply should be sent to Khrushchev treating the letter as a bona fide offer . The letter was treated as a genuine offer to the Soviet Union . A reply was sent, treating it as an offer of friendship .
 Drafting work on the reply commenced late that night at the State Department and the White House . The State Department responded to the request for a reply .
 President's reply to Russell's appeal was sent and made public . Bertrand Bertrand's reply was made public that evening . Russell was the President of the United States. Bertrand was the president of the US.
 Kennedy pressed the theme that it was strange to criticize those who caught burglars, rather than the burglars themselves . Kennedy: It's strange to criticise those who catch burglars rather than those who break into homes .
 Saturday morning began on the high seas. Grim News, Conflicting Signals Saturday morning . Grim News. Saturday morning. Saturday .
 Two navy ships were ordered to intercept and trail the Soviet ship Grozny . Another was . intercepted the Lebanese 180. ship Pella .
 The intelligence summary contained the information that work on the missile bases appeared to be continuing . The information was contained in the intelligence summary .
 The discussion then turned to the draft reply to the Khrushchev letter . The draft reply was then discussed in the Senate .
 At that very moment Radio Moscow was broadcasting the test of a new message from Khrushchev . The test was broadcast by Radio Moscow at the time .
 Unlike the private letter of the previous evening, this one contained a serious catch . Unlike the earlier letter, the letter contained a real catch: 'I'm sorry for you'
 We agree to do this and to state in the U.N. this commitment. We are committed to doing this. We agree, to state this commitment in the United Nations,’s president says .
 Khrushchev continued to term the missiles ""defensive"" ""The weapons in Cuba that you have mentioned and which you say alarm you are in the hands of Soviet officers," he said . The weapons are in Cuba, he said, and they were 'defensive' The missiles were
 An American U-2 accidentally overflew the Chokut peninsula on the eastern part of the USSR, due to navigational difficulties . At the other side of the world an American U.2 was on an air sampling mission in the Arctic .
 Soviet fighters scrambled from a base near Wrangel Island to intercept the stray . The stray was captured by Soviet fighters in the early hours of the day .
 Within another hour one of the low-flying reconnaissance planes encountered artillery and small arms fire from ground stations in Cuba . One of the planes was shot down by Cuban troops in the early hours .
 Fidel Castro vows to shoot down planes that violate Cuba's air space . Fidel Castro shouted defiance of the U.S. in a television broadcast from Havana .
 The hopes that had risen from the previous evening's letter were largely dashed . The hopes of returning to the UK had been largely dashed by the letter .
 Instead of an offer, conciliatory in tone, which the U.S. could honorably accept, the Exomm and President were being asked publicly to bargain away the security of a close ally and, with it, a part of NATO's nuclear shield . Instead of a conc
 Evacuating bases under duress would call into question the U.S. commitment to Europe's defenses . Evacuation could seriously shake the Western alliance, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Khrushchev's offer had an obvious appeal to many nations, especially the neutrals, and to the people everywhere who were willing to grasp any 3traw to get out of what was widely viewed as a nuclear impasse .
 The obvious conflicts in the substance and tone of the Khrushchev messages were puzzling, says historian John Avlon . "The obvious conflicts were puzzling," he says .
 Most likely, it was felt, there were competing groups within the Kremlin . Most likely to be felt, was thought, there was competing groups .
 One group viewed the Cuban missile venture as a gamble that failed and was willing to pull it out . The group was hoping escalation towards nuclear war would be avoided . Another group viewed it as a failed gamble and wanted to pull out .
 The other, bolder, group considered it worth trying to exact a price for removal of the missiles . The two groups considered it possible to remove missiles .
 Khrushchev thought linking missiles with U.S. overseas bases was worth a try, writes Peter Bergen .
 President would pick out of Khrushchev letter those sections which provided the basis for a satisfactory solution . After much discussion a tentative decision was made by the President, He would pick from the earlier, private letter, to pick out those sections .
 Several Exoomm members assembled at 2:30m. in George Ball's Conference Room . Several ExOomm members gathered at 2.30m . in the room to discuss the future of Exoom .
 The problem uppermost in everyone's mind had veered away from the dangers of boarding a Soviet ship at sea to the consequences of having U.S. reconnaissance planes shot down .
 Low-level flights were going over Cuba at two-hour intervals night and day . Low level flights were flying over Cuba night and night . Cuba has been a source of tension between Cuba and Cuba for years .
 Detailed consideration was given to the timing and implications of a possible air strike . The United States is considering a possible strike in Syria .
 State Department announces CLEARCERT procedures to allow vessels to transit waters near Cuba without running afoul of quarantine . At 3:15 p.m. ET, the State Department announced the procedures . ClearcERT procedures will enable vessels to pass waters near Cuban waters .
 At 3:35 the Pentagon issued a statement explaining the legal and diplomatic basis for the presence of the Jupiters in Turkey pursuant to a NATO Council resolution of December, 1957 . The statement was issued by the Pentagon at 3.35pm ET .
 The Defense spokesman also said that one of our U-2's was missing over Cuba and presumed lost . Any interference with our surveillance of Cuba will meet counteraction, he said .
 At 4:00m. the President called the Excomm back to the White House to review the proposed replies to Khrushchev . The Excomm was at 4:30m. at the time of the exchange .
 McNamara reported that two low-level reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba had been fired on by light anti-aircraft and small arms . McNamara said the planes were fired on in Cuban airspace .
 President approved the two messages to Khrushchev . After brief discussion, President approved of the messages . President later approved the messages and sent them home .
 It was decided to make both public, though the letter would be delayed until later in the evening . The letter will be made public at the end of the night .
 The President decided not to say anything about the accidental U-2 flight over the USSR unless the Soviets publicized it . The Soviets did not do until the next day - which they did not reveal until the day after .
 He also ordered further air reconnaissance over Cuba despite the downed U-2 and reports of ground fire . The U.2 was downed and ground fire was reported .
 It did not shut the door to negotiations on bases, but it made plain that no such discussions were possible until the missiles were removed .
 After final polishing, the letter to Khrushchev was despatched at 8:05m, having been sent to U Thant half an hour earlier . The letter was sent to Khushchev at 8.05m .
 The letter was phrased with great care, since it might form part of the contractual basis for a settlement . It was written carefully to ensure that it might be part of a settlement, not just a legal document .
 Key elements of your proposals seem generally acceptable as I understand them . You would agree to remove these weapons systems from Cuba under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision . And undertake, with suitable safe-guards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems .
 Its main purpose was to have the President approve the calling up of 24 Air Force reserve squadrons, which he did . He did .
 At the State Department a message was received from U Thant that Zorin had refused to receive information about the reception area . The State Department received a message from the U.S. State Department .
 Castro's reply to U Thant rejects the proposal that missile bases be dismantled . Castro also demands immediate halt of the quarantine . Castro has also demanded that the quarantine be lifted .
 Around 5 million leaflets for Cuba had been printed and loaded into containers . During the day approximately 5 million leaflets had been loaded in containers .
 The Tension Breaks Sunday morning dawns bright and warm in Washington, D.C., a glorious fall day .
 The city had had an extra hour of sleep due to the return to standard time . The return to the standard time had meant the city had a longer night of sleep .
 Names of the air force reserve units to be called up were released . The names of the reserve units have been released .
 The 5th Marine Expe ditionary Brigade embarked at West Coast ports and headed towards the Caribbean via the Panama Canal . The brigade is headed for the Caribbean .
 Radio Moscow announced it would have an important announcement on the hour . Radio Moscow said it would be important announcement at the end of the day .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin's visit to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow is broadcasted at 7:00 a.m. in Moscow . Putin is expected to make a speech in Moscow at the end of the broadcast .
 Only 5{r 193.m. to the Excomm when it convened at the White House at 11.30am . Only 5.5% of the secret documents were made public by the State Department .
 A reply to this message was prepared, discussed, approved, and sent, without even waiting for an official copy of the message . A reply was prepared and approved by the author of the original message .
 SECRET monr 5lr 5lr 19*. both our governments which should be promptly carried out. both governments . Both governments should be duly carried out .
 I hope that the necessary measures can at once be taken through the United Nations as your message says, so that the United States in turn can remove the quarantine measures not . in effect .
 There was a deep sense of relief in the Excomm, though not without reservations . There was also a sense of concern that the government might not approve of the move .
 The President said that, while the message was welcome news, it contained some disquieting £y 2S oflSY 195 .
 'Byes owly — elements and, above all, it remained to be implemented. Cj Lb RET RET ''
 Serious hitches could arise in connection with such an operation as dismantling, withdrawal, and inspection of the missiles .
 The message had not mentioned the IL-28 bombers; these must be gotten out too . The message must also be sent out too. The IL-27 bombers must be released .
 Khrushchev's reference to ""earlier instructions to cease work on the missiles was puzzling, as no such cessation had been observed . No such cessation of work was observed .
 It was not a time for gloating, nor could one draw general conclusions about the future course of Soviet conduct . Certainly it was not the time to gloatate, nor to predict future Soviet behavior .
 Station was inspected until arrangements had been made for adequate inspection . Station was temporarily closed until arrangements were made for inspection .
 The tone of the Administration was optimism that morning . Nonetheless, the basic tone was optimism .
 At 5.00 pm Secretary Rusk met with the Latin American ambassadors to brief them on the latest developments . The leaflet dropping operation was suspended .
 At 5.40 a letter was received from U Thant stating his understanding of the agreement that had been reached . The agreement was reached at 5.30pm GMT .
 President replied confirming the lines along which a satisfactory settlement could be reached . President Obama said a satisfactory agreement could be made .
 Later in the evening the Secretary General informed Castro that he accepted his invitation to go to Cuba with his aides to work out a solution . The Secretary General said he accepted Castro's invitation to Cuba .
 Cu£l 'KVSS ■on™ TOP SECRET^, ^ EPILOGUE . The 28th of October was not, of course, the end of the story .
 In one sense it was the beginning — of negotiations which ultimately dragged on until the turn of the year . It was the start of negotiations that dragged on from the beginning of this year .
 It soon became evident that the solving the missile crisis did not solve the problem of Castro Castro . Castro was still at the top of the world's most powerful political power . The Cuban crisis was the result of the Cuban crisis .
 Castro demands U.S. cease "violations of air and naval space" of Cuba; end "all measures of commercial and economic pressure;"" and withdraw from the Guantanamo naval base and return it to Cuba .
 Unless all hi3 conditions are met, Castro insisted, he would not permit any inspection or verification in Cuba of the missile withdrawal . Castro insisted that the withdrawal would not be inspected or verified .
 U Thant and a party of 19, including Brigadier General Rikhye and a small military staff, flew to Havana .
 The main subjects in these discussions were the modalities for checking and inspecting the withdrawal of the missiles (and further incoming Soviet shipments to Cuba) The role of the International Committee of the Red Cross was discussed .
 Mikoyan flew from Moscow to Havana to Havana on November 2 in what turned out to be fruitless effort to get Castro to agree/on-site inspection . He flew to Havana in an attempt to convince Castro to allow inspection .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were exchanging private letters between them . Kennedy's private exchange of letters was underway between the two Soviet leaders .
 Both leaders indicated that they valued this channel of communication and hoped it could be kept open . It was a continuation of correspondence exchanged during the week ending the 28th .
 An agreement was reached under which the U.S. would lift the quarantine and the Soviets would remove the IL-28's . As a result of this correspondence an agreement was made with the United States .
 The Soviet Government carried out it3 promise to remove the IL-28's, and by December o informed the U.S. that all of them had left .
 President mentioned international arrangements for the task of inspection and verification in Cuba that the President had mentioned on November 20, and which were part of the original . But virtually no progress was made .
 Mikoyan's three-hour conversations with the President on November 29 and with Secretary Rusk on the 30th did not advance the discussions significantly . The discussions did not progress significantly, the White House says .
 It became apparent that further settlement of the outstanding issues would remain elusive., and in the end a formula to terminate the discussions and remove the issue from the Security Council's agenda .
 It represented a standstill, rather than a final settlement, and to an extent was an agreement to disagree . "It represented a . standstill," says former President Barack Obama . Obama: "It was a ... standstill"
 On January 7 the two governments sent a Joint letter to the Secretary General which he then transmitted to the Council . The letter was then sent to the secretary general .