 Users of these materials are advised to determine the copyright status of any document from which they wish to publish .
 Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction . Libraries and archives can furnish photocopy and other reproduction of material .
 If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excesses of “fair use,” that user may be liable for copyright infringement . If a photo is used in excess of fair use, it may infringe the right to
 This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of the order would involve violation of copyright law . The institution has a right to not accept a copy order if it is found to violate copyright law.
 The copyright law extends its protection to unpublished works from the moment of creation in tangible form .
 Transcripts were scanned using optical character recognition . The resulting text files were proofread against the original transcripts . The transcripts were scanned and proofread by the original author .
 Page numbers are noted where they would have occurred at the bottoms of the pages of the original transcripts . Page numbers have been placed at the bottom of the page .
 Robert S McNamara, recorded interview by Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., April 4, 1964, , John F Kennedy Library Oral History Program . Suggested that McNamara should have been assassinated in 1964 .
 Copies of the transcript may be deposited in or loaned to institutio ns other than t he John F Kennedy Library . Copies may not be returned to the John F. Kennedy Library.
 The Treasury Department and not the Defense Department established the size of the defense budget, President Eisenhower says . Neither State nor Defense established the military force structure, military strategy, the limits of our foreign policy, he says .
 Eisenhower's belief that fiscal security was the true foundation of military security . Eisenhower believed that further increases in the total budget was threatened by further increases .
 Eisenhower proposal for defense expenditures in fiscal year 1962 was $44,700,000,000 . Defense expenditures in 1961 were $44.676,000 million . Defense spending in 1961 was $45,700 million .
 It was a planned limitation on the size of the defense budget – a limitation, as I say, imposed by the Treasury . The Treasury imposed that limit on defense spending, he says .
 Secretary of the Treasury said to the President that he believed the defense budget should be cut by several billions of dollars . Hughes' book gives his memory of a cabinet conversation on this point .
 The President accepted his recommendation and Wilson was simply ordered to cut it by that amount . Wilson ordered the President to cut the amount . The president accepted Wilson's recommendation .
 Eisenhower appeared to believe in – and in any event his fiscal limitations on the defense budget forced – complete reliance upon nuclear weapons . Eisenhower's fiscal limitations forced him to rely on nuclear weapons, he says .
 If a single Soviet or Communist Bloc soldier stepped over the border into the West, the U.S. would respond immediately with an all-out nuclear strike . Radford had told him that if a single . Soviet or . Communist . Bloc . soldier stepped into the . West
 Radford indicated to Strauss that this was the basic military strategy and policy of the U.S. Radford has indicated that this is . Radford said this was . The United States. has indicated .
 The policy "did not stop Communist political and military aggression," he says . He says it didn't stop Communist aggression . The policy did not stop Soviet aggression, he adds .
 The U.S. failed to use nuclear weapons in the Korean War in 1952 and 1953 . Certainly it was never credible after the United States had failed to . Use of nuclear weapons never credible .
 The Soviets did not believe that the U.S. would respond to minor acts of aggression – however you wish to define minor – with a nuclear response . And certainly the Soviets believed that the United States would respond .
 "Because they didn't believe we would respond to minor acts of aggression with a nuclear response, they continued to apply pressures on Berlin, on Southeast Asia, and elsewhere in the world," says Peter Bergen . Bergen: "They [North Korea] continued to pressure Berlin and Southeast
 A military strategy, based on or limited to an all-out nuclear response to any level of aggression, was in a true sense a bankrupt strategy, he says . So a military strategy based on a nuclear response is in a 'bustustust'
 It became increasingly incredible as the strength of the Soviet nuclear forces increased . The strength of Soviet forces became even more impressive as the Soviet Union increased .
 By 1961, it was clear that any strike by the United States against the Soviet Union would lead to the loss of tens of millions of our people .
 We could not hope to knock out so much of the Soviet nuclear power by an advance strike as to leave them with a force so small that it would cause inconsequential damage to our country . Certainly by 1961 we could not . hope to . knock out . so much Soviet power by
 Kennedy Administration took steps to permit a shift in strategy . Kennedy Administration shifted from reliance on massive retaliation with strategic nuclear weapons to a controlled response tailored to the level of political or military aggression .
 It was this decision which, in my opinion, removed the fetters from our foreign policy, it was said . President Kennedy allowed such responses to Soviet aggression as that of the U.S. in the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 .
 President Barack Obama took office in January 2013 . Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the White House . The White House says it is working on a 'controlled, flexible response'
 If we had continued our forces and readiness at the 1960 to 1961 level, we would not have had enough forces to carry out a successful invasion of Cuba if that should have proved necessary in the missile crisis of October 1962 .
 "Our capability for carrying out a successful invasion was an absolute requirement for the blockade itself. And, of course, our capability for . carrying out an invasion was a requirement," he said .
 We would never have been willing to undertake such a blockade had we not had the capability to follow it, if necessary, with an invasion. We would not have had to do so if we were able to do it, says President Obama .
 The October 1962 plan for the invasion of Cuba called for 1-1/2 Marine Divisions and four Army Divisions . These forces were exclusive of those required in reserve as insurance against other contingencies .
 In 1961, only eleven of the country's 14 army divisions were combat-ready . In 1961 only 11 of the army's 14 divisions had combat ready for combat . The U.S. Army now has a total of 14 divisions, but only 11 were combat ready .
 Only 3/4 of the number of Army Divisions required for the invasion of Cuba . None available for reserve against other contingencies . So we had only 3/2 of the . number of . Army . Divisions . required for invasion of . Cuba .
 Army divisions lacking combat-ready Army divisions are one of a host of such military force deficiencies . The U.S. Army has been criticized for lack of combat readiness in recent years .
 Our strategic forces, for example, were almost entirely soft-based, concentrated, and highly vulnerable to a surprise missile attack . The country's strategic forces are almost entirely vulnerable to surprise missile attacks, he says .
 The 1500 SAC bombers stood on about 60 bases, but only a third of those were on alert . An attack by a relatively small number of nuclear missiles could have caught 2/3 of the bombers and destroyed them .
 Because of the inadequacies of our warning system at that time, it is possible that even more that 2/3 of the bomber force could have been destroyed on the ground . The U.S. could have lost 2/4 of its bomber force in the war .
 With the growing Soviet missile threat, this was an extremely dangerous situation . The Soviet missile force was not as large as the intelligence community had predicted it would be, even though the Russians were not turning out, were not producing intercontinental ballistic missiles .
 President's first act was to request an increase in the Defense Department budget to permit the number of Strategic Air Command aircraft on alert to be increased .
 The percentage of the force maintained on alert was raised from 33 percent of the total force to 50 percent . That increase is a 17 point increase in the size of the bomber alert force . The increase was a 50 percent increase .
 The original fiscal 1962 budget proposed by the Eisenhower Administration had provided for only five Polaris submarines . The original budget proposed for the Polaris submarines was only five .
 President Kennedy doubled the number of Polaris submarines in both the 1961 and 1962 budgets . The Polaris submarines were a total of 20 in the 1960 and 1961 budgets .
 The Minuteman program was expanded from a total of four hundred missiles to six hundred missiles by the summer of 1964 . This number was expanded by President Kennedy's supplements to the fiscal 1962 budget and was expanded . The program was accelerated by the president's budget supplements .
 The army in 1961 had only 14 divisions, and of the 14, only eleven were combatready . Of the 14 divisions in 1961, only 11 were combat ready . The army had only eleven combatready divisions .
 The President took action to increase the number of divisions to a total of 16, all to be combat-ready . The President also increased the size of the divisions to 16 .
 The number of combat-ready divisions held in reserve in the U.S. was raised from three to eight . This meant that the number of units in reserve had been raised from 3 to 8 . This means that the United States has an extra combat readiness force .
 It was this, more than any other action, that prepared us for the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . The U.S. helped prepare us for that crisis, President Kennedy says .
 Chinese Communist invasion of Southeast Asia was always a contingency we had to reckon with . And, of course, our deficiency would have been at least as great had we faced a Chinese invasion of Asia .
 Both in the Cuban missile crisis and in the case of a Chinese movement in Southeast Asia, we would have faced serious shortages of air and amphibious lift, as well as shortages of combat personnel . The situation would have been similar in both cases .
 There would have been no reserve forces available to move against Soviet or Communist moves elsewhere in the world, which we recognized as highly probable in retaliation for any of our moves against Cuba at the time of the missile crisis .
 "The divisions that we had in January of that year were so deficient in equipment that they would not have been able to fight longer than a few weeks before running out of ammunition," he says . The divisions would have been unable to fight for longer than several weeks before they ran out of
 Production of new equipment would not have been able to start in time to in any contribute to the war effort . Furthermore, production would not be able to be started in time .
 The effectiveness of our combatready divisions, limited as they were in number, was seriously degraded . And this meant, of course, that the effectiveness of these divisions was severely degraded . This meant, as well as the effectiveness, our combat ready divisions were seriously degraded, he said .
 The list of deficiencies was very long, but I think I can give you a few examples to illustrate the problem . The list is a long list of problems, but it is not long .
 "We had only 15 percent of the authorized number – the required number – of recoilless rifles," says President Obama . "And we had only . 15 percent" of the . authorized number of – the . required number of . rifles, he says .
 In the fall of 1961, the U.S. Army had to strip thousands of pieces of equipment from active Army units in the United States in order to be able to send two divisions of equipment to Europe .
 In effect, in many critical lines of equipment, our inventories were actually bare . "Inventories are actually bare," says CNN.com .
 Orders for additional equipment were placed in large volume in 1961, but production had not been delivered by October 1962 .
 At the time of the Cuban missile crisis we actually didn’t have equipment on hand for 18,000 of the priority Reserve personnel that we would have had to mobilize had we faced a Cuban invasion . The U.S. didn't have the equipment on .
 "We had grave imbalances in the inventory. And despite these shortages, which were very serious, we had grave shortages," says the government . "We are not going to be able to solve these problems," says President Obama .
 "We actually had surpluses, serious excesses, in a number of items of supply," says David Cameron . "I actually had surplus, excesses of supply. We actually had excesses," he says .
 I'll come later to an explanation of why I think that situation existed . I'll also explain why I believe that situation exists .
 It existed, I think, primarily because the budget was set to a financial limit . "It existed ... primarily because of the budget being set to the financial limit," he says .
 It was not set in relation to an analysis of contingency war plans and a translation of those war plans into military requirements, it said .
 The surpluses are very peculiar since these are in conventional equipment . One can understand the shortages as a consequence of that policy of putting all the eggs in the nuclear basket, starving non-nuclear forces .
 Surpluses existed because at that time the procurement was being made against requirements that were grossly inflated . Surplused existed because of the procurement requirements being grossly inflated, says the government .
 The total requirement for equipment was estimated to have a value of $40 billion . If I recall the figures correctly, the figures were correct, he said .
 "We had an inventory of something less than $8 or $12 billion. Against that we had to $8," he said . "Against that, we had something under $8"
 Certain sections of the Department of Defense were buying to the level of the total requirement . Certain sections were buying more than the total amount .
 "They couldn't buy 5 or 10 percent of the total requirement, and it was this that led to the imbalance," says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 "One of the first things we did when we put in a centralized control was to wring the water out of the requirements calculations," he said . "We're going to have to wrinkle the water from the requirements," he added .
 We annually reduced the requirement by $24 billion, from $40 billion down to $16 billion . The requirement was reduced to $15 billion, down from $20 billion .
 "We balanced the levels of inventories of the various items to that level so that we ended up with a force that had a $16 billion fighting potential" " Then we bought to the .16 billion requirement, and we balanced the . levels of . inventories" "to that
 Previously, with a $40 billion requirement and perhaps an $8 or $12 billion inventory, we had a fighting potential that wasn't worth more than $1 or $2 billion . Now, we have a $10 billion requirement, perhaps $8 to $12 .
 We had serious equipment shortages, so serious that had we been forced to fight in 1961, we could not have fought for more than a few weeks, if that long . In any event, we had serious . equipment shortages . We had to fight for a short time, if we were
 So much emphasis in the air force had been placed upon our strategic nuclear capability that they took what limited funds they had, spent them on those forces, and neglected the fighters that were required to provide the air support to the ground forces .
 At that time the air force had sixteen wings of fighter bombers, but over 75 percent of those were F-100s . The air force also had 16 wings of bomber bombers .
 It was barely supersonic when carrying no ordnance and had no all-weather capability . The plane had no air force capability . It was a barely-supersonic aircraft carrying no weapons and was a bomber .
 Only about 10 percent of the force was composed of Mach 2, all-weather fighters . Only 10 percent were Mach 2 fighters . The U.S. military says it has no plans to cancel the mission .
 The number of fighter bomber wings has been increased by over one-third under Kennedy administration . Almost all of them are to be equipped with modern supersonic aircraft, says Air Force Secretary of State .
 Almost complete lack of supplies of modern non-nuclear ordnance . Perhaps even more important than the deficiencies in the aircraft themselves was the lack of ammunition .
 For example, the air force had only about a fourth of the required number of Sidewinder missiles .
 In air-to-ground weapons it had nothing but Korean War vintage general-purpose bombs and rockets . Most of the weapons were not suitable for the aircraft in the inventory .
 This meant the air force would have been unable to provide tactical air support for the army in the event of a non-nuclear limited war . This meant, in effect, the air would not be able to provide any meaningful tactical support .
 In order to carry out a demonstration for me of tactical air power in support of ground forces, the air force actually had to borrow certain ordnance from the Navy because their own stock was so short . As a matter of fact, during that period, in . order to . carry out
 Eisenhower budget for fiscal 1961 included only $4.4 million for air force ordnance . Eisenhower budget included $1.2 million for the air force . Air force budget was $3.5 million .
 The Kennedy Administration increased that in fiscal 1962 to about $240 million . The Kennedy administration increased that amount in fiscal 1960s to $240 .
 Our airlift capability at the time was so inadequate it would have taken nearly two months to airlift one infantry division and its equipment to Southeast Asia – a period of time completely unacceptable in relation to the contingency war plans then on the books . Furthermore, not only were we short of troops
 The airlift force was largely composed of obsolescent aircraft designed for civilian passenger transportation . The airlifted force was mostly composed of obsolete aircraft designed to carry passengers .
 Only about a third of the aircraft could be said to be modern cargo aircraft designed to perform the military airlift mission .
 Eisenhower budget for fiscal 1962 for airlift aircraft provided for only forty-two aircraft . Eisenhower budget was short of hundreds of such aircraft when we were short .
 The vulnerabilities and shortcomings of our forces in 1961 were so serious that it meant we had only a facade rather than the reality of military power . To summarize our deficiencies, the deficiencies were so severe that it .
 The U.S. deterrent forces actually invited attack because these vulnerabilities were as obvious to the Soviets as they were to President Kenney and to the members of his Administration . The United States deterrent forces were actually inviting attack .
 We had too few divisions, had divisions without enough equipment, troops without adequate air support . We had air support aircraft without adequate ordnance, and we had troops without enough air support,’sss . We also had too little equipment, too little air support and troops without
 We were spending about $44 billion a year in the Eisenhower budget, for defense, but we weren't getting anything close to that . The Eisenhower budget was spent on defense because of the many imbalances and the critical weaknesses in our program .
 We could have attained the same degree of usable military power at a far lower figure . We could not have achieved the same level of usable power at the same amount of power .
 President Eisenhower submitted a proposed supplement to the Eisenhower fiscal 1962 defense budget, submitted it to Congress . The hearings were held, and the Congress very shortly passed it .
 President Kennedy submitted the first of three such supplements to the 1962 Eisenhower budget . That was but the first such supplement to the budget was submitted by President Kennedy .
 No, although they were listed in a set of work projects that I set up during the first week after taking office, he says . They were not listed in the set of projects that he set up .
 This was so apparent in discussions with the chiefs of the services and with other members of the department, it had become very apparent . There was an utter lack of balance between the elements of our forces – men versus equipment, men and equipment versus mobility, men versus mobility .
 As President of Ford Motor Company this had been outside my area of thinking and responsibility . As President . Ford Motor Co. President, I would not have been able to answer questions about the role of Ford .
 President Kennedy brought into office with him a feeling that it was essential that we broaden our strategic base and that we develop a capability for what I have called a controlled, flexible response, a response tailored to the specific level of political or military aggression .
 It came very quickly because it didn't take me long, once we got in here, to find out the deficiency or bankruptcy in both strategic policy and in the force structure . "I didn't think it would be the first time I had been in charge of the U.S.
 General Taylor described the bankruptcy as well as anyone in his book The Uncertain Trumpet . I think perhaps General Taylor had described it as a bankruptcy .
 "We joined together and, in a period of three or four weeks, made a quick audit of the situation. Men of that caliber and experience brought with them some knowledge of where to look for the deficiencies, and we joined together," he says .
 "It was very obvious to them, as it was to me, that the deficiencies existed," says David Cameron . "They were very obvious that they had deficiencies," he says .
 The most noticeable deficiency, as I mentioned, was the imbalance that existed between the elements of our forces . We should eliminate that either by cutting out the peaks or filling in the valleys, he says .
 With one exception I knew none of them before joining this administration, I knew them before I joined this administration . I'm not sure how many people I knew before joining the administration .
 I was elected President of Ford Motor Company the day after President Kennedy was elected president of the United States. Ford Motor Co. was Ford's President of the Year, President Kennedy . Ford was elected to President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Five weeks later I came into my office one day and my secretary reported to me that Mr Kennedy had called . Mr Kennedy called. Five weeks after, Mr Kennedy was back in his office, he said .
 "He didn't explain the purpose of his call other than to say that he would like me to see his brother-in-law," he said . He didn't say why he wanted to see him, but he said he was looking for his brother in law .
 I asked the nature of the business his brother-in-law would like to discuss with me . I asked him what he wanted to talk about .
 Mr Kennedy stated he preferred to have his brother-in-law discuss that with me at the time of our meeting, Mr Kennedy said . Mr Kennedy told Mr Kennedy that he would rather have the matter discussed with Mr Kennedy's wife .
 He said no, he, preferred to arrange an earlier meeting with his brother-in-law . He said he would prefer to meet with him in Detroit .
 He said he could be there in three hours, that he was then in Washington, D.C. "I'm in Washington," he said .
 President-elect Barack Obama "approached me to offer me an appointment as Secretary of Defense," Obama said . Obama's election victory was a victory for Obama, Obama's first term .
 I replied that for a variety of reasons it would not be appropriate for me to accept such an appointment . I replied ‘for a number of reasons I would not accept such a position.’
 I was known as a Republican at the time, although I had contributed financially to President Kennedy's election campaign and had voted for him . "I had, as a matter of fact, contributed financially" to Kennedy's campaign, he says .
 "For a variety of reasons it would be inappropriate for me to accept the President's offer. And, as I say, I told Sarge Shriver at the time," he says .
 "My major reason was my complete lack of experience, both in the Defense Department and, as a matter of fact, in government," she says . "I'm not going to be in the military, but I'm going to do it," she adds .
 Sarge Shriver responded by saying that he had been authorized to accept a favorable reply, but in the event the reply was unfavorable, he asked that I meet with the President to discuss the matter in person .
 "As a matter of courtesy I did agree to go to Washington to meet with President Kennedy. Although I had no intention of changing my mind, I did . I did not intend to change my mind," he says .
 I expressed to President Kennedy the same views I had presented to Sargent Shriver . "I expressed to . President Kennedy, I expressed the . same views," he said. "I had presented . My views were the same as those of President Kennedy," he says .
 President Kennedy said to me he wasn't aware of any school for either Cabinet Officers or Presidents . "Lack of experience was not an adequate excuse," he said . Kennedy said he was aware of no school for Cabinet officers or presidents .
 I was certain there were many more experienced than I I listed several possibilities, each one of whom he disposed of with reasons that I was forced to accept . I then shifted my ground somewhat to say that I recognized there were few men who had served as Secretary of Defense, and few who
 First meeting was the first time I had ever met the President, by my saying that I still felt he would make a mistake to put a person as inexperienced as I in such a position . But, nonetheless, we concluded that first meeting, which . was the . first meeting .
 He did ask, and I did agree, to reconsider and to meet again a few days later . He did agree to reconsider, and then agreed to meet with her again .
 "In the interim I discussed the matter with some of my associates and with others whom I felt more qualified than I to appraise my own capabilities for carrying out the responsibilities of the Secretary of Defense. In the interim, I decided to take a look at some of the things I felt
 CNN's John Sutter says he moved to Washington for the first time in his career . Sutter: "It's not surprising that I moved to D.C. immediately after I moved there, it's a good thing for the country"
 I have only been back to Ann Arbor once in the intervening three and a half years . I have been back in Ann Arbor, Michigan, since 2010, but I've never been back .
 I moved to Washington, into the Ford Suite at the Shoreham Hotel, where I spent the three weeks prior to Christmas and the two weeks after Christmas on the telephone 12 or 14 hours a day calling acquaintances and friends throughout the country to ask their recommendations .
 Sarge Shriver said he had been authorized to offer him either the position of Secretary of Treasury or Secretary of Defense . Shriver: "I didn't mention, Arthur, that he actually said to me that he'd be able to offer me either the . position of Treasury"
 I told him I felt even less well qualified to be Secretary of the Treasury than I did Secretary of Defense . I said I felt less qualified for Treasury post than I felt for Defense Secretary .
 "I had served in the air force three years during World War II and I had, during a part of that period, been stationed in the Pentagon," he says .
 I knew very little about Treasury and had had no formal experience in banking or fiscal affairs. I was very keen to get involved in the Treasury, but I knew nothing about Treasury . I was in charge of the Treasury at the time of the crisis in 2008 .
 The President, I think, once told me that at your first meeting you asked him whether he had really written Profiles in Courage, which he said was true . The President also said that at his first meeting, he had asked him if he really wrote Profiles In Courage .
 "I had read the book when it was first published, in 1956, and I was tremendously impressed by it," he says . "I was impressed both by the substance of the book and also by the beauty of the writing"
 I had heard numerous stories that it had been ghost written and I was just interested in how he would answer the question . "I had heard the numerous stories of how he wrote the book," he said .
 Had it been six months later, I never would have asked him because in that intervening period I saw him write prose of equal quality on many occasions in my presence . Had he had asked him six months earlier, he would have said yes .
 In any event, the book impressed me as no other book that I read in the 1950's did. In any other book, "No other book" impressed me .
 It impressed me because he dealt with one of our major national problems – the problem of principle versus expediency . He dealt with it beautifully, I felt. It was a major national problem .
 "I don't think I have admired any man that I have associated with more than I did him," he says . "I was very close to him over the course of nearly three years," he adds .
 The day after accepting the position I moved down to Washington and spent the next three weeks prior to Christmas in recruiting personnel and the two weeks following New Year's doing the same thing .
 Zuckert had been a colleague on the Harvard faculty early in the 1940's . Zucksert was the Secretary of the Air Force, who had been on Harvard faculty during the 1940s .
 The straw poll was a straw poll in the Graduate School of Business Administration when Willkie was running against Roosevelt in 1940 . Willkie ran against Roosevelt .
 The vote was ninety-eight to two among the members of the Harvard Business School faculty . The decision was made by faculty members .
 Barton Leach referred to the straw vote on the other side of the river during the campaign . Leach was speaking to Leach on the day after the vote was taken .
 In any event, there were only two votes against Willkie – one of them was mine . "I voted for Willkie, and I voted for him," he said .
 Two members of the faculty who would cast a vote for Roosevelt voted for Roosevelt . "I recall sitting in the Faculty Club, as a young instructor, opposite a very senior member of faculty with whom I worked quite closely, and hearing him say he couldn't believe that there were two members
 He really felt that the vote was in the nature of an intelligence test . He said: 'He really felt [the vote] was a very serious intelligence test'
 I do remember calling him from the Shoreham Hotel and being told that he was probably at their home on the Eastern Shore . But I called him from Shoreham hotel and was told he was likely at their Eastern Shore home . He was later found dead at his home in a hospice
 It was a rather inauspicious beginning to my approach to him to leave his law firm and come to Washington. It was the beginning of his approach to the White House .
 CNN's John Sutter agreed to meet with him at the Baltimore airport on his way to his Eastern Shore home . He agreed to talk again that day at the airport .
 We sat in a car in the snow to discuss his appointment as Deputy Secretary – this after I had made a very intensive investigation which led me to conclude he was by far the best man qualified for the post . I had asked for President Kennedy's authority to offer him the post, and
 "On our first meeting we came into complete agreement as to the approach that should be taken in the department and as to his role in it. On his first meeting, we came to complete agreement," says Mark Hughes .
 "It was one of the most satisfying associations that I've had in either business or public life," he says . "I think it was typical, I think, of the relationships that were established between me and all of the key members of the department," he adds .
 Charlie Hitch, as you probably know, was a Rhodes scholar . He was one of the first asked to stay on at Oxford, after his graduation, to teach . Hitch was the first Rhodes scholar to stay at Oxford after graduating .
 'A very bright man, and a man who has done an amazing job in reforming the requirements calculations and the financial management of the department. A very bright . man,’s . job . has been described as a 'very bright man'
 Paul Nitze was Dean Acheson's former director of the Policy Planning Staff . Nitze had spent two decades in studying political-military affairs .
 John McNaughton gave up his professorship at Harvard to serve as a deputy to Paul Nitze . John McNaughton is another Rhodes scholar professor at Harvard .
 Tom Morris, a former principal in Cresap, McCormick and Paget, has done more, I think, to change procurement policy in the department . Tom Morris has had more influence on the management of defense industry than any man in the last two decades in this country, says
 These are typical of the type of men who were recruited during that five or six week period . These were typical of those recruited during the recruitment period .
 President Kennedy's attitude toward hiring political candidates for political positions was discussed before he accepted the post . Kennedy: "One of the subjects that President Kennedy and I discussed was his attitude toward recruitment of individuals for the political positions"
 There was only one standard against which those men were recruited and that was the highest possible ability in relation to the requirements of the job . "There were only one standards against which they were recruited," she said .
 Some of my recommendations proved very embarrassing to President Kennedy . President Kennedy was embarrassed by some of his recommendations .
 Franklin Roosevelt Jr. was very anxious to obtain the position of Secretary of the Navy, partly because of the association of his father with that job . I recall, for example, that Franklin Roosevelt Sr. was anxious to get the job . FDR Jr. wanted the job because of that association
 President Kennedy mentioned this to me and asked me to consider him for the post . President Kennedy said he was interested in the post, and asked for his support .
 President Kennedy said he owed a political debt to Franklin Roosevelt Jr., particularly for his work in West Virginia . Kennedy wished that he had met Roosevelt to learn more about him before concluding that he was not qualified for the job .
 "His name was brought to my attention. During the telephone conversations between me and friends and acquaintances around the country," he said . "I'm glad to have been able to talk to him about his life," he added .
 It was very difficult for people to believe that Lyndon Johnson had nothing to do with it. It's very difficult to believe he didn't do it. Lyndon Johnson was responsible for it.
 I had never met the Vice President at that point and had no conversation with him at all in relation to the appointment prior to the time that I recommended the name to President Kennedy . President Kennedy was appointed to the post in 1963 .
 I was calling President Kennedy from Aspen to ask his approval to offer the job to Connally, whom I had determined was the best qualified among the men I had considered . President Kennedy was in Aspen when he called President Kennedy to ask for his approval .
 The President agreed that I could offer it to John. Needless to say, both were enthusiastic about the appointment, and the President agreed to .
 Stahr, again, came to my attention through these telephone calls, and his record showed that he should have been qualified for the job . The former secretary of state of state says he was not qualified to take over .
 He had been an assistant to Frank Pace when Frank Pace was Secretary of the Army .
 He was highly recommended by friends and associates, but he did not prove as competent as we had expected, he said . It seemed desirable and necessary, as a matter of fact, to make a change, which we did approximately two years after his appointment .
 They serve as subordinates to the Secretary of Defense in limited areas of directing research and development, requirements calculations, and recruitment and training for their services .
 Their responsibilities do not include operational planning for those services, nor application of the forces in relation to specific political and international crises . They are no longer in a position in which they can make final recommendations on force requirements .
 These must consider more than the area of responsibility of a particular service, says chief executive .
 They must consider the broad range of capabilities and requirements of the several services before developing a final recommendation on the force level of a service .
 I think there has been a gradual change in the responsibilities of the Service Secretaries over the past ten years . I think it has been gradual change over the last ten years, he says .
 As the responsibility of the Service Chief as a Service Chief has decreased, so has the Service Secretary's responsibility . The Service Secretary is now responsible for the role of Service Chief .
 As the responsibility of the Service Secretaries has decreased, so have the responsibilities of the Assistant Secretaries of Defense increased . The responsibilities have been increased in the past .
 The Assistant Secretary of Research and Engineering is responsible for research and engineering . He is also in charge of international security affairs . The Secretary of State says the U.S. needs to have a strong presence in Washington .
 The Assistant Secretary in charge of installations and logistics is the most senior official in the U.S. history .
 There have been recurrent stories about resistance in the Department of Defense to the new methods – to the Rand approach, computers, the so-called ""whiz kids"" and so on .
 As individuals we resist change because we wouldn't be doing something we didn't believe right . Whether the change, with hindsight, proves wise or foolish, as individuals we resisted change .
 The very fact, therefore, that we're doing it indicates we believe it right . When someone else indicates they believe it wrong, an immediate controversy develops, he says . He says the very fact of the fact that he believes it right indicates it is right .
 Such controversies developed in the Defense Department because of the huge number of changes at all levels and in all areas that we introduced, he says . Such controversies develop in the defense department because of changes, he adds .
 "I don't believe there has been another period of such widespread change since the department was created," says chief executive of the Department of Public Health .
 I say this without in any way implying that . the subject matter of my responsibility here is . any way comparable to that at Ford . Ford. Ford.com . Ford says it's not the same thing .
 Administration problems are very much the same for large religious bodies such as the Catholic Church, or a large industrial organization such as Ford Motor Company, or an educational institution .
 The problems are simply the problems of organizing a group of people to move toward a common objective, and not away from it . They are the problems that organizers must overcome, and continue to move .
 Oh, I think the use of computers is of secondary importance wherever one is. I think it's secondary importance to computers . I think computers are important to people in the world .
 The tolerances of calculation are refined far beyond the accuracy of the assumptions, the author says . The tolerance of calculation is refined to far beyond accuracy of assumptions .
 Most of the judgments we make do not depend upon computers, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Most of us make decisions with computers, he says, not computers .
 A quantification of the factors affecting the alternatives that we face. But they do depend upon a quantifying of the . factors affecting . the alternatives . The alternatives are not the only ones that can be quantified .
 In other words, a computer is a means of making the alternatives precise . A computer is used to make the alternatives more precise, the author says .
 I really think in many, many cases, we use computers to obtain a greater degree of precision than is warranted by the assumptions . And, as a matter of fact, as I stay, as he stays, I think in . Many, many times, computers can be used to obtain
 Perhaps we could go on to another subject and then come back to that at another time . We could go back to the story of the first time .
 This incident occurred during the period of organization of the new administration . "As a matter of fact, that was one of the factors that influenced the outcome, I'm sure," he said .
 President Kennedy assumed full responsibility for the decision . But the fault lay not with the President, in my opinion, but with his senior advisors, myself included .
 Primary advisors based their advice on recommendations from the Joint Chiefs and the Central Intelligence Agency .
 Not a single senior advisor to the President, other than Senator Fulbright, recommended against the operation . Not a . single senior . advisor to President, including Fulbright , recommended against it .
 The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs, and the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, who had the direct operational responsibility, all were in favor of the operation . President Obama and Hillary Clinton were among those in favor .
 Most of the senior advisors had been in office less than ninety days . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Guatemalan government has terminated use of its territory for training of Bay of Pigs recruits . The decision was made following the decision to terminate the use of the territory for the training of the recruits .
 Each of the senior advisors believed they were following a well-established plan and policy developed by the previous administration . Thirdly, each of the advisors believed it was following an established plan .
 Fourthly, the weaknesses of the operational plan were not disclosed to the policy advisors . Fourthly the weaknesses were not fully disclosed to policy advisors, the government said .
 There had been poor staff analysis of the plan, the CIA and Joint Staff say . That is to say, according to the CIA staff and the Joint Staff, they say .
 Joint Staff had been handicapped, it is true, by a lack of time for preparation of their study and by incomplete exposure of the plans . The Joint Staff were handicapped by the time they had to prepare their study, it was true .
 Joint Staff had not been participants in the development of the plans, but had been called in only at the last moment . The Joint Staff was called in after the Kennedy Administration came into power .
 Arthur: "I don't recall, Arthur, but it would have been shortly after the administration came to power. I don't remember, Arthur" Arthur: It would've been shortly before the administration became power .
 The operation itself took place approximately ninety days after inauguration . But, as well as the operation itself, it took place 90 days after that inauguration .
 Mr Dulles in his book The Craft of Intelligence denies that this was the view of the intelligence community . I noticed that he had written that this is not true .
 I'd like to review the papers, but I believe they will support my statement that it was the view of the intelligence community that the people would rise up and initiate a movement to overthrow Castro . Such a movement would be sparked by the invasion itself, he says .
 The cost of failure was seriously understated because it was believed that in the event of failure, the invading force could escape to the hills to carry on successful guerrilla operations . It was believed in the case of failure that an invasion force could be able to escape from the hills .
 "The international political implications of failure were never fully understood," he says . "I think the international political consequences of failure never ever fully understood" he adds .
 President said immediately after the failure that it was his decision alone, and he assumed full responsibility for it . But the failure was not his but the failure of his advisors who were unanimous in their recommendations to him with the single exception .
 "I participated in all of the events, excepting only the discussion of whether that single air strike should be carried out," he says . He says .
 I didn't participate in that decision, but I think it has been greatly exaggerated in importance, he says . But while we are on that point, let me say, let's say, "I think it's a matter of importance"
 They were only talking of a few sorties – I have forgotten whether it was six or nine . Six or nine sorties couldn't possibly have influenced the outcome in any substantial way, says Mark Hughes . The former England skipper says he has 'forgotten' that sorties were
 As I recall it, when those meetings began, the matter had not been made clear as to whether American military participation was excluded . The matter was not clear when those discussions began, when they began, as I recall .
 The President made clear before the invasion started that the U.S. would not support it, he says .
 By early in April, and indeed by the middle of March in March in the meetings he'd made that clear . But before, by early in . April, it was clear that by early . in . March, he said, "I'd make that clear. But before"
 Senior advisors all recommended to the President that he carry out the operation . I don't remember whether it was excluded initially, but I know that it had been made perfectly clear that it was to be excluded before the senior advisors .
 "There was no misunderstanding in their minds at the time they made the recommendation. There were no misunderstandings in the minds of those who made the decision," said the hospital .
 "No overt application of U.S. power in support of the invasion," he said . "They all understood and, as a matter of fact, I believe all recommended that there be no application – no overt application – of United States power in . support of . the invasion"
 It was shattering, but, as often, it proved to be the foundation for future successes . It was shattered, but as often as often the case, it was a failure proved to inspire future success .
 It taught each advisor something about himself and about his department, he said . It taught him something about his own life .
 Mac Bundy decided that we'd better start holding staff meetings on foreign policy problems, and so on. Mac Bundy decides that we're better to discuss foreign policy issues with foreign policy .
 I don't think there were any similar changes in the Defense Department. I think there will be no similar changes to the Pentagon .
 I think I relearned a lesson I had learned many times before, and that was never to rely on the advice anybody gives me on anything . But, as I say, I think . I think it . I'm not going to rely heavily on advice from anyone, but I
 Perhaps we can now turn to the second Cuban crisis, that of October 1962, following the recognition that the Soviets had introduced medium range and intermediate range ballistic missiles into Cuba .
 This information was received by the President Tuesday morning, October 16, following which he instructed State, Defense, CIA, and other government departments to join together immediately to develop a program of action for his review .
 "We met on the succeeding days and considered basically five alternatives. We met with basically five options. We decided to make a decision," she said . "We're not going to go to the extremes," she added .
 First, political pressure on the Soviets, designed to force them to withdraw their offensive weapons from Cuba . Second, a program of action limited to political pressure alone, including military pressure .
 A declaration of a policy of open surveillance plus an offensive weapons blockade, and an indication that if the weapons blockade failed to lead to withdrawal of the offensive weapons there would be the application of further military pressure .
 Thirdly, a restricted air strike – an air strike directed to the destruction of the medium range and intermediate range launchers . The strike was directed to destroy the medium and intermediate ranges launchers .
 Fourthly, a more extensive air strike directed not only against the offensive weapons themselves, but also against the air defenses, the surface-to-air missile sites, and the fighter aircraft located in Cuba . The U.S. military says it has launched a strike on Cuba .
 Finally, a military invasion of Cuba preceded by a comprehensive air strike, would be a fifth course of action . The U.S. military invasion would be followed by an air strike on Cuba .
 These five alternatives were discussed intensively by the Secretary of State and his representatives, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and members of the White House staff . The White House has been briefed on the alternatives .
 On the 18th of October, October, the President met with the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, the Director of Central Intelligence and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs .
 There was still considerable difference of opinion among the President's advisors, both those from inside the government and those from the outside whom he introduced into the discussion .
 Mr Lovett was present, as I recall, at one of the discussions on the 18th . And they had met with us on several occasions and were present, he said . Mr Lovells was present at the discussions, he added .
 It was on the evening of the 18th that these alternatives were presented to the President . The alternative was presented to him on the night of the night .
 He heard the views of those present, including several who proposed no action against Cuba other than to include it as a target .
 A target that would be struck along with the Soviet Union in the event of a strategic nuclear strike against the USSR . That is to say, say, a target . The U.S. would want to strike along with Russia in a strategic strike .
 The President indicated his preference for a course of action involving a blockade, preferably a blockade to be established without declaring a state of war . The President, following a discussion of the pros and cons of each of the courses of action, indicated he preferred a blockade .
 "He instructed us to be prepared to undertake such a blockade on the following Monday morning," he said . The blockade was set to take place on a Monday morning .
 He also asked that preparations be started for a speech to be made to the nation Sunday night . He asked that we increase the level of reconnaissance effort directed against Cuba .
 Some of those who had been present the previous evening spoke to the President expressing their disagreement with the decision of Thursday night . Then on Friday morning some of those . had spoken to him to express their disagreement .
 The President became concerned that the decision was becoming unstuck, to use his language. The decision was made by President Barack Obama . The President said he was 'concerned' that it was becoming 'unsuck'
 Initially it was a highly controversial decision, the decision was to be reviewed intensively on Friday, Saturday, and ultimately on Sunday . I mention this only to indicate that initially it was . Initially, this was a decision that, while first made Thursday night, was . to be . reviewed
 I think the criticism on Friday morning was from those who felt it went too far . I think it was a reaction to the criticism of those who thought it was going too far. I think that was the criticism we received on Friday .
 One of those who felt it went too far went privately to the President expressing his great concern over how far it had gone . The President expressed his concern that the President had gone too far .
 There were those who felt it hadn't gone far enough . On the other hand, there were also those who said it wasn't far enough.
 One of those individuals said in a meeting at the State Department on Friday that he was in favor of an air strike and invasion . Without qualification, he said without qualification, that was without qualification .
 President's decision to limit the action to a blockade was so disturbed by the decision that he thought he would have to disassociate himself from such an action, he said in a private conversation in the hallway .
 I mention this simply to indicate feelings and emotions were running high and controversy was rampant . I mention it simply to . indicate feelings . running high . It is not the first time I have seen a person in the U.S.
 The President met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the White House on Friday, October 19th . President Obama met with them on Friday .
 My notes don't indicate whether it was in the morning or the afternoon of the day . I'm not sure if it was either morning or afternoon .
 The chiefs stated they believed we could not tolerate the existence of the missiles in Cuba . They were united from a military point of view in believing that the missiles should be taken out by force .
 The Soviet missiles were discovered in the Soviet Union in the early 1980s . The U.S. government recommended the use of military force to destroy the missiles .
 The President outlined his approach to the consideration of the issue of the problem, starting with the question of why the Soviets supplied the weapons . President Obama said the weapons were supplied by the Soviet Union .
 He went on to say he recognized the danger of a U.S. failure to act . He said the United States is at risk of failing to act.
 He pointed out that such a failure to act would weaken the alliance and might mislead the Soviets in their appraisal of our strength of purpose to support freedom and independence .
 He stated that if we took the missiles out by an air strike there was bound to be a reprisal by the Soviet Union . He said that if . we took out missiles there would be a . reprisal, he said .
 "They might take Berlin by force, and that, of course, would leave us no alternative but to respond with nuclear weapons," he says . "That would be the only option," he adds .
 The Chiefs stated they recognized all of these points but emphasized that our security depends upon the credibility of our response to Soviet action and we must act, and act promptly .
 General LeMay stated that if we limit our action to either political action or to a blockade, the missiles will move into the woods, as he put it . Therefore it is absolutely essential that we destroy them with an air strike, he said . LeMay said that if . we limit
 He stated he didn't believe that if we struck Cuba from the air the Soviets would move against Berlin, that our strike against the missiles in Cuba would not change the Berlin situation in the slightest . He stated that he believed that if he struck Cuba he would not be able to move against
 He further stated that a course of action limited to the political action or to a blockade would lead right into war . Such actions would be as bad as Munich, he said . He added that such actions would lead to war .
 Admiral Anderson stated that an air strike against the missiles was the only proper course of action . Admiral Anderson said the air strike would be the only way to deal with the missiles .
 The Navy could carry out a blockade, but the blockade would not affect the weapons in Cuba . The blockade would give the Soviets full time for assembling such weapons . It would give them full time to assemble such weapons.
 The blockade would escalate to higher forms of military pressure and would eventually lead to a nuclear attack on the U.S. It would lead to higher military pressure, according to experts .
 Taking positive, prompt action in Cuba would deter the Soviets from later aggressive acts against Berlin . On the other hand, taking positive action would deter Soviet aggression against Berlin, he says .
 The President pointed out that when we had grabbed their U.N. representative, they threw out ours . "They threw out theirs," he said . The President said .
 General Wheeler stated that from the point of view of protecting the people of the United States, the safest course of action would be to take out the missiles by an air strike . General Wheeler said the safest of the situation would be an airstrike .
 The Soviet Union had not yet incorporated Cuba in the Warsaw Pact . Soviet prestige would not be placed at stake by an air strike by the United States against the Cuba missiles .
 The commandant of the Marine Corps stated that placing the weapons in Cuba indicated the Soviets' intention to inflict damage on the United States . However, such action by the Soviets was hard to reconcile with the fact that we had known for months that the Soviets have nuclear power directed against us,
 The power equation did not appear to have been significantly altered by the introduction of weapons into Cuba . Yet the Soviets hadn't attacked us nor had we attacked them, and the power equation was not significantly altered .
 LeMay said the big problem was the blackmail threat that would exist if we left the missiles there . LeMay went on to add that the threat would be blackmailed if the missiles were left .
 The blockade, he stated, did not support the political promises and public statements made by the President . The blockade does not support any political promises, he said .
 He didn't see how we could continue to maintain surveillance over any extended period of time . Guantanamo would prove to be a serious problem for us, including short-range cruise missiles directed against Guantanamo .
 LeMay interrupted to state that we must do more than just take out the missiles . LeMay said we must take out missiles . He said we need to do more to remove missiles .
 Admiral Anderson stated if an air strike was initiated, we must strike to protect Guantanamo . Admiral Anderson said if an attack is initiated, the U.S. would strike . The strike would protect Guantanamo, he said .
 There is no acceptable solution to the military problem in Berlin and the Cuban problem in Cuba other than a complete destruction of the Soviet power on that island . Neither is there any acceptable solution for Berlin's military problem .
 "We will never be able to apply sufficient political and economic pressure through a blockade to force the Soviets to remove that military power from Cuba," says President Obama .
 The President stated he appreciated the views of the Chiefs; he will maintain contact with them . The President said he appreciates the views .
 The controversy among the President's advisors continued throughout Friday and Saturday .
 The President met with us on Saturday, he said, "I was asked to express the views of the group" The group says the president met with them on Saturday to express their views .
 I stated that we could not bring to him a unanimous recommendation, that we were split . "I stated that . I stated we could . not bring . to him [the] unanimous recommendation," she said. "We were split"
 Sorensen, Ros Gilpatric, Paul Nitze, Alex Johnson, George Ball, Bob Lovett, Tommy Thompson and George Ball favored the blockade route .
 Initially we would blockade the further introduction of weapons and do so within the framework of the OAS resolution and the Rio Treaty . Initially, the blockade would be within a framework of a resolution and Rio Treaty, according to the UN .
 We might expand the blockade by steps to cover all types of goods and thereby increase its power and pressure to the point where it would result in a Soviet agreement to withdraw the weapons . Subsequently we might expand . The blockade might also cover all kinds of goods, thereby increasing its power .
 Following the speech and the application of the blockade, negotiations would be started directed toward removal of the offensive weapons .
 "We recognized that blockade might not either stop the movement of Soviet ships to Cuba or lead to the withdrawal of the weapons," he said . "It might, therefore, require additional action," he added .
 "We believed that it would be possible to control the escalation to meet whatever contingencies developed. But we believed that we would be able to control it," says President Obama .
 Some weapons in Cuba would have an operational capability for a strike against the U.S. with nuclear warheads . Any military action beyond the level of the blockade would carry with it great risk . At the time the blockade was initiated, it was recognized that some weapons .
 Chip Bohlen stated there was a very good chance the Soviets would confine themselves to United Nations action and would not initiate military action if the U.S. program was limited to a blockade . Bohlen said the Soviets may not initiate any military action against the United States .
 It would almost certainly extend over a period of several days during which world pressures would build up and impatience would develop inside the U.S. It would be almost certainly extended over the next few days .
 It would lead to political negotiations, upon the conclusion of which our position vis-a-vis the Soviet Union would be stronger than it was today . But it might be weaker than it had been prior to the introduction of the missiles into Cuba .
 I also emphasized the advantages of the blockade as contrasted to alternative courses of action . The blockade is a form of blockade in the region of the Middle East .
 The U.S. would not allow the Soviets to build up offensive weapons capabilities in this hemisphere . The United States would have moved to retain the respect of its allies, both in Europe and Latin America .
 It avoided the Pearl Harbor approach of a sneak attack and a war without warning on a small nation . The U.S. avoided Pearl Harbor and avoided the sneak attack of a . sneak attack .
 'It was really the only course of military action compatible with our principles and our standing as a free world leader,' says President Obama .
 Khrushchev had been conditioned to believe that his use of those weapons against the United States would be interpreted by us exactly as though the weapons had been based in the Soviet Union . Thirdly, it avoided the risk of a surprise attack against potentially operational nuclear weapons prior to the time when
 The application of a blockade as contrasted to an air strike and invasion, avoided a sudden military move so forceful as to force Soviet action – action without thought, a spasm type of response – which could seriously damage our own military forces and our worldwide prestige . And perhaps most importantly, perhaps
 The blockade gave the U.S. the best chance to control the consequences of its application of pressure on the Soviet Union . I emphasized that in the view of those who favored the blockade, this course of action .
 The President called on other members of the group present, heard their views, and then stated that we should make preparations for immediate application of the blockade . After listening to an outline of the alternatives and to the pros and cons relating to the blockade, the President called .
 He issued instructions for the various departments to carry out these preparations . The president also issued instructions to the police and the military .
 On Sunday, the President met in the Oval Room of the White House with the Attorney General, General Taylor, General Sweeney [Walter C Sweeney Jr.], and me to discuss possible military action over and above a blockade .
 I started by stating that following the start of an air attack, the initial units of the landing force could invade Cuba within seven days . The initial units would be able to invade Cuba in seven days, he said .
 The movement of troops in preparation for an invasion could start at the time of the President's speech .
 No mobilization of reserve forces would be required for such an invasion until the start of the air strike itself . No mobilization would be needed until the beginning of the strike itself itself .
 General LeMay had stated that the transport aircraft from the reserve and guard units which would be required for such an invasion could be fully operational within twenty-four to forty-eight hours after the call to active duty .
 Based on information which had become available during the night, it appeared that there was equipment in Cuba for approximately forty medium range or intermediate range ballistic missiles . I then went on to say that, based on the information, there was . there were . forty medium to intermediate range or . intermediate
 Mr McCone, who had joined the group fifteen or twenty minutes after we started our discussion, confirmed that report . And Mr. McCone said he was in the group at the time of the discussion .
 The location of some of the sites for some thirty-six of these launchers was known . Thirty-two of the thirty-two known sites appeared to have sufficient equipment on them to be included in any air strike directed against Cuba .
 We believed that the forty launchers would normally be equipped with eighty missiles . The forty launchers were normally equipped with . eighty missiles, the government said .
 John McCone reported that a Soviet ship believed to be the vessel which the Soviets had been sending to Cuba with missiles, had made a sufficient number of trips to the island to allow it to have off-loaded approximately forty-eight missiles .
 We assumed there were approximately that number of missiles on the island at the time . However, we had located only about thirty of them. Therefore, we assumed there was about 30 of them .
 General Sweeney outlined the plan of air attack, the objective of which would be the destruction of the known Cuban missile capability . The objective of the attack would be to destroy the known missile capability, he said .
 The five surface-to-air missile installations in the vicinity of the known missile sites would each be attacked by approximately eight aircraft . The five missile installations would each attack by eight aircraft, the Pentagon says .
 The three MIG airfields which were defending the missile sites would be covered by twelve U.S. aircraft per field . The three airfields were defended by twelve United States aircraft each .
 Defense suppression operations, including replacement aircraft, would require about a hundred sorties . In total, the defense suppression operations would need about 100 sorties, including replacements .
 Each of the launchers at the eight or nine known sites, a total of approximately thirty-two to thirty-six launchers, would be attacked by six aircraft . A total of about two hundred and fifty sorties would be flown for that purpose .
 General Sweeney strongly recommended an attack on each of the airfields to destroy MIG aircraft . The United States aircraft covering the three MIG airfields would attack the MIGs if they became airborne .
 He went on to say that he was certain the air strike would be successful, but that even under optimum conditions it was not likely that all of the known missiles would be destroyed .
 No more than 60 percent of the total missiles on the island could fall into the known category . And, as I mentioned before, probably no more than . 60 percent is likely to fall into that category .
 General Taylor, General Sweeney, and I all emphasized our opinion that the initial air strike must be followed by strikes on subsequent days and that these, in turn, would lead inevitably to an invasion . General Taylor and General Sweeney said they wanted to strike in turn .
 A CIA representative said it was probable the missiles which are operational could hold indefinitely a capability for firing with from two and one-half to four hours notice, and included in that notice period was a countdown requiring twenty to forty minutes . There were between eight and twelve operational missiles equipped with nuclear
 General Sweeney believed the first wave of our aircraft would give ten minutes of warning, the second 'wave forty minutes' of warning . The third 'wave' was required to assure destruction, General Sweeney said . The first 'wave of our attacking aircraft' was given ten minutes and forty minutes
 General Sweeney strongly recommended, as I mentioned, that any air strike include attacks on MIG aircraft and, as well, attacks on the IL-28 bombers . General Sweeney also strongly recommended that any strike should also target the MIG and IL-27 bombers .
 To accomplish the destruction of these aircraft, the total number of sorties of the air strikes should be increased to five hundred, says President Obama .
 The President directed that we be prepared to carry out the air strike Monday morning or at any time thereafter during the remainder of the week . The President has directed that the strike will be carried out Monday morning .
 The President recognized that the Secretary of Defense was opposed to the air strike Monday morning and that General Sweeney favored it . The President recognizes that the President's decision to strike was made in light of that .
 The Attorney General stated he was opposed to such a strike because it would be thought of as a Pearl Harbor type of attack and it might well lead to unpredictable military responses by the Soviet Union which could be so serious as to lead to general nuclear war .
 He thought we should start with the initiation of a blockade and, thereafter play for the breaks . He thought, as did I, that we should begin with a blockade . The blockade is a form of war, he said .
 Mr McCone agreed with the Attorney General, but emphasized that he believed we should be prepared for an air strike and, thereafter, for an invasion .
 Admiral Anderson stated, “We have been taken;” General LeMay said, ‘We should probably strike tomorrow anyway.” Admiral Anderson said .
 Monday morning is already late, and it’s the last acceptable postponement . Monday morning was already late . Monday is already Monday morning .
 On October 29, General LeMay stated, “We don’t share the general enthusiasm in the believe we have won a victory.” On the following day, at a meeting in the afternoon with the Chiefs, General . LeMay said he didn't share the enthusiasm
 On the 22nd of January, 1963, the President, during a meeting with his advisors, emphasized the lesson we had learned from Cuba . The President of the United States, George H.W. Bush, spoke to the President of Cuba .
 This was the major argument in favor of the blockade instead of the air strike . The blockade was a major argument for the blockade of Syria in the past .
 This should be our objective for future confrontations with the Soviets, says the U.S. State Department .
 President Barack Obama was in the Cabinet Room at the White House for a Cabinet meeting . Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in his administration .
 Caroline Bouvier Kennedy was running in toward the mansion, perhaps a hundred feet away from the President . It was about six o'clock .
 As is so typical of a four or five-year-old, she gave no answer at all . She gave no indication she had even heard the question .
 President Obama's administration came to power 60 to ninety days after he was elected . Obama was in office at the time of the incident .
 "It was a very much more difficult period to live through. We weren't familiar with each other and with our strengths and limitations," he says . "We were very different to each other," he adds .
 President Obama says intelligence collection agencies acted with considerable skill . He says the intelligence agencies acted "with considerable skill" in the wake of the attacks .
 The weapons were discovered long before the Soviets anticipated we would discover them . They were discovered by the Soviets long before they anticipated they would find them .
 "We believed so at the time and all the evidence since then indicates that is a correct interpretation of the Soviets' view," says Putin . "All the evidence has since then indicated that is the correct interpretation"
 "Our intelligence collection and evaluation agencies operated in a manner far above criticism. So, recognizing we were dealing with a closed society, I think our intelligence collection . We were dealing in a very closed society," he said .
 Had there been overflights then, I doubt that we would have discovered the weapons more than a day or two earlier than we did . I doubt it would have been possible to find out more quickly if there were overflights .
 "I don't believe our course of action, either as to time or substance, would have been changed in the slightest by additional overflights," he says . "We're not going to have any more overflights. I don't think we would have had any more," he adds
 The President reached a decision on Thursday night in favor of the blockade and against the strike, CNN's John Sutter says .
 President Obama received a barrage of military opinion in favor of the strike, and also some civilian opinion, on Friday . The strike is expected to take place in Syria on Saturday .
 No, I feel that at no time did he feel we should initiate any action other than a blockade . No, he said, "I feel that he feels we should start a blockade," he said .
 I think he recognized that, by initiating a blockade, we might subsequently be forced to other action, he said . I don't believe that at any time he felt we should initiate those unless we were forced to by Soviet action . He said he felt he should have instructed us to make
 He seemed to have functioned as the President's representative in meetings when the President was not there . He was seen as a key figure in meetings with the President .
 "He functioned as a highly intelligent and receptive and wise member of the special group," says the former president .
 Tommy Thompson: Tommy Thompson's and Chip's views on it would be interesting now to have Tommy Thompson and Chip Kelly's views . Kelly: "I think it's interesting now, now that Tommy Thompson is here to talk to Chip Kelly about it"
 I must say in passing that their appraisal of the way the Soviets would react proved to be extraordinarily accurate, and was a major factor in influencing my judgment at the time .