 The Inauguration of John F Kennedy and the Speech That Changed America, by Thurston Clarke . The speech that changed America was the speech that led to Kennedy's inauguration .
 All of us, even those born after he died, can still see and hear him, brushing his chestnut mane, punching the air with a finger, displaying his self-deprecatory wit at a press conference .
 In Ask Not, he claims that Kennedy, not Theodore Sorenson, was the "stonemaker and mason" of the inaugural address . The speech is one of the great orations by a 20th-century politician .
 In his fascinating hour-by-hour narrative of the run-up to the inaugural, Clarke unearths a gold mine for Kennedy fact-fetishists .
 To establish Kennedy as the ‘principal architect’ of the inaugural address, Mr Clarke dissects every scrap of available evidence .
 The President-elect wrote most of the memorable phrases he uttered 10 days later . Kennedy’s dictation to Evelyn Lincoln differs significantly from the text that Mr Sorenson had furnished .
 Mr Clarke acknowledges that the intellectual intimacy between Kennedy and Mr Sorenson makes it difficult to know who was responsible for which phrases in any given speech .
 Kennedy was an accomplished stylist; he certainly made many changes to the drafts he reviewed . Kennedy was known for his work on the cover art, but his work was never finished .
 Kennedy went out of his way to convince reporters that he himself had written the inaugural . Kennedy was burned by charges that he ghostwrote Profiles in Courage .
 Mr Clarke pushes aside questions about the documentary record he left behind—or destroyed . Mr Clarke has a strong will to believe , Mr Clarke pushed aside questions over his documentary record .
 Ask Not provides compelling evidence that Kennedy, at his best, was a poet laureate of politics with few peers among the Presidents . Ask Not is published by Ask Not.
 Kennedy “decided on every word and, more importantly, on every idea” for a speech that inspired a generation and continues to be quoted 40 years after it was delivered . As Mr Sorenson has said, Kennedy ‘decided to every word’ for a
 Kennedy’s reputation rests most heavily on his handling of the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . The subject of Max Frankel's High Noon in the Cold War is the subject of a new book .
 Khrushchev remained restless and impetuous, aware of the massive military superiority of the U.S.
 Mr Frankel insists the crisis did not bring the world to the brink of nuclear war . The crisis, he says, was not the end of the era .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were responsible, rational, intelligent leaders, firmly in charge of their governments and determined to avoid a war . Kennedy was a rational, rational and intelligent leader .
 Khrushchev ordered that nuclear weapons not be used even if Cuba was invaded . When his prediction that Americans “will make a fuss, make more of a fuss and then accept” the missiles came a cropper .
 He didn't challenge the U.S. blockade or retaliate in Berlin, as Kennedy feared, or threaten bases in Turkey . He didn’t challenge the United States blockade or retaliating in Berlin or Berlin . Kennedy feared that he would be killed if he tried to take action in
 Kennedy rejected the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs for an invasion of Cuba . After he gave his impulse to take out the missiles a reality check, Kennedy rejected his impulse . Kennedy: "I don't want to invade Cuba"
 Kennedy ordered a blockade aimed only at offensive weapons . Instead of a blockade, he ordered a "quarantine" aimed at weapons only . The blockade was actually a quarantine .
 A show of strength and determination, it provided time for negotiations, it says . It provided time to negotiate .
 Kennedy promised Khrushchev that if the Soviets removed their offensive weapons from Cuba, he would withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey within five months . Kennedy promised to withdraw the missiles in five months if they were removed from Cuba .
 By keeping the swap a secret, he preserved the appearance of a totally triumphant U.S. The swap was kept secret by President Obama .
 Both leaders found it useful to argue that the Cuban missile crisis had been high noon in the Cold War . Both leaders argued that the crisis was high noon .
 Khrushchev insisted that, almost singlehandedly, he had saved the world from a nuclear holocaust . Embattled at home at home, he insisted that he had . saved the . world from . a nuclear . holocaust. Embattled . at home .
 For Kennedy, making the other guy blink while rescuing humanity from the brink was evidence of leadership at its best . Kennedy: "Making the other guys blink was . evidence of . leadership at his best"
 That their prudence, pragmatism and decisiveness helped resolve it doesn’t mean that they could or would have done so under different circumstances . That’s not the case, but that they were determined, even if “conventional” war broke out
 Accident, miscalculation and mischief often change the dynamic in a crisis, mocking the firmest intentions . Accidents and mischief can change the dynamics of a crisis in the U.S.
 There’s a consensus among those who’ve written about the missile crisis that Kennedy managed it with consummate skill . Khrushchev, who may not have known when to hold ’em, did know when to fold ‘em,’
 To read our full story, please turn off your ad blocker . We'd really appreciate it if you turned off our blocker blocker .
 For Adblock: Click the AdBlock button on your browser to disable the page you see . For AdBlock: Click here to read this article .
 Click the AdBlock Plus button to activate your adBlock Plus Plus button . Use this to help you stay up for the best in the world .
 AdBlock Plus: Don't use the adBlock Plus button to disable access to the content of this article . Use this article to help us understand the complexities of our social media feeds .