 Almost one-half century ago a series of events occurred, which came as close to causing a nuclear war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union than at any other time since the end of WWII and probably right up to the present .
 Our president at the time was John F Kennedy and the Soviet leader was Nikita Khrushchev . Our president was John Kennedy and our president was Vladimir Putin, Vladimir Putin said .
 Kennedy faced a crucial decision concerning what was to become an abortive attempt to invade Cuba, and which ultimately led to debacle on the beaches of Cuba . Kennedy had taken office in 1961 and was immediately faced with the decision .
 The relations between the United States and Cuba, never to clubby since Fidel Castro had taken over, worsened . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for decades .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union entered the Cold War in 1962 . The Cold War was the first major conflict between the two countries to break up .
 What occurred between early September and November will forever be remembered as the moment in time when the two powers came close to a nuclear war . The two powers will be remembered for their close proximity to nuclear war in November .
 In early September 1962, Mr Khrushchev announced that the Soviet Union would be providing arms and personnel to Cuba for defensive purposes . The Soviet Union announced that it would provide weapons and personnel .
 In October, a USAF reconnaissance aircraft flying over Cuba took photos that revealed that the Soviets were installing offensive ballistic missile sites in Cuba . Additionally, other United States military aircraft, flying over the Atlantic to the east of Cuba, had sighted Soviet vessels loaded with military hardware steaming towards Cuba
 The missiles already in place plus the cargo ships heading toward Cuba constituted an unacceptable threat to the United States, the administration says . The missiles and cargo ships headed toward Cuba were unacceptable threats to the U.S., the administration said .
 President Kennedy and his advisers discussed a number of options, all of which contained elements of dire consequences, no matter the outcome . President Kennedy's advisers said they had no idea what the outcome would be . Kennedy: "All of the options were very serious and very serious"