 Cet essai constitue une telle réflexion, en grande partie partie d'une perspective canadienne. Cet essence is a big part of the Canadian perspective .
 Some aspects of how the crisis was handled politically and some of the related military actions still bother people, so continued research holds the promise of something new about those events .
 Many details remained classified until the Cold War ended . The initial level of analysis was necessarily shallow, but kept alive by first-hand accounts .
 Without an adequate data base of facts, there is no way of assessing the reliability of the accounts, especially those covering operations at sea where the absence of information was marked .
 Conspiracy theories and suspicions of cover-ups arose because of lack of information . Conspiracy theories arose because so much information just was not available to the public .
 Any errors, omissions, or contentious statements remain entirely my responsibility . Any errors or omissions in this article remain entirely  responsibility .
 The events of October and November 1962 really did bring the world to the brink of nuclear war . For the first time, people began to realize that the events of that month . The events in 1962 were the first to realize the world was at risk of war .
 Since then, analysis has continued, but with greater emphasis on details and the actions of individuals, often in a critical way .
 In 1993, I entered the fray with an analysis of Canadian involvement in the crisis . In 1993 I entered that fray with a . analysis of Canada's involvement in . the . crisis .
 Rather than focus on political factors, as most previous analyses had done, I tried to look at the military involvement as well as the political factors . Rather than focusing on politics, I looked at the involvement of the military as well, I focused on the military role .
 "I was constrained by a lack of some key information, especially concerning Soviet submarine operations," says author . But he says he was able to provide key information on submarine operations in Soviet submarines .
 The necessary context of Soviet submarine operations was missing and this left too many unanswered questions . For this reason, I was always slightly disappointed with my analysis . I was able to explain most Canadian military activities during the crisis .
 Jan Drent’s excellent article on the Soviet submarine operations provided much of the impetus for this essay . The essay is based on an article by Drent that was published by the same author .
 I also had some nagging doubts about the political handling of the situation in Ottawa, especially with respect to nuclear weapons, but that is another story for another day .
 New information is available and so it is time to re-visit my original analysis . Now, a dozen or so years later, new information has been available .
 International law is clear in stating that warships may use the territorial waters of another state for the purposes of innocent passage and, in the case of submarines, that they be on the surface .
 Law is not clear about foreign warships using contiguous and other adjacent waters of a state . That law does not apply to foreign ships using contiguous waters of states .
 1982 UN Convention of the Law of the Sea addressed some of the lack of precision in the law . UN Convention did not provide definitive statements or even guidance on the use of the high seas beyond the territorial waters for naval operations .
 In 1962, the law was not clear on the use of ocean areas contiguous to territorial waters by foreign submarines in nonwartime situations . This was a major concern for U.S. and Canadian naval staffs .
 The right to attack unidentified submarines lurking offshore had never been a problem in the Second World War when their purpose was unambiguous . Unidentified submarines were never a problem during WWII .
 Article 25 gives states the right to suspend innocent passage where exercises are being conducted . Article 25 is Article 25 of Article 25 which gives states right to suspension of innocent passage .
 The advent of strategic weapons, essentially nuclear weapons and missiles and their adaptation to submarine use, led to re-appraisal of the policies for dealing with unidentified submarines .
 In preliminary phase of a nuclear war Soviet submarines will be deployed to positions in Canadian coastal waters from which nuclear missiles can be launched against targets within their range to coincide with air attacks .
 To achieve simultaneous attacks by sea and air would necessitate the submarines being sailed some days previously in order to make the transit to their launching positions .
 It is conceivable, therefore, that the first indication of the enemy’s war intentions may well be the detection by sound surveillance systems, ships or aircraft of a number of submarines approaching the coasts of Canada .
 The proposed change reflected the earlier shift in NATO strategy to acknowledge Soviet nuclear capabilities, which was to be sent to the Cabinet Defence Committee . It was sent to state that existing rules were inadequate in light of recent submarine developments .
 Recommendations for changes in the rules did not include RCAF maritime patrol aircraft . Recommendations were made for changes to the rules, however, not including RCAAF maritime patrol planes .
 Central to the new procedure was the initial interrogation of the submarine contact to establish its identity where possible . When it could not be identified positively positively, and contact was only made acoustically , then it would be deemed “hostile” only if a hostile act was committed .
 It seems an operational assumption was that the rules of engagement applied to unidentified submarines found within their theoretical maximum weapons range and to those contacts .
 The emphasis, it was stated, was on attempting to make early identification .
 The Naval Staff’s strategic logic, however, was not supported completely by the officials of the Department of External Affairs . Officials foresaw political rather than legal problems in the proposal . The proposal was rejected .
 It might be prudent to give the submarine the benefit of the doubt, experts say . The submarine is believed to be the largest in the world .
 The view was that sinking a Soviet submarine outside territorial waters on the basis of non-identification paralleled questionable Soviet actions in shooting down unidentified aircraft outside the territorial airspace of their country .
 External Affairs lawyers and the chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, General Charles Foulkes, believed that the procedure and rules should be consistent with those used by the Americans .
 The problem lay in the definition of a “hostile act,” a matter that would remain a highly contentious issue for many years . The issue would remain contentious for years .
 The next step was to work with the Americans in drawing up a set of coordinated bilateral rules for dealing with unidentified and hostile submarines in North American waters . U.S. and Canada are working on drawing up bilateral bilateral rules .
 Draft instructions for “The coordination of Canada-United States ASW operations in defense of North America” were submitted to the Canadian Chiefs of Staff in 1958 . This was done through the Military Cooperation Committee of the Permanent Joint Board on Defense .
 DeWolf’s fairly uncomplicated criteria had been massaged into a broader policy statement that would require further amplification if it was to have any operational value . Unfortunately, DeWolf's fairly unplussed criteria had to be massaged .
 The maintenance of surveillance and control of the North American and North Pacific Oceans both before and during war requires the following to be accomplished: The acquisition, evaluation and exchange of information concerning the pattern of action by non-friendly submarines .
 C) After the outbreak of war, the detection and destruction of enemy submarines was the focus of the U.S. Navy .
 The proposal continued in establishing the responsibilities for developing operational plans and procedures . The proposal included a concept for avoiding mutual interference between Canadian and American submarines .
 Chiefs of Staff have directed that interlocking national plans be drawn up . After the usual discussion, the proposal was concurred in by the chiefs of Staff .
 The Chiefs of Staff reviewed the new national plan on 28 August 1956 . This was done, and the plan was approved .
 The plan is designed to strike a balance between U.S. and Canadian requirements . Slemon is concerned that the plan does not provide enough guidance for the military .
 Chiefs of Staff debated, at length, the political implications of attacking missilefiring submarines when the location of the target was not known . They also debated the political ramifications of attacking a missile fired at a target .
 The decision on approving the plan was deferred pending further review by the Naval Staff . Eventually, the decision was deferred .
 In April 1959, the Naval Board reviewed a draft of the “Canada-U.S. Rules of Engagement for Defense Against Submarines” passed on from the Chiefs of Staff Committee . The rules of engagement for defense against submarines were approved in 1959 .
 Documents prepared under political constraints seldom meet all operational requirements . Not surprisingly, there were reservations to the proposal .
 Draft rules left to “competent shore authorities” to define what a “hostile submarine’s” definition was left to shore authorities to define rather than to the operational commanders .
 There was concern that the precise criteria for deeming a submarine “hostile” needed to be spelled out very clearly because there could be no room for doubt . There was also concern that there could not be a clear definition of what a submarine would be considered ‘hostile
 The admirals wanted a mechanism for requiring that a submarine identify itself . On top of this, they wanted to have a system for requiring a submarine to identify itself.
 The new set of rules were approved by the Canadian Chiefs of Staff on 28 January 1960, and forwarded to the minister of National Defence for approval . Revisions were made and sent back to the MCC for discussion .
 Chiefs of Staff yet again fiddled with the text of the rules . The rules duly came back with further amendments, and the rules were amended .
 The audit trail is rather difficult to follow because the various files are not complete in themselves and so one is left to garner information from a series of files . Audit trail is not complete, so one can gather information from series of file files .
 Much of the material has not yet been de-classified in Canada . Also, because this subject dealt with Canada-US relations much of it was not yet classified .
 The key issue of how Canadian forces were to demand that a suspected non-friendly submarine identify itself remains unclear . A copy of the document cannot be found now and so the key issue is unclear .
 Use of five small explosive charges in quick succession became the adopted practice to call a submarine to the surface within NATO and for Canada-U.S. forces .
 The United States State Department sent a telegram to the US Embassy in Moscow telling the Ambassador to inform the Soviet government that the US Navy would use a procedure to have unidentified submarine contacts come to the surface .
 Sonar signal normally made on underwater communications equipment in the 8 KC frequency range . This sonar signal is normally made by underwater communication equipment .
 Submerged submarines, on hearing this signal, should surface on an easterly course . Submarged submarines on hearing the signal should surface in the early hours of the day .
 The four "Foxtrots" were surprised by the use of sound signals and believed they were under attack . As the various accounts written by the . captains of the . four “Oxtrots” of their confrontation with the United States Navy attest, they were completely surprised
 The Soviet government’s rejection of the advisory note on the surfacing procedures was dangerous if not reckless . It left the submarine captains unsure of what to do under the circumstances which led them to consider using their nuclear torpedoes in self-defence .
 A controversy still exists over whether the ‘Foxtrot’ captains would have used their nuclear torpedoes in self-defence . Controversy remains over whether they would have been used in self defence .
 One commanding officer believed he was being attacked by something more powerful than a grenade . According to Svetlana Savranskaya, one commanding officer thought he was attacked by a more powerful weapon .
 Unable to reach his higher authority by radio, he discussed the situation with his political officer and second-in-command . He wisely decided not to use that weapon .
 The Americans used “scare grenades” to bring the ‘Foxtrots’ to the surface and identify themselves . There are no Soviet accounts of this procedure . Even though the U.S. used ‘scare-grenades,’ there are
 Those submarines that came to surface did so because of mechanical problems . Those submarines came to the surface due to mechanical problems, officials say .
 Use of five scare charges was routine during exercises, says former submarine officer . Five scare charges were used during exercises in the 1970s and 1980s .
 On return to Murmansk, commanding officers and Brigade staff were interrogated . For a while there was concern that they would be severely punished for compromising the mission by surfacing to correct defects .
 Soviet submarines were unaware of the standard NATO and Canada-US surfacing and identification procedures . They attempted to remain covert for as long as possible in accordance with their initial sailing orders .
 That they misinterpreted the ‘scare’ charges for depth charges and were forced to contemplate action for self-defence is troubling . The incident is troubling that the players misinterpreted their “scare charges” for depth .
 The refusal of their government to accept the advance notification of that procedure is even more troubling . The refusal to accept that procedure was even more disturbing .
 The Soviet submarine captains were mere political pawns left to manage a very difficult situation without adequate orders or command and control systems . The Soviet submarches were left in the chaos without adequate command or command systems .
 The Soviet Navy stayed much closer to home for the next few years . That is probably the result of this dangerous and humiliating situation . The Russian Navy stayed close to home .
 The problem with the submarines is that no one, save the Russians of course, knows exactly how many Soviet submarines eventually took part in Operation “Anadyr” or were already on patrol in North American waters in October and November 1962 .
 Without knowing the exact numbers, one cannot determine the potential threat (as a function of both actual capabilities and Soviet intentions) posed by those submarines with any accuracy . But that does not mean that we cannot re-examine what we do know and see if the submarine threat can be assessed
 There are two underlying problems in trying to throw more light on the Soviet submarine aspects of the crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Russians have yet to open the Soviet Navy archives and so all we really have are a few first-hand accounts some of which could possibly have been produced for a western audience and embellished accordingly .
 In the early 1960s Western intelligence estimates of Soviet submarine capability were generally poor . Second, in the early 60s, Western estimates of the Soviet submarine's capability were poor .
 West over-assessed the Soviet submarine capability in thinking that the Soviets would be very quick to exploit the technology acquired from Germany in 1945 . This was a systemic problem going back to the period immediately after the war, when the West had seriously overestimated the Soviet capability .
 In reality, it took the Soviets until the early 1950s to begin exploiting the technology available through the German type-XXI and type-IXIII submarines .
 By 1958, the various Soviet shipyards were in full production with a family of good, ocean-going diesel-electric submarines some of which could fire relatively shortrange missiles . Some of the submarines could also be used to launch relatively short range missiles .
 The first nuclear-powered submarine was launched in 1958 and additional hulls followed fairly quickly . It took the Soviets about five more years to exploit that technology fully .
 The first Soviet SSN, K-3 Leninsky Komsomol, was commissioned in July 1958 and deployed in June 1962 deployed under the ice to the North Pole . The first SSN was commissioned by the Soviet Union in 1958 .
 The Americans, in the USS Nautilus, had made a similar historic voyage almost four years before . The Americans made the voyage in the 1970s .
 Many obsolete submarines included many obsolete submarines as well as a number of small, coastal submarines . The important difference between ballistic and cruise missile-firing submarines was not made .
 Not having those numbers broken down by class or type, it's hard to calculate what the Soviets could have deployed into the western North Atlantic in 1962 .
 To re-create the effective Soviet long-range submarine capability in the fall of 1962, we need to look elsewhere . The U.S. must look elsewhere to find a way to rebuild its submarine capability .
 Jane's Fighting Ships gives a relatively consistent estimate by type of submarine . The overall numbers of submarines given in Jane’s Fighting Ships varied considerably from year to year .
 The Leninsky Komsomol made it safely to the North Pole was used as a way of showing that nuclear propulsion technology had been made safe . The subsequent triumph, as the Soviets heralded it, was used to show that the technology was safe .
 A Soviet Zulu-class submarine; at least two of this class were on patrol in North American waters before the start of the crisis . Two of the submarines were in North America before the war .
 Measuring effective submarine strength is difficult and is usually only done for a specific moment in time rather than as a generalization . Measuring effectiveness of submarine strength can be difficult .
 All we are interested in here are those submarines capable of crossing the Atlantic covertly in the Fall of 1962 . This essentially means that they came from the Northern Fleet and were “Zulu” and “Foxtrot” patrol submarines .
 Despite SOSUS analysis up to and including 27 October that there was no evidence of nuclear powered or missile firing submarines,24 I am reluctant to completely discount their presence .
 The approximate distance from Soviet Northern Fleet bases to a hypothetical patrol station off Chesapeake Bay is 4,500 nautical miles . Cuba is 5,500nautical miles and the approximate distance to the hypothetical patrol stations is 5.5m .
 Had they waited another two years to try to implement their Cuban strategy, it might have been a very different situation . The U.S. government has been criticized for its approach to Cuba .
 Moscow started planning for the build-up of military forces in Cuba in July 1962 . It would include more than just defence forces to hold off the anticipated American invasion and boost Cuba’s defences . They would also provide a strategic deterrent force in the region .
 Operation “Anadyr” called for a large fleet of surface ships, mainly coming from the Baltic Fleet, and a composite squadron of four “Foxtrot”class submarines and a “division” of seven “Golf”-class
 The plan was that the submarines would deploy covertly and rendezvous with the surface vessels in an area south of Bermuda (an area the Soviets referred to as the Sargasso Sea26) to conduct a fleet exercise openly; presumably as a “show of force”
 The part of the Sargasso Sea lying around Bermuda later became a patrol area for the Soviet “Yankee-class SSBNs . The area became an area of strategic concern for the Americans .
 On 6 October 1986, a “Yankee’s-class submarine caught fire in the Bermuda operating area after an explosion in one of the missile tubes and sank with the loss of four lives . Four people were killed in the explosion .
 The crews of the four “Foxtrots” did not know why the decision was made . Curiously, perhaps, perhaps the crews of four ‘FoXrots’ didn’t know why .
 The addition of the nuclear torpedoes added complications to the already complex operation . The operation was complicated by adding nuclear weapons to the arsenal .
 It had become a temporary deployment rather than the permanent one originally planned . The deployment had been meant to be a temporary one .
 We do not know why the plan was changed or why it suddenly became a covert operation . It is not known why it was changed to be covert operation, but it is not clear why .
 Part of the mission was to protect the Soviet merchant ships, especially the Alexandrovsk and the Indigiraka carrying nuclear warheads for the land-based missiles . The passage to Cuba was to be made over the following 30 days, with the passage to be done covertly . The
 The revised plan also made provision for one “November-class SSN, also with a nuclear torpedo, to accompany the formation . But apparently this was cancelled at the last minute .
 A “Zulu-class submarine already on station on North American waters, and carrying two nuclear torpedoes, was assigned to the protection of the high-value transports . A ‘Zulu’ class submarine, described as “reconnoitring the American coast
 The real surprise for the West in this information has been the presence of the nuclear torpedoes, he says . At the time we had absolutely no idea that the Soviet submarines were carrying nuclear weapons, he adds . The West had no idea of the Soviet submarine's nuclear weapons .
 Hurricane Ella has passed through that area four days before making ASW operations more difficult than usual . The weather was not good because of the weather .
 Meeting the U.S. Navy in force was a surprise for the Soviets, but before long they were able to figure out what was going on . The Soviets were surprised by the surprise of the surprise .
 M Zakharov and V Fokin, “Initial Plans for Soviet Navy Activities in Support of Operation Anadyr” , 18 September, 1962, attachment to Burr and Blanton, The Submarines of October . They could intercept not intercept not 27 M Zakarov
 Report on the Progress of Operation Anadyr,” 25 September 1962; attachment to Burr and Blanton, The Submarines of October .
 Soviet Navy headquarters later ordered a change in the deployment which held the submarines at sea rather than sailing to Cuba . The submarines were held at sea instead of sailing to the island of Cuba .
 Three of the four ‘Foxtrots’ were forced to the surface by the U.S. Navy . This exposed them to the full force of United States Navy ASW operations for the next two weeks . The four were exposed to full force during that time .
 The U.S. Navy was involved in the incident in the area of Polyarnyy in December . Eventually, they left the area and got back to their home base at the end of December . The crew was able to make their way northward to their base base .
 Operationally, it was a humiliating defeat for the Soviets . They were unable to conduct covert operations against the Americans . They had great difficulty evading the ASW forces .
 This was a major failure in the capability vital to their overall strategy . This was the biggest failure in a capability vital for the country's overall strategy. This was not the first time the U.S. government has failed to make a major mistake .
 All detections of submarines in these regions were made by ASW aircraft while the boats were either snorkeling at periscope depth, or holding communications sessions while operating under electric motors .
 Third, the submarines were detected visually with the support of ASW airplanes or helicopters sent to the region from shore-based command points or surface ships .
 The submarines that were forced to come to the surface, submerged after having recharged their batteries and managed to break away from the U.S. Navy's ASW aircraft and surface ships in pursuit, after which they were not detected anew . Finally, the submarines were not found again after
 American and NATO concepts of ASW operations, especially the dependence on maritime aviation for initial detection and localization, were effective . In other words, U.S. and thus NATO concepts were effective.
 Soviets routinely stationed submarines along the Eastern Seaboard of the North America since the late 1950s . Soviets were unaware they were at a distinct operational advantage .
 The major concern was their use of American and Canadian territorial waters . As with the Soviet fishing fleets and the electronic intelligence-gathering vessels .
 Submarine submarines came close to Soviet fishing fleet and ELINTs to replenish and possibly use them as communications links . Although the submarines generally stayed out of those waters .
 The fishing fleets worked close to the outer limits of American and Canadian territorial waters . That was where the best catches were to be had .
 This is a very short summary of Captain Ketov’s account of the deployment in which he tells a tale of uncertainty, discomfort, apprehension, and occasionally fear . There is no reason to believe that any of the 32 crew members were killed or injured .
 CTG 136. message O 310034 October 1962, attachment to Burr and Blanton, The Submarines of October . Sonar contact was never lost .
 The Soviets felt it necessary to respond in kind but did not do so until after the Cuban crisis . Because the Americans started to deploy their ballistic missile-firing submarines in the autumn of 1962, the Soviets did not respond to the Americans .
 One of the reasons for the American deployments was a simple reflection of the belief that the Soviets would try the Cuba gamble again despite the agreement reached after the 1962 crisis . The U.S. deployed troops to Cuba in 1962 was a response to the threat posed by the Soviets .
 HMCS Bonaventure had to return to Canadian waters at economical speed and so missed much of the search for the Soviet submarines . HMCS Bonaventure returned to Canada in economical speed .
 Western navies were just beginning to understand the more complex aspects of sound propagation through water . The effect on sound propagation of temperature layers in the ocean can be seen in detail .
 The traditional Second World War sonar equipment only transmitted and received sound waves along the surface layer . The ships were virtually blind to submarines operating below the temperature layer .
 Research after the war proved that moving transducers below the layer vastly improved detection potential . Transducers were used to detect radioactivity in World War II .
 Passive sonobuoys were used to detect submarines and localization of targets . If possible to prevent the submarine becoming aware that it was being tracked, they were used with passive sonoboys .
 In 1962, sonobuoys were the main sensor used to search for, localize, and track underwater contacts and to attack designated hostile submarines . In 1962 sonoboys were used to look for and localize underwater contacts .
 SOSUS relied on strings of hydrophones laid in cables along the sea bed to detect noises generated by submarines and surface vessels . SOSUS relies on strings in cables to detect sounds made by submarine and surface vessel .
 SOSUS had good detection ranges but directional accuracy was limited . SOSUS also had good accuracy for directional accuracy, but was limited by its accuracy .
 Maritime patrol aircraft would respond to SOSUS contacts and attempt to localize and identify contacts using sonobuoys .
 This procedure was relatively effective in 1962, infinitely more so than the ship-borne transducers which had short ranges and could not operate below the layer . This procedure . was . infinitely more . so than ship-mounted transducers . which had . short ranges . could not . operate below
 Variable depth sonar transducers were eventually fitted to escorts which allowed them to conduct ASW over a much greater area . Success in attacking an enemy submarine was a function of the range of the weapons .
 In this, the helicopter became both a sensor and a stand-off ASW weapon . The helicopter became an ASW sensor .
 Canadian analysts often re-assess American intelligence using additional input from the embassy in Havana . Washington shared the intelligence with Ottawa .
 In September 1962 the Canadian Joint Intelligence Committee examined the movement of weapons to Cuba,36 . The situation did not become a Canadian political concern until the crisis became public on 22 October .
 U.S. concern deepened by mid-October as intelligence and aerial surveillance made it clear that medium-range ballistic missile sites were being built in Cuba . In the United States, concern grew as intelligence showed that missile sites had been built .
 The US military quietly began planning for a blockade of Cuba and offensive operations against the island . The blockade would be downgraded to a pacific quarantine later . The latter under the guise of an amphibious exercise .
 At the time, though, the full extent of the Soviet military deployment was unknown . In the 1980s, Soviet troops were deployed to Afghanistan .
 Maritime surveillance stepped up to find merchant ships carrying military equipment and personnel to the island . In conjunction, maritime surveillance was stepped up in case the Soviets attempted to deploy submarines into the Caribbean .
 In the fall of 1962 there may have been two or three Soviet submarines on patrol in North American and Caribbean waters . Sonobuoys provide both a deployable acoustical signal source and reception of underwater signals of interest .
 These received signals are transmitted to any monitoring unit that then process the signal for analysis, classification of any target, and recording on magnetic tape media for replay and post event analysis .
 The others present an analytical problem because the Russians have not yet said anything about them, so we have to rely on American and Canadian operational analysis records . The other Russians present a problem because of their lack of information about them .
 Because of the Soviet propensity for compartmentalizing information, the captains of the four ‘Foxtrots’ would not necessarily have known about other Soviet submarines in the North American theatre . The Brigade Commander might have known though though though .
 In all probability, the four ‘Foxtrots’ would have been routed in such a way as to avoid mutual interference . In all likelihood, they would have avoided mutual interference, the author says .
 RCN destroyer in heavy seas; for much of the time the ships sought the Soviet submarines .
 The problem was that North American bilateral surveillance systems were not able to provide complete coverage of the western Atlantic . The problem is that the problem was not being solved by bilateral surveillance .
 The SOSUS system was still in its infancy and adequate libraries of acoustic signatures had yet to be built-up and the existing archives were not completely accurate .
 Maritime aircraft conducted routine patrols of the seaward approaches to the continent . They investigated possible submarine contacts gained by SOSUS .
 39 CTG 81. message “Appreciation of SOSUS activity in western Atlantic from 230001Z to 271300Z” P 271645 October 1962, attachment to Burr and Blanton, The Submarines of October .
 Without reliable intelligence on the intended movements of Soviet submarines, the U.S. and Canadian military watched for changes in deployment and detection patterns .
 One or two submarines on patrol off-shore were expected but any change in that pattern or the appearance of additional submarines and/or Soviet fleet auxiliaries in mid-Atlantic was cause for immediate concern and quickly led to increased surveillance .
 The first indication of a higher-than-normal level of Soviet submarine activity in the North Atlantic came on 13 October when a submarine was sighted in the Caribbean . The first sign of Soviet subactivity in the region was a sighting of a submarine in October .
 Suspicions raised by the arrival of the Soviet Northern Fleet auxiliary oiler Terek later that week . Suspicion was raised higher by arrival in the western Atlantic of Terek .
 Soviet submarines were known to rendezvous with electronic intelligence-gathering trawlers and use oilers like the Terek to refuel and get other supplies during their patrols .
 The problem was to find them because they often took shelter within the various fishing fleets using North American waters . They often take shelter in North America's waters .
 Rear-Admiral Ken Dyer, commander of the Canadian Atlantic Fleet, agreed to increase surveillance at sea without political approval . He agreed to do this as it was within his terms of reference to increasing surveillance .
 The tempo of RCAF ocean surveillance, which came under Dyer’s operational control, had been increased the day before . It is almost certain that some of this had been discussed between Dyer's and Taylor's staffs earlier that week .
 I will come back to these and other command relationship later as they are important, and understanding them clears up a few entrenched myths . The U.S. Army has a strong presence in the Middle East .
 An RCAF Canadair Argus patrol aircraft gained contact with a possible Soviet submarine well to the West of the Azores . Contact was held sporadically for the next three days but without getting proof of identity .
 By plotting the various submarine contact positions and calculating speeds of advance, it is possible that the contact made by the RCAF on 17 October was the same submarine sighted alongside Terek on 22 October . Meanwhile the four “Foxtrot-class submarines in the area between
 It would make sense to order the submarine already on patrol in the WESTLANT area to rendezvous with the fleet oiler and replenish fuel .
 Occasional contact was also made with the Soviet submarine operating in the Caribbean as it moved closer to Cuba .
 From recent Russian accounts this submarine could not have been any of the four ‘Foxtrots’ as they were too far to the northeast, a fact confirmed by subsequent analysis . The submarine was too far from the northeast of Russia to be identified as the “Fo
 As the crisis unfurled, it seemed that there were possibly six or seven Soviet submarines in North American waters . One or two were in the area north of Bermuda and five in the general Caribbean area .
 Trying to clarify the submarine situation in the area north of Bermuda is very much more difficult because of the total lack of Soviet information . The situation is more difficult to clarify due to the lack of information from the Soviet Union .
 It is a puzzle that needs to be solved because of the conflicting contact assessments . Yet, it is a mystery because of conflicting assessments, says the BBC .
 SOSUS conditions in the Caribbean were reported as being “good,” nothing specific was said about the northern area . However, it would appear that the acoustic conditions were not as good as those to the south .
 Irrespective of the weather conditions, greater reliance was usually placed on SOSUS and aerial surveillance using sonobuoys .
 Operations in the Canadian area need to be reconstructed to see if the data provides any new information . We now have a pretty good understanding of ASW operations in the Caribbean .
 A logical point of departure to re-look at Canadian ASW operations is the sighting of the “Zulu”-class submarine alongside the fleet auxiliary, Terek, on 22 October .
 Those who participated in the operations in the Canadian area agree that this was the start of the ASW side of the crisis .
 There are accounts of a second submarine sighting in the general area north of the Azores two days later, but they were never substantiated . There were accounts of second sightings in the same area but nothing was substantiated, though .
 It is far more likely that the “Zulu-class sighted on 22 October returned to its patrol station off the northeastern seaboard after replenishing .
 If this was so, the contact gained and held intermittently by RCAF Argus aircraft from 26 to 29 October was the same submarine . The speed of advance was a steady five knots which is realistic, but it cannot be given any classification higher than ‘possible’
 Contact was lost on the 29th at the same time as all the submarines, even those in the Caribbean went silent as the crisis reached its most dangerous point .
 Contact was gained on another possible submarine late on 2 November as it tried to seek shelter in the Soviet fishing fleet working Georges Bank in the Gulf of Maine .
 The location of this new contact was consistent with the projected speed of the advance of the contact held earlier . It made absolute sense for a submarine to seek out the fishing fleet and replenish from the tanker Atlantika which was also there . It was also made sense for the submarine to
 Some Soviet fishing vessels tried to drive off Canadian destroyers attempting to pin down the submarine . The incident occurred in the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 This contact was in the same general area as the ELINT trawler Shkval which had been sighted on 29 October . This contact is in the general area of the area where ELINT was sighted in October .
 The RCAF was also involved in the U.S. Navy’s ASW barrier established between Newfoundland and the Azores on 27 October .
 The U.S. Navy had to ask Canada for help in providing air cover for the patrol area furthest from Newfoundland . The United States Navy's Lockheed P2V Neptune patrol aircraft did not have the necessary endurance to maintain a useful patrol there .
 The barrier's main purpose was to catch submarines in transit between their home bases and patrol areas . Concern existed that a missile-firing ‘Zulu’-or “Golf”--class might be in the area and might attempt to close to firing range .
 Contact had also been made with several other possible Soviet submarines, but these did not have the same degree of reliability . Contact was also made with other possible submarines, including several possible Soviet subs .
 Commander of RCAF maritime air forces, Air Commodore Clements, informed the chief of the Air Staff that even though the view from Ottawa was that the crisis was practically over, the submarines had not left the area .
 In his own words, “there have been 5 positive, two highly probable, and 4 possible submarines in Western Atlantic in last week’s last week. “There have been a number of possible submarines,” he said .
 The acoustic signatures of the ‘Zulu,” ‘Foxtrot,’ and ‘Golf’ classes were similar because of a common propulsion system . When Paul Hellyer became minister of National Defence in April 1963 he attempted to solve some of these
 The four “Foxtrots” were held before returning to their Northern Fleet base and were found by the U.S. Navy . Submarine contacts fall into four distinct groups and areas, including Bermuda and Windward Passage .
 There are reports of a fifth submarine in that area, but they were never confirmed by visual sighting . There are also reports of another submarine in the area .
 The role of Shkval is still puzzling; at the peak of the crisis she was near the submarine off the Cape Hatteras and headed north to the area of the United States Navy’s ASW barrier and also to the submarine held down on Georges Bank by the
 Shkval and perhaps other ELINT trawlers had a more direct operational support role for the predeployed submarines . As the crisis turned into a debacle for the Soviet Navy after 29 October, the task of those vessels was to help the submarines extricate themselves .
 The evidence, albeit circumstantial, points to this being the same submarine sighted alongside Terek to the northeast of the Azores on 22 October .
 If this is correct, it could not have been B-75, which leads to the conclusion that there were at least two Soviet submarines on patrol in the Eastern Seaboard .
 As I stated earlier, there were many more reports of contact with unidentified submarines, some little more than fleeting contact and others that were held for significant periods . Some of the contact was fleeting contact, some of which were held more than briefly .
 SOSUS claimed to have held no less than 26 contacts at one stage . Some were later proved to be United States Navy submarines . Others were confirmed to be either marine noise or fishing vessels .
 There were 16 “possible’s contacts mainly based on single or short-term detections . After that, there were 16 "possible" contacts, mostly based on short or long-term detection .
 The submarine held by the Canadian Navy off George’s Bank was not mentioned because it was primarily a report on United States Navy ASW operations, but correlates with the ‘Zulu’-class found with Terek .
 In retrospect, it does not appear that there were twelve Soviet submarines deployed in the northwest Atlantic and Caribbean during the crisis as we originally thought . The Soviet submarines were thought to have been deployed during the Cold War .
 Evidence seems to say that there were certainly six submarines and possibly a seventh . The evidence seems to show that there was certainly a seventh submarine .
 We will not know for certain until the Russians open the Soviet Navy archives . The Soviet Navy is believed to have been involved in World War II .
 First, the implications of a greater number of Soviet submarines in North American waters were recognized early and an appropriate response made without delay . This action was well within the terms of reference of the respective commanders .
 Steps were taken quickly to resolve ambiguities, where possible, and sufficient units moved into the key areas to provide both a deterrent presence and a credible attack force .
 American and Canadian maritime forces had trained in the role for which they had trained . It was also a classic use of sea power in a crisis management situation .
 That the Americans and Canadian worked together so effectively is confirmation of the soundness of the bilateral maritime defence plans . That the U.S. and Canada worked together is confirmation that the plans are sound .
 Second, the Soviet submarine capability was not as fearsome as portrayed by the intelligence community; but this was not known until long after the crisis . This was not true, but it was known long after long after that .
 More troubling now is the knowledge that they were equipped with nuclear weapons . More troubling is the fact that they are now armed with nuclear arms .
 Had this been known at the time, one has to wonder if ASW operations would have been conducted differently . It is not known if the information was accurate .
 This question cannot be answered easily; responses existed for missiles fired from submarines but there was a distinct difference between merely having weapons on board and actually firing them . This question is not easily answered .
 A torpedo presents a different and more difficult problem because the actual launch may not be easily observed and then there is no way of knowing exactly what type of warhead is fitted . The actual launch of a torpedo can't be easily seen because it is not easily seen .
 The Soviets went home with their tails between their legs represented a crushing blow to their naval prestige . It would be five years before they ventured anywhere near Cuba again, and then only with great caution .
 Suggestions have also been made that the way in which the Canadian military as a whole responded to the crisis constituted a serious breach in civil control of the military . This too is a story for another time .
 Dyer’s actions in coming to the assistance of the U.S. Navy in seeking out the Soviet submarines have been upheld as courageous . Alternatively, Dyer's actions in helping the United States Navy were upheld as heroic .
 The 1962 crisis was the RCN’s finest hour of the Cold War as popular history frequently contends . Yet, doubt exists as to whether the 1962 crisis really was the best hour of Cold War .
 Military command structures and bilateral defence organization as they existed in the autumn of 1962 . These are important issues and to make sense of them we need to relook at military command structures, writes David Cameron .
 The crisis was just that, an international situation which deteriorated to crisis level but never to the point of becoming a war . A formal emergency was never declared, and the crisis was never to be a war.
 NATO and Canadian national emergency procedures had been under review for several years . In September 1962 the first NATO-generated simulation exercise, FALLEX 62, was conducted . The exercise was conducted in September 1962 .
 This proved that although much was right with the new procedures, a lot of work remained to be done . The new procedures will be used to test the effectiveness of the new system .
 It provided authority for specific actions and provided guidance on how to put the country on a war footing . It also provided guidance for how to prepare for a war .
 The problem was that it was based on a slowly deteriorating international situation precipitated by Soviet initiatives in Western Europe . The problem is based on the situation in the West, he says .
 The crisis was never managed under NATO command and control systems . Instead, a blend of Canada-United States bilateral and national procedures was used throughout .
 Canadian war plans developed over the previous three years were not invoked . Canada's war plans were also not invoked in the wake of the war .
 For instance, established procedures such as those for the employment of Canadian forces in the event of a nuclear war did not apply . The Chiefs of Staff Committee on 17 March 1961 approved that Canadian forces would not be employed in nuclear war .
 Instructions for Planning and Control of Joint/Combined Operations of Canadian Forces in the Defence of North America did not apply . Those instructions were predicated on NATO taking overall control of those operations .
 The History of the Canadian Navy (Toronto: McClelllland & Stewart, 1999), 290. The Navy is the largest naval force in the world . The Canadian Navy is one of Canada's largest naval powers .
 The Bilateral Defence Organization should have come under closer political oversight . It has often been claimed that the bilateral maritime defence structure should have been under political oversight in the same way NORAD became political .
 A counter-argument is that it was neither intended originally nor necessary for NORAD to become politicized . NORAD was never intended to be politicized, nor was NORAD ever intended to become .
 NORAD and its maritime equivalent have puzzled many people for years . NORAD was NORAD's most powerful military force in the world, but it was also the most powerful in the United States . The U.S. Coast Guard has been involved in NORAD operations since the 1950s
 NORAD is concerned with territory and clearly established boundaries . NORAD's maritime situation involves only the less-contentious high seas outside territorial waters . One theory holds that NORAD was concerned only with maritime issues .
 The origins of Canada-US defence plans were not easy because of the very different military-political cultures of the two countries . As those who have studied the origins of the defence plans understand, their birth was not easy .
 A potentially destructive impasse emerged in the early stages of planning and was not resolved until a carefully engineered joint public statement was made simultaneously in Washington and Ottawa on 12 February 1947 .
 There would be a clear distinction between the Basic Security Plan and its specific functional appendices on the one hand and the implementation of those plans on the other hand .
 The BSP was considered a war plan and as such only its actual implementation required political approval . The plan was drawn up without any commitment of forces or other assets .
 Subordinate plans and any subsequent revisions could therefore be “agreed’s” by the respective Chiefs of Staff organizations . Those plans neither made nor implied actual force or financial commitments . Subsequent revisions could then be ‘agreed by’�s chiefs .
 Military Cooperation Committee allowed planning to progress on a more even keel . This was helped enormously by the development in September 1947 of logical contingency planning criteria .
 In fact, the whole joint planning process gained a great deal more focus, and the politicians came to realize that it was not intended to remove their traditional and necessary right of exercising political control over the military affairs of the nation . Rather, it would establish procedures for military coordination and improve readiness
 NORAD Agreement needlessly became a political “hot potato” NORAD would have remained under exclusive military management until such time as forces had to be committed to hostilities when political approval would be needed . NORAD agreement needlessly become a political "hot potato" NORAD should have
 In the autumn of 1962, a comprehensive series of bilateral contingency plans existed . These had been carefully structured to be interoperable with national contingency and basic operations plans .
 The U.S. chose to treat the situation as a national threat rather than a NATO problem . So, when faced with an evolving operational problem in the western Atlantic that had nothing to do with NATO, the question of how to integrate American and Canadian ASW surveillance operations did not became
 COMASWFORLANT in the U.S. and COMARLant in Canada to deal with the Atlantic with a parallel structure on the Pacific through COMTHIRDFLT and COMMARPAC respectively . COMARlant in the United States and COMARPAC in Canada
 Each maritime commander had a very clearly defined geographic area of responsibility with precise instructions on what he could and could not do in various situations in those areas . From a Canadian perspective, each maritime commander was told what to do .
 The corresponding area of American responsibility extended north to 40 degrees of north latitude but further out into the North Atlantic . The corresponding areas were American responsibility for American responsibility .
 Fleet Commanders until such time as a formal emergency, or national crisis, or a war was declared, had extensive authority to conduct operations in the areas for which they were responsible . Fleet commanders were Senior Officers in Chief Command until such a crisis was declared .
 It was important to establish the operational command criteria early in a developing situation, military says . Thus, for the military, it was important for the U.S. to establish a command criteria .
 Dyer (as both a Fleet and a Maritime Commander) was accountable to the CNS, Vice-Admiral Rayner, who was in turn accountable to Douglas Harkness . Dyer was in charge of the Navy's Fleet and Maritime Command .
 The chairman of the Canadian Chiefs of Staff Committee was not part of the operational command structure at that time . He was not a member of the military's operational command staff .
 Dyer’s task was complicated by the fact that he also had to coordinate operations with his United States Navy counterparts to ensure maximum information flow . Dyer had to avoid mutual interference where Canadian and American units were operating together .
 Canadian and U.S. naval and maritime air forces exercise combined ASW procedures frequently . This was not difficult; Canadian and United States naval and air forces exercised combined ASWs frequently .
 In many ways, the ships and aircraft of the two countries were more comfortable working with each other than with NATO warships . The Royal Navy remained the Canadian "mother" service despite a marked trend to home-grown training and operational procedures .
 Maritime forces of the U.S. and Canada had developed a high degree of interoperability, especially in antisubmarine operations . Today, one would say that the United States and Canada have developed a . high degree . interoperability .
 bilateral procedures were almost identical to Canadian national procedures other than for the command structure . Canadian ships remained under overall Canadian control .
 Little post-exercise analysis took place and that little was even said about the exercise afterwards is perhaps not as remarkable in hindsight as some believe .
 Operationally it was just another incident involving Soviet submarines outside Canadian territorial waters . Operationally, the incident was just one of many involving Soviet vessels .
 The crisis was largely political even though those submarines presented a potential threat . The crisis is largely political, even though the submarines presented potential threats .
 No formal alerts were issued; rather, operational readiness was 54 QRCN, Article 41.01 . Yet, no formal alerts have been issued .
 Maritime Commanders are responsible for training, conducting exercises, and maintaining routine surveillance .
 Maritime Commanders controlled both RCN and RCAF ships and maritime aircraft . Operationally, this meant that . RCN ships and aircraft were controlled by the Maritime Command .
 "Dyer acted prudently and completely within the established criteria for exercising operational command of RCN and RCAF units assigned to him," says Dyer .
 RCN and RCAF performed well in responding to an uncertain but potentially threatening situation, the RCN says . The RCN responded quickly to the situation quickly .
 They conducted complex ASW operations in conjunction with the United States Navy as well as could be expected under difficult circumstances . The U.S. Navy also conducted ASW .
 We still don't know exactly how many submarines were on patrol in North American waters before the four ‘Foxtrots’ sailed in early October . The four “FoX’s” sailed in October .
 Two, procedures for dealing with potentially hostile submarines found in North American waters were tactically sound but inherently difficult politically . Two, the U.S. Navy's procedures were designed to deal with potential hostile submarines . Three, the Navy's submarine program was developed in the 1980s and 1990
 It would be interesting to know how politicians would have dealt with RCN prosecution of Soviet submarine found on Georges Bank .
 Canada-U.S. response to Soviet submarines would have been different had we known about the nuclear torpedoes . Three, we can only speculate in what ways the Canada-US response to the Soviet submarine attack would've been different .
 HMS/M Alderney of the Royal Navy's Sixth Submarine Division in Halifax deployed early in the crisis to find the Soviet submarines . HMS/Alderney was deployed to find Soviet submarines in Halifax .
 The submarine is shown here after a particularly rough trans-Atlantic crossing in January 1962 .
 The book is based on the original analysis and messages exchanged between Halifax and Ottawa that are included in the book . The book includes analysis of Halifax-Ottawa ASW operations .
 If there is still criticism of Canadian command and control procedures, then we need to look at the political level, says CNN.com's John MacIntosh .
 Those who remain sceptical or critical of the CanadaUS response to the Soviet submarines should bear in mind that the procedures in place in late 1962 were very different to those of today .
 To assess the appropriateness or legality of 1962 ASW procedures one needs to do so from the position of the 1962 concepts and not those of today . To assess whether or not ASW should be allowed to operate in the U.S. ASW is not a matter of law
 Modern navies are superbly versatile political instruments always ready to do the bidding of their political masters in any corner of the world at short notice . They are all classic examples of the fact that modern navies can be a political instrument .
 navies are unique in this respect. Armies and Air Forces cannot make that claim; navies must be unique in that respect . Navies and air forces are unique to navies, unlike other forces, they are not .
 The RCN and the RCAF Maritime Air Group rose to a challenge and carried out the tasks for which they had trained in an exemplary manner . In summary, what we can say is that in the fall of 1962 the RCN .
 Programme includes papers on themes such as early charts and navigation of the North Atlantic . Programme includes a balanced mix of established and emerging scholars .
 Two sessions of the conference will be dedicated to an historical appreciation of Canada’s Naval Reserve and the naval presence in Quebec . The Naval Reserve of the Canadian Navy is headquartered on Quebec's lower town waterfront within easy walking distance from the conference .
 Artfully displayed artifacts throughout the hotel provide a fascinating glimpse into the life of Quebec's first inhabitants . The hotel is located in Quebec .
 The Auberge Saint-Antoine has created a succession of 94 stunning rooms . Many offer a view of the St Lawrence River, others of Quebec's fortifications or the Musée de la civilisation .