 U-2 captured photographic proof of Soviet missile bases under construction in Cuba on October 14, 1962 . Nikita Khrushchev's ill-fated operation happened in America’s backyard without prior knowledge of the United States president, the U.S. intelligence services, and American
 From its inception in 1776 when courageous and heroic American men and women proclaimed their inalienable rights to self determination from the forces of colonial England, the government and people of the United States never imagined Weapons of Mass Destruction would be hauled 7,000 miles all the way from the shores
 American global political estrangement boosted Soviet leaders’ ill-conceived and detrimental willpower which consequently accelerated their convoluted ideological foundations across the globe undeterred . U.S. global political relations with Soviet leaders boosted by the American global estrangment .
 For decades, there have been conflicting political, social, and economic rifts between the leaders of the U.S. and Cuba . The leaders of Cuba and the United States on one side and those of Cuba on the other .
 The Soviets, through reckless dissemination of propaganda and rigorous deception, exploited every conceivable economic fiber of these retarded nations . Working in concert with host nations besieged by European domination, colonialism, and imperialism-nations .
 A REBUTTAL TO A MISGUIDED COLONIAL ANTHROPOLOGIST December 9, 2021 by Deeq Yusuf & Adan Makina .
 The characteristics of a modern organization are multi-faceted and multi-tasked . A modern organization is multi-tasking . The best characteristics of an organization are a multi-personality .
 Blogger Makina President Mustafe Omer President of Somali Region, Ethiopia Amina Mohamed Secretary of Education, Kenya Ali Bunow Korane Current Governor of Garissa County Garissa . Current President of the Somali Region and President of Somalia .
 President of Somalia Mohamed Abdullahi aka Farmaajo is the current Prime Minister of Somalia . Hassan Ali Kheyre Abdiweli was the current PM of Somalia and Omar Abdirashid Ali Shermarke . Anab Subow was the first Somali Prime Minister to hold office
 Aden Barre Member of Parliament, Garissa County Nadif Jama Former Governor of Garissa . Nadif Jama Former President of Gariss County . Aden Barre MP for Garissi County .
 When white colonial administrators first came to Somalia, they were impressed by the beauty of this animal .
 This site is for the gathering of the wise who want to make changes to their shrinking world . It is for a gathering of people who want change in the world .