 These will be collected for evaluation at the end of the period to assess proficiency of CCSS ELA standards .
 Questions for the students can be posted or printed on the back of the article . The students can also post or print their questions for the teachers .
 Explain what he wanted the average American to conclude from his message . Tell us what you think he wanted to say from the message .
 In October 1962, an American U-2 spy plane secretly photographed nuclear missile sites being built by the Soviet Union on the island of Cuba . The U.S. government says the missile sites were being built in Cuba .
 President Kennedy did not want the Soviet Union and Cuba to know that he had discovered the missiles . President Kennedy didn't want the Soviets to know .
 He met in secret with his advisors for several days to discuss the problem . The president met with advisers to discuss his decision .
 Kennedy decided to place a naval blockade, or a ring of ships, around Cuba . After many long and difficult meetings, Kennedy decided on the issue . The blockade was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 The aim of this ""quarantine" was to prevent the Soviets from bringing in more military supplies, he said . The aim was to stop the Soviets bringing in additional military supplies .
 He demanded the removal of the missiles already there and the destruction of the sites . He demanded that the missiles be removed and the sites destroyed .
 On October 22, President Kennedy spoke to the nation about the crisis in a televised address . President Kennedy's address was broadcast on October 22 .
 No one was sure how Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev would respond to the naval blockade and U.S. demands . No one knew how the Soviet leader would respond .
 The leaders of both superpowers agreed to a deal in which the Soviets would dismantle the weapon sites in exchange for a pledge from the U.S. not to invade Cuba . The deal was made public in the wake of a nuclear war in Cuba .
 In a separate deal, the U.S. agreed to remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey . The deal remained secret for more than twenty-five years .
 Although the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba, they escalated the building of their military arsenal . The missile crisis was over, the arms race was not. The arms race is not over, it was not .
 In 1963, there were signs of a lessening of tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and the United States . The two countries were at odds in the early 1960s .
 President Kennedy told Americans in June 1963, "Our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet" President Kennedy said in his inaugural address, "For, in the final analysis, our most basic . common link" is that "we all inhabit a small planet," Kennedy