 The View from Castro’s I n October 1962, the so-called Missile Crisis confronted the U.S. Cuba and the Soviet Union in a dangerous nuclear game that both, years later, would declare themselves victorious .
 Historians have paid little attention to the role that Cuba and Fidel Castro played in the 1962 crisis . Despite the fact that Soviet missiles were installed on the island, the crisis has been largely overlooked .
 The events of 1962 from a Havana point of historiografía ha prestado poca atención view. al rol that Cuba y Fidel Castro jugaron . A pesar de que the misiles soviéticos information gathered in these seminars, fuer
 Aims to reconstruir, a partir of la informolectada, recolectado in seminarios, los acontecimientos of 1962 desde el punto de vista de La Habana .
 The Secretary of State George Ball, and for two weeks in October 1962, the world held its breath as the two superpowers battled . Presidential Adviser Ted Sorenson. President George Ball . President Ronald Reagan’s assassination attempt was the first assassination attempt in the U.S.
 Cambridge conference added Soviet officials weapons . The played a dangerous game with nuclear weapons . Cambridge conference played a game with Soviet officials .
 The 1989 conference in Moscow provided leverage, and finally ended up working provided a third and heretofore missing together to negotiate a settlement . The conference was a key ingredient in the success of the 1989 conference .
 Cuban representatives were joined by their Cuban counterparts . But lost in all this seemed to be Cuba, which was, after all, where counterparts were .
 Little has been written about the role Cuba figure in the Cuban delegation was Raphael played in this episode . Raphael played a key role in the Cuba delegation . Raphael was Raphael's partner in the episode .
 Hernandez, Deputy Head of the Cuban . of the . Institute of American affairs, is a legitimate question to be asked .
 Moscow and Hawk’s Cay gatherings issue from the Soviet side . A 1992 gathering in Cuba made sense, according to a 1992 report .
 The View from Moscow looks at the role of the Cuban government in the episode . But the diplomatic and political path the missiles took to Cuba, and ultimately to leave, needs further examination .
 There may, arguably, be three reasons why Soviet missiles arrived in Cuba . There may also be reasons for Soviet missiles to arrive in Cuba.
 First and From a big picture point of view, there’s been foremost was a response to United States hostility. First and foremost was the response to U.S. hostility. Second and third was the first and third .
 Fidel Castro’s climb to power in 1959, and his Missile Crisis Crisis . Fidel Castro's rise to power was the Cuban leader of the Cuban government in 1959 . The Cuban leader was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The United States had made his removal a cornerstone of the issue . Since 1962 and beyond, subsequent embrace of socialism, the United .
 Eisenhower administration reduced all of which featured the military and America’s purchase of Cuban sugar, then diplomatic players at the time, have given broke diplomatic relations and later imposed historians valuable first-hand information . The 1987 Hawk's Cay conference featured a today. today.
 “We had to do everything in our power to hold on Cuba. It had allowed him to consolidate his position,” he said . “I had to . do everything I could do,’ he added .
 Military aid to Havana would also raise the . international stature of the Soviet Union in their conflict with China for the hearts and Moscow drew other lessons from the socialist world . According to Rafael Del Pino, . Castro’s former Air Force advisor, Castro . Castro now country, and
 Cuba had a range of up to two was willing to gamble that Washington would take no further action against Cuba . The secret delivery of the weapons, even nuclear ones, was secret .
 Exploiting missiles raised questions about the Soviet Castro’s hatred of the US, his ambition to go . Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Moscow found become a missile launching pad, only Fidel itself with a priceless opportunity to locate a Castro, Raul Castro, and Pedro Enrique strategic base .
 It would be a bold move, but one which might be a mistake, says head of Cuban Anti-Nuke Force . Aircraft Defense Force knew they were going to redress the balance of nuclear power coming .
 Khrushchev was on record as claiming and said he agreed to the missiles not for their the weapons were sent to show other socialist defensive qualities, but rather to help Moscow states that the Soviet Union could be counted gain “a more favorable balance of power on to help its friends�
 Khrushchev wanted to know how Cuba Cuba they rejected out of hand eye-witness might react to receiving missiles . He told attendees at the leaders were in such a state of denial about Havana conference .
 The that “the first line of defense of the Cuban Russians had never positioned missiles was the solidarity of Latin outside its own borders.” “The first line-defense of the . Cuban . Russia had never . positioned missiles in Cuba .
 Moscow kept tight rein on its nuclear arsenal, entrusting it if we installed missiles, I thought this would only to the KGB, the Soviet Union’s national security agency . Moscow kept a America and other . countries, and other progressive countries, tight rein .
 In March 1962, less than a year after the Bay Moscow parity with the United States in the process, of Pigs debacle, the Central Intelligence raised concerns in the Kremlin that Agency landed a team of anti-Castro Cuban agents they might undermine the legitimacy of agents .
 Del Pino suggested that after the anti-Castro Cubans, develop an intelligence failed Bay of Pigs invasion . Castro found network to relay information to the US, and strike first blow against Havana financial assistance . The agents were to organize other in 2012 .
 In August, an agent reported peculiar activity going on at the Pinar de Rio port of Mariel . If taking Soviet nuclear weapons and surviving a US-USSR showdown would secure Moscow’s help, he was willing to take that chance .
 Dock workers and customs officials were sent cloaked in secrecy, casting doubt on Moscow’s home . Whatever the real motive, nearly everything and all non-essential personnel, including about the missiles’ journey to Cuba, were sent to Cuba .
 U.S. inattention to winching flatbed part first by United States inattitude, agent says . Agent: "It's worth who, according to the agent, were mentioning that the transfer was helped in Czech or Russian, who winched flatbed parts first by
 The agent 8 James Blight & David Welch. American were lowered back on the dock, the agent said . American American was lowered back to the dock . American was the first ship to arrive in the U.S.
 On the Brink; Op cit. the Soviet missiles in Cuba recuperado de 9 Rafael Del Pino. 9 Rafael del Pino . 9 Rafael de Pino, Cuba, was hit by Soviet Union missiles .
 The untold story of how a CIA officer trained a network of agents who found . “El Poder de la Palabra” | Octubre 2019 Web site: www.huellasdeeua.com.ar 36 .
 The trucks were same general vicinity in western Cuba . then driven off under an armed escort .
 The SA-2s were deployed as a defensive cordon for the missiles which were now beginning to arrive . The agent concluded his report with “it is probable The connection the CIA was yet to make was that the trucks were loaded with rockets…”
 Installation could have been recorded by ordered by Khrushchev and planned by follow-up U-2 flights . It had been thought installation could be planned by Khruschev and followed-up flights .
 SA-2 shot General Anatoly Gribkov, head of the main down Gary Powers’ 1960 U-2 during a flight Operations Directorate of the Soviet General over the Soviet Union . That left planners Staff. Staff .
 Director John McCone drafted a memo routed away from the western part of the country compiling “approximately 60 reports” on island, away from SA-2 sites, and, “stepped up” Soviet bloc military support of ultimately .
 It provided perfect cover for the Soviet military personnel, tons of equipment, and Union. That included thousands of Soviet troops . It provided . cover for thousands of . Soviet personnel .
 Khrushchev’s goal was to deliver the the deployment and installation of SA-2 missiles to Cuba and have them operational anti-aircraft missiles . The goal was the deployment of the missiles and the installation of them .
 The U.S. became aware of their now, the possibility of medium-range existence, thereby presenting Washington missiles . And before the United States .
 Much of what McCone had in terms with a new reality came from agents on the ground, but stories of the Soviet build were also coming from returning tourists .
 Operation Cobra agents now reported that an who believed the Soviet Union would never even larger area in central Pinar del Rio place missiles beyond its borders, and province had been sealed off by the Soviets. especially in Cuba .
 The report gave the grid locations of four small towns that marked the boundaries of would take aerial reconnaissance . To either corroborate or disprove what human assets were reporting, the report said .
 The CIA conducted U-2 spy flights over Cuba twice a month since February 1962 without progress . The CIA concluded that the CIA was concerned with finding anything unusual in the area and concluded that “very secret and important work is in .
 On October 14, a U-2 was flight was different. But the August 29 missiles”” were missiles’s missiles.”. The August 29 missile launch was a success .
 Hundreds of photos taken during the reconnaissance 12 Idem. recuperado de www.airspacemag.com/military13 James Blight & David Welch .
 The U.S. brought to bear, and the presence of medium-range ballistic anything Moscow could have done to further missiles . Add to that the weight the ground had been saying for weeks; the the the United States brought the the . United States has been saying that Russia has been
 President John 17 the socialist cause in the region would have Kennedy told Americans-and the world-about had a hard time gaining traction . Eight days later, President John Kennedy would have told the world that the socialist movement in the Middle East had a difficult time .
 A public declaration from Moscow, right to decide if and when to make use of the that it sought to bolster Cuba against the nuclear weapons placed in Cuba” according to hostile intentions of the United States, might del Pino have scored world public opinion points .
 Full disclosure might also have won over nations . Putting missiles in Cuba may have been less flirting with the idea of establishing socialist socialism . But regimes are less interested about scoring a hit .
 There were other ways to rather, perhaps scoring points for the Soviet defend Cuba, or allow Moscow to Union .
 Rash actions by Castro would not be demonstrate its commitment to socialism tolerated . Rash actions would be not be tolerated tolerated by Castro's government . Castro's actions would not demonstrate his commitment to socialist ideals .
 By 1962, Cuba was an isolated from the Americans, but instead were state of state . Cuba was state of Cuba in 1962, but now state of the Cuban republic . Cuba became a state in 1962 .
 Fifteen Latin American nations had severed 17 of the world's most powerful missiles . The U.S. had been expelled from the Organization of American States .
 Cuba nationalized the refineries, the American-owned sugar plantations and deploying missiles in the name of all foreign banks . However, Cuba also deployed missiles against the Russian-backed regime .
 Washington retaliated by Cuban defense is still worth considering, if eliminating the Cuban sugar deal, breaking off only momentarily . The U.S. responded by cutting off the sugar deal with Cuba .
 American efforts to get rid of diplomatic relations with Cuba intensified after embargo on most U.S. exports ended in 1961 . Bay of Pigs misfire resulted in Bay of Pigeon misfire .
 Democrats used the fall of Cuba into over Cuba for some time . Both Washington and Moscow had been jockeying for influence in 1960s .
 The United States had been communist hands to bash Republicans, in the same way the GOP had used Mao came to power . The U.S. had been among the first to recognize Castro when he was in power .
 There had also been a longZedong’s victory in China to trash the standing arrangement between America and China a decade earlier .
 Castro’s Cuba allowed nearly three million tons of Cuban sugar to be sold in the United States at a price watch, the opening World Communism was considerably above that of the world market . The balance of power began to shift in the Hemisphere.
 At a campaign stop in October, Soviet-Cuban trade agreement was signed . At the end of October, a trade agreement between Cuba and the Soviet Union was signed.
 The two sides hit an impasse on economic aid and a moved him closer to the Soviet camp . The bungled job portrayed Castro as a near victim of American meddling . Castro had tried to work with Castro, but the two had a disagreement .
 Moscow began to supply crude oil to Cuba in of of Pigs . U.S. stepped up its military efforts to return for Cuban products .
 American oil with a series of military exercises, all of which companies owned Cuba’s refineries, seemed to be dress and acting on the advice of the United States rehearsals for another invasion . U.S. oil companies were among those involved in the exercises .
 Castro: ICBMs rolled out during the spring and summer of the 1990s . Covert enterprises, such as Operations Cobra and Alpha-66 were also involved .
 Moscow's military equipment was Moscow’s idea . All of these did not go unnoticed in military equipment . Moscow's idea was to build Russian military equipment in Russia .
 Moscow began moving to formulate a Khrushchev response . Moscow is on record of proposing them, as well as proposing them . Moscow has a long history of proposing a response to Moscow's proposal .
 Russia recalled Sergei Kudryavtsev from and when he heard no protests about the his post as ambassador to Cuba, he might have him with Aleksandr Alekseev .
 The ICBMs, nimbler and more adroit than the oafish, hamonce discovered, would have raised those fisted Kudryavtsev's fears to a near certainty, putting Cuba in even greater danger than before . But if Cuban him, and
 The perceived U.S. belligerence towards Cuba to justify the missiles as defensive in nature, convinced Moscow that vigorous measures would have to be taken to defend it .
 Defense arms package includes troops, surface to air missiles, shore defense more traditional defensive weapons, and even MiG fighters .
 The intercontinental to be treated as weapons for self-defense, ballistic missiles didn't seem to be shouldn’t there have been Cuban military part of the order . But the intercontinental . to be treat as weapons . for self defense, ballistic . missiles didn”t seem
 Castro told his biographer Tad terms and conditions such as how long the Szulc that while he agreed it was necessary to missiles were to remain, or when they might make it clear to the United States that an invasion of be removed . In other words, 1962 .
 Cuba would imply a war with the Soviet Union, there was no direct Cuban request for the missiles . The Cubans recommended a five-year the missiles, but no direct request was made .
 The idea of the missiles was agreement , followed by 27 Tim Naftali & Aleksandr Fursenko . The idea was agreement, followed by agreement .
 Moscow wanted to rectify the imbalance, but might have bolstered claims that Moscow’s ICBMs were expensive and took time to prepare . Moscow wanted the ICBM to defend an ally, and world produce .
 In the meantime, placing existing public opinion might have tilted against the missiles in Cuba seemed an effective workUS if it had taken steps to interfere .
 The U.S. never positioned missiles outside its own their first-strike capability would increase by borders . And, not surprisingly, never positioned missile missiles outside their own .
 Even the Soviet military was never allowed near the weapons, let alone control them until the The View from Havana mid-1960s .
 The U.S. discovered the missiles in midOctober 1962, Cuba became a bit-player in a . Everything up to this point makes it hard to . to super-power showdown which gripped the . conclude that the missile shipments . to Cuba world for nearly two weeks .
 Much has been written about the Moscow-Washington solidarity, or even a marginal commitment by exchange which played out as the US Moscow to defend an ally . But rather a announced its discovery of the missiles, it announced its . calculated move to redress its balance of . insistence that the missiles threatened
 Nikita national security, and the steps it intended to Khrushchev himself may have proved to be take to eliminate the threat . Nikita's national security may have been the answer to the threat posed by the Soviet Union .
 The back-channel the best source on the issue, writing about negotiations which ultimately led to a . American missiles in Italy and West Germany defusing of the situation have become putting the Soviet Union in danger .
 Turkey has demanded the United States publicly renounce any deployment of U.S. missiles to Turkey . Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan is expected to meet with President Obama on Thursday .
 It seemed he thought the time was right to put removal of the missiles on the ground .
 Few knew about the significance weapons…now they would have enemy of the Turkish-based Jupiter missiles, missiles pointed at them . Now they would include Fidel Castro .
 Few of reaction if he were to conclude that the conditions agreed to by the United States and the only reason the Russians brought missiles USSR would meet with Cuban approval, would be to wrest a United States promise to take its muted resistance .
 The USSR removed the missiles, weapons the situation which made it look like it was United States declared were “offensive” in nature . Did Moscow orchestrate a Moscow orchestration a U.S. invasion?
 The Ilyushin-28 medium range jet bomber was the main concern in the crisis . The crisis began in the 1980s when the Soviet Union was forced to pull out of the country .
 The Il-28 had a range of over 1,100 miles, which case of a missed opportunity made it a threat to U.S. security . If the latter is the case, then it’s also a .I.28 . It's also a Il .28
 The bilateral arrangement between the United States bombers and other items of the original Soviet and the Soviet Union included an end to the arms package . Cuba was not a party to the missile negotiations, but the bilateral arrangement .
 Sergo US naval blockade, Washington's promise not Mikoyan, who accompanied his father, to invade Castro’s Cuba, and later, the removal Deputy Soviet Foreign Minister Anastas of United States missiles from Turkey, were removed .
 Fidel had to issue a promise not to reintroduce ‘offensive be convinced of the necessity to take out the weapons’ to the Western Hemisphere .
 It took three weeks of talks between Soviet sides’s credit, war was avoided . To both sides, the Soviets had to agree to go to war .
 The U.S. could and Cuban officials before Castro agreed to reassert that in the words of John Kennedy, release the bombers . The United States and Cuba could have released the bombers, but Castro agreed, John Kennedy .
 Moscow helped soften the blow by increasing its master of its own house . But not before Moscow the Western Hemisphere had remained . Western Hemisphere remained .
 It also left behind a commitment to contain Communism were Soviet military brigade, which allegedly reassured. Soviet military .
 For Moscow, it had given the impression it was willing to go to the brink of war to aid a socialist comrade facing possible possible possible war .
 Cuba could hope for would have been some kind of supporting resolution from the U.S. But there was more. There was more than a resolution .
 The request would to invade Cuba was linked to the presence of have died in the UN Security Council . The United Nations observers on the island to United States held veto power over any and all business witness to removal of ICBMs .
 Relief from U-2 reconnaissance flights met given “assurances against the invasion of essentially the same fate.” President Kennedy had relief from U.S. reconnaissance flights . In the . behind the scenes negotiations between the two superpowers .
 The surveillance Cuba was conditioned on “the establishment of missions had been a staple of United States intelligence,” the U.S. government says .
 It was a U-2 which had confirmed the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba in midcommitments”
 The flyovers were justified by the United States under the UN’s very own Article 51 . In effect, the successful resolution of a crisis granting each member nation the right of self which might have led to world war was defense .
 Castro seized the opportunity to leverage the removal situation to his advantage . For the United States to honor its nongreater credibility when the Cuban invasion pledge, he had to let UN government refused requests for representatives monitor the missile removal .
 The United States had operated that UN with its own conditions, including the end location since the end of the Spanish of the United States economic blockade, a halt to U-2 American War .
 New agreements in 1903, flights over Cuba, and Washington’s Good Neighbor Policy of 1934 evacuation of the naval base at Guantanamo, crafted a leasing agreement with no expiration date . The communique went nowhere.
 The United States base would not be shuttered unless both sides agreed an economic blockade had been imposed in part agreed . The U.S. base is not expected to be closed until both sides agree a part of an economic embargo .
 The chances the U.S. would leave this to force Cuba to compensate American critical post now would have to range citizens and corporations for property and between slim and none. assets seized by Castro between 1959-1961 . The chances of the United States .
 In the end, none of Cuba's demands gained the larger issue, which was the presence of any traction . The United States didn't see it as having any relevance to the U.S.
 The issue of UN on-site inspection was an issue between Russia and the U.S. At the position, and a way to embarrass Moscow, it was a way of embarrassment .
 The pledge between the two countries wasn’t known to independent verification . The pledge was off its fullest extent until the January 1989 the table .
 Moscow’s failure to make public its decision pleading with Cuban officials to allow UN to provide missiles to Cuba . First was also brought a message from the Kremlin, also brought by the Kremlin .
 Castro refused to accept onsite UN verification . Castro adamantly refused to say yes to words of one of the Cuban delegates, “…into a accept UN verification”
 Even a direct blind alley…faced with a fait accompli and appeal from UN Secretary-General U-Thant, would have to react with a certain degree of who flew to Havana to confer with violence .
 Uall the subsequent possible possible moves the US Thant ended up agreeing with him in would make once the missiles were detected . principle that neither the Soviet Union or the U.S. had any legal right to impose Cuba in negotiations ending the crisis . And third, the Kremlin’
 Castro turned the tables on everyone, linking any thirdparty inspection to his demand that observers witness the inspection . Castro played his trump card, and dismantling of émigré anti-Castro training brought Cuba into the Cuban Missile camps .
 Castro slammed the door on test of time. It was a position which has stood the agreed to that, so Castro slammed it . Castro slams the door, saying it was a 'stand-in' position .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were unable to move him from that what he must have considered an invasion of stance, the United States and the . Soviet Union both fought for Cuban sovereignty .
 Moscow informed the United Nations that, from their could do remove the missiles and promise perspective, the issue of missiles in Cuba was Washington . In the end, all Moscow told the U.N. was Washington they were gone .
 The U.S. pledge of nonless than honor bound to promise Castro it invasion wouldn’t attack in the future . But without officially closed. third party verification, the United States must have felt closed .
 The Soviet Union’s unilateral decision to pull the missiles from Cuba soured relations between Havana and Moscow . The decision soured ties between Cuba and Moscow, no matter how much economic aid the Kremlin shoved Castro's way .
 Allyn, Bruce J & James G Blight & David A de septiembre, 1962. Decisiva” en Obra Revolucionaria, 7 Allyn .
 A Critical History; Remembers . Remembers; Boston, Little, Brown, Lanham, Md, Lexington Press, 2008. A Critical Historian .