 For 13 days in October 1962 the world appeared to stand on the brink of nuclear war . Cuba is an island just 90 miles off the coast of Florida .
 Until 1959, it was closely allied to the U.S. under the leadership of the right-wing dictator General Batista .
 There was considerable American investment in Cuba and the USA was the chief consumer of Cuba’s sugar and tobacco .
 One of Castro’s first moves was to go to the USA to secure support for his new state, but President Eisenhower refused to speak with him . One of his first moves in the U.S. was to visit the USA, but he was denied access .
 Castro had not been a communist before 1960, but was drawn to communism by the friendship and support offered by Khrushchev and his government . Castro had been drawn to the communist movement by the support of the government .
 Castro nationalised all American-owned companies in Cuba, and refused to pay compensation . Castro also nationalised Cuba's largest oil and energy companies .
 The U.S. imposed a trade embargo on Cuban goods, depriving Cubans of a market for their sugar and tobacco . This backfired badly on the Americans as it meant the Cubans then looked to the USSR for a market .
 In April 1961, John F Kennedy approved a plan to invade Cuba and overthrow communism . Just after he was installed as President of the USA, he approved the plan .
 The CIA landed 1,400 Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs on the southern coast of Cuba . The aim of provoking an anti-communist uprising was to provoke an uprising, the CIA said .
 Almost at the last minute, Kennedy cancelled an order that had promised the Cuban resistance U.S. Air Force support for their coup d’etat . The order was cancelled at the end of the coup d'etat in Cuba . Kennedy cancelled the order .
 The rebels were easily defeated when they were met by 20,000 heavily armed Cuban troops . The lack of air support meant the rebels were able to defeat the rebels .
 American spy plane flying over Cuba took pictures that showed the construction of Soviet missile launch sites in October 1962 .
 Advisors known as ‘Hawks’ on both sides advised aggression, and in the USA some believed they would have a good chance of winning . Advisors advised aggression in both teams to be aggressive in both countries .
 Khrushchev: Soviet ships will not stop at the blockade, but will force their way through . October 11, 1962, Kennedy receives a letter from the Soviet leader saying that the blockade will continue .
 Despite Khrushchev’s ‘tough talk', the twenty ships approaching the blockade turn back . 25 October US spy planes report increased building work at missile launch sites on Cuba .
 Khrushchev promises to remove launch sites if the USA agrees to lift the blockade and promises not to invade Cuba . Kennedy receives a letter from the Soviet leader to remove the launch sites .
 Khrushchev letter says launch sites will only be removed if the U.S. removes its missiles in Turkey . Letter was sent to the White House in October 1962 . Letter says the United States must remove missiles from Turkey .
 Kennedy opts to answer only the first telegram while privately offering to consider the removal of missiles from Turkey . Kennedy offers to consider removing missiles from the country .
 Khrushchev saved the communist regime in Cuba from invasion by the USA . He negotiated a deal with the USA on the removal of their Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Kennedy kept nuclear missiles out of Cuba and stood up to the USSR . A hotline was installed to ensure easier communication between Washington DC and Moscow in the event of future conflict .
 The crisis may have created a willingness on both sides to enter into the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks later in the 1960s . These talks eventually led to the 1963 Test Ban Treaty which began the process of ending the testing of nuclear weapons .
 You may be asked to give an analytical account of why something happened . Revison tip: You may have been asked to explain something .
 Cuba and the USA was the chief consumer of Cuba’s sugar and tobacco . For 13 days in October 1962 the world appeared to stand on the brink of nuclear war."
 Castro had not been a "element" before 1960, but was drawn to Khrushchev by the friendship and support offered by his government . Castro had never been a member of the Communist Party .
 The U.S. imposed a trade embargo on Cuban goods, depriving Cubans of a market for their sugar and tobacco .
 1,400 Cuban soldiers landed at the Bay of Pigs on the southern coast of Cuba with the aim of provoking an anti-communist uprising . The landings were intended to provoke an uprising .