 The United States would have survived as a functioning country and would have only been hit by 30 or so nuclear weapons, not enough to take out all the U.S. state capitals . The U.N. would have been hit only by 30 nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet Union and Europe would not have been so lucky . On the other hand, the Soviet Union would not be so lucky, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 During the crisis, the U.S. had 3,500 nuclear weapons capable of reaching the Soviet Union via bomber or missile . The United States also had a nuclear arsenal of 3,000 nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union was the only nation to have nuclear weapons that could reach the Soviet
 The Soviets had slightly more than 12 ballistic missiles capable of reaching the US, hardly a missile-borne rain of death . Also, the Soviets had little to say, but also had a few ballistic missiles that could reach the US .
 Around 90 nukes were mounted on ballistic missile submarines, which would have been vulnerable while launching their missiles . The submarines would have had to be protected from attack .
 Most nuclear weapons at the time were set for airbursts to destroy cities, which would have thrown out far less radioactive fallout than groundburst weapons . As for the nuclear fallout, most nuclear weapons in the 1950s would have been set for an airburst, not groundburst .
 Volk Field Air Base was swarming with activity just a handful of days after President Kennedy announced that there were Soviet missiles in Cuba . A Bear Triggered a false alarm .
 An alarm had gone off, signaling that Soviet bombers were flying over the North Pole at that moment . The alarm was triggered by an alarm going off at the time .
 U.S. fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles had to stop them . United States fighters stopped them using nuclear missiles to stop the attack .
 Jets were lined up to take off when the pilots' missions were suddenly canceled . The entire thing was a false alarm caused by the wrong sound coming out of the speakers .
 A black bear crawled over a fence and triggered sabotage alarms at a U.S. Air Force control center near Volk Field . The alarm was broadcast to other bases .
 Volk Field Air Base had received a war alert instead, triggering the massive mobilization . The base had received an alert from the U.S. government, triggering a massive mobilization.
 A vehicle raced to the runway to stop the aircraft from taking off from the runway . Fortunately, communication with the control center soon cleared up the error .
 Kennedy was scheduled to end a tour of the U.S. at the Century 21 Exposition in Seattle, Seattle, in October 1962 . Kennedy bowed out of the tour just before he was set to end his trip .
 The administration provided a photo of Kennedy that looked like he was sick . The administration even provided the press with a photo .
 He was also seen wearing a hat, only the second time he had ever been seen wearing such a hat .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson was called in to replace President Kennedy at the Century 21 Exposition . President Kennedy was sick with a stomach ailment . Vice President Johnson was invited to attend the event .
 Kennedy and Johnson were dealing with a serious case of the Cold War . But the excuse was ironic, given that Kennedy and . Johnson were . dealing with . a serious issue of Cold War.
 American spy planes had photographed Soviet missiles in Cuba just days earlier . American spies had been flying over Cuba to take photos of Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy didn’t want to make the situation public, so he started the prescheduled nationwide tour . Kennedy didn\u2019t want the situation to be made public . Kennedy: "I'm not going to make it public. I'm going to do it"
 Kennedy cut his tour short with the \""cold\"" excuse . Then analysts discovered that the missiles would be ready to fire earlier than they expected, prompting Kennedy to cut his .
 During the crisis, the two leaders found that the most effective way of communicating was via public announcements, which were then relayed through the international press to the other leader .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev's formal communications took six hours through official channels . Diplomatic channels were used by both sides of the Cold War .
 During the crisis, a few hours were an eternity when anything could happen . During this crisis, the crisis was an eternity . The crisis was a time when anything was possible .
 Public announcements became an awkward but effective means to relay information between the superpowers . Public announcements were used to relay info between superpowers to each other .
 The Soviets even had Aleksandr Fomin, one of their KGB agents, give messages to an ABC correspondent .
 The U.S. President and the U.K. have been in touch with each other for years . They've been together for decades, including in Afghanistan .
 The U.S. was also flying daring, low-level spy missions over Cuba using carrier-launched RF-8 Crusader aircraft .
 As they sped to their targets, the aircraft soared just 60 meters over Cuba on initial reconnaissance runs to avoid antiaircraft fire . The aircraft soared only 60 meters above Cuba on reconnaissance runs .
 Dog collars and sanitary napkins helped these crews immensely in their spy missions over Cuba .
 A new piece of equipment designed to warn the RF-8 pilots of incoming antiaircraft missiles had a tendency to get loose and bounce around the cockpit . The equipment was designed to alert the pilots to the danger of incoming missiles .
 The pilots faced as great a threat of getting hit in the head by the warning devices as they did of getting shot down by the Cubans . With this new problem, the pilots faced a greater threat of hitting their head .
 To solve the problem, pilots used dog collars as fasteners and sanitary napkins as padding . Dog collars were fastened to fasteners, while napkins were used to protect passengers .
 At the height of the crisis in October 1962, the Soviets launched two Mars-bound space probes eight days apart . The Soviets launched the first mission to the Red Planet in October 1963 .
 The first probe broke up in Earth orbit, and the second probe failed on the way to Mars . The first mission to Mars failed on Earth orbit .
 The Soviets were also fielding the R-7 ICBM at the time, which could be launched from the same launchpad as the Soviet Mars probes . The Soviets had also fielded the ICBM .
 The rocket for the second Soviet Mars probe was hogging a potential nuclear missile launchpad, interfering with the Soviet military response to the crisis . The launchpad was a potential launchpad for a second mission to Mars .
 The second Mars probe was ordered to be removed from the pad to make way for a nuclear-tipped missile . The mission was ordered by the government to remove the second probe .
 The missile didn't reach the pad before the crisis was resolved, so the Mars probe was launched . However, the launch was delayed and the probe was sent to Mars .
 The crew of the Russian submarine had no idea that the depth charges were nonlethal . However, the crew of a Russian submarine did not know that they were dangerous .
 The captain prepared to fire a nuclear torpedo on a nearby American aircraft carrier . The captain was preparing to fire the torpedo on the nearby American carrier .
 Captain needed the approval of two senior officers before he could launch a nuclear torpedo . The captain needed the agreement of two more senior officers to launch the torpedo .
 Vasili Arkhipov, one of those officers, refused to authorize the attack . He says the attack was ordered by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 He convinced the captain to surface to see if war had actually begun . Eventually, he convinced him to surface and see if the war had begun .
 In doing so, he probably saved millions of people across the world from dying in the war that would have resulted if a U.S. carrier had been nuked .
 Not aware of the frantic United States and Soviet efforts to defuse the situation, Castro ensconced himself in a bunker on October 27 . Fearing an imminent American invasion, Castro feared an imminent invasion .
 Castro's involvement would have made the negotiations more complicated . Castro wanted things that Kennedy would not accept, such as a withdrawal from the U.S. base at Guantanamo .
 Castro also believed that it was better to be nuked by the United States than have U.S. troops invade Cuba . If war broke out, Castro said it would be better than being nuked than being invaded .
 In April 1961, the disastrous Bay of Pigs Invasion happened during the presidency of the recently inaugurated John F Kennedy . Eisenhower Predicted The Crisis in April 1961 .
 This epic disaster made the Soviets see Kennedy as an indecisive individual . It emboldened them to provoke the United States in ways they otherwise might not have . The Soviets saw Kennedy as indecisive .
 Kennedy asked Eisenhower for advice after the Bay of Pigs fiasco . Kennedy asked for advice from Eisenhower after the incident .
 Eisenhower asked Kennedy why he had not given air support to the Cuban exiles invading Cuba . Eisenhower also asked why he did not give air support during the invasion of Cuba . In turn, Kennedy asked Eisenhower why he hadn't given support .
 Kennedy was worried that the Soviets would respond in tit-for-tat fashion in Berlin . Kennedy responded that he was worried about the Soviets' response . The Soviets responded to Kennedy's concerns that they would respond to Berlin .
 Eisenhower told Kennedy that the Soviets would see the lack of air support as a weakness and would be "emboldened" to do something they would otherwise not do . The prediction came true less than two years later .
 The Soviets claimed that the base did not violate their agreement not to station offensive weapons in Cuba . But the Soviets said it did not breach their agreement that they did not .
 U.S. suspicions were sealed when soccer fields were constructed in Cuba . United States suspicions of Cuba were sealed by soccer fields being constructed .
 Henry Kissinger said: "Cubans play baseball, Russians play soccer" Henry Kissinger also said that Cuba plays baseball, Russia plays soccer .
 Sam is just a broke college student struggling to get by!""Jamie is the founder of Listverse.com .
 Jamie Frater is the founder of Listverse . Jamie founded Listverse due to an insatiable desire to share fascinating, obscure, and bizarre facts .
 He has been a guest speaker on numerous national radio and television stations . He is a five time published author .
 Kennedy didn't want to make the situation public, so he started the prescheduled nationwide tour . Kennedy didn’t want the situation to be made public . Kennedy: "I’m not going to make it public. It’s a good start to a national
 On October 27, 1962, American destroyer USS Beale was dropping practice depth charges to get a Russian B-59 submarine to surface . Watch this video on YouTube .
 After the Soviet presence was confirmed, the United States drew a line in the sand with stern warnings . The U.S. drew a . line in . The United States has been in touch with the Soviet Union since it was confirmed .