 Castro overcame imprisonment at the hands of dictator Fulgencio Batista, exile in Mexico and a disastrous start to his rebellion . The bearded revolutionary survived a crippling U.S. trade embargo as well as dozens of assassination plots . He died eight years after ill health forced him to formally
 For decades, he served as an inspiration and source of support to revolutionaries from Latin America to Africa . For decades he has been a source of inspiration and support for revolutionaries .
 His commitment to socialism was unwavering, though his power finally began to fade in mid-2006 . Raul handed over the presidency to Raul in 2008 .
 His defiant image lingered long after he gave up his trademark Cohiba cigars for health reasons . His tall frame grew stooped and his tall frame became stooped . He was known for his defiant image and defiant image .
 Castro visited East Berlin in June 1972 during his visit to the former German Democratic Republic . Castro autographs a book in a June 1972 picture in the former East Berlin city .
 Castro chats with Nobel laureate Gabriel Garcia Marquez during a gala dinner marking the Havana Festival celebrating Cuban cigars, on 4 March 2000 . Castro talks to Marquez at the gala .
 Castro visited Leuna, formerly the German Democratic Republic, in June 1972 . Castro reviewed troops during his visit to Leuna in this June 1972 picture .
 Castro was in the United States during his first visit to the United Nations after coming to power . Castro visited the U.N. during his visit to Washington .
 Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter and then Cuban President Fidel Castro listen to the Cuban national anthem at the baseball stadium “Latinoamericano in Havana in Havana on 14 May 2002 . Former United States president Jimmy Carter attended the stadium in Havana .
 Castro relaxes in a swimming pool during a visit to Romania on 28 May 1972 . Castro visited the country on a visit from 1972 to 1972 .
 Castro wearing a Viet Cong hat and checkered scarf, samples root fibers, the staple food of Vietnamese living in the underground tunnel network during the Vietnam War, in Vietnam in 1995 . Castro Castro was captured in 1995 in a photo taken in the tunnels .
 Castro is seen during a hunting trip in Romania in a May 1972 picture . Castro was seen hunting in Romania with a group of men . Castro is now a successful businessman in the world .
 Then Cuban Prime Minister Castro smokes a cigar during interviews with the press during a visit of United States senator Charles McGovern in Havana in May 1975 . Castro was then prime minister of Cuba .
 Castro plays golf at the Colinas de Villa real club in Havana, Cuba . Castro has been in Havana for more than a decade .
 Then Cuban president Castro laughs during the year-end session of the Cuban parliament in Havana in Havana, Cuba in 2005 . Castro was then president of Cuba .
 “Socialism or death"" remained Castro’s rallying cry even as Western-style democracy swept the globe and other communist regimes embraced capitalism . The island of 11 million people is economically crippled by Castro's Marxist regime .
 Washington and Havana announced they would move to restore diplomatic ties for the first time since 1961 . Castro survived long enough to see Raul Castro negotiate an opening with President Obama in December .
 He cautiously blessed the historic deal with his lifelong enemy in a letter published after a month-long silence . The letter was published in the wake of a month's silence .
 Fidel Castro Ruz was born 13 August 1926, in eastern Cuba’s sugar country . His Spanish immigrant father worked first recruiting labour for United States sugar companies and later built up a prosperous plantation of his own .
 His life as a rebel began in 1953 with a reckless attack on the Moncada military barracks in the eastern city of Santiago . He was one of the most prominent members of the rebel movement .
 Most of his comrades were killed and Fidel and his brother Raul went to prison . Fidel and Raul were both imprisoned . Most of the comrades died and Fidel was killed .
 Castro fled to Mexico and organized a rebel band that returned in 1956, sailing across the Gulf of Mexico to Cuba on a yacht named Granma . He was freed under a pardon, and returned to Cuba in 1956 . Castro was freed from prison in 1961 .
 He rallied support in Cuba’s eastern Sierra Maestra mountains . After losing most of his group in a bungled landing, he rallied support . He has been in Cuba for more than a decade .
 Three years later, tens of thousands spilled into the streets of Havana to celebrate Batista's downfall and catch a glimpse of Castro as his rebel caravan arrived in the capital .
 The U.S. was among the first to formally recognize Castro's government . Castro's early assurances he merely wanted to restore democracy, not install socialism, he says .
 Castro’s daughter Alina Fernandez Revuelta and his younger sister Juana are among those who fled . Hundreds of thousands of Cubans fled, including Castro's daughter and sister .
 Millions in Cuba and across Latin America saw it as an example of how the seemingly arrogant Yankees could be defied . Still, the revolution thrilled millions of Cubans .
 Many on the island were happy to see the seizure of property of the landed class, the expulsion of American gangsters and the closure of their casinos .
 As Castro moved into the Soviet bloc, Washington began working to oust him . U.S. cut United States purchases of sugar, the island’s economic mainstay .
 The American government imposed a trade embargo, banning virtually all U.S. exports to the island except food and medicine, and it severed diplomatic ties on 3 January 1961 . The embargo was imposed by the American government .
 About 1,400 Cuban exiles stormed the beach at the Bay of Pigs on Cuba’s south coast . Castro declared his revolution to be socialist on 16 April of that year . The next day, the next day he declared his socialist revolution .
 The debacle forced the U.S. to give up on the idea of invading Cuba, but that didn’t stop Washington and Castro’s exiled enemies from trying to do him in .
 The biggest crisis of the Cold War between Washington and Moscow exploded in 1962 . President Kennedy announced there were Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba and imposed a naval blockade of the island .
 After a tense week of diplomacy, Soviet leader Nikita Krushchev removed them . Humankind held its breath as they held their breath . The Soviets removed them from the world .
 Neighbourhood “revolutionary defence committees"" kept an eye on everyone . Neighbours kept a watchful eye on each other in the neighbourhood .
 Castro exported revolution to Latin American countries in the 1960s . He dispatched Cuban troops to Africa to fight Western-backed regimes in the 1970s . Castro sent troops to African nations in the 1980s to fight West-backed governments .
 The collapse of the Soviet bloc ended billions in preferential trade and subsidies for Cuba, sending its economy into a tailspin . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the collapse of its Soviet bloc .
 Castro briefly experimented with an opening to foreign capitalists and limited private enterprise . Castro briefly tried to open the doors to foreign investors in Cuba . Castro's government has been criticized for its policies .
 As the end of the Cold War eased global tensions, many Latin American and European countries re-established relations with Cuba . Cuba is one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 In January 1998, Pope John Paul II visited a nation that had been officially atheist until the early 1990s . The Pope's visit was the first time he had visited the atheist nation .
 Castro steadily reasserted government control, stifling much of the limited free enterprise tolerated during harder times . Aided by a tourism boom, the economy slowly recovered and Castro reasserts government control .
 As flamboyant as he was in public, Castro tried to lead a discreet private life . Castro was known for his love of the art of art and fashion .
 He and his first wife, Mirta Diaz Balart, had one son before divorcing in 1956 .
 Castro had a relationship with Dalia Soto del Valle for more than four decades . Castro was married to Soto de Valle, who died in 2009 .
 The couple had five sons together and were said to have married quietly in 1980 . They had five children together .
 By the time Castro resigned 49 years after his triumphant arrival in Havana, he was the world’s longest ruling head of government, aside from monarchs . He was the leader of Cuba, Cuba's longest-serving government .
 In retirement, Castro voiced unwavering support as Raul slowly but deliberately enacted sweeping changes to the Marxist system he had built . Castro voiced his support for Raul in his retirement .
 His longevity allowed the younger brother to consolidate control, perhaps lengthening the revolution well past both men’s lives . The younger brother was able to take control of the country .
 In February 2013, Raul announced that he would retire as president in 2018 . He named newly mint-minted Vice President Miguel Diaz-Canel as his successor .
 U.S. President Barack Obama has been elected to the presidency of the United States in 2008 . He has been in office in Washington, D.C., since 2001 .