 The United States finally decided to first blockade rather than immediately attack Cuba to prevent the Soviet Union from finishing installation of missiles that could reach the continental United States . The U.S. finally decided not to attack Cuba rather than attack Cuba .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy, Vol., 1961-1964, is a new publication . This article introduces the little-known story of the battles between the “hawks” and “doves” in the Kennedy Administration .
 When President John F Kennedy finally announced the naval blockade of Cuba and the reasons for it on national television, Americans huddled together, practiced nuclear drills, and prayed for some peaceful solution .
 Only decades later did the full story of brinkmanship, bravado and brilliance come out about what really happened during those two weeks .
 This accounting of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during this tumultuous period in the history of American foreign affairs goes beyond the normal third party historian’s post mortem . The author was able to meet with several members of the joint chiefs in the 1970s to add more of their personal insights
 United States Marine Corps General David Shoup, U.S. Army General Earle Wheeler, President Curtis LeMay, President Kennedy, President John Kennedy, General Maxwell Taylor and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . United States Navy Admiral George Anderson .
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston . What results is an interesting amalgam of history and a peek into the tensions between military joint chiefs and the civilians .
 The old-school Joint Chiefs were concerned about the new approach to foreign policy being espoused by the Kennedy administration . Tensions grew as tensions grew .
 In April 1962, Nikita Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba to double the Soviet strategic arsenal . The missiles would provide a real deterrent to a potential U.S. attack against the Soviet Union .
 Fidel Castro felt a second attack by the U.S. on Cuba was inevitable, so he agreed to host the missiles as protection . The failed Bay of Pigs invasion the previous year had led to a second invasion of Cuba .
 Initial U.S. intelligence estimates of possible United States targets within range of the nuclear-capable Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballisticmissiles found by the U.2 spy plane surveillance photographs if they were launched .
 National Photographic Intelligence Center confirms U-2 spy plane flight proved Soviet missiles were in place in Cuba . Ballistic missiles capable of hitting Atlanta, the Midwest, Washington, DC, and even Los Angeles and Seattle were indeed in place .
 President Kennedy and Secretary McNamara assembled the Executive Committee of the National Security Council call “ExComm” as a task force . ExComm would debate the United States’ options to deter the Soviets from nuclear escalation .
 Earlier in September 1962, after cloud-obscured U-2 photos had hinted at Soviet build-up in Cuba, the Joint Strategic Survey Council had submitted a recommendation for blockading rather than invading Cuba . A blockade would be less dramatic, require smaller resources, cause fewer casualties,
 The primary debate among the military commanders of the Joint Chiefs was over whether to carry out an all-inclusive attack against Soviet and Cuban forces on the island or a surgical strike confined to just attacking the missiles themselves, the nuclear storage sites .
 President Kennedy and McNamara thought that an all-inclusive attack would inevitably lead to invasion of Cuba, and then possible counter-attacks elsewhere by the Soviets or escalation to all-out war .
 Joint Chiefs and combatant commanders felt “so strongly about the dangers inherent in the limited strike that they would prefer taking no military action” General Taylor reported that the Joint Chiefs would prefer a limited strike .
 Joint Chiefs opposed to only attacking the medium-range ballistic missiles themselves . Not attacking the enemy’s planes would expose the continental U.S. and Puerto Rico to air attack .
 Lyndon B Johnson, Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson and CIA Dir. Douglas Dillon . William C Foster; William F. Foster; Douglas Dillon; . Treasury Douglas Dillon: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson; Ambassador L. Llewyn Thompson; . Ambassador William F Foster; CIA
 President John F Kennedy, Sec. John McCone, Secretary of State George Ball and Sec. George Ball were at the scene of the assassination . President Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 .
 Even more fascinating was the story of the war gaming techniques used . Photo by Cecil Stoughton, JFK Library ST-A26-18-62 The Blues vs. the Reds .
 The ExComm task force split into two groups that constantly exchanged position papers and critiqued each other’s work . To quickly develop two alternative scenarios for the President, the task force developed two alternatives to the President's decision .
 The “Blues’s” were to prepare the scenario for a surprise air strike . General Maxwell Taylor, Robert Kennedy, Douglas Dillon, Director McCone, Dean Acheson, and McGeorge Bundy were among the "Blues"
 The “Reds,” drafting the blockade option, included Chief of United States Naval Operations Adm. Joe Biden . The ‘Reds’ drafted the blockade .
 George Anderson, Marine Corps Commandant David Shoup, Secretary Rusk, Deputy Secretary Gilpatric, and Theodore Sorensen. George Anderson . George Anderson was George Shoup's Secretary of State .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff along with General Taylor are shown on the “Hawks” Strike side of his list on the right . Note that the ‘Chiefs” meaning the Joint Chiefs . of Staff are shown .
 In less than two days, two complete scenarios were prepared and presented to President Kennedy on October 20, with competing input coming from the Pentagon and the State Department .
 To find out exactly what happened and how the drama played out behind the scenes, pick up a copy of this fascinating book .
 Government publications about Cuba are published by the U.S. government . Find out more about Cuba's government publications about the country .