 Assia, Fouzia, Sabah, Rhadia and Nedjwa and my brothers : Abdelghani, Abdelsalam and Hamza . Assia . and Fouziia .
 I want to say thank you to my supervisor, Mrs Sehili for her help and also to Mrs Attmani. I want you to thank you for your help . I want the world to know what I need to do to get my job done .
 The Cold War is considered as an important aspect of both the history and foreign policy of the U.S. It is considered a significant aspect of the history of the United States .
 The Eastern Bloc is used to refer to the intense competition which occurred between the Communist countries or the Western Bloc, which was led by the United States . It is a term which is used in reference to the competition between Communist countries and the Western countries .
 It began at the end of the Second World War and lasted until the 1980’s . It began in the 1950s and 1980s .
 The confrontation took place in October 1962 between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and Cuba on the other hand . It is the confrontation which took place between the United States and the Soviets .
 It is among the most serious crises which happened during the Cold War, that’s why it is of great importance . The crisis is of 'great importance' to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Americans have tried to interfere with the island since the Nineteenth Century . The Americans have several times tried to take control of the island .
 The U.S. became an enemy to the Soviet Union and vice versa in 1945 . In the twentieth century and in 1945, the United States was an enemy of the Soviet Russia . The United States became an ally of the USSR and vice vice versa .
 Cold War began with the end of the Second World War and lasted until 1989 . Cold War included many crises, including many crises .
 The U.S. got into trouble with Cuba when Fidel Castro became the Prime Minister of the island . Fidel Castro was one of the primary leaders of the Cuban Revolution, leading the revolution .
 The U.S. saw that their country was in jeopardy when the Soviets constructed missile bases in Cuba . The Americans saw their country in jeopardy in the wake of the missile bases .
 The U.S. tried to contain the spread of Communism in Cuba, especially because it is very close to the United States. The United States tried to stop the spread in Cuba .
 This leads to the idea that the U.S. as usual claimed rights which 1 normally it should not have . The United States as usual has rights which normally it shouldn't have, says the author .
 The relationship between Cuba and the U.S. went from the Eighteenth Century to the mid half of the Twentieth century . The first one starts with explaining the nature of the relationship before the Cold War .
 I have mentioned some doctrines and events which are crucial to the understanding of the U.S. attitude towards Cuba and Latin America as a whole . I have also mentioned some doctrine and events that are crucial .
 I used also online articles, journals and magazines, some of which are descriptive and the others are argumentative . I used some of these articles to make my point .
 U.S. policymakers did not colonize all Latin American nations officially, they strove to get control of them by any means . The United States tried to take control of Latin America by means .
 They capitalized on the bad circumstances from which those countries have suffered, turned them to their interests . The U.S. has taken advantage of the situation in the past to gain power .
 Cuba is a good example of the relationship between the U.S. and Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba's relationship with the United States helped define its relationship with Cuba, he says .
 The relationship between the U.S. and Cuba is deeply rooted because each of them dealt with the other even before it got its independence . The Spanish Ame rican War of 1898 was the result of the Spanish invasion of Cuba in 1898 .
 In the early Eighteenth Century, the North American mainland and Cuba, which was at that time a Spanish colony, began to make illegal commercial contracts in order to avoid paying colonial taxes . The contracts were made to avoid colonial taxes in the early Seventeen Century .
 Cuba became approximately a prosperous area in the region . Cuba became a center of tobacco and sugar production . Cuba is now a center in the area and a center .
 Cuban merchants travelled to North American ports to establish trade contracts . During this period, Cuban merchants established trade contracts that lasted for many years .
 The British occupation of Havana in 1762 opened the trade with the British colonies in North America . Havana was the first city to be occupied by the British in Cuba . The occupation opened trade between the British and American colonies .
 Because of the American Revolution in 1776, Spain opened 3 Cuban ports to North American commerce officially in November of the same year . The island became gradually dependent on that trade and vice versa .
 From the beginning of the dissolution of the Spanish power in America, American statesmen began to look at Cuba as a possible new state . Cuba was a possible state of Cuba in the 1930s .
 There were many reasons which made it desirable like its nearness, fertility, mineral wealth and command of the Gulf of Mexico . There were also many reasons why it was desirable .
 The annexation of Louisiana in 1803 and Florida in 1819 reinforced these reasons and suggested further extentions of territory at the expense of Spain .
 The Secretary of State, John Quincy Adams, described in a letter to the United States Minister to Spain Hugh Nelson the probability of United States annexation of Cuba in the following fifty years stressing that it would not be easy because of the difficulties which existed .
 During the first two decades of the Nineteenth century, many revolutions took place in Spain’s South American colonies, which was not the case for Cuba . Cuba's revolution was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 President Monroe’s biographer, Ammon, wrote, ""the all-absorbing problem in foreign affairs during Monroe's presidency was that created by Spain crumbling American empire"
 Nearly all his major decisions either centered on this issue or had to be closely correlated with the questions it raised . Nearly all of Obama's major decisions have to be related to the issue .
 One aspect of the problem was the series of revolutions in Latin America . One of the problems is that Latin America has had a long history of revolutions .
 Jefferson's words were seen in Jefferson’s words as ""another example of man rising in his might and bursting the chains of his oppressor.”
 The United States did not intervene militarily, but it preferred to be“the beacon on the hill"", functioning as a guide for those who struggled in Latin America .
 The majority of Americans did not believe that the people in Latin America could follow this beacon. However, the majority of those who did believe that they could follow it .
 Many American commentators felt that the people of Latin America whom they sympathized with were uncapable to rule themselves if they won . As a result, many American commentators thought that the Latin American people were not capable of ruling themselves . The result of the result was that many Americans sympathized
 John Quincy Adams used similar reasons to support his argument for his delay to recognize the new states, at least until the Florida matter was settled . Adams used the same reasons to argue for his decision to delay recognition of the states .
 Spain ceded Florida to the United States, the time came for Latin America . The time came to Latin America for the first time in the region .
 James Monroe declared an end to the New World colonization in his seventh annual state of the Union Address message to Congress . Monroe warned foreign powers that any intervention in the Western Hemisphere would be considered as a threat to the United States .
 The Monroe Doctrine asserted that the U.S. would not interfere with existing European colonies nor in the internal affairs of European countries . In addition, the United States expected that the latter would do the same .
 The Roosevelt Corollary was written in 1904 to assert the right of the U.S. to intervene in Latin American lands if they suffered from economic or political trouble . It created a sphere of influence that would grow stronger with the addition of the Roosevelt .
 The Monroe Doctrine was neglected in the international arena because of the U.S. lack of a credible navy and army at that time . Its influence would appear later in the world .
 The Monroe Doctrine was of 6 great importance because it became a defining moment in the foreign policy of the U.S. It was one of its influential tenets . The U.N. State Department's Monroe Doctrine is one of the most influential tenets of its policy .
 It set the first ideological justification for any direct or indirect U.S. intervention in the area . It firmly established an official American tutorship over Latin America. It set an ideological justification .
 The U.S. was eager to annex Cuba in 1845 . It was the first time the United States had been able to take control of the island .
 Between 1848-1850, several attempts were made to produce a revolution in Cuba . Several expeditions were provided in the U.S. to help this movement .
 Zachary Taylor interfered, but European countries did not side with him . The President of the United States interfered with his actions . European countries were not involved in the crisis .
 English and French ambassadors to the United States joined to ask the U.S. government to unite with them in making a tripartite guaranty of Cuba to Spain . This was clear when the English, French and Spanish ambassadors asked for a united guarantee .
 On December 1, 1852 Secretary Everett on behalf of President Millard Fillmore refused to provide the guaranty . Secretary Everett refused to give President Fillmore a guarantee .
 The American vessels were vulnerable to 7 Spain’s arbitrary annoyances and seizures . The U.S. ships are vulnerable to Spain's arbitrary annoyanceances .
 The Black Warrior, a U.S. ship seized in Havana in March, 1854, was the first ship seized by the United States in Cuba . The ship was seized in 1854 .
 Spanish officials in Cuba argued that the ship violated custom regulations and fined the owners 6,000 dollars . Unlike Congress which saw it as a violation, the Spanish officials said it was a violation .
 Spain released the ship, but the Pierce administration’s concern for Cuba remained . The Pierce administration was concerned about Cuba's plight .
 After Soulé’s failure, Secretary of State, William L Marcy, directed James Buchanan, minister to Great Britain, and John Y.Mason to discuss the issue at Ostend, Belgium, where they assembled on October 8, 1854 .
 The document was completed and published in Aixla – Chappelle, in Prussia, on the 18th of October .
 The Little War which was led by Calixto Garcia was as unsuccessful as the first one . It was the first attempt to take over the Spanish capital . The war was unsuccessful .
 Spain cancelled a trade pact between Cuba and the U.S. in 1894 . In 1894 Spain cancelled the trade pact with the United States .
 The imposition of more taxes and trade restrictions pushed the Cubans in 1895 to launch the Cuban War of Independence . The war led the United States to the imperialist age with the acquisition of the Phillipines, Purto Rico and Guam .
 The war was inspired by José 9 Marti, who was a poet, journalist and ideological spokesman of the revolution . The war is inspired by the poet and journalist who was an ideological spokesman .
 He employed sophisticated guerrilla tactics under the leadership of Maximo Gomez, who used “ scorched – earth” policy3 , and Antonio Maceo. Maceo .
 In parallel with these events and during the same year, there was a problem between the United kingdom and Venezuela . The United Kingdom and Venezuela were at the center of the crisis .
 The conflict led the President Grover Cleveland to cite the Monroe Doctrine and threaten the British that the Americans would interefere if the British failed in solving their problem with Venezuela .
 The Americans reminded the European powers that the U.S.’ control over the Western Hemisphere is not just theory or words written in documents, but it is rather practical . This means that the Americans reminded them that the . United States’ . control over . the . Western Hemisphere
 The America ns also confirmed that the United States’ order should be implemented to the Latin Americans and should limit any interference in the continent . Through this proclamation, the America ns said that the U.S. should not interfere in Latin America .
 In 1897, Spain recalled Weyler and proposed partial autonomy to the Cubans . Cuba leaders refused it and continued their call for complete independence .
 The battleship Maine was sent to Havana in 1898 to protect the United States citizens and property . In January of 1898, the Maine battleship was deployed to Cuba .
 After a hot debate, the Congress approved a joint resolution in which support was given to McKinley’s request . McKinley's request was supported by the Congress, but it was ultimately rejected .
 Congress promised that the U.S. would not annex the island . Although there was no evident support to recognize Cuba as a republic, Congress promised not to annex Cuba .
 This seems clearly through the fourth and last part of the joint resolution, which is known as Teller Amendment . This seems to be the case, according to Teller .
 On April 19, 1898, Congress passed the amendment, 42 to 35, and the House of Representatives agreed 31 to 6 .
 President Mckinley signed the joint resolution on April 20, 12 1898 . The ultimatum was sent to Spain . The resolution was signed by the President of the United States .
 The Spanish American War was brief because the Spanish forces were inferior compared to the American forces . John Hay called it a “splendid little war” as it was called .
 On May 1, 1898, the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay in the Philippines was destroyed by the United States navy under the command of commodore George Dewey . The U.S. Navy destroyed the fleet in May 1 .
 On July 3, the United States troops began a battle for the city of Santiago in Cuba . U.S. troops began the battle for Santiago on July 3 .
 When Spanish fleet was sunk on July 3, and Santiago was captured on July 11, the war was effectively over . Santiago captured in July 11 .
 The armistice was signed on August 12, ended the hostilities and directed that a peace conference would be held in Paris by October . Armistice ended hostilities, directed that the peace conference was held by Paris .
 Spain relinquished Porto Rico and Guam and ceded the Philipines respectively to the U.S. According to Articles II and III of the treaty, the treaty was signed in 1877 .
 The Spanish -American War ended Spain’s colonial rule in the Western Hemisphere . It also made the United States for the first time in its history a world power .
 It was considered as a base on which the orthodox or traditional interpretation of the U.S. foreign policy was established . It is also important because it was considered a base for the traditional or traditional interpretations of foreign policy . It was also considered important because of its importance to the United States
 In 1899 and after the collapse of the Spanish regime in Cuba, the United States adopted a formal policy of occupation . Members of the McKinley administration were afraid of new revolutionary governments in Cuba .
 American Secretary of war Elihu Root formulated in 1901 an amendment to the Army Appropriations Act . Senator Orville H Platt presented the amendment in the U.S. Senate .
 The Cuban Assembly was rejected at the beginning by the Cuban Assembly . It was accepted later by a vote of 16 to 11 with four absentions and integera ted into the Cuban Constitution .
 Article II stated that Cuba would not contract any foreign debt without guarantees that the interest could be served from ordinary revenues . Article II said that Cuba wouldn't contract foreign debt if it was guaranteed that it could serve the interest from ordinary revenue . Cuba's Article II also said that it would not
 Platt amendment gave Cuba a limited right to conduct its own affairs and debt policies . On the other it gave the U.S. the right to intervene in Cuban affairs .
 After the acceptance of the amendment, the United States ratified a tariff pact that gave preference to 14 Cuban sugar in the U.S. market and protection to select United States products in Cuban market .
 Platt amendment caused a great opposition both inside and outside of the United States . The Platt Amendment was passed by Congress in 1903 .
 The United States anti imperialists used their arguments against foreign involvement . Many Cubans complained that the U.S. was simply a subst itute for the Spanish oppressor .
 Secretary of War Root tried to establish a difference between “ interventionism” and “ interference” with the island’s domestic affairs . Besides, he said that interventionism is not interventionism .
 He argued that the U.S. intervention would occur only to protect the government of Cuba and preserve the island’s independence . He said that the United States would not interfere in the country's internal matters .
 The U.S. signed the Peciprocity Treaty with Cuba which tightened the relationship between the mentioned countries by lowering duties on the island’s exports to America . During the same year, the U.K. signed a treaty with Cuba to lower duties on its exports
 Roosevelt Corollary asserted the right and obligation of the United States to stabilize the economic and political affairs of small States in the Caribbean and Central America if they were unable to pay their international debts, like what happened in Venezuela in 1902 .
 The purpose behind the Corollary was to avoid European intervention in the Western Hemisphere . It was designed to avoid the intervention of the Western hemisphere .
 Cuba’s first president wanted to keep power in the 19051906 elections knowing that he was to a very great exte nt submissive to United States influence . This happened when the Liberals opposed Estrada Palma .
 The rebellion which broke out led to a second U.S. 16 occupation in September 1906 . The rebellion led to the second occupation of the United States .
 Estrada Palma resigned as Secretary of War, William Howard Taft, failed to find a solution to the problem . Taft's successor, Estrado Palma, resigned from the post .
 Charles Magoon was made temporary governor of the United States . The U.S. government made him temporary governor . Magoon is a former governor of Texas .
 Magoon gave the government to the Liberal President, José Miguel Gomez, in January 1909 . A committee, composed of many advisers, revised electoral procedures .
 U.S. officials argued that the Roosevelt Corollary was beneficial to Latin America, but it was rather harmful . U.N. officials continued to argue that it was beneficial for Latin America .
 Roosevelt Corollary and Monroe Doctrine were flagrant examples of U.S. imperialism in the region, an imperialism that would last until the Twentieth Century . That is so because of the Monroe Doctrine .
 Critics say small countries would benefit economically from the Roosevelt Corollary . The critics are among the proponents who said that the small countries .
 Critics also thought that financial stability would lead to the political one . Financial stability would also lead to political stability, they said .
 Roosevelt Corollary announced America’s intention to replace the European empires in the Western Hemisphere . In other words, if the Monroe Doctrine forbade European empires to enter the . Western Hemisphere, the Roosevelt Corollary said .
 Roosevelt’s Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine is Big Stick Diplomacy, which in turn is a form of control or hegemony . Many people described Theodore Roosevelt's Corollaries as Big Sticks Diplomacy . The Monroe Doctrine was described as Big Stick diplomacy .
 The first use of the phrase by Roosevelt was on September 2, 1901 in a speech at the Minnesota State Fair in which he described his approach to foreign policy .
 In the Big Stick Diplomacy or Ideology, there is the idea of negotiating peacefully while at the same time threatening with the“big stick ”or the military forces . Realpolitik is a theory in which a particular state uses its power in a coercive manner to oppress another
 After the end of the second presidential term of Theodore Roosevelt in 1909, the Americans tried to further their aims in Latin America, including,of course, Cuba . Cuba .
 William Howard Taft wanted to reach the same goal of his predecessor but with different means . Roosevelt’s successor wanted to achieve the same goals as his predecessor . Taft was the President of the United States in the 1920s .
 They saw that they could dominate Latin American business by using economic power instead of military power . The U.S. government says it could use economic power to dominate Latin America business .
 President Taft also shared the view held by Knox that the goal of diplomacy should be to create stability abroad which in turn would promote American commercial interests . Taft's view was that stability abroad should be created to promote American interests .
 Knox felt diplomacy was meant to use private capital to further U.S. interests outside its boundaries . Knox felt that diplomacy should be used to further United States interests outside the borders .
 Diplomacy allowed the U.S. to gain financially from Cuba and other countries . It also prevented other foreign countries from doing the same thing . Diplomacy prevented other nations from doing same .
 Like in Honduras, Nicaragua, Coloumbia and Haiti, Dollar Diplomacy was evident also in extensive U.S. interventions in Cuba . Like in Nicaragua and Nicaragua, it was also evident in Haiti and Haiti .
 There was graft, corruption, maladministration, financial irresponsibility and social carelessness, especially toward Afro – Cubans . This happened during the Gomez administration in which there was graft and corruption .
 They felt that it was too imperialistic for the U.S. to conduct fore ign affairs without taking into consideration Latin American interests . They felt also that the United States .
 They opposed expenses which were used to raise armies that would help Latin American countries . In addition , they opposed the expenses which would help . Latin American . countries .
 Through the Good Neighbour policy, the Americans wanted to abandon the use of military intervention as a means for solving the internal problems of Latin American countries .
 PanAmericanism includes support for strong local leaders, training 20 of national guards, economic and cultural penetration, export– import bank loans, financial supervision and political subversion . The latter includes the establishment of PanAmism6 , support for local leaders .
 Roosevelt was ambivalent on Cuba and the Good Neighbour Policy . Roosevelt was an ambivalent .
 He ordered 29 warships to Cuba when the internal confrontations between the government of Gerardo Machado and the political opposition led to a military overthrow by Cuban rebels in 1933 . On the one hand, he ordered 29 ships to Cuba .
 Cuba is considered as one of the most important and closest countries to the United States in the Western Hemisphere . It is crystal clear that the U.S. had a strong relationship with Cuba, President Obama said .
 Under the Monroe Doctrine no foreign power could dare to recolonize the island . They promised that they would not annex Cuba in the Teller Amendment . They knew that under the Monroe doctrine no foreign . power could . dare to . recolonise the island.
 Platt amendment gave Americans the right to intervene in the internal affairs of the country . The amendment was passed after the Spanish – American War ended in 1918 .
 Cubans were given formal independence in 1902 . So, they maintained control over the island before they gave it formal independence .
 In 1904, President Theodore Roosevelt introduced his Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, which is considered as a means for applying the President’s Big Stick Diplomacy . Roosevelt introduced it in 1904 .
 In the Corollary, he stated that the United States had the right and the 21 duty to intervene in Latin American countries whenever the latter misconducted their affairs . Like what happened in Cuba between 19061909, he said that the U.S. should intervene .
 After Roosevelt, Taft brought the Dollar Diplomacy which focused on achieving economic prosperity by reinforcing American investments in Latin A merica, including Cuba . Taft also brought the dollar Diplomacy to America .
 Franklin D Roosevelt introduced a new policy known as the Good Neighbour policy . Roosevelt introduced the policy to encourage neighbours to live together .
 Although he cancelled the Platt amendment in 1934, he sent the American army to Cuba a year earlier . He sent the U.S. Army to Cuba, a year before, in order to send troops there .
 Many American diplomatic historians, like Dexter Perkins, defended this kind of interpretation . They said that U.S. foreign policy was characterized by discontinuity .
 The Spanish American War of 1898 changed the status of the United States and made it a world power . They argued that the U.S. was more or less isolationist before the war .
 This interpretation helped to make the American public think that the U.S. foreign policy was isolationist until the Second World War . The interpretation of this interpretation helped make the public think of the United States isolationist .
 In Germany, Realpolitik is used to describe modest or realistic politics in opposition to unrealistic one . In the United States, it is often similar to power politics . In Germany it's used to say 'modest' or 'realpolitik' in contrast to 'unrealistic
 U.S. and Soviet Union fought in World War II immediately after the end of the Second World War . The conflict took place between the United States and the Soviet Union shortly after the war's end .
 After the end of the Second World War in 1945, the U.S. along with the Soviet Union emerged as the only two superpowers of the world . The Cold War and Cuba in the 1950’s were the only superpowers in the world, with the United States and
 Although they were allied in their fighting against the Axis powers during the war, this was no longer the case when the war was over . The two countries were no longer allied in the war .
 This was clear especially in the Yalta and Potsdam Co nferences in which they did not agree about the future development of Germany and Eastern Europe . The two sides were clear in which the future of the region was unclear .
 The post – 1945 struggle which occurred between the two countries is called the Cold War . The Cold War is the result of a post-war struggle between Russia and the U.S.
 Many Americans felt that the security of their country was vulnerable to the Soviet Union’s attempt to spread everywhere, beginning with the creation of the Eastern Bloc . Many Americans believed the security in their homeland was vulnerable .
 In 1946, the United States State Department asked the Russians why they opposed the creation of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . George F Kennan, a diplomat and historian, answered the question at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow .
 Soviet power, unlike that of Hitlerite Germany, is neither schematic nor adventuristic, he said . He added that Soviet power is not schematic or adventuristic .
 "Impervious to logic of reason, and it is highly sensitive to logic, force of force," says author . "It is a powerful force that has no sense of reason and no logic of logic," he says .
 Kennan submitted a report called ‘the sources of Soviet Conduct’ to Defence Secretary, James Forrestal . Kennan sent the report to Forrestal in January 1947 . The report was published in 1947 by the Foreign Office .
 The Cold War policy of Containment was tested 90 miles from the Florida coast on the island of Cuba in 1962 .
 To contain Communism, the United States began to help the European countries which were considered as the most vulnerable nations to the threat of Communism . The U.S. helped the countries considered as as the least vulnerable nations in the world .
 Truman Doctrine¹ and the Marshall Plan¹ were created to accomplish this goal . Marshall Plan² was created to help the U.S. achieve the objectives of the Truman Doctrine .
 The American perception of the people of Latin America in the 1950’s was not different from that of their ancestors . The American view of the Latin American people in 1950s was similar to that of the 1950s .
 They saw that the economic difficulties of the region were caused by their incompetence and inefficiency, they said . They said they saw that they were causing the region's economic difficulties . The region was suffering from 'incompetence and incompetence'
 From 1952 to 1959, Cuba was ruled by Fulgencio Batista . Batista's rise led to an era of cooperation between the governments of Cuba and the United States .
 Batista’s second term began with a military coup, which was planned in Florida . Batista was elected to a second term of his second term .
 The United States President, Harry S Truman, quickly recognized Batista’s return to rule and provided him with military and economic aid . The U.S. President of the Cuban Republic, Fidel Castro, was assassinated in 1953 .
 During his presidency, the United States dominated nearly all the Cuban economy . There was an increase in the American corporations. The U.S. dominated most of the Cuban economies .
 Havavna became a popular shelter for American organized crime figures . This happened in a time when there was widespread corruption especially in Havavne . Havavn was a place for organized crime in the country .
 Batista had always leaned toward the United States during his second term as president . The relationship between the U.S. and Cuba was described as "mutmutualist"
 It was regrettable like all south Americans, that he was known – although I had no absolute knowledge of it to be getting a cut, I think is the word for it, in almost all the, things that were done . It's regrettable that all south American, like all
 They owned 75% of the agrarian land, 90% of essential services and 40% of sugar production . They owned about 75 % of the land . They also owned 90 % of  essential services .
 The bad economic conditions were not the only factors which led to Batista’s fall . Batista's fall was the result of a series of corruption scandals .
 Fidel Castro was a legislative candidate for the elections of 1952 . However, Batista overthrew the government of President Carlos Prio Socarras and cancelled the elections .
 Castro attempted many times to remove Batista’s new dictatorship, but he failed . Castro attempted to remove the new dictatorship many times but failed .
 Because of the political amnesty of 1955, Castro and his brother Raul were released . Castro and Raul Castro and Castro were released from prison in 1955 . Castro's brother Fidel Castro was also released from jail .
 Castro organized the Cuban exiles into a revo lutionary group called the 26th of July Movement . Their release pushed them to continue their campaign against the Batista regime in Mexico, in which Castro, organized the group .
 All of them were captured except for Castro, Raul, Ernesto Che Guevara and nine men who went to the Sierra Maestra of southwestern Oriente province to continue their guerrilla warfare .
 In the next two years, they attracted hundreds of Cuban volunteers . They won several battles against Batista’s demoralized armed forces . They eventually advanced westward .
 The expected Cuban president, Manuel Urrutia Lleo urged the U.S. to stop its sale of arms to Batista . The expected president is expected to take office .
 In march 1958, the United States prevented the sale of weapons to Batista’s government . The U.S. stopped selling weapons to the Batista government .
 Many Cuban military commanders sympathized with the rebellion or joined it . In addition, many Cuban military leaders sympathised with the rebels .
 Earl T Smith, U.S. Ambassador to Cuba, resigned his post . He was replaced by Philip Bonsal .
 The United States became angry about Cuba’s agrarian reforms and especially about the nationalizations of United States owned industries . The U.S. government became angry at the reforms in Cuba .
 Castro and a delegation of representatives visited the United States as guests of the Press Club . Between April 15 and 26th , 1959, Castro visited the U.S. as guests .
 During his visit, he met with Vice President Richard Nixon and outlined his reform plans for Cuba . He also outlined his plans for Cuban reform .
 The United States began to impose gradual trade restrictions on the island . After the meeting, the U.S. imposed gradual restrictions on trade .
 As it was used to be, Cuba emerged once again as a major issue in U.S. foreign policy . Cuba emerged again as an issue not only in American foreign policy but also in American political debate .
 Richard Nixon and John F Kennedy faced off in the 1960 presidential election . Richard Nixon was the Republican candidate, Richard Nixon, and the Democratic candidate, John F. Kennedy . Nixon was elected president of the United States in 1964 .
 Both candidates competed with each other in warning the U.S. of the danger caused by the new government in 29 Cuba .
 The debate between the two candidates showed that the American public was not certain in its attitude towards Fidel Castro . The debate was the first of its kind in the U.S.
 State intervention and nationalization continued, trade restrictions on Cuba increased . Trade restrictions were increased in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Lack of trust was deepened by Castro’s trade agreement with the Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan in February 1960 . Castro signed the deal with Mikoyans in February 1961 .
 After four months, Castro nationalized American oil refineries, which refused to process Soviet petroleum . Castro nationalizes American refineries after four months .
 Eisenhower stopped to buy Cuban sugar and refused to supply its former trading partner with oil which affected the island’s economy negatively . Eisenhower stopped buying sugar from Cuba and stopped buying oil from Cuba .
 In March 1960, tensions increased when the French ship La Coubre exploded in Havana harbor and resulted in the killing of over 75 people . Over 75 people were killed in the explosion in March 1960 .
 Fidel Castro blamed the United States and compared the incident to that of Maine . Fidel Castro said the incident was similar to the incident in Maine .
 In the same month, President Eizenhower authorized the Central Intelligency Agency to organize, train and equip Cuban refugees as a guerrilla force to overthrow Castro . The agency was authorized to organize and train Cuban refugees .
 The preparations continued and culminated in the Bay of Pigs Invasion during Kennedy’s presidency . The invasion took place during the 1960s and 1961 .
 Whenever the Cuban government nationalized American properties, the U.S. government reacted . The American government reacted to the government's actions .
 On October 19, 1960, the U.S. government prohibited all exports to Cuba, and in Janaury, 1961, it broke all diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 When Kennedy became president, he was informed by the C.I.A. about the invasion plans . Kennedy was also told that the invasion would result in a great victory for the U.S. in Guatemala .
 President Kennedy also knew that the Bay of Pigs, located on the southwest side of the island was the place of the invasion and the April 17, 1961 was its date . April 17 was the date .
 At the beginning, Kennedy approved the invasion plan only as a contingency operation, which means that it could be annulled at any time . The invasion plan was approved only as contingency operation . At the start of the plan, Kennedy said it was only a contingency .
 The State Department published a pamphlet 31 entitled “Cuba” in which it was stated that Castro did not make the reforms which he promised to do . During the same time, the State Department said that Castro had not made the reforms .
 The Kennedy administration did not try to negotiate with Castro and did not consult congress in its achievement of the Bay of Pigs Invasion . The administration also didn't consult congress about the invasion .
 The plan for the invasion was tended to be secret, but this did not happen . The plan to invade was tendered to be kept a secret .
 When Castro heard about the invasion, he maintained effective personal control over the army . He sent all available troops, tanks and airplanes to the invasion area . Castro was in control of the army during the invasion .
 His call for strong resistance against the invaders did not include Communist ideology, but rather Cuban nationalism and anti – Americanism . Besides, his call for resistance was not Communist ideology but Cuban nationalism .
 The United States Ambassador to Cuba, Philip Bonsal, attempted to show to the Americans that Castro’s regime became communist because of the Unites States policy towards Cuba . The U.S. ambassador to Cuba tried to show that the Castro regime had to become communist due to
 The United States government was not convinced by what he said . However, the U.S. government is not convinced .
 On April 15, 1961, three U.S. airplanes which were piloted by Cubans bombed 32 Cuban air bases . The U.N. planes were flown by Cuban pilots .
 After two days, the Cubans who were trained by the U.S. landed in many sites, the most important one was that of the Bay of Pigs . The Cubans used United States equipment in the landing .
 The invasion failed because Castro’s troops were stronger than the Cuban exiles, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Castro's troops were strong enough to take over Cuba, he says . Castro was stronger than his Cuban troops, he adds .
 The invasion ended on April 19 when its last stronghold was captured . More than 1100 men were captured during the invasion .
 Kennedy accepted the full responsibility for the failure of the invasion . He considered the C.I.A. and the Joint Chiefs of Staff as responsible for this catastrophe .
 If the failure of the invasion humiliated President Kennedy, it pushed Castro forward . Castro was pushed forward, and the failure humiliated Kennedy .
 The latter considered it as a great victory for the Cuban Revolution over American imperialism . The Cuban Revolution was defeated by the U.S. in 1945 .
 The failure of 'Operation Zapata' strengthened the relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union . Operation Zapata was a success story for Cuba . The failure strengthened the Cuban-Soviet relationship .
 Castro affirmed publicly his personal commitment to the ideology of Marxism – Leninism . Castro said he was a Marxist 33 – Leninist and will be one until the day I die . Castro aligned Cuba with the Communist nations .
 As a response, the Kennedy administration wanted to isolate Castro both politically and economically . Castro was isolated by the U.S. as a result .
 Latin American nations voted to expel Cuba from the O.A.S. in January 1962 . They did not agree to punish it economically . After some hesitation, they voted to approve the American proposals .
 When the Bay of Pigs invasion failed, a special committee was founded to look for ways to overthrow Castro from power . The committee was formed after the failed invasion failed in Cuba .
 Through this committee, the Kennedy administration wanted to eliminate communism especialy in Cuba . This was the nearest communist country to the United States .
 The Cuban people believed that the failure of the government’s socialist economic policies and the persecution in Cuba made the Cuban people live in an atmosphere in which a resistance program would be possible . Furthermore, they believed that . the failure . of the socialist economic . policies and . persecution in
 The U.S. developed a secret plan to arouse anti – regime spirit . Because of this, the United States developed an anti-regime plan . The plan was developed to raise awareness of the regime .
 The United States Department of Defense Joint Chiefs of Staff saw that the project’s greatest objective was to provide adequate justification for a military intervention in Cuba . The project was designed to provide justification for an invasion of Cuba .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy kept effective control of project . They asked Secretary of Defense to give them responsibility for the project .
 Samuel Halpern, a C.I.A. coorganizer said, CIA and the U.S. army and military forces and Department Commerce, and Immigration, treasury, all were in Mongoose .
 Some of the use of American Green Berets, destruction of Cuban sugar crops and attempts to assassinate Castro Castro . Some of them included the destruction of Cuba's sugar crops .
 Operation Northwoods was created in order to make the U.S. public side with the military intervention against the Cuban government . The operation was created by the United States to make public support for the military action against Cuba .
 The latter was a 1962 plan, signed by the chairma n of the Joint Chiefs of staff and presented to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara who approved it .
 Operation involved 35 artificial attacks on Cuban exiles and U.S. military targets . The operation involved 35 attacks on American military targets in Cuba and Cuba .
 The Cuban Project was stopped on October 30, 1962, after 3 of 10 sabotage teams had already been sent to Cuba .
 The Cuban Project is considered as an American policy failure in Cuba . Like the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Cuban Project was considered as a failed policy failure .
 In May 1962, Nikita Khrushchev thought that the best way to react to the U.S. superiority in developing and deploying strategic missiles was to place his own intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 The careful denial and deception which the Soviet Union adopted from the beginning was called in Russia as Maskirovka . It was called by the Soviets in the beginning of the 1950s and 1960s as a form of deception .
 All of the planning and preparation for transporting and deploying the missiles were done secretly . The planning of the missiles was done secretly, according to the U.S. government .
 The Soviet code name for the operation ANADYR was also the name of a river which flowed into the Bering Sea . Even troops who were prepared for the mission were given false information; they were told that they should wear suitable clothes for the winter seaso
 In early 1962, a group of Soviet military specialists in constructing the missiles went with an agricultural delegation to Havana . The missiles were built in Havana .
 The Cuban leaders agreed with the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . They met with Fidel Castro because the Cuban leaders had a great expectation that the United States would invade Cuba .
 Like Castro, Khrushchev felt that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was very soon . The U.K. felt that the United States invasion was coming soon .
 They thought that the loss of Cuba would harm the communis t cause, especially in Latin America . The loss of the Cuban nation would harm Latin America, they thought .
 The plans for installing nuclear missiles in Cuba were approved by Cuban President Rodion Malinovsky, on July 4 and Khrushchev on July 7 . The plans were later approved by the Soviet Union and the Cuban government .
 In September, Congress approved the use of military force in Cuba if American interests were threatened . The Cuban leaders became worried when Congress approved a resolution authorizing the U.S. to use force in the country .
 The U.S. announced a major military exercise in the Caribbean, PHIBRIG LEX-62, which was considered by Cuba as a proof that the United States planned to invade it . The exercise was considered as a sign of a possible invasion .
 The leaders expected Kennedy’s acception of the missiles because they saw him as a weak 37 and less confident person after his failure in the Bay of Pigs invasion . The leaders also expected Kennedy to accept the missiles .
 Dobrynin confirmed to U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Adlai Stevenson that the United States.R. was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba .
 The first sending of R-12 missiles arrived on the night of September 8 and followed by a second one on September 16 . The first of the missiles arrived September 8 .
 The Soviets continued their Maskirovka program and denied several times that the weapons which brought to Cuba were offensive . The weapons were never found to be offensive .
 Cuban president Osvaldo Dorticos spoke at the U.N. General assembly on October 7 . He said, "If we are attacked, we will defend ourselves. If we want to defend ourselves"
 No U-2 flights were made over Cuba from September 5 to October 14 . Americans heard about the missiles in Cuba, but no U.2 flight was made .
 On October 12, the administration decided to transfer the Cuban U-2 reconnaissance missions to the Air force .
 They thought involving Air force flights would be easier to explain than C.I.A. flights . Air force flight was thought to be more likely to be explained by the Air Force than other flights .
 When the reconnaissance missions were re-authorized on October 8, the plans were kept from flying . Bad weather kept the plans from flying because of the weather .
 The committee was in a hurry because it had to make a decision before the missiles became operational . The committee had to decide before it could be operational, the committee said .
 Ex Com discussed the effect on the strategic balance of power, both political and military . The Ex Com also discussed the effects of the US President Barack Obama's presidency .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that the missiles would change the military balance seriously, but Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagreed .
 He was convinced that the missiles would not affect the strategic balance at all . He said he was confident that the missile strike would not change the balance .
 An extra forty would not make a big difference in the strategic balance, he said . He said that an extra forty wouldn't make a difference to the balance .
 The United States had already approximately 5,000 strategic warheads; while the Soviet Union had only 300 . The U.S. had already . approximately 5.000 strategic . warheads .
 In 1990, he repeated that “ it made no difference . “The military balance wasn’t changed.” He said in 1990, “It made no . difference . The military balance was not changed .
 EXCOMM agreed that missiles would affect the political balance . However, the EXCOMm agreed that the missiles would impact the balance of the balance .
 The U.S. credibility would be damaged in the eyes of the American people and its allies if they allowed the Soviet Union to compensate the strategic balance by placing missiles in Cuba . Second, the United States credibility would also be damaged if it allowed the . Soviet Union .
 Kennedy explained that “ it would have politically changed the balance of power.” After the crisis, Kennedy said “it would have been politically changed . The crisis would have changed the political balance in the country .
 The former wanted an air strike on the missile installations and a further invasion if necessary . But the latter wanted a naval blockade through which ships would be prevented from coming or going to Cuba .
 Robert McNamara supported the naval blockade as a strong but limited military action that left the U.S. in control . McNamara: "The blockade was a strong, but limited action"
 Admiral Anderson’s, Chief of Naval Operations wrote position paper that helped Kennedy to differentiate between a quarantine of offensive weapons and a blockade of all materials .
 Since it would take place in international waters, President Kennedy obtained the approval of the O.A. for military action under the hemispheric defense provisions .
 On October 19, the EXCOMM formed separate working groups to examine the air strike and blockade options . On October 20, the group formed a working group to examine air strikes and blockade . The group is looking at air strikes, blockade and other options .
 At 5:00 p.m. he met with 40 Congressional leaders who opposed the blockade . He met with them and asked for a strong action . He also met with congressional leaders who oppose the blockade.
 In Moscow, Ambassador Kohler informed Chairman Khrushchev about the blockade and Kennedy’s speech to the nation . In Moscow the ambassador told the Chairman of the Soviet Union that the blockade was illegal .
 American delegates met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold MacMillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer and French President Charles de Gaulle before the speech .
 On October 23, the British press expressed their doubt about the existence of Soviet bases in Cuba and guessed that Kennedy did this to be reelected . The British press speculated that Kennedy may have done this to get re-elected .
 Khrushchev explained that the missile sites were put only to defend Cuba against the U.S. attack of the United States . On October 23, Khrushchevsvs said the sites were only to protect Cuba from the attack .
 On October, 24, the first Russian ship, which carried oil, reached the naval quarantine and was allowed to enter Cuba . The first ship, carrying oil, was allowed into Cuba in October .
 This was not the case for the other ships which carried missiles . However, this was the case of the other missiles .
 During the same day, the Chinese People’s Daily announced that 650,000,000 Chinese men and women supported the Cuban 41 people . The Chinese People's Daily said 650,00,000 people supported the 41 Cuban people .
 In Germany, newspapers supported the U.S. response and expressed their fear of a Soviet retaliation in Berlin . In Berlin, newspapers expressed their support for the United States .
 In France, an editorial in Le Monde doubted about the authenticity of the C.I.A.’s photographic evidence . An editorial in France also doubted about its photographic evidence.
 Khrushchev sent a telegram to Kennedy in which he proposed to dismantle the missiles if Kennedy agreed to stop the blockade and promise a non – invasion of Cuba . On October 26, 1962, Kennedy was asked to stop blockade of Cuba and promise non-invasion of Cuba.
 Castro sent a letter to Khrushchev through which he wanted to convince him that the United States would invade Cuba and that he should respond with a nuclear strike against the U.S. In the same day, Castro wrote a letter saying that he would respond to the invasion .
 Khrushchev sent another letter on October 27, and before Kennedy could reply, he sent it to Kennedy . Kennedy could not reply until Khrushchchev sent a reply to the letter .
 Kennedy should also dismantle U.S. missile bases in Turkey, he said . Kennedy also should dismantle American missile bases there .
 Kennedy replied that he agreed to the terms of the first letter and also to the second letter but secretly . The incident was ignored by Kennedy who replied .
 On November 20, 1962, Kennedy lifted the blockade and on April 25, 1963, the Jupiter missiles were removed from Turkey . The Jupiter missiles had been removed from the country since 1963 .
 The blame should be put on the United States, Cuba and the Soviet Union, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The United States and Cuba should be blamed for the collapse of Soviet Union .
 The United States tried to contain communism in Cuba as part of its application o f the Containment policy . The U.S. has been involved in the Cuban government for decades .
 Under the Monroe Doctrine, the United States had the right for doing so to protect itself from the Soviet Union’s threat and especially in Cuba which is a Latin American country . The U.S. has the right to do so in Cuba especially in Latin American countries .
 Without taking the Monroe Doctrine into consideratio n, the U.S. had not the right to intervene in Cuba . Cuba was an independent country and can make any agreement with any country .
 The Cubans accepted the Soviet Union’s installation of the missiles because they wanted to defend themselves against U.S. aggression . The Soviet Union installed the missiles in order to defend itself against United States aggression .
 The U.S. isolated Cuba diplomatically, ousted it from the Organization of American States, imposed an economic embargo, assisted anti Castro rebels in the Bay of Pigs Invasion, tried to assissnate Castro in Operation Mongoose .
 The Soviet Union also had the right to install its missiles in Cuba as a reaction to the United States’ installation of missiles in Turkey . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were also allowed to install their missiles in Cuban territory .
 After 1945, the Cold War emerged and brought with it the Containment policy which the Americans used to protect themselves against the Soviet Union . The Containment Policy was used by the U.S. to protect itself from the Soviets .
 The Americans of the 43 1950’s saw Latin American nations as primitive people and inferior to them . The perception is not new for Cuba, whose people throughout history believed in their superiority .
 During the 1950’s, Cuba witnessed many internal problems and at the end of the decade, Fidel Castro's rule began . Fidel Castro was the Cuban president of the 1950s .
 Harry S Truman declared economic and military aid to the governments of Greece, threatened by Communist insurrection, and Turkey, under pressure from Soviet expansion in the Mediterranean area . Truman declared aid to Greece and Turkey in March 1947 .
 Great Britain announced it could no longer afford to aid Mediterranean countries during the Cold War . The West feared the Mediterranean countries were in danger of falling under Soviet influence .
 Truman requested $400,000,000 for this purpose . Congress responded to Truman's request by appropriating the money . Truman's message was passed by Congress .
 The current government of Cuba was excluded from participation in the Organization under a decision adopted by the Eighth Meeting of Consultation in Punta del Este, Uruguay, on 31 January 1962 . The current Cuban government was excluded by the decision .
 Organization of American States to MarxismLeninism is incompatible with the inter-American system . The alignment of such a government with the communist bloc breaks the unity and solidarity of the hemisphere, the U.S. says .
 The Cuban government was incompatible with the principles and objectives of the inter-American system . Cuba has officially identified itself as a Marxist-Leninist government, the U.S. says .
 That this incompatibility excluded the present Government of Cuba from participation in the inter-American system, the Cuban government was excluded from participation, the government said . The Cuban government is excluded from participating in the Inter-American System .
 The centeral principle contained in its articles is that an attack against one is to be considered an attack on all of them . This was known as the “ hemispheric defense” doctrine .
 In this crisis, the United States interfered to stop the spread of communism and remove the missiles which the Soviet Union had installed in Cuba . The U.S. interfered in this crisis to stop communism and also to remove missiles, the author says .
 It helped make the United States and the Soviet Union realize that a nuclear war was impossible . The U.S. and Soviet Union realized it was impossible to go nuclear war .
 This dissertation shows that the U.S. interference in Cuba in 1962 was not new . This dissertation also shows that this was not the first time the United States had interfered in Cuba .
 Throughout history, the U.S. has interfered in a way or another in Cuba . The United States has been involved in Cuba in the past .
 It shows also that the crisis did not happen by accident, but it was well calculated . The crisis shows that it was not by accident but by well calculated, the government says . It shows that this is not an accident, it is a well calculated way to deal with it .
 This is clear if we look to what happened before the crisis took place, says Simon Tisdall . This was clear if you look to the history of the crisis, he says .
 United States Foreign Policy at Home and Abroad, 1750 to Present 2nd ed. U.S. foreign policy at home and abroad: 1750-1750 .