 With rare exceptions, schools fail to acknowledge that there even is such a thing . Schools fail to admit that there is even a thing called a "sexist"
 Thomas Edison, George Westinghouse and the Invention of the Electric Chair, by Mount Holyoke College sociology professor Richard Dean Moran . The invention of the electric chair was invented by Thomas Edison in 1903 .
 The violence, we often tell, was a reaction to misguided U.S. policies . The violence is often told, but it was a response to misguided US policies . It is not the first time we have seen such a reaction .
 The series traces the history of the Middle East from 1855 to 1917 through the eyes of an Egyptian who fought British occupiers and the Zionist movement . The series is based on the life of a man who fought the British occupation in Egypt .
 The general health of Native Americans had apparently been deteriorating for centuries before 1492 . What had not been clearly recognized until now, though, is that it had been deteriorating .
 John Noble Wilford gives examples of what the teams of anthropologists, economists and paleopathologists who did the research found . Wilford explains how the research was carried out .
 President Bush's release of a new strategy last month stunned Washington and even some close allies . Bush's new strategy for defending America against future foreign threats stunned Washington, allies .
 America, it states, is the world's strongest nation, enjoying""unparalleled military strength,"" and will never again allow its military supremacy to be challenged as it was during the cold war . The U.S. government says it will never be challenged again .
 Mencken, a left-wing anti-Communist who fought the Fascists in Spain, would have been disgusted with the result . Orwell was an obstreperator against American Puritanism, but would have met with a disgust of his own .
 Both books touched on issues that are still unresolved and still urgent . Yet here they are brought close by the accidents of publishing and the epicycles of literary taste .
 It is not clear if the North Koreans are bluffing, actually have a nuclear program or have yet produced any nuclear explosives . It is unclear if North Korea is bluffing or if it has ever produced any explosives .
 He reportedly sympathized with the 9/11 attacks . Even less does it amaze that he reportedly sympathizes with the attacks .
 Forty years ago today, a U.S. spy plane's surveillance tape showed evidence that the Soviet Union was constructing nuclear missile silos on Cuba, 90 miles from the United States mainland . The Soviet Union built the silos 90 miles away from the U.K. mainland .
 Journalist Richard Heinberg suggests comparisons of the U.S. with Rome and Bush with Caesar do a disservice to Caesar .
 Roman Catholic faith transformed more sweepingly than any other single event since the Protestant Reformation . It transformed the faith sweepingly .
 The Mountain Meadows massacre remains shrouded in mystery and rumor . Despite two trials, one execution and many official investigations, the event remains a mystery . The massacre was known as the Mountain Meadows Massacre .
 Three high-profile cases of plagiarism involving Stephen Ambrose, Doris Kearns Goodwin and Hannah Crafts are discussed . Historians and plagiarism are discussed as well as the historical manifestations of it .
 NPR News presents a seven-part series on the roots of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict . The series will help listeners understand the situation in the Mideast .
 In fact, John Paul II has recognized more saints than any pope in history . More than all the popes of the past four centuries combined . John Paul I have recognized more saintly than any other pope .
 It is certainly true that pre-emptive wars are not the norm in history, but it is true that they are not always the norm . It is also true that the US has not been able to win a war in the past .
 It is not about weapons of mass destruction, terrorism, or terrorism, it's not about U.N. resolutions, it says . It's about Iraq, not terrorism, terrorism or Saddam Hussein, it is about Saddam Hussein .
 The Battle of Oxford, Mississippi, 1962 was a pivotal moment in the civil rights movement . The battle proved to be the biggest domestic military crisis of the twentieth century .
 Calendar depicts undergarments from the early 18th century to the 1960s . Calendar depicts underwear from the 18th to the 60s .
 Last chapters include account of how David Irving responded to the evidence in court . The last chapters include an account of the trial .
 Charles Tripp explains how the history of Iraq led to the creation of a Saddam Hussein . Tripp is author of a history of the country and author of an Iraq book .