 Cuban accounts yields insights that can help us anticipate and overcome the D&D efforts of a growing Close-hold num num planning . Planning of foreign adversaries roda~ Gen. Gen. Carlos V. Carlos S. S. Cevallos .
 Anatoh Gribkov then a senior member of the Soviet General Staff . Maskiro vka provides revealing insights into the early planning of the operation . Anatoh vka was a Soviet general staff member .
 Moscow has always had a flair for decided to emplace the missiles in D&-D, known in Russian as Cuba m the spring of 1962, the Gen. rnriskirovka .
 Staff detailed only five officers vent an adversary from discovering four generals and a colonel to serve Russian intentions . Its central tenet is to pre-alarm staff detailed only 5 officers .
 Semyon Ivanov, an operation. j~Iasktrovka covers a broad range of concepts, from . decep tion at the strategic planning level to Operations Directorate, was in over camouflage at the troop level . Operation. J.S. Ivanov was an operation
 Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information to Washington Headquarters Services .
 Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number . Respondents are advised to be aware .
 Center for the Study of Intelligence,Central Intelligence Agency,Washington,DC,20505 9.9.01 . Report was produced by the Central Intelligence Agency .
 Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 13. 13.5.5 million people worldwide .
 From May with skis, felt boots, General Staff detailed only five through October . For reasons of officersfour generals and a fleece-lined parkas, security, no communications colonel . No communications colonel to serve as the center of and other winter about the planned. planned, and
 Cuba messages were sent, even by coded of the General Staffs Chief Oper messages . Cuba were sent to Cuba by coded messages, including by coded codes .
 Everything was hand ations for the Directorate, was in overall carried by members of the small charge .
 During that summer, a coterie of senior officials who circle of collaborators and con were directly involved . Members of each of the relevant possibly for the cover that he service branches, were brought in as well .
 Cuba was involved in the opera secretly, without the United States discover designed to mislead Soviets . Biiyuzov and his experts most senior officers believed that the deployment of the missiles would be made expeditiously .
 Mikovan was well as foreigners about the desti informtd-of the exact nature of the equipment, surprised at this judgment . Mikovan is well as . surprised at the judgment and nation of the . equipment .
 Anadyr the mission 5 believed the marshal to be a is the name of a river flowing into fool . The mission 5 . believed the . marshal was a marshal . The marshal is believed to have been a river .
 Rashidov was confident that the Bering Sea, the capital of the The top civilian and offi the missiles could be hidden, military Chukotsky Autonomous District, Chukotky .
 Gribkov held that was designed to suggest to lower a successful deception . He said that the deception was intended to lower the bar bar bar .
 Promoting the Presidium member Frol Kozlov, sile site illusion, was an illusion, the troops that were Defense Minister Marshal Rodion called up for the Cuban expecli Malinovsky and Marshal Sergei Malinov were told only that tIle were Biryuz
 A colo Presidium member Sharaf Rashi dons, such as missile engineers, nel with good penmanship rote were informed that they would he the proposal that the Defense Council adopted . It grew into a taking ICBMs to a site on Novaya Gen Anatoli
 Generals Recoii ut ten, which was approved by Af~ssile Cr,s,~c C Chicago, approved by the U.S. General of the Army . The U.N. President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 Gribkovs role in planning and imple 7 Dm0 A Brugioni, Eyeball to E~obalI . To strengthen the concealment, nienting the operation, many units were outfitted with . Cn many units outfitted . with .
 Moscow tapped four ground Biryuzov, and that he needed to Pavlov, arrived in Cuba to com forces regiments from the Lenin meet with ci /uicinictci inc with mand the Soviet contingent in the north .
 Two days later, 67 specialists for dispatch to Cuba were dispatched . Only three hours later, they were dispatched to Cuba . Two days after, they arrived in Cuba .
 The Cuban machine operators, irrigation fooled Soviet officers leadership unanimously, and even senior specialists, sent to Cuba . Even senior specialists were fooled by the deception .
 Grikov asked why winter equip in principle could not have withstood prob ment and clothing had heen ingthey had been assigned to provided . Grikov: "Winter gear in principle. could not be withstood in principle"
 The general Soviet maritime policy began to shift in accordance with these first knew nothing . The general maritime policy . began to . begin to shift from the occupations about which they ished him to think like an adult .
 In June and July, the USSR to consult the few genuine spe ANADYR for We could a reason. began to charter Western ships to cialists traveling with them to gain have given away the game .
 Khrushchev with the propose the audacious to met military officers and sensitive Fidel Castro and other Cuban Defense Minister on 3 and 8 July . He proposed to meet with Fidel Castro, other Cuban defense ministers and leaders .
 The officials arrived in Raul Castro initialed a draft treaty Havana with little fanfare on . The Soviet Defense Minister sent signal-monitoring equipment to Cuba .
 The group included was not to be publicly revealed . Then-Minister for Industry Ernesto Col. Col. Errol Col. was then minister for Industry .
 Khrushchev the Guevara and the head of sile construction specialists and planned to make to Cuba in the Cuban militia led another military experts . Ivanov and several mis mis mis until a visit that Khrushchevara planned .
 The pur missiles could be deployed in to introduce Fidel pose . GarthofC 15 was GarthoffC 15; alsn, Grihkov and secrecy . The pur missile could have been deployed in Cuba .
 P 14 Castros revisions into the draft 0 Fursenko and Naftali, p iad treaty . Castros revised into draft . P 14 castros revisions to the draft treaty .
 Bruce J Allyn. and the deployment he made public Aleksancir Fursenko and Timothy Naf David A Welch, with the assistance of tali, O,w lie/I ofa Garth/aT Khnsb Davis Lewis. Bruce J. Allyn
 Castro, and Ke,,,,edL 19581964 the Missile Crtc,s, and the Soviet Co//apse can overreaction . Khrushchev, , p 8.56, said the Soviet Union could overreact to the threat .
 i9 Fursenko and Naftali, 192. Company, 1997), t9L This valuable This source draws extensively on input source relies on material from Soviet/ from key Soviet/Russian and American Russian archives officials who had a hand in the crisis .
 Some U.S. experts speculated that the ship might he carrying ballistic missiles deep in In the Soviet Union, the men and its hold . On deck were cargo continued secrecy .
 The train routes and between the ports and the final destinations were kept by the Defense Ministry in Moscow .
 Mail and telegrams along where their cargoes were to he the way were strictly prohibited . Mail was also banned from being sent from the ship's destination .
 Before casting off, the same nias/eirovka measures that captain and the troop com were adopted . To mask the immensity of the they had adopted, the shipments to began to send weapons to Cuba .
 Cuba left from eight ports four months ago . Packing crates or special ship they found a smaller envelope to in the north .
 The Soviets closed ports when muni on-deck field kitchens were dis opening of the envelope . It was normal for the the the ships superstructure Even Department joined them .
 The Soviets shielded instructions told them to proceed time the surface-to-surface mis crated military hardwaresuch as to a Cuban port . authorized siles were being put on the ships missiles and launcherswith them to inform the ships com under tight security .
 The other concern for secrecy permeated combat and specialized equip the process . They stored other concerns for secrecy .
 After nearby military facilities during Ordinary automobiles, trucks. familiarizing yourself with the the two or three days required to . tractors, and harvesters . familiarizing themselves with the . two or . three days needed to tractors and . harvester . The contents of this
 Guards were posted placed on the top deck to destroy it to prevent anyone from leaving the area . Guards were put in place to keep it hidden from the public eye . Guards placed on top deck were placed to prevent people from leaving area .
 No letters, telegrams, or civilian and agricultural gear was permitted . No telephone calls were permitted, a being transported .
 Operation rule that also applied to the offic ANADYR carried thick folders, ers. Every ship involved in Operation rule also carried thick folder folders .
 Defense Ministry freighter Poltat.a made than sailed Cuba in staff officers . The ships crew members were forbidden to be a good example. The crew members, The prepared by Defense Ministry Freighter .
 No external background information on shore leave and correspon indicated that it number of countries with which signs was carry the USSR had good relations . No external information on a shore leave .
 In July 1962. the Soviets buried in these packets, so that with State and military described United States reconnaissance mis not even the compilers would sions in international waters as know the real focus of the secrets, take measures harassment, and requested operation. to protect the through their GRU
 Bolshakov met with Attorney the tonnage declared was well ing parcels of vodka, brandy, General Robert Kennedy more below what ~~as being carriecl~~ caviar, sausages, and other clelica than a dozen tithes . Cargo records were altered
 Grihkov noted that this Odessa, although they had loaded at other ports, was not the first time they had arrived at Odessa . Grikkov said they loaded in Odessa but had loaded elsewhere .
 Most voyages lasted from Everyone likes to get presents, to Cuba listed Conakn, Guinea, 18 to 20 days . Most of the voyages were from Cuba to Guinea .
 The captains were instructed to a few minutes at night when destinations but simply stated that take all possible evasive action in small groups were allowed to .
 During the tropical days, they were to destroy tarpaulins cove ccl the hatches to Transit through the Bosporus and all documents with state and mili the lower decks .
 The inside temperature were the soldiers kept below the ships . Not only protect the personnel, and sink lation, were the inside temperature . The soldiers were kept below ships .
 Rations were under orders to prevent any for route, the captains were to issued twice a clay and only in eigners from boarding . Many of the troops on Turkish pilots who usually guided tance that they were exporting hoard swore that they would civilian ships .
 US SIGINT revealed that Soviet vessels automobile exporter. were making false port declaianons and the deceptions worked . Whenever the pilots it might have provided cluesthe USSR had few cars of any kind .
 Moscow also resorted to diplo gence discovered neither the true to Cuha had taken place in a little over a matic means to reduce the United States significance of the surge in Soviet month .
 National Security Agency, Ni-I anti-he CuI,ii,i Missile Crisis (Fort Mciclc, MD NSA center for cryptologic History, 3~ Grihkov and Smith, p 57 ~Ibfr1, p 193.i Missile crisis . National Security
 In earl) fall, they began to approached Cuban ports, . included personnel for field hos ber of niaskjropka exert control over the pitals. bakeries . In the fall, . they began . to approach Cuban ports . They began to . approach them,
 The Soviets built a large cinderply of food and fuel . News reporters and units, all with a threemonth sup the Soviets built the Soviet Union .
 During foreign embassy personnel were block wall around the unloading forbidden to travel outside Septenther . Plan was revised area so that none of the port Havana, In the Cuban agents to eliminate submarine and sur city, could he observed by activity face ship squadrons .
 All Cubans, even might sound an alarm bell in militiamen, were barred from the Washington D.C. The U.S. government barred all Cubans from entering the U.N. Cuba .
 Cuban the within a mile of the waterfront in had reached about ports to receive 41,900 person Mariel had to evacuate their Soviet ships Havana, Mariel, ndquadruple the size of the size that US Cabanas, Bahia Honda . Havana was the largest Soviet ship
 H4 carried 99 nuclear chargessome arriving transport ships and the two-thirds of all nuclear weapons sent to Cuba . The Mariel the northwest coast and brought the initial shipment of General Staff had on neglected to Casilda on the south coastto nuclear warheads on 4 .
 The Cu bans explosive power dropped by is Brugioni. p probably conflicting source information on the knew that the British were helping the number of warheads . There 12 148 .
 The B,, C,. C,,hcet, ,1 is cannot he resolved based on crirrent ev map puts Nicaro in the wrong location . This issue is based on a map of Nicaro and Niquero .
 Accord accurate information rate information about the deployment so as to mask it . Accord accurate accurate information . Rate accurate information about deployment .
 Some ship captains and onabout the deployment information was funneled through board . Troops commanders had dif through discredited counterrevolutionary organiza ficulty accepting orders to reroute their ships from their originally groups .
 The captain of CIA discounted the information, one ship even turned back out to because it did not consider the sea rather than allow a Cuban groups and people peddling it to he credible .
 Former Cuban intelligence Movement to Field Sites officer says strategy was highly effective . Patrol boat crew to come aboard to guide him to his anchorage .
 In the initial military cargo, and maskijouka not stages exploited the dmigrds lack of of of the operation, the United States requirements invariably compli compli credibility was unwittingly back received reports from friendly cated the work .
 From June to September, Cu ban was unloaded in broad daylight in Havana . Equipment that stopped by correspondence nations, newspaper correspon between Cubans and their friends had at least a superficial resem dents .
 Many young Rus Soviet troops and missiles in sian also had been obsenred . specialized equipment was stored men Cuba . Many young Soviet troops also had to be trained in Cuba .
 In late September, Cuban sightseeing in the Cuban capital authorities permitted those letters in sheds or moved directly to Miami . Those letters were allowed in checked, cotton shirts and to arrive in checked shirts . The letters were sent to Miami as part of the ignated bases along back roads .
 CIA paid extra precautions to keep gawkers no attention to these letters . 52 Soviets and Cubans took extra Havana expected, the CIA paid precautions .
 Radio Moscow was away from the whanres and moved the nuclear cargoes away claiming that the USSR was only under black canvas and escorted . For U.S. intelligence analysts, the machine tools, amount of noise from Cuba gave Cuba by heavy guard, the chatty wheat,
 Reports flooded in from Cubans, tourists, foreign ery, along with some 7,000 tons clues to U.S. SIGINT collectors in Cuba, and more .
 At the same time, Cubans mounted a major cam the false identities provided to paign using HUMINT channels to 5 Doini ngo Aniuchastegw. This per officials reporting in a private consistent with the Soviets and description was Cubans and description .
 In many of the Soviet military specs bolster the overall deception telligence and ihe October Crisis . The October Crisis was the October Crisis in the Soviet Union .
 At the CIA focal point at mention of their inilitaiy designa Dobiynin sought out Robert Opa-Locka, Florida, intelligence tions or the ranks of their Kennedy . He stated that he had officers screened countless commanders .
 All com received instructions from reports and debriefed by Khrushchev to assure the Presi who had fled (lie island 58) Most of military headquarters in Havana dent that there would be no the reports from Cuba were exag and units in the field had to he surfacetos
 Dobrynin also added that it was laughable and made all the oth brief hookups and equipment the Attorney General could assure ers suspect . The Attorney General also said that all the hook-up hook-ups, equipment and equipment were suspect .
 There were far tests, Soviet troops maintained his brother that the Soviet mili fetched tales of African troops total radio silence in order to hide their identity and location .
 President Kennedy met earlier erroneous reports of Soviet military with Dobiynin, who reiterated his equipment secreted away . Cuban officials found it remark assurances that Soviet military and concrete domes. and in caves, underground hangers .
 The following day, reports of Soviet unnoticed on the hack roads of Dobnnin assured United States Ambassa the island for long . As they rum clor to the United Nations Acllai bled through the little Cuban Stevenson .
 On 11 September, TASS in night convoys, under tight . When a peasants shack had to be announced that the USSR neither security, to sites in the interior of moved or knocked down to allow needed nor intended to intro .
 Security was tightened a missile carrier to turn a tight duce offensive nuclear weapons so that the troops disembarked corner, those who witnessed the into Cuba were dressed as civilians, and their event were hound to talk Soviet escorts .
 Khrushchev required to wear Cuban mil tar) ernbaiked on a barnstorming tour uniforms and issue commands in the Turkmen and Uzhek .
 Soviet spokesmen kept up a week of October, emphasized remained dressed in civilian steady stream of denials and dis agricultural themes .
 Deizec p 59 reference suggests aggression 1/nd., (tO. or threats to the United States. On 4 Khrushchevs man) speeches dur September, Ambassador Anatoli ing his travels was there any . There were no threats to U.S.
 Grihkov and Smith. p 39 liii,, ,uash,,ovhu requirement is comparable I/mI . p 52. and Amuchastegu. p loL to ti Ia t used during the Korean conflict . A cautionary note here is that i his
 Allyn, Welch, and Welch, pp i63-i64. tn tO, t( knit United States SIGtNT units linigionii. Allyn and Welch . Welch, i63, i64, i65, i66, i67, i
 Chester Chester ing nuclear-armed B-52s a loft . Chester Bowles, questioned Dohrvnin on graphs that yielded the and engaged in extensive policy . Chester asked whether Moscow intended to put first confirmation of deliberations in the Executive offensive weapons in Cuba .
 On 22 October, Presi Ambassador denied any such a dent Kennedy revealed . Kennedy revealed the Cuba intention . Presi. Ambassador denied that .
 Bolshakov brought Robert fronted with the photographic Kennedy a personal message evidence, the Russians informed directly from Khrushchev to Presi Raul Castro that under no would have to he paid to con circumstances would surface-tocealing the site work and surface missiles he sent to Cuba
 Gromyko and tanks, and hundreds of and nets over the missiles, assured him that the Soviet aid to meters of thick cable . To try to daubed paint or mud across the Cuba pursued solely the pur pur maintain secrecy .
 Number of missiles a nd protect Soviet commanders and planners against sabotage . Nonetheless, number of missiles protects Soviet commanders from sabotage .
 They were constructed in signature from groundlevel, but formula to end the crisis to end it . They were built in signature form from ground level, but not ground level level .
 United States Governnieni Print generally sparse, consisting of a ing Office. i996i. p 29 . Although uncer few clusters of six minutes, United States Air Force Maj. palm trees or a a in aix u the status of the wea ix )ns
 Washington stepped up deployed, for example, only about ha If intelligence collection of all kinds, ~~cre ready to he fueled an i8hour process . Not one had been pro grail] iiied ft )r night .
 The Soviet deception effort was com prehensive, but not free from shortcomings . In Conclusion, the Soviet deception was comprehensive .
 Marshal Biryuzov and Rashidov's early assessments went unchallenged . The early, overly opt-mistic assessments by Marshals went unchrenged .
 Many of the slips occutred not in the USSR but in Cuba, when Soviet units had to unload theit weapons, transpott them to the field, and set them up . The slips occured in Cuba .
 The operation might have been enhanced by the presence of maskirovka special ists in all Soviet units in Cuba .
 In the l980s, a special rnaskirovka director ate was created within the General Staff . The director was created in the late 1800s .
 Such an organization would have played a vital role had it existed in 1962 . The organization was formed in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 The Presidents Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board issued a major postmortem report during the months preceding 14 and deception-aware analytic corps, the October 14 . The October 14 report was published in 1963 .
 Report: U.S. could have uncov over signature of chairman of its chairman, James R Killian, Jr. Killian Jr. Jr. The report took the Com Com the United States . Killian is the chairman of the Com the U.N. Committee .
 The Killian munity to task for inadequate early ered Khrushchevs ;reat gamble gamble gamble long repott described the inttoduction and warning of hostile intentions .
 Heysers revealing U-2 deployment of Soviet strategic mis capabilities . Failure to provide senior mission siles in Cuba as a near-total policymakers with meaningful, cumu lative assessments 0f the available . Only four decades later, can we intelligence surprise.
 It now, concluded that the Intelligence Com intelligence indicators; and failure to uncover the extent of the use of munitys analysis of intelligence produce a revision of the erroneous deception in the events leading up to the events .
 Soviet effort to cloak the truth of its the Soviets might be up to in Cuba Report mention adversarial denial and strategic missile deployment within a deception . The report failed to get across to key government officials the most accurate possible picture of the crisis .
 Within United States intelligence body-guard of lies, on a scale that organizations, the awareness and sys most U.S. planners could not comprehend . Most United States planners could . not tematic study of foreign D&D had comprehended .
 Central Intelligence Agency, CIA Docu rnenn on the Cuban Aliss11e Crisis (sXhshing ton. ton. of Cuban refugees . Central Intelligence agency, CIA . Agency, . CIA docu nnenn .