 This movie is on TWM’s short list of the best movies to supplement classes in U.S. History, High School Level . The movie is one of the most popular examples of American history .
 TWM offers the following movie worksheets to keep students’ minds on the film and to focus their attention on the lessons to be learned from the movie . The movie is based on the themes and themes of the film .
 Film Study Worksheet for a Work of Historical Fiction . Film Study worksheet for ELA Classes . Worksheet also includes Works for Cinematic and Theatrical Elements and Their Effects .
 Teachers can modify the movie worksheets to fit the needs of each class . Teachers can use the worksheet to help students in different classes .
 See also TWM’s Historical Fiction in Film Cross-Curricular Homework Project and Movies as Literature Homework project .
 In 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the U.S. discovers that the Russians are secretly installing nuclear missiles on the island of Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy convenes a team of advisors to decide how to respond to the crisis . President Kennedy meets with advisors to help decide how best to respond .
 Thirteen Days captures the tension that the crisis provoked and provides an example of how foreign policy was made in the last half of the 20th century . The film is a great example of foreign policy in the United States .
 It enables students to understand the importance of diplomacy and leadership in high office . Students will be able to learn from the lessons of diplomacy .
 Students will exercise research and writing skills in the expression of these insights . Students will also exercise research, writing skills to express them .
 Thirteen Days can be a valuable supplement to the study of the Cold War, but only if serious misimpressions are brought out and discussed . The book is a valuable addition to the history of Cold War .
 The Helpful Background section of this Learning Guide provides the information necessary to make these corrections . The helpful background section of the Learning Guide explains how to correct these errors .
 You may want to read the Helpful Background information in this Guide . You may also want more details about this risky period of Cold War history .
 Thirteen Days is the story of mankind’s closest brush with nuclear Armageddon . The film is based on the book, "Thirteen Days" and "Thirteenth Days" The book is set to be released in September 2015 .
 The crisis began and ended in October of 1962, but the story began much earlier .
 Almost immediately after World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated, ending cooperation which enabled the Allies to defeat Nazi Germany . Relations between Russia and the U.S. deteriorated almost immediately after the war .
 Britain and America thwarted the expansion of the Azerbaijani Soviet Republic into Iran and began the policy of containment attempting to restrict Soviet expansion . In response, Britain and U.S. thwarted the Soviet Union's expansion into Iran .
 Soviet blockade of Berlin, Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace . Chinese shelling of Taiwanese islands Quemoy and Matsu, and confrontation between Soviet ally Egypt and Western allies Israel, France and Britain over the Suez Canal .
 IRBMs could not reach the U.S. but they could reach Western Europe . The IRBM could reach the United States but could reach Europe . It is not the first time IRBMMs have been able to reach the continent .
 President Kennedy adopted a middle approach in which the U.S. Navy quarantined the island of Cuba, preventing any additional missiles or weapons from reaching the island .
 President Kennedy had ordered these missiles removed months before, but because of objections from the Turks and bureaucratic inertia, the missiles had remained in place .
 Future U.S. presidents and Soviet leaders conducted Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in the 1960s and 1970s to limit the number of nuclear warheads poised to strike the other side .
 Germany demanded that Czechoslovakia cede to it a part of Czech territory called the Sudetenland in which approximately 3 million ethnic Germans lived . The area was part of the Czech Republic, which was then known as the Sudetoenland .
 Hitler promised that if Germany absorbed the Sudetenland, it would seek no additional territory . Hitler promised to ensure that no more territory was sought by the Nazis .
 Their father, Joseph P Kennedy, had been one of the few millionaires to back Franklin Roosevelt in the 1932 election . Their father had been a millionaire to back FDR .
 From the time of Munich until long after the U.S. had declared war on Germany, Joseph P Kennedy advocated a compromise with Hitler and isolationist foreign policy . Kennedy was the president of the United States during the Second World War .
 The status and the prosperity of West Berlin increasingly annoyed the Russians and the East Germans . West Berlin's status and prosperity was increasingly annoyed by the Russians . East Berlin's prosperity was a source of friction between Russia and the West .
 Through the years, West Berlin became a glittering oasis standing in stark contrast to the drab and relatively impoverished life of East Germany .
 Robert Kennedy, at the direction of the President, personally supervised these activities . Robert Kennedy pushed the CIA for more aggressive action against Cuba and against Castro personally .
 "They’ve got enough to blow us up now anyway, I think it’s just a question of … After all, this is a political struggle as much as military," he says . He says the U.S. is in danger of being blown up .
 The U.S. took preemptive action in Cuba, says President Obama . Cuba would say it endangered their interests, security and reunification, says Obama .
 I must say I think it’s a very satisfactory position from their point of view. So I think they’ve got ... So I’m not surprised at the way they've got it, but I'm very pleased with them .
 Berlin is what Khrushchev committed himself to personally. In every conversation we’ve had with the Russians, that’s what . Even last night we talked about Cuba for a while, but last night, but Berlin .
 It was therefore impossible for any U.S. government to permit the missiles to remain . The United States would go to war, if necessary, to remove the missiles, President Obama said .
 Khrushchev forgot that the United States mainland hadn’t been invaded since 1812 . The U.S. mainland hasn't been invaded by a major war-torn nation since that date .
 Khrushchev never dreamed that the United States populace would react so dramatically to Russian missiles in Cuba . The U.S. never dreamed of the reaction .
 Over the years, as more about the crisis became public, it has become clear that the non-invasion pledge was a real concession . The pledge is a concession to the U.S. government, but not a concession, it's a concession .
 Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly conduct a massive military build-up in Cuba, introducing 40,000 Red Army troops, and that 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis .
 Khrushchev had several goals when he ordered IRCBMs to be installed in Cuba . It appears he had a few goals in mind when he sent them in .
 He wanted to increase Russia's nuclear capacity without waiting for Russian scientists and engineers to improve and build Russia’s own missile fleet . Russia has not been able to increase its own nuclear capacity .
 President Kennedy didn't believe that the U.S. advantage in ICBMs meant that the United States could safely engage in nuclear war with Russia . Kennedy didn’t believe that . The United States’s advantage in . ICBM missiles meant that . the . United States
 Even with the great U.S. advantage, there was no defense against the 40 ICBMs possessed by the Soviets . The Soviets were able to make the most of the world's most powerful weapons systems .
 The Russians achieved nuclear parity a year or two sooner, by placing missiles in Cuba, was not very important to him . That Russia achieved parity a few years earlier, he says . That is not the case, he adds .
 Khrushchev is reported to have made several remarks to close aides that indicated that improving Russia’s nuclear capabilities and reducing the United States advantage were important to him . The remarks were made to aides .
 Khrushchev could have just sent the 40,000 Red Army troops with a mission to defend the island . The Red Army could have sent the troops to defend it .
 Any of these situations, if they had come to pass, would have shown Europeans that they could not rely on the U.S. to look after their interests . It would have undermined the NATO alliance .
 The entire Presidium signed onto the plan to put missiles in Cuba, but Khrushchev’s word was final . At that time he was the absolute dictator of the Soviet Union . The Presidium was the only Presidium to agree to the plan .
 The refusal of the United States to disavow a nuclear first strike made the Russians justifiably nervous . However, the U.S. has not disavowed a first strike, making the Russians nervous .
 On balance, responsibility for events which put the future of the world at risk fall more heavily on the Soviet side than to the U.S. More to Khrushchev than Kennedy than to Kennedy .
 'Thirteen Days' recreates for this generation of Americans much of the reality of the most dangerous moment in human history . Thirteen Days’ is a new documentary about the Vietnam War .
 Most of the incidents described in the film actually occurred, including the meetings in which the Russian Foreign Minister Gromyko lied directly to President Kennedy when he assured him that the Russians were not installing missiles in Cuba . The late night meeting between Bobby Kennedy and the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin in
 The language of many important conversations has been taken out of the transcripts or reports of the participants . The language is taken from the transcripts and reports of those conversations .
 At the time of the crisis, the Russians were far behind the U.S. in nuclear capability . The 40 operational ICBMs located in Russia would have caused unacceptable casualties in the United States and the Russian IRBMs could have decimated Europe, something that would be intolerable to
 The strains on the NATO alliance would have been severe and perhaps fatal . The strain on NATO would have led to the collapse of the U.S.-led NATO .
 The secret placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba was an aggressive move by the Soviets . It was the first time the Soviets had placed nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 The movie does not show the role played by U.S. foreign policy in helping create the atmosphere in which the crisis occurred . The movie doesn't show the U.N. role played in the crisis .
 The friction between the U.S. military and President Kennedy was overstated in the movie . However, the United States refused to disclaim a nuclear first strike policy . The movie was based on the film's portrayal of President Kennedy .
 General LeMay thought that nuclear war with the Soviets was inevitable and wanted it to occur before the U.S. lost its 18 to 1 superiority in nuclear delivery devices . LeMay wanted the war before the United States lost its 18 to 1 superiority in nuclear delivery
 The film acknowledges the importance of the vote of the Organization of American States supporting the quarantine . The film also acknowledges the significance of the OAS vote .
 Russia changed its position from being an outlaw acting in violation of international law into a country acting in accordance with twenty allies legally protecting their position . It should also be noted that this vote “had a major effect on the Russians and changed our position from that of an outlaw .
 The movie glosses over the importance of the quick support of NATO allies of the United States and even of African countries . African countries would have had an important role if the Russians had tried to send nuclear arms to Cuba by air .
 The only available landing strips for refueling were in two countries, Guinea and Senegal, which had agreed not to permit the flights .
 The role of O’Donnell was overstated and the roles of other advisors whose input was very important to President Kennedy, were minimized . O'Donnell's role in Kennedy’s decision to appoint a White House adviser was also overstated .
 Khrushchev tried to “change horses in midstream” when he was informed of Kennedy’s feelers that the U.S. might also trade the missiles in Turkey . After offering to remove missiles in return only for United States guarantees that it would not invade Cuba
 McNamara and McCone agree that the U.S. could now “run the table” on the Russians in places like Asia . Another beautiful elegant touch is the conversation between them at the end .
 President Kennedy had everyone on the Security Counsel read Barbara Tuchman’s The Guns of August . Just after his administration took office, President Kennedy urged everyone to read the book .
 The person making the ultimate decision, in it is the United States the President, should have the benefit of the best information possible and many recommendations and opinions from both inside and outside of government .
 President Kennedy learned this lesson from the Bay of Pigs debacle . President Kennedy had learned the lesson from this lesson, he says .
 At the end of World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated, ending cooperation which enabled the Allies to defeat Nazi Germany . Relations between Russia and the U.S. deteriorated .
 The Communist bloc and the capitalist democracies lurched from crisis to crisis . Communist blocs and capitalist democracies have been at odds for decades .
 The IRBMs on Russian soil could not reach the U.S., other than Alaska, but they could reach Western Europe . Russia has a history of using IRBM missiles on its soil, but could use them to reach the West .
 Well over a hundred million people could have been killed in the U.S. and NATO countries . Well over 100 million people died in the United States and the NATO countries.
 In April 1961 the CIA mounted an invasion of Cuba that had been planned during the Eisenhower Administration . President Kennedy’s approval of the invasion was approved by the CIA . In the effort to stop the spread of communism, the invasion occurred in April 1961 .
 Using Cuban exiles as the initial landing force, the target was the Bay of Pigs on the Cuban coast . The Bay was the target of the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Allen Dulles and an assistant were told by President Kennedy that they were to resign after a decent interval . The responsible officials, the head of the CIA, Dulles, and his assistant, were told to resign . President Kennedy told Dulles to resign as soon as possible . Dulles
 After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed Operation Mongoose which actively tried to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Cuban President Fidel Castro . The CIA developed the operation in response to the invasion of Cuba .
 The Soviets, for their part, acutely felt the inferiority of their nuclear deterrent . The Soviets felt inferiority to their own nuclear deterrent.
 The Soviet leadership, however, didn't realize how much the U.S. feared Russia’s nuclear power . The United States feared Russia's nuclear power.
 Nikita Khrushchev began a program to secretly place intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . In an attempt to redress the imbalance in nuclear missiles and ensure that the U.S. would not mount another Cuban invasion, the Soviet Union secretly placed the missiles .
 Some recommended diplomacy, others pressed for military options, such as air strikes or an invasion of Cuba . Others pressed for air strikes, air strikes and a Cuban invasion .
 President Kennedy adopted a middle approach in which the U.S. Navy established a quarantine preventing any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching the island . President Kennedy took the middle approach . The quarantine was established by the United States Navy .
 The U.S. mounted a public relations and diplomatic offensive to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles . In the meantime, the United States mounted a diplomatic and public relations offensive .
 A Soviet missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot and exacerbating the tension between the Cold War combatants . Acting without Moscow’s approval, a Soviet surface-to-air missile battery opened fire .
 Future presidents and Soviet leaders agreed to Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties in the 1960s and 1970s . Treaties limited the number of nuclear warheads poised to strike the other side .
 Never again would America and Russia come to the brink of a nuclear Armageddon . The U.S. and Russia would never again be able to come to terms .
 President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev faced a stark contrast in styles of decision-making in the 1960s . Looking back on the Crisis from the safe distance of decades, it is easy to see the contrast .
 President Kennedy reached out to a broad array of advisors for help in making decisions, whereas Chairman Khrushchev had very few advisors . President Kennedy had a broad range of advisors, President Kennedy said .
 U.S. policy makers rushed to prepare an invasion of the island without knowing that the missiles were already operational . The island was guarded by 40,000 Red Army personnel armed with tactical nuclear weapons the size of the bombs dropped on Hiroshima .
 He also knew that there would have been all out war, if nuclear weapons were used on U.S. troops . He knew there would be no war, he said .
 Khrushchev mistakenly thought that the young President was callow and weak . He thought that he was weak and callow, but he later thought he was a weak man . Khruschev thought he had a chance to win the presidency .
 Khrushchev withdrew the missiles when faced with the probability that his ploy in Cuba would lead to nuclear war, and given an out by the U.S. The U.K. gave an out .
 Khrushchev had not understood when he gave the order to put the missiles in Cuba in the first place . U.S. population was unwilling to tolerate hostile nuclear missiles, he says .
 Failure to gauge the reaction of ordinary U.S. citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev’s key mistake in planning for the crisis .
 By 1962, with the advent of nuclear tipped ballistic missiles, that feeling of insulation was irrational, but it was still held by many Americans . Many Americans still believed in the belief that the threat was irrational .
 Given the massive military buildup in Florida, Castro had good reason for this belief . Castro believed the military buildup was behind the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 He may not have been completely aware of the great advantage that the United States had in ICBMs . But he did know that Russian IRBMs in Cuba could deal a massive blow to his enemy to the North .
 Castro knew Cuba would be incinerated but was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for the good of the Communistcause world-wide . Castro knew he was going to sacrifice Cuba for the better of the Cuban people .
 Khrushchev was willing to back down after President Kennedy made a formal commitment that the U.S. would not invade Cuba and that it would not help others to do so . Kennedy also made a commitment that if the missiles were withdrawn, the United States wouldn't invade Cuba .
 President Kennedy always chose actions that would not lead to war . As shown in the film, while on the one hand preparing for war if it had to come, he prepared for war . President Kennedy's actions would not have led to war.
 Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly conduct a massive military build-up in Cuba demonstrate the wisdom of President Kennedy’s approach . The Russians were able to introduce 40,000 Red Army troops and introduce 42 nuclear missiles during the crisis .
 The primary example of Kennedy’s restraint occurred on October 27 when a Russian Surface to Air missile shot down an American U-2 spy plane killing the pilot .
 President Kennedy did know that one choice led the world much closer to nuclear war and the other kept alive the hope for a peaceful resolution . President Kennedy made the choice between the two options .
 President Kennedy chose to believe that the attack on the U-2 was unauthorized . President Kennedy believed the attack was an unauthorized attack .
 Khrushchev, on the other hand, exhibited poor leadership by initiating the crisis, writes . "Krushchev's actions were not good leadership," says historian . "He started the crisis by initiating it," he says .
 Most Western historians believe that the gravest responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviets . Both sides contributed to the crisis, although most Western historians say that Khrushcheva and the Soviet Union are responsible .
 Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from invasion from the United States . Even before the crisis, with the history of the Bay of Pigs invasion and the ongoing “Operation Mongoose,” the Russians and the Cubans had reason to fear United States intentions . Furthermore, in the
 Khrushchev is reported to have made several remarks to close aids indicating that improving Russia’s nuclear capabilities and reducing the United States advantage in ICwere important to him .
 U.S. policy makers felt that its ‘nuclear shield’ was all that kept the peace in Europe . United States policy makers believed that its "nuclear shield" was all .
 This imbalance of blame most likely played a role in Khrushchev’s decision to back down and that was his saving grace . The imbalance of responsibility played a key role in the decision to end the war .
 The world and Khrushchev were fortunate that the U.S. had elected a president who had the wisdom and personal strength sufficient to resist demands for an invasion or an air strike . The world was fortunate that there was not another escalating incident .
 During the crisis he warned that there will be people who, through stupidity or because of their own agenda, would take actions to push the country toward a nuclear Armageddon . He warned that people will take actions through stupidity .
 What may have been the result had those who wanted military action against Russia, prevailed . Russia is a major ally of the U.S. in the Middle East .
 Students should note that each side has something to gain and lose in any confrontation . Best conclusion to a deadly stand-off is an honorable exit in which both parties save face as they back away .
 In 1962 the American people thought that the installation of intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba would have resulted in an intolerable change in the balance of power . However, in 1962 the U.S. thought that such a change in power would have been intolerable .
 These missiles could have destroyed every major U.S. population center killing an estimated 100,000,000 people . That was an unacceptable result for any United States leader. That was unacceptable for any .
 While the United States had more ICBMs than Russia, the two superpowers were at a stalemate . The U.S. and Russia are at a "stalemate"
 The addition of IRBMs in Cuba didn’t really change the balance of power in the U.S. The American people were wrong to regard the installation of missiles in Cuba as a substantial change in the . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was wrong to say
 It would probably have been impossible for President Kennedy to convince them of this . However, it would probably be impossible for him to convince the White House .
 There were other considerations, including the need to look strong on the International stage . The need to punish Russia for a reckless gamble, etc. etc. There were also considerations .
 A key episode in the movie Thirteen Days is the confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship which refused to stop . A key part of the movie is a confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet ship refusing to stop in the battle .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara argued that the rules had changed, given the significance of the crisis and the chances for misperception and mistake . Defense Secretary McNamara said the rules were changed .
 The response of the U.S. warship could have led to war . It was a civilian matter because the response was not a military response .
 Some may suggest that President Kennedy affirmed aggressive actions against a small, weak enemy yet supported peace when the stakes were high and the enemy was powerful . Some may say that he affirmed aggressive action against small, but supported peace .
 It appears that his peacemaker role depended upon the weight of risks and the potential for success both in political and human terms .
 Munich taught us that one concession is usually followed by a demand for another, and on and on until war results from miscalculation or when the aggressor simply goes too far . Munich showed us that a concession is often followed by another demand for one .
 Unlike the Bay of Pigs invasion, it would probably have started a nuclear war . However, like the . Bay of . Pigs invasion would have been a complete disaster, but would have started nuclear war?
 The advantage of using previously-planned-out scenarios is that they have been developed at a time of leisure when the stresses of the present crisis didn’t deprive planners of the time to think clearly and meticulously .
 See the Helpful Background section relating to the first strike option . See the helpful background section of this article for more information .
 The only justification to prepare for a first or a retaliatory nuclear strike is to convince the other side that if it strikes you, it will be destroyed in turn . "The only justification" to prepare is that if a nuclear strike hits you, you will destroy it, it's destroyed
 A memorable scene from the movie involves the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, demonstrating that the Soviets were installing missiles in Cuba .
 It turns out that Iraq did not have weapons of mass destruction or programs to make them . There was no operational link between Al Qaeda and Iraq, etc.
 Stevenson’s speech was instrumental in preventing a war and it enhanced U.S. prestige . Stevenson's speech helped prevent a war but also enhanced the United States prestige .
 The intelligence on which the speech was based has proved to be faulty, the speech has resulted in damage to U.S. prestige . Now that the intelligence based the speech on which it was based, the damage has been done .
 The civilians not only have a valuable perspective but they have the ultimate responsibility . The civilians are responsible for the deaths of Americans in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The civilian leaders must have absolute control over the military, says President Obama . Therefore, the civilian leaders should have complete control of the military .
 President Kennedy may not have wanted to send a message to Khrushchev, McNamara said . In this case, firing on the Soviet ship sent a message .
 The consensus of the world community, expressed in several treaties, is that nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons are special cases, and that their development should be controlled . The consensus is that the development of nuclear weapons is special cases .
 The general consensus is that President Kennedy displayed excellent leadership skills in this crisis . This leadership was key in avoiding nuclear war . President Kennedy was President of the United States during the Cold War .
 Any of the discussion questions can serve as a writing prompt . Assignments, projects and activities can be used to help students understand each other .
 Research sources and write an expository essay on one of the following topics . The essay can be expanded to include a power point presentation to the class .
 Write a review of the film in which you discuss the tension and seriousness of the situation as it may be evaluated by viewers .
 Compare tension, efforts to resolve the problem, and the public’s response . Compare the tension, the efforts to . resolve the issue and the response to it, the public .
 Write a proposal for a checklist of steps and decisions that the U.S. would have to make before engaging in warfare .
 To John A Tures, Assistant Professor of Political Science, at La Grange College, Georgia, for help with early drafts of this Learning Guide and to Alexander Frieden for proofreading and comments .
 TWM offers the following movie worksheets to keep students’ minds on the film and to focus their attention on the lessons to be learned from the movie .
 Dr. Strangelove, or How I Stopped Worrying and Learned to Love the Bomb, is available on Amazon.com .