 Donald Trump assumed the presidency of the United States on Jan 20, 2017 . Many believe the prestige of the office of the presidency and the position and the influence of the U.S. around the world has diminished since he took office .
 President Trump alienated NATO member states by calling them obsolete . He also supported the UK's decision to leave the EU . Trump is at odds with North Korea’s dictator .
 President Trump’s unpredictability and inflammatory rhetoric to pressure Pyongyang has instead risked the world peace . North Korea is not Iraq or Afghanistan but a nuclear power, given that North Korea isn't Iraq .
 This is not the first time the world almost came to a standstill . However, if we look back at history, this is not a repeat of what happened in history .
 Adan Makina takes us back to the era of Cuban missile crisis and how it was handled by President John F Kennedy . Makina tells us how the crisis was dealt with by President Kennedy .
 Chinese rulers of the postclassical era thought the Taklimakan Desert to be a natural barrier against foreign infiltrations . The pharaohs of Egypt saw the Sahara Desert as an obstacle for alien invaders, likewise, there was a perception in the United States that the massive Pacific and
 The objective of this research is to uncover the pitfalls of the Kennedy administration for failing to uncover Soviet military buildup in Cuba . Nikita Khrushchev’s fantasy of ensuring Soviet longevity through justification and emulation, and Moscow's morbid suspicion of foreigners-especially America and Americans .
 In words and deeds, Soviet leaders and Soviet intelligence worked exhaustively to inflict harm to the U.S. Right after the end of the Second World War, they tried to inflict significant harm on the United States .
 If the U.S. government arrogates this right to itself, it is standing on very shaky ground, he says . "It does not…possess the military might that would permit it to dictate conditions to other countries"
 The phrase “direct aggression against another country” is in reference to the United States’ policies toward Cuba . “social system” denotes the communist system established by Fidel Castro in Cuba with help from the Soviet politburo .
 Khrushchev issued this echoing message as a stern warning to the United States while the administration in Washington remained oblivious and unperturbed . The message was an echoing message to the U.S. President Nixon's administration .
 Designed to carry nuclear warheads and capable of travelling 1,100 miles, medium-range missiles were capable of striking Washington, DC, Mexico City and other cities in the south-eastern parts of the U.S. and Central America .
 The intermediate-range missiles had the capability to strike major cities in the western hemisphere from Hudson Bay in Canada to Lima in Peru . The intermediate range missiles were capable of striking major cities .
 President Kennedy noted that Soviet bombers capable of carrying nuclear warheads were being assembled in Cuba . Cuban air bases capable of accommodating the bombers remained under construction . On the other hand, President Kennedy said that Soviet planes were being "uncrated"
 The Soviet’s undaunted political irredentism and ideological obscurantism predate the Cuban missile crisis . Soviet Global political Irredentistism predates the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Soviet Union embarked on forceful territorial expansion by craftily moving southwards towards Iran and Turkey and by stealthily injecting communist thought into Greek political arena . During Josef Stalin’s reign, the Soviet Union moved southwards and into Iran, Turkey and Iran .
 After World War II the Soviet leaders embarked on a precarious mission of occupying the northern regions of Iran until the prime minister of Iran conceded defeat by promising the Soviets offer of oil to which the Soviets categorically rejected . The United States and Britain got involved with a view to controlling Soviet irred
 Stalin made various demands that included giving up of Turkish regions straddling Soviet borders, joint Soviet-Turkish administration of the Dardanelles Strait, and severing relations with Britain . Soviet demand that Turkey lease bases in the Strait exclusively for Soviet naval and land forces .
 In Greece, communism spread like wildfire leading to the formation of a right-wing government . In Greece it was led by the government of the Communist Party . The government was formed after the collapse of communism in 1968 .
 The expansion of Soviet influence in Eastern Europe coupled with the spread of communism in Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and Latin America created prolonged competition between the forces of capitalism and communism . American Demilitarization and Soviet Expansionism was the result of the Americanization of the Cold War
 The United States, assisted by the largest and the deadliest nuclear arsenals, enjoyed leverage over the seas . Despite the United States’ active-duty personnel drastically dropping from 12 million in 1945 to a mere 1. million in 1948, on the other hand, the U.S.
 This unprecedented sweeping reduction of active-duty personnel by the United States sent commotion across continental Europe especially among nations that relied on American defense against anticipated Soviet aggravations .
 America’s sublime alienation sped up the evolvement of despotic and authoritarian leaders in Asia, Eastern Europe, and Africa, in the runner-up to the Cold War . In addition to the rise of authoritarian leaders, the U.S. has also contributed to the emergence of
 The U.S. enjoyed little global dominance at the height of communism . The Soviet Union’s malevolent communist ideology blanketed continental Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Latin and South America, and the Caribbean .
 The Rise of John Fitzgerald Kennedy happened at a time when the U.S. president of the United States, kept his brother Robert F Kennedy as his closest advisor and advisor .
 This task would have been left to someone with profound knowledge of national security issues- issues related to the containment of the Soviet Union’s unabashed spherical predation and growing global communist antagonism .
 Khrushchev and his foreign minister Andrei Gromyko and others considered the new president of the United States, John F Kennedy, ‘a typical pragmatist’ while Soviet Americanists saw Kennedy’s position on USA-Soviet relations as being quite contradictory .
 Under Khrushchev, Russian people always saw America as inferior technologically and militarily . The Russians always saw the U.S. as inferior to Russia .
 Fidel Castro climbed the ladder of success with the promise of transforming the Caribbean island into a conspicuous Shangri-La . Fidel Castro is a dedicated Communist who is credited with turning the island into an icon .
 Fidel Castro-the revolutionary zealot and doyen of socialism, hung crucifixes and pictures of Virgin Mary on the walls of his office . Despite preferring ‘godless communism’ to the virtues of peace, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness enjoyed by his neighbor .
 Fidel Castro’s rise to power culminated in his resentment of the United States . His coining of the phrase ‘yanqui imperialism’ resonated across central and south America where Spanish remained the established lingua franca .
 hawkish U.S. civilian and military leaders preferred the use of force against Cuban leadership before, during, and after the Cuban missile crisis .
 The defeat of the communist regime in Havana would have ushered in the overall annexation of the island after the dust settles. Consequently, the defeat would have led to an overall annexation .
 The thought by some U.S. leaders that the imposition of tough economic sanctions would cause unprecedented economic strangulation failed to materialize . Some American leaders thought the sanctions would bring abrupt change in the Cuban political hierarchy .
 JFK and his ardent supporters in government dismantled Soviet-Cuban hostility toward the U.S. and her allies . For dovish JFK, the use of strategies that reconciled with democratic expectations and norms was key .
 JFK’s pursuit of legitimate national security prerogatives was constrained by constraints . JFK's pursuit of national security was compromised by the constraints placed on presidential powers . Such constraints and others of like measure placed on president's powers unquestionably created intrinsic predicament .
 U.S. foreign policy has been a victim of tumult and political confusion for decades . American foreign policy is a result of political turmoil and political uncertainty .
 An aura of political malevolence and penumbra of mistrust has ludicrously contaminated America’s congressional, senatorial, and presidential operations . The author says the nation's political operations have been tainted by a ‘parasolar’ aura .
 The placing of precipitous limitations on presidential powers and erosion of confidence intensified the defeat of raison d'être among members of the legislature . Members of the U.S. House of Representatives say they are disappointed by the outcome .
 Since the formation of pluralism, political parties in the American landscape-Democratic, Republican, and moderates alike-have been at loggerheads regarding the direction the nation ought to be steered .
 JFK was surrounded by a staff that had conflicting ideas about how to handle the Cuban missile crisis . Besides, JFK's staff had mixed reactions about how they handled the crisis . JFK had a staff of conflicting ideas and mixed reactions .
 JFK had little trust even for John McCone- the man who succeeded John Dulles as the highest-ranking CIA operative . JFK's trust in McCone was not strong enough for JFK to trust McCone .
 McCone assigned Philippe L Thiraud de Vosjoli who was Washington chief for French intelligence to go to Cuba and have a glimpse of the island . In early August 1962, McCone sent him to Cuba .
 de Vosjoli presented compelling evidence regarding Soviet missiles directed at the U.S. An agitated McCone asked JFK to take action about the Cuban threats .
 Because McCone was a Republican, the Kennedy’s gave little attention to his information . The Kennedy's gave little notice of McCone's information .
 McCone’s reports were leaked to the GOP who accused the president of appeasing Castro . However, McCone said the president had appeased Castro .
 All we have wanted from them was that they would behave themselves and be prosperous and happy so that we would not have to interfere with them . All we want from them is that they behave themselves, so that they are prosperous .
 Almost all U.S. presidents shared similar mental images in their concerted attempts to restrain the tiny Cuban republic . Almost all United States presidents shared mental images .
 George W Bush did little to effect change in Cuba . He embarrassed wealthy Cuban-American campaign contributors and regular voters .
 The Russians were adept at deceiving foreign leaders who felt inspired by communist principles with medallions of prestige and honor at grandiose ceremonies attended by a retinue of public figures with twenty-one gun salute .
 From Latin America to Asia to Africa the number of foreign dignitaries lining up at the Kremlin to be showered with praise must have been vast and boundless .
 U.S. national security services enjoyed superior infiltration and information gathering structures inside the Soviet Union . United States enjoyed superior and rigorous infiltration of Soviet Union intelligence structures . The United States had superior intelligence and surveillance systems inside the USSR .
 Soviets enjoyed superfluous and extraordinary array of intelligentsia where communism thrived . Soviet military advisors and multifarious intelligence networks espousing inferior intellectual paraphernalia in context and arrangement-flourished .
 The United States was turning a blind eye to the rest of the world with the exception of Western Europe . The Soviet Union expanded its sphere of influence clandestinely through antiquated blueprints .
 Even with the proliferation of Soviet military build-up across the globe during the Cuban missile crisis, the administration in Washington, DC remained reluctant at deterring Soviet global threat .
 Eisenhower's farewell reproach by statesman Eisenhower fell on John F Kennedy’s deaf ears .
 Anatoly Dobrynin was the Soviet ambassador to the U.S. during the terms of six American presidents, from John F Kennedy to Ronald Reagan . The Soviets had been perturbed by the presence of NATO missiles in Turkey, Dobrynins says .
 The Soviet Union may have been a dedicated ally of the United States during World War II, but the truth of the matter is, it transformed into a venomous serpent after the war concluded . Perhaps in direct retaliation for the 20 million Russian lives lost and the devastation wrought from 1939 to 1945
 By championing communism, Soviet leaders took a perilous road for the sake of empowering and disseminating their godless ideology of collectivism . Soviet leaders feverishly denigrated the democratic system of governance enjoyed by the U.S. and her western European allies .
 Because of the veto power of the United States and Russia, the United Nations remained equally ineffective in settling the Cuban missile crisis . The United Nations had jurisdiction over matters pertaining to international disputes . The U.S. and Russia had veto power over the issue .
 The United Nations was either ineffective or at the sidelines during the siege of Berlin, in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and in Afghanistan . The U.N. was not at the forefront of the crisis in Afghanistan or in Hungary .
 Historically, whenever a dispute arose with incumbent Soviet politburos, leaders of the U.S. oftentimes preferred settling matters of concern through diplomatic means . The behavior of key holders to the Kremlin may have appeared obstinate and inappropriate .
 Lack of rigorous national security arrangements, failure to infiltrate to the core Soviet-Cuban global conspiracy, enabled Khrushchev to clandestinely set base in communist Cuba . The absence of collective efforts to safeguard U.S. security from outside dangers by the National Security Council enabled the move .
 The absence of rigid national security establishment hindered the U.S. determination to restrain the spread of communism and contain the Cuban missile crisis, says historian John Avlon .
 Had there been been close cooperation between the various sectors of the national security establishment and had there been profound monitoring of the spread of communism in the Caribbean peninsula, the spate of Soviet aggression would have been curtailed and kept at bay .
 George Keenan's long-term policy espousing fortitude and good judgment proved productive during the presidency of Ronald Reagan . Keenan helped the U.S. contain the Soviet Union, a policy espoused fortitude .
 George Keenan, the U.S. Charge d’affaires in Moscow, was a bright career Foreign Service diplomat and Soviet expert . Keenan was a Princeton nonconformist who left significant footprints that benefited several presidents .