 Materials in the Library of Virginia’s collections contain historical terms, phrases, and images that are offensive to modern readers . CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS—STRATEGIC CONSIDERATION, OCTOBER 1962 CONTENT WARNING .
 These include demeaning and dehumanizing references to race, ethnicity, nationality, and nationality; enslaved or free status; physical and mental ability; and gender and sexual orientation; .
 In October 1962, a U.S. spy plane captured evidence of the Soviet Union moving nuclear weapons into Cuba . Cuba lies 90 miles off the coast of Florida .
 President Kennedy had to made plans within 7 days in secret, before word of this potential international issue was released to the public . President Kennedy also had to make plans within seven days before word was released .
 President Kennedy met with his most trusted advisors, including his brother Attorney General Robert Kennedy, to create a plan of action . Kennedy's brother Robert Kennedy was Attorney General John Kennedy .
 President Kennedy announced to the world that they had discovered nuclear missiles were being transported to Cuba . President Kennedy made the announcement at a press conference in Washington DC .
 The U.S. plan of action was to impose a naval blockade to prevent further shipments to Cuba . The plan was imposed by the U.N. to impose further restrictions on Cuba .
 While the blockade was successful in stopping additional nuclear weapons from entering Cuba, the missiles already in Cuba were in the beginning stages of becoming operational . The blockade was unsuccessful in stopping more nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy proposed a policy that the U.S. would not invade Cuba, if the Soviet Union removed all nuclear weapons from Cuba . Kennedy, however, chose to reject both options and rejected both .
 Soviet Union Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to this deal, partly due to a secret clause that the United States would also remove U.S. missiles from Turkey within 6 months of removing Soviet missiles from Cuba .