 Dino A Brugioni is perhaps the last surviving veteran of the high-stakes meetings on the crisis in the Kennedy White House . “We came damn close,” he says of the meetings .
 Brugioni served in October 1962 as a senior official at the National Photographic Interpretation Center, a branch of the Central Intelligence Agency . Now ninety, now ninety, he was a senior intelligence official in 1962 .
 Brugioni's job included preparing the large reproductions of the aerial reconnaissance photographs that revealed the Soviet missiles . It was his boss, CIA official Arthur Lundahl, who led Kennedy's first briefing on the matter .
 When I talked with him by phone, he sounded talkative and animated, fastidious about facts . He sounded eager to educate a younger man about the direness of the great event .
 He was highly decorated before joining CIA in 1948 and served there until 1980 . He served at CIA until 1980 and is now retired from CIA .
 Also on the list was Ralph Dungan, whom I tracked down in Barbados through his daughter in Wisconsin . He even gave me his e-mail address .
 Dungan was one of nine men, alongside the likes of Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. and Lawrence F O’Brien, who held the title of Special Assistant to the President during Camelot . Dungan served three years, under LBJ, as United States ambassador to Chile
 He had first gotten to know Jack Kennedy during the latter’s Senate days, through speechwriter Ted Sorenson . Kennedy had a close relationship with Kennedy's former Senate colleagues .
 Dungan was recruited to serve as ‘Kennedy’s spy’ on the Government Operations Committee . Dungan once recalled how he was recruited by Kennedy to serve on the committee .
 Dungan moved into the empty West Wing office that had formerly belonged to Sherman Adams, the disgraced chief of staff to President Eisenhower . Dungan, too, was eager to recall the missile crisis, even as he acknowledged that he had had nothing to do with it, professionally .
 Fenn was tapped, in 1961, to work as a staff recruiter at the White House . He was serving on the faculty of the Harvard Business School when he was tapped .
 His place within the Kennedy orbit grew over time, such as as the first director of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library . In 1972, he was named, in 1972, as the director of JFK's presidential library .
 Fenn, like Dungan, will tell you up front he didn’t work on the crisis; but he remembers well the tension that gripped Washington in the days leading up to the disclosure of the missiles on Cuba . People knew something big was happening, but not what, exactly
 Fenn has participated in numerous oral history programs, conducting lengthy recorded interviews with trained historians about his time in Camelot . Like the others I contacted, Fenn is an expert in oral history .
 We’ve married the snatches of audio to transcripts you’ll be able to read along with, while seeing photographs of the people doing the talking . We also have a transcript of some of the most important speeches in the world .
 You’ll also be able to join our live chat and pose your own questions through your Twitter or Facebook account . We'll also be offering a live chat to answer any of your questions .