 Burlatsky, ""Karibskiikrizisi ego uroki"" , Literaturnaya gazeta, November 11, 1987, p.m. Burlatatsky .
 We highlight areas in which recent discussions have most significantly advanced our understanding of the crisis . We organize our treatmentby topic-and, where possible, in chronologicalorder-on the assumption that the reader will be familiar with the main events of this crisis itself .
 The desire to deter an American invasion of Cuba emerged shortlyafter the crisis itself as the official Soviet rationale for the deployment . Most Western commentators have dismissed or discounted this motivation, however, because it seemed calculated to justify the public terms on which the crisis was ultimately resolved .
 Cuba's national pride is betterpreserved by these claims than by the admission that Cuba required assistance from another nation, in the form of a nuclear deterrent, to protect her own sovereignty . The Soviet Union had already taken risks in support of the Cuban revolution, writes Castro .
 Moscow conference highlights link between deployment of missiles to Cuba and Soviet desire to redress the strategic imbalance .
 A successful Cuban deployment could have more than quadrupled the number of warheads that Soviet missiles could have delivered on the United States . Most Western analysts have assumed that some such calculation was the primary motivation for the deployment .
 Khrushchevdenied at the Moscow conferencethat the deploymentof missiles to Cuba was a cost-effective solution to the strategicnuclear imbalance . Stationing ICBMs on Soviet soil, which required nothing extra in the way of conventionaldefenses, would have been a more
 The Soviets were experiencing in producing three-stagelong-rangerockets . There was simply no long-range option available in 1962 .
 The crucial question is whether or not the Kennedy administration intended to oust Fidel Castro . Soviet and Cuban fearsthat this was the case seem to have played an important part in the decision to deploy nuclear missiles .
 Ambassador Alekseev explicitly stated that the Cubans had ""precise data"" about American plans to invade Cuba . Cuban and Soviet intelligence apparently interpreted the plan as reflecting a policy decision of the Kennedy administration .
 Khrushchev reportsthat Anastas Mikoyan expressed strong reservations . Sergei Khrushchekchev reported that Anastass Mikoyans said it was a 'very dangerous step'
 Gromykoreports that he told Khrushchev in May that a deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba would trigger a ""political explosion"" in the United States .
 Khrushchev sent a special mission to Cuba to find out how Castro would react to the proposal . Alekseev expressed grave doubts that Castro would agree .
 Fidel Castro expressed immediate interest in the proposal, according to Alekseev . Che Guevara, President Dorticos, Blas Roca and himself- were unanimously in favor of the idea .
 The Presidium ordered the Defense Ministry to develop specific plans for missile deployment . Biryuzov reported the result of negotiations at a meeting of the Presidium on June 10 .
 Raul Castro and Marshal Malinovsky met for two weeks with Khrushchev . The first SAMs and supporting equipment for the MRBMs were shipped at the very end of July .
 Sergo Mikoyan believes that Biryuzov'sestimate was influenced by his fervent desire to redress the strategicnuclear imbalance . Del Valle interview with Sergo Moyoyan was published in the book "Biryuzova"
 Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones traveled to Moscow to secure Soviet approval for Castro's changes . They proposed that the agreement be made public immediately .
 The Cuban delegation identified Khrushchev's judgment as a serious mistake . The Soviets' greaterexperience in foreign affairs meant that the matter should be dropped .
 As part of the operation, over 40,000 Soviet troops were sent to Cuba, under secrecy so tight that only the commanding officers of the units dispatched knew where they were headed .
 Khrushchev believed from the start that the U.S. would react to the news of Soviet missiles in Cuba with moderation . Aragones interview.
 This figure is much higherthan previous American estimates, which ranged from 4,500 to 16,000 in October and November, 1962, and later went to 22,000 .
 U.S. never detected nuclear warheads in Cuba, but assumed they had arrived . Kennedy administration assumed that they would have arrived .
 Mendoza was Director of the Institutode Historia de Cuba, Cuba, May 15, 1989, Havana . He was killed in a car crash in Havana, Cuba .
 See,g., McGeorge Bundy, Dangerand Survival:ChoicesAbouttheBombin theFirstFifty years , 425. See, e.g. Bundy .
 Details of deployment in Cuba evince a high degree of Soviet self-reliance, and an equally high level of Cuban deference . Del Valle interview .
 EssenceofRevision 1155 believed that physical mechanisms preventingunauthorized use (such as modern permissive links) were built into the warheads . EssenceofRevision 1155: Physical mechanisms preventing unauthorized use were built in warheads .
 Gromykohas claimed he was instructed by Moscow to say that the Soviets were deploying a ""small quantity of missiles of a defensive nature"" to Cuba, and encouraged quiet diplomacy .
 AleksandrFomin, an officialat the Soviet embassy in Washington, met ABC's State Department correspondent John Scali . Fomin asked Scali to determine whether the U.S. would be interested in resolving the crisis by pledging not to invade Cuba in return for the withdrawal of
 The State Department began to receive a private, conciliatoryletter from Khrushchevto Kennedy between 6:00 and 9:00m. on Friday, October 26 . The State Dept. had begun to receive the message at 4:43m. The American embassy in Moscow had
 Fomin-Scali communicationwould have been too late to influencethe contentof the letter . Moscow time (early Friday morning in Washington) was many hours before Fomin's initiative .
 The president's reticence suggests that the ExComm had become largelyirrelevant to the president's decision-making at the height of the crisis .
 Some have surmised that the shoot-down was the unauthorized act of a Soviet officer . Others have supposed that Cubans had in factfired the missile, either after seizing control of the SAM site in a firefight with Soviets,103 .
 Sergo Mikoyan reportsthat neitherhe nor, so faras he knows, his father, ever heard of any conflict between Soviet soldiers and Cuban regulars,fromeither Soviet or Cuban sources .
 Othon Montero and Sergio del Valle say Cuban Armed Forces had no surface-to-air missiles . Alekseev interview;del Valle interview .
 Later that same day, an American U-2 on a routine air sampling mission in the Arcticstrayed into Siberian air space as the result of a navigational error .
 Statsenkohimselftold U Thant that Cubans shot down the American U-2 . Statsen: "Cuban soldiers shot down U.2. It is worth noting that Statsenhohimelftold told U.Thant that Cuba shot down
 RobertKennedy telephoned Dobrynin to requestanothermeeting . TheResolutionoftheCrisis met at 7:15m. on Saturday,October 27, to discuss the crisis .
 The second respect in which Dobrynin contradictsRobert Kennedy's account of the meeting helps explain the first,and the second,and concerns the status of the missile trade . The meeting took place in 1961 in Moscow .
 It appears, therefore,that the withdrawal of the Jupitermissiles from Turkeyin the spring of 1963 was indeed part of a privatedeal thatled to the withdrawalof Soviet missiles from Cuba in November, 1962 .
 The U-2 shoot-down and the inadvertentstraying of another U.2 over Soviet air space on October 27 indicated that events were slipping out of control . But perhaps as important, it appears thatKhrushchevwas influencedby a communication fromCastro throughAle
 Fomin in proposing termsforsettling the crisis; Dobryninin raising the issue of Turkishmissiles . Robert Kennedy in suggesting a deal (with the president'sknowledge, but not the ExComm's) Scali in delivering an ultimatum. Fomin .
 The Ambassador reported that Castro had given him the report face-to-face . Castro informed him that he had reliable information that an American invasion would take place .
 Castro believed the missiles should have been fired in the event of a full-scale American invasion, though not preemptively . Castro said in February 1989 that he believed missiles should be fired in event of invasion .
 Alekseev communicated to KhruInternational Security14:3 1168 gram fromCastro . Alekseyev: "It would stand as one more reminder of the significance of major miscommunicationsduringcrises"
 Ambassador Alekseev believes troops that took up positions around the missile sites were in fact Soviet soldiers in Cuban uniforms . Both Sergio del Valle and Emilio Aragones insist that the troops were Cuban anti-aircraft units .
 The American demand that Cuba relinquish weapons intended for the Cuban Air Force, wholly independently of the Soviet missile deployment,only added insult to injury . Mikoyan's success was aided by one of those curious interventions of fate: the sudden death of his wife at the very moment he arrived
 The Cuban delegation to the Moscow conference added that Khrushchev's explanation for his failure to consult Castro-that therewas simplyinsufficienttimewas wholly plausible . Aragones interview.
 Del Valle explains that between October 24 and October 24 batteries were mobilized from the reserves and were assigned to protect 28, fiftyanti-aircraft the missile sites .
 Sergio del Valle maintains that twelve Il-28s had been delivered, of which only threreewere to be transferred to the Cuban Air Force . 1170 delivered to Cuba, only seven had been assembled;145 Sergio Del Valle, however, maintains that 12 .
 Emilio Aragones, who was present throughout negotiations between Castro and Mikoyan, does not recall any discussion of the Americanthreat .
 According to del Valle, the Cubans planned to use theirIl-28s in a coastal defense role . Del Valle interview: "Mother ships from which smaller craft would carry subversives"
 The Il-28s-obsolete, short-range bombers believed to have a nuclear capability, but for which no nuclear weapons had been supplied - were to be withdrawn . The effect was to give the United States carteanche to specify which weapon system was withdrawn .
 To date, Western students of the crisishave not seen a single Soviet or Cuban document against which to check . All of the new evidence assembled here, however, has been testimonial.
 According to Soviet testimony, no written records of Kremlin decision-making were kept prior to October 22, 1962, precisely to avoid breaches of secrecy . Most relevantdecisions were made in conversationsthat were not recorded .
 International and politicalscientists believed that they would not have the chance to hear the Soviet and Cuban stories at all .