 Mohammad Qayum is the chair of the Cold War Resistance Crisis Committee . He says he is honored to be your head chair for the committee . The committee is based in Washington, D.C., New York City .
 "I was offered this committee by my Crisis Director and I accepted because I am always excited to participate in committees that deal with fun, exciting, and creative challenges," she says .
 "The West Wing" is a television series created by Aaron Sorkin . It depicts the day-to-day functions of the White House Senior Staff and the President .
 In addition to that, I spend the rest of what I have in free time playing soccer and/or watching it .
 I want all of you to know that I look forward to watching you participate in this committee . With that said, I want to watch you participate, Mr. Obama says .
 I expect a high level of debate, discussion, and formality during the course of the conference . I have no doubt that you will deliver that. I expect you to deliver that, and I'm sure you'll deliver that .
 Feel free to email me any questions you may have about the committee or this background guide .
 The Cold War Resistance Crisis Committee is a simulation of a real historical event, with a slight twist in the actual occurrences that took place during the administration of Ronald Reagan .
 Delegates can expect to be faced with the challenges of a Presidential cabinet and the surprises of national security events, along with a change in who they serve .
 The cabinet will gather at the start of the committee with a briefing of the situation in hand . The cabinet is expected to meet at the end of the week .
 The default structure of committee will be a perpetual moderated caucus . Debate structure will be the same as a perpetual moderator caucus .
 Delegates will have the chance to motion for and vote on various topics as well as sending the committee into an Unmoderated Caucus, Voting Bloc, or a Suspension . The committee will also vote on whether to send the committee to a Unmoded Caucus, voting Bl
 All debate and conference activity will be done in English . Delegates will not be allowed to use any electronic device while formal debate is in order .
 Delegates expected to remain in full decorum during moderated caucuses . Delegates are expected to stay decorum at caucuses .
 When this happens, a directive’s amendment will be separated into its own and voted on separate from the entire directive . The amendment will then be voted on separately from the whole directive .
 The Cold War 3 Davis Model United Nations Conference XVI . World War II was largest interstate conflict in the history of the world . The event was a model for the United Nations .
 The expansion of Nazi Germany took Europe by surprise, with major nations like France being over-powered . France was over-run by Nazi Germany, with the expansion of Germany taking Europe by a surprise .
 The United States joined the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to create the Allied Powers . The Allied Powers fought alongside one other in World War II .
 The relationship between the two nations was not the friendliest of ones . Yet, the relationship between them was not a friendliest one .
 The expansion of the USSR in Eastern Europe put fears in many Americans that the Russians plan to control the world . Many Americans feared that the expansion of Russia would lead to control of the world.
 The USSR was upset about the fact that the U.S. was developing their arms in addition to taking on an interventionist role in the international community . Meanwhile, the USSR was angry that the United States was developing its arms .
 The hostility and strength of both nations led to what the world now knows as the Cold War . Both nations were involved in the conflict in the 1950s .
 The small island nation was led by Fidel Castro, a dictator who embraced the ideals of communism . Fidel Castro was the leader of the island nation .
 The Best of the Humanities on the Web can be found at the National Endowment of the . The best of the humanities is on CNN.com/Heritage .
 Later that summer, construction and development began in the missile sites on the Cuban Island .
 President Kennedy warned against aggressive arms development so close to American territory . President Kennedy delivered a public warning against aggressive weapons development . The warning was made public in the wake of the threat .
 A United States U–2 aircraft took photos during one of its flights to find clear photos of the long ranging areas that included space for both medium range and intermediate range ballistic missiles . Regardless, a few months later, a U.S. Air Force photo was taken by the U.
 President Kennedy gathered a team of close advisors to figure out how the U.S. could respond to this crisis . Kennedy's team of advisors was able to come up with a plan to respond to the crisis .
 A team of advisors believed that the best option was to bomb the missile sites and follow through with an invasion of Cuba . A part of the team of advisers believed that . The best option would be to bomb missile sites, followed through with a . invasion .
 Other advisors pushed for a diplomatic route, trying to reach out to the Soviet government and garner a diplomatic agreement to stop this .
 Central Intelligence Agency: "The bay of pigs invasion" Agency: 'The bay-of-pigs invasion'
 Department of State, history.state.gov.gov: "frus1961-63v06/d60.60" Andrew. lass, Andrew. Andrew.
 While a few ships turned back in the following days, the signs of the crisis coming to an end did not look too hopeful . The crisis did not seem to be over .
 The U.S. slowly began to believe military action would be the only way to settle this once and for all . The United States slowly believed military action was the only option .
 President Kennedy did not want to give up on the diplomatic side, knowing the causes, he wanted to give it one more chance . President Kennedy decided to give the cause of the problems .
 After a series of negotiations, the crisis seemed to come to an end . 10 believed to be a letter from Gorbachev believed to have been sent .
 With a number of proxy wars taking place along with a divide in Europe, controversy looms as large as ever . With a series of proxy war taking place, Europe's political divide remains large .
 At this current moment, President Reagan has taken office and began work toward a stronger America and a communist-free world . President Reagan took office in 1980s and began working toward stronger America, a free world .
 President Reagan took a tough stance in his campaign for the presidency . Defeat of the Soviet Union was a main priority for Reagan's campaign .
 His administration is steadfast in assuring that the President reach his goal to make the U.S. the global hegemon and put an end to any Soviet Dominance .
 His main focus lies on the separation of East and West Europe, primarily in the existence of the Berlin wall . The Berlin wall is a symbol of the separation between the two parts of Europe .
 Khruschev Letter to President Kennedy is published in the Library of Congress . The letter was written by the then-Kruschev's wife, then-President Kennedy .
 Anatomy of a Controversey​, 1995, was published in 1995, and was published by the U.S. Census Bureau .
 Imagine a group of American government workers, Deputy Secretaries and some private American business owners getting together to push for the nation to win the Cold War . The group would like to see the nation win the war .
 The goal of this committee is not to extend American interest, not by the slightest, the committee says . The goal was not to "extend American interest," the committee chairman says .
 Each delegate is in there for one purpose, to serve Soviet Premier Gorbachev and work from the inside to defeat the U.S. Each delegate was in the Soviet Union to serve the Soviet premier .
 Delegates must come up with the best and most strategic methods of acting like they are working for the U.S. yet really working for it . That of course, is up to the delegates, to come up .
 GM Exxon Mobil – Born in Omaha Nebraska, the gentleman here quickly learned the ways of how to go about running a business . Exxon Mobil was born in Omaha, Nebraska, and Exxon Mobil went on to become the world's largest company .
 He now helps run a multi-million-dollar corporation and looks to use his expertise to advance this committees progress .
 Growing up as a middle class young man from Forks, Washington, nothing fascinated the art of flying more than flying . GM Boeing: "Nothing fascinated the kid more than fly"
 Vision problems held him back from becoming a pilot . His goal was to become a pilot, but vision problems kept him from doing so .
 Instead he went on to get his engineering degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
 He is now head of the world’s largest aircraft manufacturing company . From there he worked his way up the rankings .
 His knowledge about both business and engineering will be keen to his participation in the committee .
 The moment caught this young boy by surprise was watching the first ever televised Presidential debate between Senator John F Kennedy and Vice President Richard M Nixon . GM CBS – The moment that caught him by surprise is when he watched the debate .
 Ever since then, he knew he wanted nothing more than to be a television moderator, he wanted to be on the air .
 He attended Columbia’s School of Journalism, where he obtained a bachelor of journalism degree .
 His expertise in law, journalism, and business will help him contribute to plans this committee may have, he says .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles delivered an impassionate speech about the state of diplomacy in the post-World War II era . Nothing impressed the deputy secretary of state more than when he watched the speech by Dulles .
 After his graduation, he went on to receive his PhD Columbia Universities distinguished International Affairs school . He is a member of Columbia University's distinguished international affairs school .
 He now sits only a footstep away from America’s chief diplomat . He now finds himself strongly in favor of a New World Order, and sits only one footstep from the top diplomat .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense – As a graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, this man knows what it is like to rise through the ranks . As a West Point graduate, he is a veteran of the U.S. military .
 Sheriff's deputy has spent his life serving the U.S. military . Deputies say he was born into a military family and has served in the military .
 He realized that there is a chance he may be serving the wrong interests . Along the way, he realized there was a chance .
 He now finds himself amongst the top of the United States Department of Defense, something he will use to the ultimate benefit of this committee .
 Deputy Secretary of Treasury: Money, money, money is the number one thing on this boy’s mind .
 He started selling whatever he could as a school boy to try and earn some extra cash . He now sells everything he could to earn extra cash for his own life .
 Everyone knew this young man was bound for big things, especially with his entrepreneurial style . His entrepreneurial style was evident in his early days . He is now a successful entrepreneur .
 He did not attend college, but found himself successful with his start up ‘The Financial Assistance Team’ He consulted Americans on how to best invest and save their money . The Financial Advisor Team consults Americans on best investments and saving money .
 After making a lot of money, he sold his fortunes and joined the Department of the Treasury, in hopes of serving the nation and reducing waste .
 He now sits with this committee, ready to take revenge on Washington bureaucrats and career politicians . "He now sits in this committee," says Obama .
 Deputy Secretary of Labor – Coming from a poor, immigrant family, this man knows what work means . Deputy Secretary Of Labor: "This man is a man of honor and dignity"
 He studied Political Science with hopes of making a change in the world for the working-class American .
 Deputy Attorney General – When you think of the “know-it-all’s kid in class, this man can be described as just that . The man is known for his knowledge of the law .
 He had a change in heart and decided to apply for Law School instead of pursuing a career in the Pharmaceutical field . He decided to go to law school instead of career in Pharmaceutical .
 He received his Juris Doctorate from Georgetown Law and began his work in government . He began his career in government after receiving a Juris.
 He is here as a fed-up employee of the Attorney General, whom he resents . He said he is here because he is tired of his job .
 Chief of Staff to the American Ambassador to the United Nations – If you took a kid who spent his entire life studying John Stewart Mill, Adam Smith, and Milton Friedman, this is who you would have gotten . The former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is a former aide to the U.
 Now, he grows suspicious of American capitalism, and joins this body to explore options moving forward . "Now, he is looking at options," he says. "Now he's trying to find a way to get around the world's capitalism"
 42-year-old man’s family immigrated to the United States from Germany when he was just a young boy .
 The family escaped because of safety concerns with the growing Nazi government . The family was forced to flee the Nazi state in Nazi Germany .
 He applied for an internship with the CIA and began to work his way up the ladder . So, he applied for a job at the CIA . He says he hopes to be a success in the future .
 He became concerned with how the United States misused their power . Slowly, he exceled in the field of intelligence, and became concerned about how the U.S. misused its power .
 He now stands in this committee, ready to serve whomever he believes holds the world’s best interest . The committee will be heard on the House of Representatives .
 Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness – Snubbed for a higher position, this man is angry . The man was snubbed by the U.S. Department of Defense .
 He is incredibly skilled in diplomatic relations and his anger toward the U.S. government led him to the meeting today .
 He quickly adapted to become one of the best known and most respected detectives in the U.S. He is one of America's most famous detectives .
 He found himself invested in his job but slowly beginning to despise it . He found him invested in it but slowly began to despise the job . He said: "I'm not scared of it. It's time to get back in the saddle"
 He was bothered by the racial tensions that existed in law enforcement . He said he wanted to see how law enforcement dealt with racial tensions in the country .
 He joins the cabinet offering his investigative abilities and his knowledge of the ins and outs of law enforcement . He joins this cabinet .
 Chief of Staff of the Army – Another graduate of the United States Military Academy, this gentleman is amongst the most respected service members of all time .
 He studied Chinese and through his time in the Army developed relationships with some people from the Asian nation . He studied the Chinese and developed relationships .
 He joins this committee today with the hopes of addressing the issues existing against veterans .
 Despite goals to return and pursue a career in journalism, he found himself rising up in the rankings . Despite his goals, he was ranked No. 1 in the world .
 His patriotism convinced him to stay on as a service member . But as time went on and he was introduced to various pieces of literature his patriotism began to deteriorate .
 Now he finds himself ready in the committee to work for the ultimate good of humanity . Now he is ready to join the committee .
 After practicing law with a few private corporations, he became tired of the greedy mentality of corporate giants . He was tired of corporate greed and wanted to change that .
 He decided to turn to public service and served on the staff of Governor Ronald Reagan . He was recruited to come back for the campaign .
 He never seemed to recover from his hatred toward greed in American society, and now finds himself amongst this cabinet . He never seems to have recovered from that hatred .
 Deputy Director of CIA for Science & Technology – A young boy from Colorado, he remained close to home most of his life . He is the son of former President Richard Nixon .
 He started off working for the Colorado Department of Transportation, where he became a lead engineer .
 He decided to expand his service by joining the CIA to help with the manufacturing of some of their intelligence equipment .
 He was asked by the CIA Director to remain on and work on making the department the most scientifically advanced of the nation . He was also asked to stay on to make the department more scientifically advanced .
 He enjoyed working early on, but soon became resentful of the administration as a whole . Davis Model United Nations Conference XVI XVI .
 His knowledge of the scientific world in addition to his inside information on technological advancements will be key to his role in the committee .
 After a few years of work in the private sector, he was asked by a friend to come and join him in the mission to make NASA great again . He was asked to join by his friend to join him .
 He now finds himself in this committee, with close inside knowledge of NASA operations .
 She began to feel guilty of taking advantage of families with children to sell them overpriced toys, and she was good at it . She began feeling guilty of selling toys to children .
 She hoped to find a more ethical field of work by joining the public sector . She said she hoped to be more ethical in her work by working in the public .
 She finds herself as a key part of the Communications Team in the White House .
 She feels loyal to a nation willing to let companies like Toys-R-Us ruin millions of lives, she says . Unfortunately, she does not feel loyal to the nation .
 "She sits in this committee ready to have a world for the people and not the companies," she said . She said .