 In the Spring of 1962, Nikita Khrushchev sought to fundamentally alter the balance of power between the U.S. and the Soviet Union by secretly installing offensive nuclear missiles on Cuba . John F Kennedy was assassinated by President Kennedy in 1962 .
 On October 15, 1962, aerial photographs by a U-2 spy plane identified the missiles before they could be deployed . The missiles were identified by U.S. spy plane .
 Earlier in the year, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had assured the president that the Soviet Union would provide Cuba only with defensive missiles . The Soviet Union had promised to provide Cuba with only defensive missiles in exchange for defensive missile technology .
 The Soviets installed missiles on Cuba capable of hitting the northern U.S. It also was providing Cuba with tactical nuclear weapons to halt a United States invasion . The Soviets were installing the missiles in Cuba to halt an invasion of the United States .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy took to the airwaves to tell Americans that the Soviet Union was installing offensive nuclear missiles into Cuba . President Kennedy made the announcement to the public in 1962 .
 Kennedy’s goal was to convince the Soviet Union to withdraw the weapons without having to use force . Kennedy: ‘I’m trying to convince Russia to withdraw weapons without using force.’
 A quarter of the United States B-52 bombers were airborne for nearly two weeks . The U.S. also positioned United States troops in Florida to prepare for the possible invasion of the island .
 Kennedy also sought to offer the Soviet Union fig leaves to allow it to back down without losing face . Kennedy also wanted to offer Soviet Russia fig leaves .
 He pledged not to invade Cuba and agreed to remove 15 Jupiter medium-range missiles from Turkey . He also secretly agreed to take down 15 Jupiter missiles from the country .
 The White House has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military buildup on the island of Cuba . This Government, as promised, has maintained .