 Canadian Understandings of Revolutionary Cuba to the Missile Crisis of 1962 Caralee Daigle Hau Royal Military College . The Cuban missile crisis was a moment during the Cold War when rhetoric, brinkmanship, and politics intersected with notions of masculinity, empire and colonization .
 The crisis occurred at a moment of transition in Canada in which Canadians were profoundly concerned over the state of Canadian–Cuban relations and Canada’s place in the world .
 This article examines how previous understandings and preconceptions of ‘Cuba’ influenced how Canadians understood the crisis, their nation and how the Canadian government should interact with other powers . It examines how feminized and infantilized images of Cuban leader Fidel Castro in political cartoons and editor
 Both negative and positive images of Castro and Cuba were present in Canadian public discussion . Canadians utilized the same imagery to argue that their government should act in its own best interests .
 Prime Minister John Diefenbaker consulted with his Cabinet about what Canada’s official position ought to be . From Monday, to Thursday, October 25, the Cabinet discussed what Canada's official position should be .
 Diefenbaker announced to the House of Commons that Canada stood by its U.S. ally . The Canadian prime minister has been criticized for his indecision on the matter .
 Canada’s relationship with Cuba was also debated in public forums throughout the crisis . The relationship between Cuba and Canada has been debated in the past .
 The Cuban ambassador to Canada, Dr Americo Cruz, held a press conference to air the Cuban side of the story . Dr Cruz held the press conference the same day that Diefenbaker made his speech supporting Kennedy’s actions .
 Cruz confirmed the existence of the missile sites in Cuba, but insisted they were fully under Cuban control . Cruz said the missiles are fully under Cuba's control .
 President Kennedy’s decision to blockade the island was egregious, he said . Cuba wanted confirmation that the U.S. would not invade the island or continue to support counterrevolutionary forces in Miami .
 Relations between Canada and Cuba are as good as they've ever been, says Canada's ambassador to Cuba . He confirmed that relations between the two countries are still strong . Cuba is one of the most isolated countries in Latin American history .
 Stories covering Cruz’s press conference appeared in many of Canada's major daily newspapers . Cruz was invited to a press conference in Toronto .
 Cuba had missiles, but they were defensive, not offensive and Canada was not threatened . Canada was certainly not threatened by Cuba's missiles . Cuba's missile system was designed to protect its citizens .
 Overall, Canada enjoyed more cordial relations with Cuba than did the U.S. There was ambiguity about official Canadian–Cuban relations .
 The ambassador blamed the scuffle on the United Press International reporter, who was American, commenting ‘they are ‘always doing bad things to us,’” even though the reporter actually fired questions was Joe Scanlon from the Toronto Daily Star .
 This story illustrates a frustrated, temperamental, and of course, cigar-smoking ambassador, a stereotype of Cuban masculinity common in the North American imagination of Cuba as a place of pleasure, indulgence and tropical escape .
 The Vancouver Sun ran a political cartoon along with its coverage of the press conference depicting a man with ragged clothes, a sidearm, a bandolier and shotgun slung over his shoulder, overgrown hair and overgrown, unkempt hair .
 The press conference and its resulting news coverage highlight some important themes about how Canadians understood their official relations with Revolutionary Cuba as they were forming in the early 1960s .
 The manner of which Ambassador Cruz was depicted indicates larger discussions at play in the news media and Canadian opinion . Ambassador Cruz is portrayed in a negative light in the Canadian news media .
 A variety of images of Cuba and Cuban leader Fidel Castro repeatedly appeared in Canadian discourse in these years . The images of the Cuban leader and his country were often seen in Canada .
 Images of Cuba as childlike, feminized, out-of-control or simply criminal were most frequent . Images of the Cuban government were most often seen in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Sometimes the implications of the imagery used were decidedly negative, drawing from anti-communist sentiment to argue for severing ties with Cuba . Sometimes, the implications were negative .
 Canada often interpreted images of Cuba's actions in Cuba in a positive light . Other times, Canadians interpreted these images in a much more positive light, such as in Cuba .
 Many Canadians came to the conclusion that maintaining ties with Cuba was in Canada’s best interest . Ultimately, while there were undoubtedly some who wanted to completely sever Canadian–Cuban relations .
 This article integrates the role of perception and an analysis of imagery in the formation of policy . It is the first time this article has published an article in which we have published a comprehensive analysis of the use of imagery to form policy .
 The Canadian–Cuban relationship has been the subject of a number of scholarly analyses . The relationship between Canada and Cuba has been subject of numerous academic analyses .
 Trade relations between Canada and Cuba take pride of place in these investigations . Raúl Rodríguez: Trade and financial relations are a significant component of that relationship .
 Official Canadian–Cuban relations date back to the late-eighteenth century . Salt fish, potatoes, and lumber were sent to Cuba in exchange for sugar, rum and exotic fruits .
 This trade relationship continued steadily until the end of the twentieth century . The relationship between the U.S. and China continued to grow steadily .
 Canada and Cuba have maintained constant trade over the years since the latter’s revolution, which is noteworthy given the American embargo . Cuba and Canada have also kept constant trade since the revolution .
 Canadian financial and banking institutions also had a significant presence in Cuba . Canada's continued involvement in Cuba was an important aspect of Canada’s continued involvement .
 The role of perception, image, and imagination in the formation of foreign policy is also a significant consideration in studying Canadian–Cuban relations .
 Ryan M Touhey has recently shown how important perceptions of foreign leaders were in Diefenbaker’s foreign policy formulation . Touhey shows that perceptions of world leaders were important to the US foreign policy . Ryan has also shown that perceptions were important in the formulation of Dief
 Indian leader Jawaharlal Nehru favored non-alignment . Touhey convincingly demonstrates that stereotypes and perceptions led to the former’s relegation to the sidelines in Canadian foreign policy .
 Touhey’s work demonstrates that Canadian policymakers were just as susceptible to cultural stereotypes as the rest of the populace . Touhey points the way to other studies on the impact of popular opinion and public debate on foreign policy formation, especially in Diefenbaker's government .
 Lana Wylie also utilizes this notion of perception in policymaking . However, she turns the concept inwards, using it to make policy decisions .
 Perceptions of Cuba is a study of American and Canadian perceptions of themselves . In her work, Wylie demonstrates how these ideas had a role in determining each country’s policy towards Cuba .
 American identity was characterized by the notion of Manifest Destiny and control over its own hemisphere . The nation's identity was defined by Manifest Destiny . The U.S. was defined as the nation of America .
 Canadian identity has been characterized by the idea of the “good international citizen” and a peaceable middle power . Canadian identity is characterized as the ‘good citizen’ and peaceable .
 Canada wished to explore multilateral and inclusive alternatives to Cuba . These differing perceptions led to the U.S. taking a stricter stance towards Cuba . The United States took a tougher stance on Cuba .
 The Revolution began in earnest when Castro, based in the Sierra Maestra mountain range, began challenging the corruption he saw as inherent in Fulgencio Batista’s regime with guerrilla tactics . The Revolution culminated in Castro's successful march into Havana on New Year's Eve 1958
 Castro became something of a media darling in the wake of these interviews . Castro is now something of an international media darling . Castro's interview with CNN's John Sutter led to a flurry of headlines .
 Official relations between Cuba and the United States quickly deteriorated . Despite this initial interest, official relations between the U.S. and Cuba quickly deteriorated.
 President Dwight D Eisenhower took a dim view of several of Castro’s policies, particularly the show trials of his people . The show trials, suppression of counterrevolutionary ideas, and communist influences in his government were disturbing from the American point of view .
 By the time Castro visited North America in 1959, Eisenhower decided it would be better not to meet with him in person, and instead went golfing . Eisenhower decided to go golfing instead of meeting with Castro .
 Castro's 1959 North American visit was a success, at least from a media relations perspective . Nevertheless, Castro’s 1959 North America trip was a successful media relations success .
 In July 1960, Eisenhower suspended American sugar imports from Cuba, which had a significant impact on the island’s economy . Eisenhower suspended the sugar imports in July 1960 .
 The U.S. imposed a partial embargo on Cuba in October . Food and medicine were exempt from the embargo .
 While the American–Cuban relationship deteriorated swiftly, the Canadian relationship remained stable . While the U.S. relationship with Cuba deteriorated, the relationship with Canada was stable .
 Prime Minister Diefenbaker maintained an official diplomatic relationship and trade ties with Cuba for a variety of reasons . Cuba was Canada's first diplomatic relationship with the U.S. government .
 Jason Zorbas demonstrates that Diefenbaker’s reasoning was entirely logical and consistent . Diefinbaker's policies in Latin America were consistent and logical, he says .
 Diefenbaker’s promotion of Canadian relations with Latin America was a continuation of trade strategy from the St Laurent years . He was not interested in defying U.S. edicts on trade with Cuba merely for the sake of defiance .
 Certain goods which were not specifically military in nature but could be used by the military, such as aircraft engines, were subject to case-by-case review for export permits . Aircraft engines are subject to a review by the Ministry of Defence .
 Canadian policy statement stresses restrictions on non-strategic goods to Cuba would make little sense . It would be holding Cuba to a stricter standard even than the Soviet Union or China, it says .
 Goods of U.S. origin would not be bootlegged to Cuba through Canada as a back-door route . Goods of United States origin not being bootlegged into Cuba as a way to get there .
 Almost immediately after Fidel Castro took power, Canadians began to react . Canadians reacted almost immediately after the Castro regime took power .
 Many reactions were negative, and drew from widespread anti-communist sentiment common in the Cold War context . Many of these reactions drew from Cold War-era anti-Communist sentiment .
 Anti-communist sentiment helped create the idea that Castro was potentially dangerous, that his Revolution may have been helped along by the Soviet Union . North Americans needed to be on guard .
 The image of Castro as dangerous, and even criminal, began to appear in correspondence almost immediately . Castro's image of him as dangerous and criminal began to be printed in correspondence .
 In November 1960, Jesus Mendez wrote Diefenbaker, accusing him of maintaining relations with Cuba only because Castro had not nationalized Canadian banks . Mendez accused him of not nationalizing Canadian banks because he had not .
 As a refugee from Cuba, he knew exactly what the country was becoming under Castro’s rule, he said . He pointed out that, as a refugee, he was aware of what was happening under Castro's rule .
 A letter to the editor of the Calgary Herald in the aftermath of the missile crisis expressed similar sentiments . A similar sentiment was expressed in a letter from the editor in the 1970s .
 Author insisted that Canada was a democratic country and continued support of Cuba was criminal . The author insisted that continued support for Cuba was a criminal .
 Castro was also frequently identified as being single-handedly responsible for all the evils in Cuba . Castro was often seen as a single-handed responsible for the evils of Cuba .
 One pamphlet sent in to Prime Minister Diefenbaker is a good example of the role in which Castro was often cast . The pamphlet was sent in by Castro to the PM .
 Terror is depicted by a man sitting by a ringing phone, with a petrified look on his face . Terror depicted by man sitting with ringing phone with petrified face .
 Kidnapping is shown by a woman attempting to prevent a sickle-and-hammer-tattooed arm from stealing a child . Perhaps a reference to rumors that Cuban children would be sent to the Soviet Union for nefarious reasons .
 Atheism depicted as sickle-and-hammer-clad combat boot, tromping on rosary and crucifix . Atheism is depicted as a sickle and hammer-clothed combat boot . Atheists are depicted as tromped on a rosaries and crucifix
 This pamphlet was meant to shame those who allowed such travesties to be visited upon the Cuban people . It was intended to be a warning of the travesty . The Cuban people are still suffering .
 As soon as Castro became associated with communism, Canadians began to object to the idea that Canada might continue to trade with a communist country led by an individual .
 Whether or not Canada should continue trading with Cuba was often on the public’s mind, but never more so than when specific incidents brought it to the forefront . Canada's relationship with Cuba has been strained in recent years .
 In late 1960, Minister of Trade George Hees met with a Cuban delegation . He met with the Cuban delegation in Havana .
 Cuban trade delegation came to Canada to secure relations and discuss trade policy . As John Kirk and Peter McKenna have pointed out, this is not the first time Cuba has visited Canada .
 Hees publicly commented that one could not find better businessmen anywhere . After the meeting, Hees said that one of the best businessmen anywhere in the world .
 He was forced to go on Canadian Broadcasting Corporation’s television program Front Page Challenge and apologize .
 Reaction against his apparent eagerness to deal with Communist Cuba was vitriolic . Reaction to his apparent willingness to engage in Cuba's Communist Cuba has been met with vitriolic reactions .
 This writer assured Hees that he knew what he was talking about, having spent 25 years there . Hees: "This is a great place to go, and it's a good place to spend time"
 The reference to criminal behavior is used to refer to trade dealings . The reference is often used to reference criminal behavior .
 Many believed it was wrong and dangerous to try and continue trade with Cuba given its communist leanings . Many believed that it was simply wrong to try to continue trading with Cuba .
 There were a number of negative images present in the public imagination in the early years of Canada and Revolutionary Cuba’s relationship . These ideas entered public discussion about specific issues such as trade .
 Images resurfaced during the missile crisis of October 1962 . Images were often found in editorials, political cartoons and letters to the editors of various daily newspapers .
 In these images, Cuban leader was variously depicted as a pawn, a child having a temper-tantrum, a naïve girl, or an unknowable and unpredictable menace .
 A number of political cartoons in Canadian newspapers during the crisis made this point visually . The cartoons were published in Canada during the 1980s .
 The first depicts a chess game in which Kennedy and Khrushchev are the kings . The second depicts the two men playing chess games .
 Castro is smaller and looks apprehensive as he awaits the next move . Castro, a pawn placed in between them, is smaller than Castro . Castro is a pawn in between Castro and Castro .
 Another cartoon shows an upside-down Castro being used as a slingshot by a much larger and ominous looking arm . The image is shown in a suit and shirt with a sickle-and-hammer cufflink .
 While Castro is not literally a pawn in this cartoon, he is nevertheless a tool and weapon in the hands of another . Castro is still a tool in the hand of another, the cartoon shows .
 Another cartoon shows a fly, sporting a beard and army cap, with wingtips spelling out Cuba, perched precariously on top of a button . The caption tells us the button is the “panic button” about to be smashed by an enormous hammer bearing the American flag .
 Another common way of portraying Castro and Cuba during the crisis was through gendered or youthful images . Another way was to depict Castro was to portray him as a young man .
 The Regina Leader Post cartoon shows a woman sitting in the lap of a Soviet military officer, their arms around one another with obvious romantic intent . The cartoon was published in October 1962 .
 The woman, representing Cuba, is glaring at her brother sitting next to her younger brother . The younger brother is wearing a cap with “Guantanamo” written on the rim, jauntily dressed in a sailor outfit .
 Cuba has little regard for her own self-interest, and even her younger brother, the small slice of American-controlled Cuba at Guantanamo Bay, knows better than she does . Cuba has no regard for its own self interest, and the U.S. has little respect for the Cuban
 Rather than relying on the Soviet man for her needs, Cuba would do better to keep it within the family, so to speak, and stay close to home . Cuba should not rely on the Soviets for its needs, says the Cuban president .
 Cuba was portrayed as a child, not responsible for its own actions and prone to temper tantrums . Cuba was also often portrayed as not responsible and not responsible .
 Louis A Pérez Jr. has shown how Cuba has been represented in 88 C Daigle Hau American political cartoons, using figures such as women to show that Cuba was incapable of self-government .
 Such depictions reinforced the American sense of moral righteousness which accompanied the expansion of empire . Such depictions of the U.S. of empire reinforced a sense of . moral righteousness .
 These images were also utilized in the Canadian public discussion. Certainly these images were used in the public discussion .
 A letter to the editor of the Vancouver Sun drew on this iconography during the Cuban crisis . “I think it is time for the Cuban people to grow up and stop blaming others, the Americans, for their troubles.” A letter from the editor said it was time for
 The demand to “grow up and stop blaming others sounds remarkably like an all-knowing parent speaking to a child . The demand for "grow up" is remarkably similar to a parent's advice to children .
 The last common negative image used to describe Castro during the crisis was more powerful and frightening than the trope of pawn, female or child . Sometimes Cuba appeared as an unpredictable entity, sometimes Cuba appeared to be unpredictable .
 This is the symbol used by the cartoon discussed at the beginning of this article in the context of the Cruz press conference . The symbol used in the cartoon is that of the symbol Cruz used to refer to .
 That cartoon showed a gun-toting, bearded Cuban with an over-excited look about him, and is, by inference, a terrifying entity to be in control of nuclear weapons . That cartoon is by inference to be a terrifying image of a terrifying man in control .
 Castro was an “unstable trouble-maker” who was resistant to Soviet control, says historian . Castro was ‘unstable’ and unreasonable in his demands, he says . Castro’s demands were unreasonable, he adds .
 Castro as an unpredictable and possibly insane rebel was an image which would have struck close to home for many Canadians . Castro as a possible insane rebel would have been an image of an unpredictable rebel . Castro's image of the Castro image would have hit close to the home of Canadians .
 Canadians understand and made meaning of Canada's official relationship with Cuba . However, this negative and suspicious interpretation was not the only way in which Canadians understood . Canada’s official relationship between Cuba and Cuba has been strained .
 During the missile crisis, some used these images to express support, even if sometimes patronizing support, for Cuba’s position . Canada should maintain its diplomatic ties with Cuba .
 The image of Cuba as too infantile to fend for itself was inverted and that very youth became the reason why it had to defend itself and accept the Soviet weapons in the first place . Cuba's youth was the reason for accepting the weapons .
 A letter to the editor of the Toronto Daily Star conveys this sense succinctly . A letter from the editor to the Star conveyed this sense of the importance of this article .
 Cuba's plight is like that of the weak boy attacked by the neighborhood bully . Once assaulted, a weakling seeks help to prevent further hurt to himself . Cuba’s plight is similar to that of a weak boy .
 It is imperative that Canada not aligns itself with the US, but maintain friendly and independent relations with Cuba . Cuba, like the victim of any bully, needs friends, it needs friends. Canada should not align herself with the U.S.
 Canada is a kid on the block big enough to stop American bullying . Cuba is depicted as the helpless bullied child, but Canada is big enough . Canada is the world's largest country .
 In these early years, there was a common belief that the U.S. was pressuring Canada to sever ties with Cuba . The belief was fuelled by PM Diefenbaker’s sometimes strident nationalism .
 Some individuals congratulated Diefenbaker for maintaining Canada’s independence . Others congratulated him for standing up to a potential bully and standing up .
 I feel that the course you have chosen is not only admirable because it displays independent action on the part of our country but will rather promote the cause of freedom in a most effective manner . Unfortunately, our neighbors to the south have at times, perhaps inadvertently, alienated any possibility of maintaining friendly
 U.S. had alienated China and Cuba and attempted to stop Canada from trying to help them help themselves . In other words, the United States had alienated .
 Lester B Pearson’s files from his term as Leader of the Official Opposition use the same language and express the same sentiments, indicating this was a fairly common sentiment . However, there are a number of letters in Pearson's files from the . term that use the . same language .
 McPhee wrote to Pearson to inform him that he opposed Canada losing a customer, merely to “pamper the Pentagon” and accused the Liberals of changing their policy in an attempt to discredit the government . The Liberals changed the policy in a bid to discredit them, Mc
 Another letter stated frankly that its author pleaded “not for the Cuban leaders.” Another letter said that the author pleaded for Cuban leaders to be careful .
 He agreed with Diefenbaker's approach to Canada’s Cuba policy, and believed that Cuba should be treated no differently than China or the Soviet Union .
 Trade should continue, as long as the goods traded had no military value . Trade should not be allowed to be traded without military value, he says .
 Much of the overtly gendered or infantilized language recedes in these letters . Instead, the language of solidarity and nationalism becomes the central theme .
 The Fair Play for Cuba Committee organized a number of protests during the week of the crisis . The group organized a series of protests throughout the week .
 The Canadian branch was formed by Vernel and Anne Olsen in 1961 . For the first few years of the FPCC’s existence, they traveled to Cuba, helped Cubans who wanted to travel to Canada . 90 C Daigle Hau arranged student exchanges and trips, and produced
 FPCC supported Canada’s continued trade with Cuba after the U.S. embargo was put in place in late 1960s . The FPCC was in favour of continuing trade between Canada and Cuba .
 The FPCC had protesters in front of the American consulate in Vancouver on the same night Kennedy said missiles were in Cuba . The U.S. planned to blockade the island .
 Another FPCC-organized protest in Winnipeg received press attention as well . Well-dressed men and women, some holding the hands of small children .
 The protesters were trying to force the public gaze to recognize that a nuclear war would hurt everyone, including children . Here, they were using the image of a child, but rather than casting Cuba itself as a child .
 Another protest was organized by the FPCC in Toronto in front of the American consulate on Tuesday, October 23 .
 No fair-minded person will deny Cuba the right of self-defence against forces being unleashed by the powerful U.S. forces . Cuba has the right to self defence against the powerful United States, it says .
 The ordinary people of Canada and the U.S. have nothing in common with the US rulers in Washington . We are not prepared to go to war against the people of Revolutionary Cuba, he says .
 Signed by national chairman Vernel Olsen, it was a call to arms for Canadians and Latin Americans to stop the imperialists from instigating nuclear war .
 They argued the Cuban situation was not of Castro’s making, and that there was another way to understand what was happening . They argued that there were other ways to understand the situation .
 Olsen and the FPCC were trying to stress solidarity . Olsen: "The message is solidarity. It's solidarity" The FPCC said the message was solidarity .
 Cuba, a small power, was simply trying to protect itself against what it saw as a real threat to its existence . Cuba was simply protecting itself from what it thought was a threat of its existence.
 During the crisis, the CCFC also staged a protest, though smaller than those of the FPCC, in Toronto . The FPCC was also protesting in Toronto during the crisis .
 These solidarity groups had relatively small memberships and their protests were attended by only a few hundred people . They nevertheless successfully made their opinions and views of Cuba known .
 The truth American Review of Canadian Studies 91 about Cuba has widened the scope of public debate about Cuba in Canada . Cynthia Wright has suggested that solidarity groups circulated their version of the truth about Cuba .
 A newspaper article published shortly after the missile crisis hints at one of the most important themes present in public discussion on this subject .
 Bruce West argued that in all this discussion about Cuba and Canada and how Prime Minister Diefenbaker handled the crisis and trade relations, one important issue had yet to be identified . In this piece, columnist Bruce West argues that in the discussion about Canada and Cuba, an important issue
 Canada’s decision to continue to trade with Cuba was not the problem, West says . West objected to the “almost malicious satisfaction in flaunting our great independence” in that decision .
 Canada was displaying a kind of adolescence in which moral principles were being sacrificed in the interests of what seemed to be a narrow kind of Canadian pride . On the contrary, we were displaying a sort of adolescent in which certain important moral principles are being sacrificed .
 His position was not based on the fact that Cuba and Castro were communist or dictatorial, he says . Contrary to many others who objected to trade with Cuba, he said .
 His objections were based on the fact that Canada was exerting an independent trade policy, regardless of morality . Canada was proud to exert its independent trade policies, even if morality was involved .
 In this scenario, the childish tendencies were being displayed by Canadian leaders in their nationalist belief that trade with Cuba was an assertion of independence from American influence . The Canadian leaders were being shown in their childish tendencies .
 West objected to the policy of maintaining trade relations with a country solely to assert independence from another . The West objected .
 Some Canadians say trade with Cuba was the main purpose behind continued trade . However, for some Canadians, this sentiment was the whole purpose behind the trade deal .
 An editorial appearing in Maclean’s magazine after the missile crisis echoed some of the same sentiments . Maclean's editorial was published in the same year after the crisis .
 He claimed that continued relations with Castro had done significant damage to Canadian relations with the U.S. and it was time to stop .
 There was debate about what the continued relationship with Cuba meant for Canadians . Like West, this editorial shows there was debate over what it meant for Canada to have Cuba .
 Both commentators were tapping into the burgeoning discussion, which would heat up in the months following the missile crisis, about whether Diefenbaker should remain in power .
 Canadian–American relations were under significant strain, but, it remained to be seen whether that would in fact cause a significant change in Canadian–Cuban relations .
 The previous two commentators objected to what they saw as a perverse and self-defeating nationalism behind maintaining ties with Cuba . There were plenty of Canadians who whole-heartedly subscribed to this particular brand of nationalism, both before and during missile crisis .
 92 C Daigle Hau was not well-known publicly and there was considerable support for continued Canadian– Cuban relations . Scholars have recently shown that the U.S. state department may have encouraged continued Canadian ties with Cuba .
 One letter to the Prime Minister stressed that there was nothing wrong with Canada acting in its own best interest . One letter also stressed that Canada acted in the country's own best interests .
 This letter questions why so many Canadians think of the United States “as a heaven-sent Big Brother” who only wanted to help Canada . This letter includes a letter from the author of a book about the U.S. government .
 He stressed that the United States would not act unless it was in its own best interests and neither should Canada . The U.S. will not act in Canada's interests, he said .
 Canada perhaps needs to stop acting like a younger brother, grow up, and act in its own best interests . The central theme here is that Canada needs to grow up and act its own interests .
 The imagery of childhood is still present, but increasingly more common in letters from Canadians was the sentiment that Canada needed to assert itself and stop worrying about what the U.S. might do .
 Ethel Sorenson condemned the actions of the U.S. and praised Diefenbaker for maintaining trade ties with Cuba .
 This article has explored how Cuba was represented in Canadian opinion in the early 1960s . Canadians used those representations to make meaning of their official relationship with Cuba .
 While there were a significant number of negative images of Castro and of Cuba, there were also a number of Canadians who understood those same images in a more positive way .
 In some interpretations, Cuba was a child in need of protection or a potential ally . Cuba was trying to chart an independent path in a world where superpowers relations required them to take sides .
 In the end, these early representations of Cuba soon merged with understandings of Canada . Many began to argue that whether or not one agreed with Castro’s policies, Canada needed to act in its own best interests .
 By examining how preconceived notions and images of Cuba and of Canadians’ view of themselves worked in this period, I suggest that we can more fully understand another aspect of why Diefenbaker—and his successors—stood by this particular policy .
 Examining the nature of Canadian opinion of early Canadian–Cuban relations, therefore, reveals more complex issues and relationships of the period . Examining a history of Cuban relations in Canada reveals the complexity of the relationship of Cuba and Canada .
 Raúl Rodríguez notes that the Royal Bank of Canada had 23 branches in Cuba at the time of the Revolution . The Bank of Nova Scotia had eight branches, the Bank of Ontario had eight .
 Confederation Life, Sun Life, Crown, Imperial, Imperial and Manufacturer’s Life . Confederation Life .
 For a discussion of Canada’s red scare and Cold War context see Reg Whitaker and Steve Hewitt, 2003, for a discussion .
 For a discussion of rumors of child abduction in post-revolutionary Cuba, see Karen Dubinsky, 2010 . For more information on child abductions in Cuba, visit www.cuba.org .
 Chisholm to Minister of Trade George Hees, Chairman Economic and Foreign Affairs Committee, December 10, 1960, Diefenbaker files, Series VI, Vol. Vol. Chishlm . Chishelm to minister of trade George .
 Alberta Brown wrote to PMO in June 1962 . Letter from Alberta Brown to the PMO, June 1962, Diefenbaker files, Series VI, Vol. Vol. 1 .
 Various scholars have examined the role of gendered language in foreign policy formation . The role of gender language has been examined by scholars .
 For an excellent comparative analysis of gendered language discussion of the policies of John Diefenbaker and Lester Pearson, see Cavell, Janice.08.08 .
 Letter to the editor from Mary Meil, Vancouver Sun, Oct. 26, 1962, 4. 4.
 Cuban Dictator causes Difficulties Over Verification of Soviet Withdrawal, Winnipeg Free Press, October 31, 1962, 1; “Castro vetoes UN observers,” Ottawa Citizen, November 1, 1962 . “U Thant Tries Again To Move
 Letter to the editor, signed Dorothea Billing, published October 26, 1962, 6.6.
 Letter to the editor, signed June Black, published October 26, 1962, 4. 4.
 Letter from Paul J Selverras to PMO, 20 December 1960, Diefenbaker files, Series VI, Vol. 1, 1960 .
 Some were English translations of Castro’s speeches . Others were reports from various Canadians, students and otherwise, who had been to Cuba .
 Letter from Taylor Fitzpatrick, January 8, 1961; Letter from Mrs I Lewis, no date, Hamilton, Ontario . Letter from Michael Brady, December 22, 1960, McLean, Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan .
 Diefenbaker files, Series VI, Vol. Vol. 7, show many examples of similar sentiments in the files . The files are available in the series VI and 7,000 pages of the book .
 She is working on her manuscript about the Canadian experience of the Cuban missile crisis . She is also working on a book about Canada's experience in Cuba .