 The events train hundreds of senior military officers and of October 1962, their origins and their origins . The events fill journals as different as Time and Time and ment in 1980 produced yet another instruc in 1980 .
 Its author opened torians quarrel over the meaning of public and his work by declaring, ""The Cuban Missile private documents, attempting to unravel some Crisis has become the classic case of national of national"
 A Case Study in National Security Mansarily expresses those of the Naval War College agement (Washington, DC: National Defense or the United States government)
 The high stakes of policyfolklore of American policy-making. Finally, it exemmay not have taken place. It has entered the plifies the incredibly high stakes .
 Like any making in the nuclear age, the crisis has an easily discerned good play . The twists and turns of Kennedy administrabeginning, middle, and end. Like any good play, the nuclear crisis has a easily discernable end .
 Even its length policy in October 1962 represent the swayprovides just the right touch of ing of an accomplished tightrope superstitious foreboding .
 Three clusters of reasons account for this over the shoulders of the great as they play a extraordinary influence of a two-week episode chess game of world-historical importance that occurred two decades ago .
 Three years ago, in Schlesinger Jr., McGeorge Bundy, and ofTime magazine, Robert Kennedy was a band of Kennedy administracourse Robert Kennedy administration .
 Khrushchev puts the missiles in, article suggest a third reason perhaps the most Kennedy confronts him, . Kennedy confronted him, and he pulled them out .
 The crisis remains, story line a U-2 spy plane wanders over Soviet quite simply, the last major, indisputable, and air space during the crisis . The president is widely applauded success of American arms .
 Arresting images abound of Soviet duplicity . U.S. warships intercept Soviet freighters, Russian withdrawal of missiles from Adlai Stevenson confronts U.N. Cuba .
 American American policy at that time today today today statesmen triggered the crisis by misleading deprecate the by nuclear weapons in the role played Soviets; acted with disproportionate the crisis . We may doubt that their belligerence in confronting counterparts would them; agree with them.
 Soviet military build-up appears to be an evanescent or effec-long-gone set of circumtively dismantled the Monroe Doctrine, or namely, far-reaching American nuboth .
 On the whole, these judgments clear superiority. appear excessively harsh and hindsighted. The judgments . appear overly harsh and retrospectively . appear excessively .
 The deployment of the missiles, and the well, United States forces had reached a post-war peak accompanying deceit, U.S. forces had . The well, the well and deceit, posed a far from of size, trivial efficiency, and modernity .
 American forces in Europe posearly warning and defensive systems sessed their full and by complements of men and arms . The draft not ca's declared policies. In that prethreat to American security by outflanking Vietnam era, outflanked Vietnam era .
 Only Kennedy provided top notch manpower, but also administration's mix of coercion and coercion had andcreated a vast mobilizable reserve .
 At the prudence, the Soviet Union found itself same time, Soviet conventional compelled to forces had withdraw the missiles without reaching their post-war any nadir, thanks to open quid pro quo .
 Khrushchev's policies of spending vast sums on private. private. military. spending .
 The Kennedy administration had nuclear weapons was andnoeconomic development at more likely before the crisis than in its the expense of aftertraditional arms . A thirdCastro unusualby aspect of the crisis lies in force of arms .
 We should ask whether depth-charging of a Soviet submarine not with the crisis itself can and should serve as an standing standing. Rather, we should ask if depth-charge of a submarine notwiththe crisis itself .
 Berlin crisis is appropriate model for those studying crises before, for expolicolic or for those conducting it . To be sure, we had faced nonviolent confrontations before . Berlin confrontations are a model for others studying crises .
 If we accept the view that the use of force changes a whole array of political the crisis does not destroy its value asand anbureaucratic relationships, we may doubt archetype, or worse, make it a profoundly . We must, however, ask ourselves whether the uniqueness use of
 The difference that the Cuba itself in 1962 serious use of force would have made becomes the difference . The brevity and localized nature of the crisis made it unique, the writer says .
 The events of Octoand organizations described by Allison and ber 1962 created considerable tension between others, the incessant discussions, consultations, military men seeking to protect those under theirand collective giving of advice, provide much of command .
 The direct clash between Soviet and American forces constitutes a fourth unique aspect of the larger, more variable, and more extensive ones . American men seeking to win more time for negotiations .
 American and face will not bring us close to nuclear war (unless Soviet leaders have since attempted to avoid any the conditions of parity change radically), will direct confrontation between their armed forces. occur under conditions of nuclear equality .
 By and large, American tional strength, will involve the use of force . Will allies (including the normally fractious General de in all likelihood involve us with Soviet clients Gaulle) fall into line? No Soviet ally rather than the Soviets themselves .
 Even Fidel all likelihood, be protracted and politically comical . Even Fidel will likely be protracted .
 The remain singularly unrepresentative of post-war focus of the drama on the two gigantic primary crises . It offers precious little historical antagonists in no way resembles most post-warguidance for American statesmen today . Third parties play far larger roles in American conflicts .
 Central America, the Middle East, or WERE application application application IT simplyof the of alessons the matter of hislessons .
 The Contadora group, the Arab states, or is much worse than that. But it powers (the Contadoras group, Arab states) or the Arab groups, oris much worse .
 Clausewitz, after all, argued ples of crisis management take the actions of the that war is the continuation, not merely the Kennedy administration and generalize them, product, of policy . Clausewitz argued that crisis management is a product of the war .
 McNamara's denigration of strategy but derives its logic entirely is ""exaggerated,"" but not fundamentally erroneously from politics . During a war, not making the crisis the pre-eminent example of how statesmen should conduct security policy must dominate all others .
 He argues that ""coercive diplomacy"" and ""sigsupervision of generals and their forces by naling"" have substituted ""politico-military stratpoliticians" He advocated, therefore, for the close ous, argues that .
 Clausewitz's notion that war is not simply second, the deliberate slowing down of milthe threat of war is a political use of military itary movements to allow for communistrength .
 Clausewitzian would disagree, arguing that even For the crisis management theorist, the if one were to accept the . threatened use of force serves theorist's premises, the statesman must inevitably only as a means of communication with one's fall victim to what Clausewitz called friction, or opponent
 Murphy's Law is sometimes used to affect dency of things to go wrong, of people not to get enemy's will, or simply of denying him possesmessages or to misunderstand or deliberately igsion of that which he desires . He rejects or ignores other uses of Murphy's
 This restrictive nore them, of large organizations to fail in their understanding reduces strategy to applied cogmissions for a host of unforeseeable reasons . Large organizations failing to understand their strategy reduces strategy for the sake of their business .
 If nitive psychology, or even the art of non-verbal misunderstanding or failure to control one's forces communication, forces communication . Nitive psychology is a form of art that forces communication.
 The crisis management theois is enough to cause war, Clausewitz would say, rist fears above all else misunderstanding that mankind is doomed to chronic struggle . In one case, the forty year nuclear peace estimate the bellicosity of the other .
 The es-is an inexplicable accident. sence of international politics and the roots of conflict are not competing interests and seething hatreds, but misperception . The root of conflict in Syria is not competing . interests, it is misperceptions .
 The theory of crisis management shaped equally the misperceptions, crisis management theoristsreal policies of the administrations that inherturn to another favorite case, the eruption of ited its legacy . For an example of THE an CUBANan enormous enormous enormousimpetus MISSILE to the
 Perception had little to do with the issue relationship between U.S. and American politico . Statesmen understood each military thought and the feebleness of American other better than they later thought .
 The crisis management theorist says the historical record means little . But for the crisis theorist, again, the history means little, he says . Crisis management theorist: "History means little"
 A third element argues that the Athenian historian's attention to the crisis management theorist from his to the deeper causes of war was misplaced . The historian argues that his attention to crisis management theory from crisis management theorists was misplaced.
 He agreed, but he said ""we can do it."" their use of their use, and the tightly controlled escalation of . their use . He agreed that it was difficult . the air war over North Vietnam included the .
 McNamara and his colleagues did not, or civilian leaders paid little attention to the misperhaps could not, understand the strain that conduct of the war . Vietnamization or pacification, for example, was Vietnamization .
 North Vietnam manders knowingly to place their men in tactithrough aerial bombardment . They preferred instead to crisis management placed on military instituconcern themselves .
 The U.S. military is trying to get right those trinsically hidebound if not obtuse, and dangerthings the crisis management theorist would ously bellicose to boot . Instead, the civilians command in Washington acted as if crisis mantaught themselves that military men
 It gave them a tremendous sense of their own competence,6See Stephen P Rosen, ""Vietnam and the Amer.their ability to handle complex politico-military ican Theory of Limited War,"" International situations confidently, and independent of milSecurity 7:2 . itary
 The plan was that the only plan would wear out the and wear out, but it meant little in Communists . Communists would have had the broader context of America's unacknowledged role in the plan .
 Crisis management, by interception, will serve as a welcome, but all too definition a short-term outlook, has replaced temporary, sedative . If, asrage, in which an incident such a . incident such as . Egyptair McNamara proclaimed, ‘Crisis management,
 During the 1960s the American military grudgingly accepted its role in crisis management . The U.S. military was forced to accept the role of crisis management in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 Let policy requires little cultivation; that our instime suggest first that we (by whom I mean tutions of supreme command should be deprimarily the social scientists, of whom I am signed to make fast decisions and exercise absoone .
 Some historical analogies must inform power to juggle farflung political commitments, the decision of the harried statesman, the rea need to control the sea lanes, or the musings of the conscientious Great Britain shortly after the Boer war .
 As Ernest May has first decade and a half of this century, found pointed out, we have only the choice between itself stunned by the difficulty and the human using historical analogies and metaphors well and using them badly . We have the choice of whether to use analogies well and material costs
 It faced the necessity of preparing to things, no possibility of considering every issue fight a land war against Germany on the contiand problem on its merits .
 In the present pean enemies, and maintaining command of the debate over the Strategic Defense Initiative, for sea . The U.S. has maintained command over the S.D. Initiative .
 Arguments about Imperial Defence; the reinvigoration of some protection old ones . The British Army under the stewardism hark back to certain beliefs about the origins ship of Richard Haldane; . The complete of the Depression of the 1930s. Arguments .
 Jackie Fisher's involvement in Vietnam had something to do ruthless scrapping of old warships, construction with images of the 1938 Munich agreement . Perhaps our recasting of others (Admiral Jackie Fisher) is perhaps our recast of others .
 The British realized, as we have debates rely on history, be it their own recolbegun only too recently to see in our own case, lections or their impressions from books . The British were only too late to see their own cases, or their own .
 They could not simply outspend all of their the parasitic breed that has flourished on the many opponents . They understood too that they fringes of power in the past three decades the could not accept organizational inefficiencies policy analysts and kindred social scientists with the excuse that tradition forbade change
 This preoccupation with how atically about the problem of coalition warfare stems in large part from the theory Without exception, every war the U.S. of crisis management discussed earlier a thehas fought since the turn of the century .
 Our public (and all too often, I the middle and ends of wars, as well as their suspect, our classified) thinking about any conbeginnings, is often confused about any wars .
 What made World War I so ghastly flict with the Soviet bloc makes entirely unrealwas not so much its outbreak . It was the spread istic assumptions about the cohesion of alliances and intensification of destruction once war had in war .
 Napoleon, Kaiser Wilhelm II, and Hitler failed to find ways to bring it to an end . War councils to find strategic detours around even a liberal democratic state leading a slaughter of the trenches .
 This last point is that the U.S. government finds itself compelled to use force against particularly important people .
 The crisis management laggardly allies or ambivalent neutrals think of theorists and their students in government have the British assault on the Danish fleet in devised systems of supreme command not unCopenhagen in 1807, or like those of July 1914 .
 In ""misperception"" of French intentions by the wartime, we might be able to conduct such German government. We might also conduct such a German government, says historian .
 NATO strategy expresses confidence in the NATO strategy in the matter of small wars, the author says . Thus far, at any rate, the importance of the small wars is still unclear .
 This history might suggest to induce and support is the only kind of war we have fought since successful mutinies in the event of war 1945 . 1945, and I suspect that it will be our lot in the future. 1945 .
 Consideration of our most important post-1945 small war, Vietnam, will show how BY AND and and and statesmen LARGE, think our statesmen policy ininterms think . In Vietnam we failed with respect to raised, this crisis like 1914 or 1941 (meaning).
 See Stephen Peter Rosen's ""Mutiny & the battalion to Beirut analogous to the first two Warsaw Pact"" on page 74 Ed. Ed. Is the deployment of a Marine 9 is the deployment  of a . Marine 9 .
 All historical events are unique, and all hislatent problem of overextension is unique . The war thus exacerbated a problem of over-extension, the author says .
 We shoved our client state aside in order to fight dubious, than others . We did our torical analogies are suspect, but some episodes best to avoid seeing Vietnam as a coalition war. are more singular, and some metaphors more .
 Policy refraining from the kind of interference in its analysts have dulled our historical personnel systems and command structure that sense through sheer monotony . They have also also helped produce poor ular) had shown to be imperative .
 Of course broaddid not think through the problems of sustainening the menu of historical case studies cannot ing the war and ending it, preferring instead to alone enable us to master all our strategic diffihope that by convincing the enemy of our culties .
 But widening our investigations may very seriousness we could avoid them altogether . It's hoped that widening our investigation may very seriously prevent them .
 A well clarify problems we now see dimly or not at serious study of our own small wars in this all . A well clarifies problems we see dim or not . We need to look at our own problems in the light of this all.