 NSA has in recent years adopted a more liberal policy with regards to declassification . However, the results of that policy have been limited to a particular period of time .
 Little is known about the role of signals intelligence during the Cold War .
 The latest release, therefore, provides a rare glimpse of Sigint at work in this crucial period of American history .
 The release is also significant because it provides a new perspective on the missile crisis . The release also provides a view of the crisis in Iran .
 In the shadowy world of intelligence operations, Sigint has always occupied an especially dark corner . Sigint is known for its secretive operations in Afghanistan .
 Some information about the intelligence background to the crisis has appeared . This has been limited largely to the role of overhead reconnaissance and the work of the Central Intelligence Agency .
 Sigint's contributions to the onset and eventual resolution of the crisis remain obscured or ignored . The contributions of Sigint to the start of the conflict remain obscured, ignored . Sigint was a key figure in the creation of the U.S. government .
 A special issue of this journal considered the role of intelligence in the crisis, but had little to say about Sigint . Recently, a special issue was considered by this journal .
 A 'secret history' of the crisis makes scant mention of Sigint, while a standard history of American intelligence in the twentieth century refers to 'a massive Sigint collection program' during the crucial events in October 1962 .
 CIA published a collection of documents relating to the crisis . Sigint-related material was not included in the CIA's release of the documents .
 The newly released documents provide for the first time details about the important contributions of Sigint . Sigint.com .
 Castro's anti-American rhetoric, his tilt toward the Soviet Union, and his support for 'national liberation' movements throughout the Western Hemisphere presented the prospect of an actively hostile regime only 90 miles off the coast of Florida .
 This debacle did little to lessen the Kennedy administration's commitment to remove Castro . It demonstrated, among other things, the need for better intelligence on Cuba, he says .
 The NSA has always been an important element in intelligence operations against Castro's Cuba . The NSA had always been a key part of intelligence operations in Cuba .
 In October 1960 the Agency uncovered some of the earliest signs of Cuban-Soviet Bloc military collaboration . The Agency had uncovered some the earliest . signs of the Cuban- Soviet Bloc . collaboration when surveillance of Soviet shipping communications revealed that the cargo ship Atkarsk had arrived at a Black
 Yastrebov, whom NSA analysts knew had recently visited Havana, was a Russian trade official who had been closely associated with the export of military cargo from the Black Sea to Indonesia and the Middle East since 1956 . NSA analysts known that he had visited Havana .
 Communications intelligence also suggested that the vessel Kirov was already on route to Cuba with a shipment of arms . The vessel is believed to be headed for Cuba .
 Surveillance of Czechoslovak air force circuits revealed Spanish-speaking pilots training in ground attack aircraft at Czech airbase .
 This report was confirmed by similar intercepts in January and May 1961 . Similar intercepts were intercepted in January, May 1961 and January 1961 .
 The nationality of the pilots could not be immediately confirmed, but intelligence analysts knew that among Spanish-speaking countries only Cuba had relations with the Soviet satellites sufficiently close .
 In May 1961 NSA's listening posts targeted on Cuba recorded Cuban air force personnel complaining about having to learn Russian . The Soviet Union had assumed a direct role in training for Cuban air forces .
 American Sigint closely monitored the movement of Russian material into Cuba . The U.S. government monitored the flow of material to Cuba .
 Direction finding and decryption of enciphered messages allowed NSA to track Soviet vessels across the Atlantic and into their berths in Cuban ports . Sigint did not always provide clues to the nature of the cargoes in Cuba .
 Surveillance of Cuban military circuits revealed new Russian military equipment entering service . Surveillance of Cuba's military circuits, however, revealed new military equipment .
 In June 1961, intercept operators listened to a Cuban radioman tell a colleague at another camp that his artillery unit had received new radar . The Cuban army received a new radar in June 1961 .
 In April 1962 Cuban plaintext communications referred to radar tracking exercises . The exercises were referred to the Cuban military's radar tracking exercise .
 This traffic included references to equipment designators identical to the designators for Russian radar sets .
 By the spring and summer of 1962 American signals intelligence was also tracking the arrival in Cuba of Russian military and technical personnel, including rocketry officers .
 In July and August a total of 38 Soviet or Soviet Bloc ships docked in Cuban ports . At least five passenger liners, including at least five Soviet-bloc ships, were also docked .
 If the liners were cruise ships on holiday voyages, their radio traffic was rather curious .
 Comint evidence confirmed that Russian passenger liners were not disembarking tourists . Comint also confirmed that the Russian passengers were disembarking from the Russian ships .
 As early as May 1962 linguistic analysis of voice communications on Cuban air force circuits had detected Slavic accents among Spanish-language conversations .
 By late August American intercept stations were regularly monitoring Russian pilots and ground control personnel training their Cuban counterparts .
 The Russians were overheard reverting to their native tongue to convey a difficult command or request to each other . The Russians spoke Spanish, but occasionally were overheard using their native language .
 By October the Red Air Force had apparently colonized its Cuban counterpart . The Cuban Air Force was apparently colonizing its Cuban counterparts .
 NSA determined 12 of the 63 'Cuban' aircraft operating over the island were definitely piloted by Russians . Another 22 probably were probably were, according to NSA .
 The influx of Soviet personnel and equipment in the spring and summer of 1962 caused concerned American intelligence authorities to speculate about Moscow's intentions .
 Director of Central Intelligence, John McCone, believed that the Soviets were preparing only surface-to-air missile sites or sophisticated Sigint facilities for use against the U.S.
 In July, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara directed NSA to expand its Cuban collection program . The Agency immediately began to reposition its considerable resources .
 In 1960 NSA concluded that established intercept stations provided insufficient coverage of Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa . In 1960, NSA concluded intercept stations had insufficient coverage in Latin America .
 Aside from stations in Puerto Rico and the Panama Canal Zone, there were no facilities positioned to cover Latin American communications .
 New land stations required lengthy negotiations with host countries and were expensive to construct and maintain . Unfortunately, new land stations require lengthy and delicate negotiations with hosts .
 Ships, on the other hand, were cheaper and required permission from no one to sail in international waters . Ships were cheaper than ships and required no permission from anyone to sail .
 Initially crewed by civilians and refitted to accommodate NSA specialists and their electronic equipment . These small ships served as floating intercept stations as they cruised slowly up and down the coasts of Africa and South America .
 In the summer of 1961 a third vessel, the USS Oxford, was placed in service with a navy crew and assigned to the east coast of South America . The USS Oxford is a World War II era Liberty Ship .
 In response to the Secretary of Defense's directive in July 1962, NSA initiated action to lease and refit for surveillance missions yet another vessel . NSA: "The Navy will be able to use this vessel to conduct surveillance missions in the future"
 Oxford was diverted from its current assignment and ordered to the waters off Havana . The new ship could not be operational before December 1962 .
 Naval Security Group, the Navy's Sigint service, moved 20 personnel to an undisclosed location, almost certainly in Florida . They set up intercept equipment in existing buildings and mobile vans .
 A U-2 spy plane returned from a mission over Cuba with photographic evidence that the Russians were constructing eight surface-to-air missile sites across the island . On 29 August 1962, the U.2 returned with photographic proof of the sites .
 On 5 September another U-2 mission photographed a missile site at Banes near the coast . Another mission photographed the site on 5 September .
 American intelligence eventually identified it as a cruise missile emplacement for coastal defense . At first uncertain about the purpose of the Banes facility, U.S. intelligence initially identified it .
 In the foreign policy field such intelligence raised serious questions about the military balance of power and Soviet intentions in Cuba . The Soviet Union was losing control of Cuba in the early 1950s .
 In congressional election year, Kennedy worried about charges that he was abandoning the Monroe Doctrine . Kennedy was worried about undermining national security by acquiescing in the conversion of Cuba .
 In these circumstances, the administration needed to determine the capabilities and operational status of Soviet forces in Cuba, especially if those capabilities were offensive . The administration decided to assess the capabilities of the Soviet forces .
 The White House ordered strict controls on the dissemination of all material dealing with Soviet weapons systems in Cuba . The U.S. government ordered strict restrictions on all material from Cuba .
 At the NSA senior officers established a special handling channel, codenamed 'Funnel', for any Sigint evidence of potentially offensive weapons in Cuba .
 No further dissemination of material is authorized without specific instructions from the director of the director .
 In September 1962 NSA launched a major Elint attack against Cuba in order to identify and locate offensive weapons systems . The Elint strike was launched by the NSA in September 1962 to identify weapons systems in Cuba .
 Initially the missile site at Banes received particular attention since an accurate assessment of the missile's radar system would suggest the range of the weapon which, in turn, would indicate whether it was defensive or offensive in purpose .
 Military planners considered measures to jam the early warning, target acquisition, and guidance systems of Cuba's air defense network in order to protect American air reconnaissance operations over the island . Radars at SAM sites and air bases were also important targets .
 On 9 October, Elint operations identified a Soviet 'Komet IIP military radar in service on an unidentified aircraft . The radar was found on a Soviet aircraft .
 This discovery was especially worrisome since earlier versions of the Komet were employed with air-launched, longrange missiles . This discovery is especially worrisome because of its use of air-launch missiles .
 In another instance of successful Elint, NSA identified radars known to American intelligence as 'Spoon Rest' operating from sites near Mariel, Matanzas, and Havana . The radars are located in Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 Spoon Rest radars were used with the SA-2 anti-aircraft missiles, the weapon that had downed Francis Gary Power's U-2 over Russia two years earlier . Spoon Rest radar was used in the Soviet Union mission .
 Aerial reconnaissance had earlier determined that SA-2s were being installed at various sites . But it was difficult to determine from photographs if the missiles were operational .
 Elint in the form of emitting 'Spoon Rest' radars provided the unwelcome evidence . Elint was the first to emit a radar at the height of the threat posed .
 With SA-2 batteries operational, U-2 overflights of Cuba were now in serious jeopardy . U. 2 overflights were now at risk of U.2 over Cuba .
 By October the growing requirements of Cuban operations compelled NSA to divert equipment and personnel from other high priority targets . By October, NSA had diverted equipment, personnel away from other targets .
 Resources were stretched to the breaking point as intelligence consumers in the White House, the State Department, and the service departments and commands increased their demands for Sigint .
 General Blake decided that NSA's first priority was to cover and report in real time any Cuban or Soviet military reaction to the high and low-level air reconnaissance flights .
 This priority was reaffirmed after the disappearance of the U-2 near Banes on 27 October . This priority is reaffirmed following the disappearance .
 To satisfy only a portion of their demands NSA would have to double the current intercept and cryptanalytic effort . The Air Force's Continental Air Defense Command and the Navy's Atlantic Command were especially insistent .
 To maximize the available resources, the director moved to consolidate intercept and processing at a few locations and create jointly staffed facilities .
 NSA directed that Army Sigint personnel be assigned to the Naval Security Group for temporary service at naval Sigint stations working Cuban targets .
 President Kennedy informed the American people that Soviet medium and intermediate range nuclear missiles capable of hitting American cities were in Cuba . President Kennedy made the announcement on 22 October .
 He demanded their removal and announced a naval quarantine of the island nation . The island nation has been hit by a wave of anti-terrorists .
 At the time several Soviet vessels were en route to Cuba, and as representatives of the two great powers worked through back channels to defuse the most serious crisis of the Cold War . American policy-makers closely watched the progress of those ships .
 U.S. listening posts recorded flurry of high-priority messages between Moscow and vessels approaching quarantine line . The messages came 24 hours after the president's address to the nation .
 Directionfinding nets soon determined that Soviet vessels had stopped in the water . The Soviet vessels were later found to be in the ocean .
 On 24 October NSA reported the news for which Washington had been praying . NSA: The news is the news that Washington is praying for .
 NSA's contributions to the intelligence collection program were limited . NSA's contribution to the program was limited. While significant, NSA contributions to intelligence collection were limited. NSA made significant contributions to collection program .
 Sigint provided no specific warning that Moscow was sending offensive missiles and nuclear weapons to Cuba . The interception of plaintext messages to their families in Russia from officers known to be associated with rocketry formations was highly suspicious .
 Sigint can capture only what is transmitted or emitted . Evidence of the shipment of missiles and nuclear weapons apparently did not appear on communication channels accessible to U.S. intelligence .
 Whether Sigint provided direct insight into decision making in Moscow and Havana remains an open question . Sigint is a Russian state intelligence agency .
 There is no evidence in the newly released documents that American signals intelligence was reading any Cuban or Soviet encrypted diplomatic, 'leadership', or military traffic .
 NSA routinely declines to reveal information about sources and methods . Of course, this is precisely the information the NSA, in its concern to protect sources, methods, routinely declines .
 The items released represent only a small percentage of the documents generated by NSA in its surveillance of Cuba . A full accounting might well reveal achievements now masked by security concerns .
 Even a limited glimpse into Sigint operations enhances our understanding of the intelligence background to the crisis . Still, even the limited glimpse helps us understand the background of the crisis.
 Intelligence historians hope this release represents the first tentative steps by the National Security Agency toward a more open approach to its role in the Cold War .
 Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush (NY: HarperCollins 1995)290 pages .
 Between 1960 and 1962 more than 60 Cuban pilots trained in Czechoslovakia . It would later be determined that between 1960 and 1961 more than six Cuban pilots had trained there .
 NSA had 'intermittently' read the encrypted traffic of the Soviet merchant fleet in the 1950s . A former senior officer in NSA's Russian group told the author that in the . 1950s NSA had . 'Intermittently read' encrypted traffic from Soviet merchant . fleet .
 Elint is intelligence collected from emissions from emissions of electronic apparatus . Elint means intelligence collected by emissions from electronic apparatus.
 Cecil Phillips observed that NSA often tracked Russian personnel by monitoring plain-language telegrams informing wives and loved ones of safe arrivals at foreign postings .
 The agency referred to these communications as 'love and kisses' messages . Agency referred to the communications as love and kisses messages .
 Phillips recalled that such messages revealed the presence in Cuba of Soviet officers known to be associated with the rocketry forces . Phillips said such messages were sent to Cuba by Soviet officers .
 This comment suggests that U.S. intelligence was intercepting but not reading the traffic of the passenger ships . This suggests that American intelligence intercepted but not read the traffic .
 If the messages had been readable, conclusions about the ships' activities would have been more definite .
 The 'definites' were overheard conversing in Russian, while the 'probables' were speaking Spanish with Russian accents . 'Definites were overheard speaking in Russian with an accent .
 DIRNSA to COMUSAFSS , 10 Oct.62, CMCC; Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeballs 462, 462.62 . DIRNS to COMSAFSS: Brugionsi, Brugionei, 4