 Cuba and Communis t China sign trade agreement under .~hich Cuba is to sell Peip1ng 50,000 tons of sugar . I 3~ 12/31/59 Cuba and China sign . trade agreement signed under .hic Cuba is . to sell . Peip
 On 2/13/60, Fidel Castro and Mikoyan sign a joint Soviet-Cuban communique describing their conversations as ""carried out in an atmosphere of frank cordiality." The Soviet-Cuba communique was signed by Fidel Castro .
 Castro said this represents only a ""small part"" of the arms which CUba had received from the bloc . 1/3/61: The United States severed diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 Many reports of other secret military installations are being received continuously in my office . Many reports have been received continuously from the U.S. government .
 Cuba had the largest ground forces in the hemisphere -at least 10 times as large as those maintained by Batista's and other previous Cuban Governments . Cuba had a large ground force, 10 times the size of those maintained under Batista .
 He' ad;nits that he hid his true political ideology during his revolutionary I struggle because he felt that lIif wei when we began to have strength, had been ImoVln as people of very.radical idea's ..unquestionably all the social classes that
 On arrival, male refugees were s,::reened at the Center for intellfgence and counter-intelligence potential . Male refugees were re-evaluated for potential intelligence potential .
 Chronolo{$y prepared by the State Department a'C ':;;he request ' of Senator Morse .
 The USSR's decision to develop Cuba as a military base must have been made by the sprin~ of 1~2 and prepara ... tlons within the USSR must be under way from hat time on . Spring of 1962 was the spring of 1962 .
 "There also must have been planning activities in Cuba"" in particular, reconnaissance and survey work. There also must also be planning activities .
 The only indication of these operations which can be found is a single intercepted personal message from a Russian who had previously been at the Kapustil1 range .
 On this date the NPIC began publishlng a series of reports dealing with NPIC's evaluation"" from a photographic standpoint, o~ refugee and agent reports .
 Between 14 August and mia-October one OIA office sent NPIO 13 memoranda asking for a check on 25 separate reports containing information which was thought to raise the possibility of Soviet offensive weapons in CUba .
 A great many more such reports were .. checked with NPIO informally by telephone by telephone . A great number of such reports have been checked by NPIO .
 This recormnendation . was based on a memo from the DD/I to the DCI following a request made of the DOl on 7/10 by General Taylor . General Taylor who had asked for a review of all aerial photography activities .
 DOI I S proposa.l that U-2 flights over Cuba 'continued at their current level II.e. was that, .· eat'lier missions ;.., "" .·over . Cuba . The justification for the U-1 mission was that U.2
 Report in Ha.... :na (earlier intercepted by N S A ) USSR to take back excess war materiel •• ~"" CIA Chronology"" 11/7/62) 42. This statement was in direct contradiction to NSA's comment that it tended to corrobo~ate
 The resulting difficulties in coordination of items for the Central Intelli~ence Bulletin "" held up publication of the first item on this subject in that publication .
 OIA-DIA·differences in the interpretation of photography of aircraft crates deck-loaded on Soviet ships . The record shows that CIA was right. There were further difficulties .
 Prefabricated concrete slabs up to 1~~4x2 feet in size and more than thirty dark colored cylindrical tanks about 30 feet long and 10 feet in diameter were Off-loaded about 8 A~ust. Slabs were up to 30 dark colored tanks . Off
 Tubular and semicircular shaped concrete forms arrived in ariel during the same period . Tubular concrete forms arrival were also arrived in  Ariel during that period .
 Similar items have been photographed at IRBM sites in the GuanaJay-Bauta area . Similar items were photographed at the IRBM .
 One source reported that this material was designed for use in building missile bases, and that saIne of the cargo was delivered to Bauta area .
 Some 32 vessels are involved in the operation, including at least b~lt of these we believe to be carrying arms . Some 32 ships are involved, including some of which are believed to be armed .
 Five passenger ships with a total capacity of about 3,000 persons have already arrived . The ships are expected to have a capacity of 3,200 people .
 NPIC 13 memoranda asked for a check on 25 separate reports containing information which thought to raise the possibility of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba . Between 14 August and mid-October this office sent NPIC .
 NPIC checks with NPIC informally by telephone . NPIC: "A great many more such reports" were checked by NPIC .
 It is not possible to say how soon after 15 September the activity might have been recognizable from the air as .,' an IRBr~ site . The activity may have occurred soon after September 15 .
 By the middle of August CIA was receiving a large volume of agent and refugee reportin~ which, while understandably garbled, enabled its analysts to pinpOint areas of construction and identify some of the eqUipment comin8,. in .
 A study should be made of the various military alternatives which might be adopted in executing a decision to eliminate any installations in Ouba capable of launching a nuclear attack on the U.S. The United States should study the alternatives .
 A study should be made of the advantages and disad'... vantages of action to liberate Cuba by blockade or invasion or other action beyond the MONGOOSE B PLUS, in the context of an ~""""' aggravated Berlin Crisis .
 IBl indicated there would be a further meeting with 'the President about 9/1 to review progress on the above items' in the meeting .
 The President had taken action on the intelligence received, the President said . Furthermore, he said that the President had also taken action .
 RBM units had scarcely started en route from the USSR -but the possibility had been discussed by the . possibility of using the. RBM Units had scarcely begun en route .
 All of the articles relate that the 4.nformation came from United States officials . All of them mention the strengthening of coastal and air defenses . The U.S. government is strengthening its air and sea defenses .
 The shipments contained both military and economic 'goods and personnel' The shipments were sent to the U.S. military and personnel .
 Much of the eqUipment is likely to go into the improvement of coastal and air defenses .
 The missiles are not adaptable for . nuclear use . Half of the total military cargo consists of deliveries of industrial and agricultural equipment .
 A large nUmber of additional Soviet specialists arrived in Cuba in the same period . A large number of Soviet specialists also arrived to Cuba .
 The total number in Cuba or on the way may be as high as 5000 . Both military and nonmilitary may be up to 5000 people .
 The breakdown between military and technical personnel is not known J but the additional numbers of military specialists are not incompatible with the training and setting up of the . :{ complex military eqUipment which has arrived .
 There is no evidence of the arrival of combat' troops from other Soviet bloc countries . No evidence of Soviet combat forces from other countries .
 They appear designed to enhance the CL~ban regime's defense capabilities again3t an internal threat" and increase the effectiveness of the Cuban military e~tablishment for possible internal use .
 Shipments must have been planned several mnths ago to have arrived when they did . Shipments were planned several months ago, but arrived at the very same time .
 Cuban regime J facing economic deterioration and rising popular discontent"" probably hopes to strengthen its internal position through new demonstrations of Soviet sUPP .
 This prompted the DIA to request additional photo' graphic coverage of this area, but such coverage was not accomplished until 10/14 for a variety of reasons including weather and the .e~uirement that the U-2 not overfly SA-2 installations . The DIA requested
 II •••• were quickly overtaken by the photOgraphy which ~~came available after 29 August . II • • ••• was quickly out of printable . II was released in August .
 At the USIB meeting of 7 September, further attempts to w-Lite such a paper were deferred until 19 September, by which date the nevr :l.nforroation could be digested .
 General Lemnitzer was the result of an instruction telephoned from out of town by the DCI who had left Washington on August 23 for the West Coast, then left the country on August 30 for the Riviera, and returned on September 23 . General Carter in calling General Lem
 I'n installations on periphery of Blo~1 Formosa, etc. etc. affords USSR with opportunity for stepped-up military material and technical buildup . USSR has stepped up military material, technical buildup in China .
 Department"" that they are going to operE'·_""t~ Nl.::e missiles"" because that information we do not have at this time is not known . Department"" says they are not sure if they will fire missiles .
 "There certainly are technicians there and they may be military technicians," he says . "They may be ... military technicians. There certainly were technicians there," he adds .
 On the .,, t 1 question of troops"" as it is.generally understood"" we do not have evidence that there are Russian troops there. But on the .,. t 1question of troops."" as it . is .understood"" we don't have evidence of Russian troops
 The Cubans have had Soviet tanks for some time, but this is our first indication that they now have boats of this type . The Cuban government has not confirmed the existence of the boats, however .
 Cuba \'1111 stl1~mg then critics of Cuba's "aimsinistration"o'""aoftness"" on Cuba . Cuba \'11:11:1: 1: 11:1 : 1: 2: 3: 5: 1 : 2: 2 :
 In sums the expectat:l.on is t11at any missiles w5.11 have a substantial political and ps:rcholoGica1 impact . vibile surface-to-surface missiles would create a condition of crGaclarm, even in the absence of
 There is every indication that the naval complement to handle these boats disembarked at the same time . The naval complement is expected to disembark at the moment .
 The convoy contained jeeps, 6x6 trucks, and tracked trucks . The convoy moved in military order and contained the first ~phibious vehicious vehicles observed in Cuba .
 On August 8 there was a night i:lovement of a convoy on Carx'etera Central . It included tanks"" cannonlike trailers"" and flatbed trailers .
 Flatbed trucks were observed transporting concave metal structures supported by tubing . The convoy included a number :.\ of closed vans .
 More than 20 cargo ships have arrived from Communist ports in the last few weeks . Mo~e more than 20 ships are expected to arrive in the coming weeks .
 Between three and five thousand so-called I technicians have arrived in the past year . Between 3 and 5,000 technicians have been sent to the UK in the last year alone .
 Soviet statistics. reveal that by the end of the year the Soviets will have shipped nearly $1 billion of goods and equipment to Castro. Soviet statistics .
 Cuban trade with non-Communist countries will be down to about 30 percent next year . Cuba will be virtually isolated from the free world . The Soviets can operate unchecked and to a large extent unobserved .
 More ominous reports'suggest that the Soviets are constructing missile bases and sending over technicians and experts to man them .
 "That supposition"" which our Government has never openly adnlitted or discussed"" is a source of serious concern to the people of ~ll the Americas. That supposition" is a serious concern, the U.S. says .
 This collateral information indicates that plans to deploy ballistic' miss1.1es in Cuba were being implemented b~ the end of August . The information indicates plans to use miss1s are being implemented .
 IRBM site construction was apparently under way in September and preceded the MRBM sItes . IRBM is apparently under work under way and is believed to have been under construction .
 Information has reached the Government in the last 4 days from a variety .of sources which establishes without deubt that the Seviets have provided the Cuban Gevernment with a number .of antiaircraft missiles with a shert range of 25 miles which are similar to early models of
 Several S.oviet-made meter torpede boats carrying ship-teship guided missiles havingrange of 15 miles . Along with these missiles"" the Soviets are apparently previding the extensive radar and ether electronic equipment which is required fer their .operation .
 The number of Seviet military technicians new known to be in Cuta is estimated to be at least 3,500 .
 S, ~,.or~::pf, other .significant off'ensiv(;l' c£!papll1ty either in Cuban h!',nds or' under Sovl~t directton' and gu;1 . S,~,.
 The date at which the site acquired a recognizable photographic signature is not determinable . The site was negative, but road improvements began shortly thereafter, . Road improvements .
 "I have said that the whole story has not been told the American people," says President Obama . Obama has been accused of lying to the U.S.
 On 9/10, General Carter sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense requesting' necessary actions' including Special Group approva:-,. to provide' for ','tactical-type reoonnaissance' of the BaneS area .
 Cuba :,:""-' but the Secretary of Defense did not want the opera to be considered further until there were available the results of the U-2 reconnaissance which had been decided upon at a Whi t8 House meeting of 9/10. Cuba : "-'"
 MIG-21 crates had arrived in Cuba about 1 September aboard a Soviet ship which had been photographed en route, but the photographs were not received in Washington for several weeks .
 More than 3000 Russians landed at Bahia Honda for work on a launching' pad . Missile station IS being installed near Varadero Beach'in Matanzas Province .
 General Carter from the Riviera stated: 'Difficult for me to ... rationalize extensive' costly defenses . 'Quite possible measures being taken are for purpose or ensuring secrecy of some offensive capability such as MRBMs to be installed 'by Soviets'
 The CIA proposed-tvo extended overtlights covering the remainder of the island not covered in the August 29 nod September 5 missions . The CIA has not confirmed the extension .
 September a source was informed by'a resid~nt of the general area that a rocket pase was being constructed by the Soviets at a location . now identified from photograph;., as Remedios Site 1 . September September . September . a source . informed that a . rocket p
 At this time there was a high frequency circuit in operation between Moscow t h r o u g h . The fact that mE..1us.us. was in operation is a mystery .
 4)200 technicians are expected to be on the scene at the scene in New York City . Their arrival will raise the number of technicians on the ground to about 4,200 . The team is expected to arrive at 4.200 .
 General Carter stated his desire .to see RF-10l's '~-' over Cuba . September 19 at USIB, General Carter . stated he wanted to see RF10l over Cuba. September 19 .
 Cubans and Soviets conceive to be a danger that the United States may attempt by one means or another to overthrow it . The U.S. may attempt to overthrow the Cubans or Soviets .
 The Soviets hope to deter any such attempt by enhancing Castro's defensive capabilities and by threatening Soviet military retaliation . The Soviets evidently hope to . deter any . such a . attempt .
 The intelligence publications available to the Board fail to reflect that any particular significance was attached to Dankevich's presence in Cuba until after President made his public address relative to MRBM~ and IRBMs in Cuba .
 The DOl sent a finai cable to ... oIA from the Riviera, commenting on the conclusions of SNIE 85-3 of 9/19 which had been cabled to the DOl .
 This activity is ;puzzling; we have never seen ..:~~.~ a5Ything like it before . This activity was ; puzzling, we've never seen . anything like this before .
 Second report led CIA analysts to a tentative conclusion that the two observers had in fact seen the same convoy, and that there~s a possibility of the 88-4 identification being genuine .
 Few if any of the CIA analysts working on the Cuban problem '05 even had~lee.rances. Few, if any, if . any, CIA analysts worked on the problem .
 As 8 result, they did not know that no overflights of Pinar del Rio and Las Villas were included in the September program,' or that this program was seriously delS.yed .
 In retrospect, it seems quite ~ss1ble -but by no means certain -that they would have been picked up in the Checklist . But it is extremely doubtful if they '\-Tould have survived'tbe coordination process for Central Intelligence Bulletin .
 This machinery was designed to provide elaborate justifications an~' back-up paper work before each decision was made . Procedures reached back ~nto the early history of the U-2 operations over the US&'R/ They'were intended for the control of deliberate strategic reconnaissance of
 P.L.102-526 (JFK ACT NARA) is located in Fort Worth, Texas, Texas. P.M.L-102-566 . P.N.L is located at Fort Worth Airport, Texas .
 Iour intel11~ence collection on Cuba has improved s1nce. The first of , :{ £~ih:E:;~~~~~L :;.'.;f,t '~'~l·' """"""I~,~ .,~:;
 Jl""i pass over Cuba, was made by the Corona vehicle launched on 9/29/62 . The resulting photography was . good by Corona standards but not of' "" . .. -sufficient qua11 ty to reflect . significant photograph1c :!.ntelligence ::;
 A triangular pattern of SA-2 sites cannot be connected with any significant ini1itary installation . Further 'Test, in Pinar del Rio Province'" a triangular pattern .
 Information on the deployment of Soviet military pe,rsonnel.,' I~ ~ and ""te..::hnicians" in Cuba is derived from unevaluated refugee sources . Information. on . the deployment, of . Soviet military . pe, rsonnel . . and ""
 The greatest concentration of Soviet personnel, activity and camps is in the western end of Cuba . Significantly, the greatest concentration is in Pinar del Rio rather than in other Provinces .
 This report is unconfirmed and there are no other reports of such lnissiles . This is not the first time this report has been made public .
 The trapozoid-shapedestr;tcted area p'reviously referred to as the .oint of .0rigin for,:a:radius~:0f. Howev.er "" it is, significant to note . Thatty taking the .
 CIA analysts had naturally come to view all such reports with a high degree of suspicion . CIA analysts have been skeptical of the CIA's intelligence on such reports .
 A substantial proportion of these dealt mth the deployment of defensive missiles 'and relatedctivities' A substantial portion of these deals were dealt with in the past year .
 The CIA analytio apparatus recognized and oorrelated the first authentic reports of MREM equi:pment ever to be received' in Washington, and took action upon them .
 Joint Resolution expres'sed the determination 9f the U.S. to prevent by necessary means, including use of force, the.Marxist-Leninist regime in CUba from extending by force . or . threat of force .
 The current need is extremely urgent, (and the risk), should be very thoroughly weighed before this coverage . But it must be stated that the current need for this coverage must be extremely urgent .
 Recommeridat~~~~::~' :',:><if:~.r'{;~;~,':~t·~:~~ended that reconnaiss~ce programs be initiated ,to satisfy'.. these requirements . Recommersidat
 DC:C ',' , . '. :flights· were now res tric ted by the prenence of: SAM'sit astern:quadrant of Ouba. DC: C ',' ',' and ',' were now . The prenemence of DC
 The primary mission was accomplish-eueu. The mission was to find the best way to get to San Cristobal . Fortunately, the mission was successful .
 On 12/7/62 SAC representatives exhibited .to a Panel ot a panel ot the President's Foreign.
 I trust that . regardless o~ party, are . ,~ united in the hope that this . would be a . menacing shift in the '\'lOrld balance of power'
 Groundesolution · ··of 2-5 feet or better will suffice for this purpof:e.e. Groundesolutions · · · of 2-3 feet or . better will . suffice to be a ground solution .
 Aix>fie1d -lI a10ng l'lith a number of others which must have come in on ships . J able IL-28 crates which later showed np in U-2 photography .
 CIA personnel expressed concern that SAC did not have capability or experience to operate such U-2 photographic missions . During the period ilnm.ediately preceding and following the Presi~ential decision, CIA . personnel expressed considerable concern that the U.2. was not equipped to effectively
 SAC established the 4080th Wing in May 1956, and U-2 aircraft began to arrive 'Ihe' The U.S. flew from the Kamchatka Peninsula, the Russian land mass in the East Siberian Sea, and the Laptev Sea area of Russia,
 The 4080th has flo'WIl uhcter every conceivable condition including sno. . . . and ice, fog, desert and desert . It has been dubbed the "world's best ever"
 In addition to photographic missions, it has flown U-2 ELINT missions during'1961 and 1962 in the Far North .
 The 4080th I S crews average 3500 hours~' of,:which . . 600;hours· is in U-2 aircraft . Crews are in U.2 aircraft.
 J 156. lO/J.5/62 In thd::~'~~iy> ~ven'ing the read-out of SAC IS ini tial U-2 Ih.lssion over Cuba'''l'irst became available .
 It reflected identification of an MRBM site, in ,the San Cristobal area, in . The San Cristabal area .
 Bundy reffirmed the deoision made on 10/12 and indicated that SAC should continue to fly thes~ missions . Bundy re-confirmed the de-de-decision made by the Air Force in 2010 . Bundy said SAC will continue flying thes ~ missions
 Mr Scoville toot his office had not received the ELINT iake from the first SAC mission of 10/14 .
 "General Carter s::..l~ that .... -. there were refu~e rellOrts but no hard ~vidence"", says General Carter . Keating's charges of know MREM, sites in c.'uba -Le., "sites in c,'uba
 A message passed wi thin CUl:>a :from fLas Villas to Placetas suggested an int'ent to conceal lI equipment ll and ffuel station"" in a railroad tunnel in an area south of the Famedios IRBM site .
 Knox, in a conversation held n the ""catesoricallr stated"" Rremlin--mat lithe WE:Cl.PO Cuba included antiaucra f£ . Knox . Knox said the Soviet Union had furnished to issiles and ballistic missiles with both conventional and thermon
 Many people find it hard to believe . that . the .offensive Soviet missile' sites in Cuba suddenly mushroomed oye·r"",,.the:Yleekend. First) many people find . it hard . to believe :that .the .offensive . Soviet missile sites
 Elnd .any.;1nfor-. mation we had we knew was available to the administration· and ·.and ·.to ;,:the ..:~ President . Elnd.mation was available only to administration officials .
 Conunlttee admitted that a Soviet arms·buila-up was' '\/. going on in -Cuba' Conunluttee said that Soviet arms .buila up was'\/'\/.com' going on .
 SovIet union: "We have sufficient information that there exIst on iCuba.ri--:·te~ritor;v.v. Cuba" Union: "There is sufficient information to conclude that there is no longer an iIst"
 Cuban terri t sufficient missiles ·:to· to· des half 9 alroady assembled or in the process of assembly at st. Louis-Dreyer .
 DIA received no signiffcant information from agent sources concerning the Soviet missilebuildup. He . noted that DIA . received no . signifflant information . from . agent sources .
 The need for 'establishing an improved capability for the evaluation of indicators :as, distinguished from the procesG of pre~ :.' paring intelligence estimates;, The . need for getting across to top "". ::, I2i\ level officials the full brur1
 Ille island is alive with rumors p and it is difficult to sift the facts out of the stories of the big Russian militarybuildup still going on . Ille Island is still a source of rumors about the Russian military buildup .
 'We express plorticula.r thanks to you for your 'WOrk of the last, ttv..a weeks. II'
 The reconnaissance flights 'Which enabled us to determine Yrl.th prEicision ,the offensive build-up in Cuba . contributed directly to the 'secur:lty of the United States in ·the most important and significant 'Way' of the U.S. The