 I would like to thank Trudy Burrows for her inspiration and my wife Anya, Bill Burton, and Jo Ann Vasquez .
 Love’s Body, often forms the deep structure which organizes these thoughts, along with the insights of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis for a remark which appears as the display quote for Chapter 7 .
 "It served as an important beacon in directing this work to its inevitable conclusions. It served as a beacon"
 Autopsy evidence impugned by the following witnesses present at Kennedy's admission to Parkland Hospital in Dallas 40 3. 3. 40 3 . 40 witnesses present were present at the admission to the hospital .
 Suspicious deaths of HSCA and Senate Intelligence Committee witnesses 67 3.3.4.3 . Suspicious death of H.S.HSCA witnesses 67 . 3.5.4 .
 Significant individuals named in the literature as withholding information or engaged in disinformation about the assassination . Significant individuals also named in literature as withholding information .
 Eight 'soft 1' lines of evidence connecting Oswald to the CIA and military intelligence . Oswald had been involved with the CIA, military intelligence and the CIA . Oswald was killed in November 1963 in Dallas, Texas .
 Schools, hospitals and colleges named after Kennedy, Lincoln, Jefferson, and Nixon . 17 schools and colleges have been named after the presidents of Lincoln, Lincoln and Jefferson .
 Cause of death in Kennedy sample compared to national mortality norms 58 4.4.5% of deaths were caused by single-person causes of death .
 Case Closed 23 Evidence Against Oswald 23 Physical Evidence 24 Circumstantial Evidence 26 Physical Evidence . Dr. Oswald's case closed with physical evidence .
 "It is one of the most imposing stories of the American twentieth century. It is a story of a great American tragedy," says John Sutter .
 With the release of thousands of pages of classified assassination documents, the American fascination with the Kennedy assassination knows no bounds . The American fascination — or perhaps we should say obsession — with the JFK assassination has no bounds.
 In high-energy physics there is a theory known as “super symmetry,” in which two sub-atomic particles are predicted to appear in high energy collisions . The theory is known as "super symmetry" and predicts subatomic particles will appear .
 Scientists were unable to find them at the Fermilab, which houses one of the most expensive colliders in the world . The collider is the largest in the country and is located in the Midwest .
 As the machines get bigger, the particles get smaller, the search marches forward relentlessly . The search continues for the smallest particles in the universe .
 Super symmetry is somewhat a metaphor for the American fixation on the Kennedys and particularly the assassination . Super symmetrical symmetry is perhaps a metaphor, says author .
 There is a sense that more books need to be written, more interviews held, more documents examined — and surely, then, this enormous massing of data will ultimately deliver the elusive 1.5 billion pounds of data .
 Jim Moore, a minority voice among Kennedy assassination aficionados, claims that the Warren Commission was correct . Moore claims that Lee Harvey Oswald was the sole conspirator . Moore is a minority of those who believe Oswald was responsible for the Kennedy assassination .
 Moore says he has spent more time in Dallas than any other author . Moore has traced and retraced Oswald’s movements countless times .
 Instead of getting out where he should have, he had the cabbie drive him past his rented room by a few blocks and then walked back . Instead of leaving, he walked back to the rented room he rented .
 Steve Rivele researched the CIA’s Executive Action program . Lucien Sarti is the author of the CIA's Executive Action Program .
 Christian David, 58, is a 58-year-old serving time in Leavenworth, Kansas . It led him to a Frenchman called Christian David . David is serving time for his crimes in Kansas .
 David David was a member of the Corsican network in South America and a drug trafficker . David was member of a drug trafficking network in the region . He was a drug dealer in the area .
 He was awaiting extradition to France in connection with the murder of a Moroccan politician . He was arrested in Morocco in 2007 over a murder of an opposition politician .
 He wanted to avoid extradition to France and was willing to deal with the U.S. government and reveal the true Mafia-connected killers of the President . President Obama was assassinated in 1993 .
 According to David, Antoine Guerini, the Corsican Mafia boss in Marseille, accepted a contract to kill the President . David says Guerini is the boss of the Marseille-based Corsican mafia .
 Corsican drug trafficker and sharpshooter Lucien Sarti took the contract, instead . Corsican drugs trafficker took the job .
 Sarti and two assassins flew from Marseille to Mexico City in the fall of 1963, crossing into Texas . The assassin and his two assassins crossed into the U.S. in 1963 .
 The murderers lay low in Dallas for two weeks and were flown out of the country to Montreal . The murderers laid low in the Dallas area for two months before being flown out to Canada .
 Christian David was sent to France after he was found guilty of attempted murder . Christian David is still fighting extradition to France . The story has since gone nowhere since his arrest in 2010 .
 Introduction to the Dream was written by a Brazilian associate of Sarti who corroborated the story in all of its essential details .
 Frustrated with organized crime, Robert Kennedy ordered him deported to Guatemala . Robert Kennedy deported him to Guatemala after being caught up in organized crime . He was deported from Guatemala .
 J Edgar Floover wiretapped Marcello and obtained evidence that he had ordered a hit on President Kennedy . J Edgar F. Edgar wiretapped him and obtained the evidence he had been involved .
 Author Mark North alleges that Floover knowingly permitted the contract to take place . North also alleges that the President did not pass this information on to either the President or the Secret Service .
 Floover’s antipathy for the Kennedys, particularly Robert Kennedy, was well known .
 In this paradigm, the origin of the assassination begins with the angry, resentful, harassed Mafia kingpin, Carlos Marcello . The origin of this paradigm is that the assassination began with the assassination of Marcella, a resentful and harassed Mafia boss .
 J Edgar Floover, instead of informing the Secret Service, acts as a silent co-conspirator and accomplice . Instead of knowing the plot, he acts as an accomplice to the plot .
 North’s book, Act of Treason, points the finger directly at Floover for failing to prevent JFK's assassination . North's book also points out that the president failed to prevent the assassination .
 Kennedy intended to withdraw troops from Vietnam and close down covert anti-Castro operations, especially after his confrontation with Khrushchev during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy also wanted to close down operations in Vietnam .
 The result was that anti-Castro CIA-inspired mechanics who were angry and felt betrayed by Kennedy took down the President . The result of the Kennedy administration was that the President was overthrown .
 Mark Lane provides evidence in Rush to Judgment that the killer of John Fitzgerald Kennedy belonged to this group . Mark Lane writes in Rush To Judgment that he believes the killer killed Kennedy .
 Marita Lorenz, former undercover operative for the CIA and FBI, says Oswald, Frank Sturgis, Orlando Bosch and Pedro Diaz Lanz were on the car trip from Miami to Dallas . Lorenz says she was traveling with Oswald and two Cuban brothers .
 She said they were all members of Operation 40, a secret guerrilla group formed by the CIA in 1960 . Operation 40 was originally formed in preparation for the Bay of Pigs invasion . The group was formed in order to prepare for the invasion of Cuba .
 Oswald visited an Operation 40 training camp in the Florida Everglades, she said . Oswald later visited a training camp for Operation 40 in Florida, she added .
 Lorenz claimed that Sturgis, Oswald, Bosch and Bosch, and Diaz Lanz, former Chief of the Cuban Air Force, attended this meeting . Lorenz also claimed that the Cuban air force chief of the Air Force was present .
 A few days after this story came out, Sturgis was arrested in Lorenz’ apartment, where he had gone to discuss matters with her . Lorenz was arrested days after the story was published .
 Lorenz, in her testimony, adds that Sturgis had also fired at the President . Lorenz: "Sturgis fired at President. Lorenz's testimony... adds . Sturgs had also shot at President." Lorenz says .
 He held a pistol to his head, but then reluctantly surrendered to authorities . He held the pistol to the head, then surrendered to police . The suspect was arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
 In his dazed ramblings, he confessed to the ambush of Judge John Wood in San Antonio, Texas and the murder of John Kennedy . Kennedy confessed to killing of Judge Wood and killing of Kennedy .
 Harrelson was an associate of Carlos Marcello’s brother and was indicted with him for the murder of Judge Woods . He was also indicted for the killing of Judge James Woods, who was found guilty .
 His story of murdering Judge Woods was anything but the ramblings of a coke addict . Judge Woods' story of murder was anything more than the rambling of a drug addict .
 He provided information substantial enough to result in an indictment and a conviction, prosecutors say . He provided substantial information that resulted in a conviction .
 Some say Harrelson was one of the “tramps” picked up near the grassy knoll on the day of the assassination . Some say he was picked up in the act of assassination .
 A forensic anthropologist held that photos of the tramps matched a photo of Harrelson with a 90% likelihood of accuracy . The tramps were photographed with a photograph of a man who was killed in the Vietnam War . A forensic expert said the photos were likely accurate .
 Career criminal Chauncey Holt said that he was with Harrelson in Dealey Plaza on the day of the assassination . Holt said he was in the Plaza at the time of the shooting .
 Harrelson later said that he was on cocaine and out of his mind when he made the confession . Despite this interesting aggregation of evidence, his Kennedy admissions were considered maniacal ravings and were dismissed .
 Authorities were less nonchalant when it came to the Judge Woods murder . Judge Woods was found dead in 2011 . Authorities say they are still investigating the case .
 Let us assume that Hintz left a note hidden in his personal safe confessing that he was the grassy knoll gunman and that he killed President Kennedy . Let us further assume that he left a . note in his . personal safe .
 In his posthumous confession, he names his superior, another former military man, and a former CIA contract agent . He named his superior as a former military officer, a former contract agent and an ex-CIA contractor .
 Corroborating evidence is given that this superior did exist, that Mr Hintz worked for the CIA, that he was in Dallas at the time, and that his confession along with all other supportive information is so strong that the media itself begins believe that a second gunman has finally
 The fourth shot heard on the motorcycle tape dictabelts by the House Select Assassination Committee is now explained once and for all . The fourth of the shot heard was the fourth shot of the motorcycle shot .
 This hypothetical scenario represents the ultimate discovery of the elusive particle, the smoking gun, the end of the mystery, the final solution to the greatest murder mystery of the twentieth century . The hypothetical scenario is a hypothetical scenario .
 "We have physical evidence, circumstantial evidence, witnesses, and corroboration witnesses," says police chief . "We are going to find out what happened," says chief investigator .
 The problem in this completely made-up example is that, in a very short time, those who felt the Mafia was involved would be printing new texts suggesting that Hintz could not possibly have been the second gunman . The problem is that in a matter of minutes, the Mafia would
 Wiretaps of Mafia figures ordering a contract hit on the President and further 6.6.5 million others ordered by the President . Wiretapped of Mafia leaders ordering a hit on President and more 6.9 million others ordering a . contract hit .
 This example was created arbitrarily and with an intent to be ludicrous . It was created with the intent of being ludicrous. This example is an example of a joke .
 Almost identical example was unearthed in the research for this book . However, almost identical example has been unearthed .
 Ricky Don White, of Medville, Texas, claimed his father, Roscoe White, was one of three CIA operatives ordered to kill Kennedy . White claimed that his father was among the CIA operatives who ordered Kennedy's assassination .
 His claims came from his father’s diary, which has now allegedly disappeared . The diary is said to have disappeared from the diary .
 White claimed that his father was a CIA operative with a partner known as Saul . White claimed he was Saul White's partner in the CIA .
 McDonald claimed he learned that Saul, operating independent of any organization, was hired by certain private American citizens to execute Kennedy in Dallas . McDonald claims he learned of Saul's involvement in the Dallas execution .
 Chief McDonald was allegedly told by Saul that the contract on Kennedy was a private “hit"" paid for by people who wanted Johnson to be President . White believed that his father and Saul participated in Kennedy’s murder as possible CIA agents . White believes that the father and father participated
 The killer was allegedly contacted in May of 1963 for a meeting in Haiti to discuss a privately arranged hit of President Kennedy . The killer allegedly planned to kill Kennedy in May 1963 .
 McDonald says the Warren Commission acted as if it did not realize the significance of the exhibit . McDonald: The Warren Commission was not aware of the significance . McDonald says he hopes the public will see the exhibit at the museum .
 Gerald Ford would restate, as he predictably has done, that Oswald was the lone gunman . Warren Commission report was the only authentic and truthful rendering of the event, Ford says .
 The point of this hypothetical discussion is that, in the vast energy expended to locate the truth and to find the elusive particle, we may have made a very large mistake . The point is that we may not have made the most of the energy expended on finding the truth .
 Heisenberg, the physicist, originally described the blunder . The object observed is determined by the instrument used to observe it. That blunder was originally described by the physicist .
 We pay little attention to the instrument, and are so preoccupied with the object we forget about the assumptions inherent in the instrument we are using in the first place . We are preoccupied by the object, and often forget that it is an instrument .
 The nature of this text is not to simply look at the assassination as an object, but also to examine the instrument used to process the information . It is not only to look at an object but also at the instrument that processes the information, it also examines the process of processing it .
 The book will look at the Kennedy assassination at an unprecedented level of detaif and depth . It will also consider some elements of mass psychology and myth, which obtain to this four-decade old collective American obsession .
 The mysterious Mister X in Oliver Stone’s movie JFK was actually L Fletcher Prouty, a career intelligence officer who himself has written a book on the subject . The mysterious Mr X in the movie was actually a former intelligence officer .
 Some may believe the answer will never be known . In that business, the ‘mechanics’ are faceless and have chameleon identities .
 Others, like Gerald Posner, already think the case is closed and nothing more needs to be written . Others think it's over and out .
 The intent of this text is to review all the evidence, to do so meticulously, and yet not to 7.7. It is intended to be thorough .
 Introduction to the Dream: We lose sight of the instrument we are using to observe this data . Introduction to Dream: The Dream .
 When we understand the Kennedy assassination not only as an historic event but also as a myth that is deeply embedded in American psychology, perhaps we shall construct a fuller picture . We should also understand the myth of the JFK assassination as an American myth, perhaps .
 Numinosity and Archetype John Fitzgerald Kennedy represented something far more unconscious than conscious to the American psyche . Kennedy was an archetypical figure in American culture . He represented something that was unconscious rather than conscious . Kennedy's Archetype was his "numinosity"
 Kennedy was in office for a thousand days; his popularity at the polls for the upcoming election in 1964 was rising, but never overwhelming . Kennedy's popularity was rising but not overwhelming .
 Kennedy’s charisma was meagerly felt at the conscious level, while he was alive, compared to the virtual deification that happened after his death . Kennedy's charisma wasn't felt at a conscious level in his life, but was felt in the wake of his death.
 Americans now rate John F Kennedy one of the best presidents in history . Americans now think he is one of America's best presidents .
 Kennedy’s speeches, his rhetoric, possessed not only ‘vision’ but also carried an element of the prophetic, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Kennedy's speeches and rhetoric, he says, possessed . “vision” and “propaganda,
 Newsweek poll published results showing Kennedy to have been the country's most popular president . 30% wished he were still president, according to Newsweek poll .
 American Heritage published a poll of 75 prominent historians and journalists who ranked him the most overrated pubhc figure in American history . American Heritage said he was 'overrated' in the poll .
 JFK ranked second among the last eleven presidents, in a nationwide poll of over 1,012 respondents . JFK was ranked second in the poll of more than 1,000 people .
 Those who look only to the past or the present are certain to miss the future . And those who look to the present or the future will miss the present, he says .
 Kennedyisms carved in granite across the doorways of a dozen public buildings . There were always one or two catch phrases that were not only inspirational, they seemed gauged to be memorized by listeners .
 It is the fate of this generation... to live with a struggle we did not start, in a world we didn't make, he says . It is a struggle for this generation, he adds .
 Underneath today’s surface glass of peace and prosperity are increasingly dangerous, unsolved, long postponed problems that will inevitably explode to the surface . The problems will explode, and they will continue to do so for decades, says David Cameron .
 Kennedy’s Peace Corps challenged Americans to dream and bring a new meaning to their lives by rolling up their own sleeves and putting into practice their deepest sentiments . Kennedy's Peace Corps challenges Americans to embrace their inner-city aspirations .
 There was always a need to see the new world order with care, caution, and above all, intelligence . There was also a need for caution, caution and intelligence, says David Cameron .
 Every man, woman and child lives under a nuclear sword of Damocles, hanging by the slenderest of threads . The sword is capable of being cut at any moment by accident or miscalculation or madness .
 We have the power to make this the best generation of mankind in the history of the worid — or to make it the fast fast .
 There was a certain pacifism in his words, as if with his election came a Zeitgeist of peace, rationality, problem-solving, compromise, and eschewing arrogance and bellicosity .
 Those self-appointed generals and admirals who want to send someone else’s son to war should be kept at home by the voters .
 Kennedy’s words were not only a new voice and vision, but his charm, ease, and encyclopedic fluency with facts were spellbinding . His charm and ease with facts was spellbinding, and his charm was infectious .
 Americans remembered Truman’s proletarian clarity, Eisenhower's mumbling unintelligibility, and Nixon's humorless monotone . Americans remember Truman's proletarian clarity and Eisenhower's unintelligible mumbling .
 In 1954 the dictator of Venezuela was awarded the Legion of Merit by our ambassador . In 1954 he was given the Legion by the Venezuelan ambassador to Venezuela .
 In 1955 our Secretary of the Navy went to Argentina and made an eloquent address comparing dictator Peron to Lincoln — to Peron’s advantage . In 1955, the secretary of the navy made a speech comparing the Argentine dictator to Lincoln to Lincoln .
 $500 million worth of arms and ammunition has been dumped into Latin America over the past eight years . Much of the money has been used to strengthen the hand of dictatorships, says David Cameron .
 Although the Cold War will not be won in Latin America, it may very well well be lost there . The Cold War may not have been won in the region, but it may have been lost there.
 Congressman Baring of Nevada, a Democrat, named Bowles, Ball, Bell, Bunche, and Sylvester . Baring said you would do much better if you got rid of some of yours .
 Congressman Baring has a high regard for him and for the gentlemen that he named. And 1 would not add Congressman . Baring to that list .
 Congressmen are always advising presidents to get rid of presidential advisers . But congressmen always advise presidents to remove advisers from the White House .
 President Obama has been criticized for not paying attention to his actions in the past . The president's actions have been criticized in the U.S. for their lack of transparency .
 I sat next to Cardinal Spellman at dinner the other evening, and asked him what I should say when voters question me about the doctrine of the pope’s infallibility . “1 don’t know.” said Spellman .
 Eisenhower would open a press conference wearing a drab gray suit and stumble through the reading of a prepared statement to the press . Kennedy, by contrast, rarely read to his audiences at press conferences .
 Mr Krock has been to every major dinner in history — except the Last Supper . He had a relative at that one .
 Kennedy’s wife, in contrast to her predecessor Mamie Eisenhower, seemed comfortable in the star-like role into which she transformed the position of First Lady . Kennedy's wife seemed comfortable with the role .
 When the Kennedys went to France, Parisians swooned over Jacqueline . When she spoke French, an immediate sense of kinship developed which did not spare President de Gaulle .
 "I do not think it altogether inappropriate to introduce myself to this audience," she says . She says she will introduce herself to the audience at the end of the show .
 "I feel as a Catholic that I’ll get my reward in my life hereafter, although I may not get it here," he said . "As a Catholic, I feel as I .’I’m not going to live in the United States. I feel
 The Republican National Committee recently adopted a resolution saying you were pretty much of a failure . The resolution was adopted by the GOP National Committee .
 The search is narrowing, but there are other fields that are still to be considered, including postal background . Even a postal background could be considered .
 I see nothing wrong with giving a little legal experience before he goes into private practice, or on his father: "I just received a telegram from my father. I just received telegram."
 Kennedy inspired a new kind of liberalism in this country and set many on a journey in pursuit of their own ideals and dreams . Kennedy inspired many Americans to follow his own ideals .
 "Our job is to turn the American vision of a society in which no man has to suffer discrimination based on race into a living reality everywhere in our land," says President Obama .
 Next week I shall ask the Congress of the United States to act, to make a commitment it has not fully made in this century to the proposition that race has no place in American life .
 The rights of every man are diminished when the rights of one man is threatened, says the U.S. Supreme Court . "The rights of all men are diminished," says the judge .
 These were not the tired, dusty phrases of a political hack, but a spark that ignited a new vision of self and country including a newfound altruism . These were the words of President Barack Obama, Obama's administration .
 Kennedy became a figurehead for a renaissance in American idealism and commitment . Kennedy was a leader in the 1960s and '60s . He was assassinated in 1968 in Washington, D.C. in 1968 .
 Americans were seduced by a romantic figure who seemed to be saying just what they wanted to hear and in the loftiest phrases . Americans were gradually falling in love, seducing by the figure .
 A mystique began to surround the presidency that seemed to touch every American and much of the rest of the world as well as the president . The mystique of Barack Obama's presidency began to grow in Washington .
 Few Americans were aware the President suffered from Addison’s disease or that he needed large doses of cortisone . Few Americans knew he had Addison's disease or he needed to take large doses .
 The drug tended to make Kennedy gain weight and gave his skin an ever-present sun-tanned look . The drug made him gain weight, gave him a sun-tan look .
 The Kennedys were probably the bestlooking presidential couple ever to occupy the White blouse . Washington D.C. began to look more like Hollywood than the political center of the country .
 Journalists began writing about the frenzy that swept through audiences and of the female “jumpers,” “leapers,’ “clutchers” and “screamers” who worshipped the new celebrity . The frenzy began in the 1980s and
 At the conscious level Kennedy’s intense charisma and charm had not made much of a dent on opinion polls . Indeed, at the . conscious level, Kennedy's intense charisma . and charm has not . made a dent in opinion polls in recent polls .
 He was favored as he approached the 1964 election, but over 40 percent of the electorate were not planning to vote for him . He won't be able to be re-elected to office in 1964 .
 There was such a rush on leopard skin coats that the price jumped to $40,000 per coat . The animal soon went on the endangered species list, where it remains today .
 People froze in their tracks, forced by some unknown process to photographically record where they were and what they were doing on November 22, 1963 .
 In 1963 the worst tragedy since Pearl Harbor struck at the U.S. The United States. The U.N. was hit by a Japanese plane crash in Japan .
 It was a stunning blow that affected nearly everyone in America and a large part of the world . It was the devastating blow to the U.S. and the world.
 Westminster Abbey bell tolled for one hour, as though the King or Queen had died . All radio programming was cancelled in Ireland after the tragedy . 0,000 people marched by torchlight in Berlin and all radio programming in Ireland was cancelled .
 Every store in Paris closed up and the Champs Elysees was almost deserted on a Friday night . The Champs-Eustrassees were almost deserted .
 Thousands gathered on the lawn in front of Bethesda Naval Hospital in utter silence for hours . Thousands gathered for hours in silence to pay tribute to fallen sailor .
 At the moment President Kennedy was pronounced dead, 68% of all the people in the U.S. knew of the shooting . No one would ever forget what they were doing at the moment they heard of his death .
 No other President’s death since Lincoln so deeply affected the country . Lincoln's death has affected the U.S. since his death . No other president's death in history has so affected the nation .
 Introduction to the Dream Kennedy’s coffin was on dispiay in the Capitai Rotunda . Kennedy's coffin was delivered in the Rotunda in Rome .
 Photographers hounded her, not merely during her grieving but well into the thirtieth year after the assassination . Photographers continued to hound her, even after she was assassinated .
 His thatch of brown hair looked as though it had grown extra thick the way our wood animals in Connecticut grow extra fur for winter . His hair was so thick that it looked like it was growing extra thick for winter in Connecticut . The wood animal in Connecticut is known for its thick fur
 Kennedy looked as though it was fun to be alive, to be a politician, to . be President to be . to be President . Kennedy, a Kennedy, was a man. And he looked as if it was . fun .
 It felt good to have a President who read his mail, who read the papers and who read books and played touch football, says President Obama .
 It was a pleasure and a cause for pride to watch him take the quizzing of the press 30. It was the first time he had been quizzed by the press for 30 years .
 He’d parry, thrust, answer or duck, and fire a verbal shot on target, hitting with the same answer, the segregationists in a Louisiana or a hamlet or a government in South East Asia . He made you feel that he knew what was going on in
 It felt good to have a President who looked well in Vienna, Paris, Rome, Berlin, Berlin and at the podium of the United Nations . President Obama would go to Dublin to put a wreath where it did the most good and leave unspoken .
 "Our future is more hopeful because of his work but our future is not safe nor sure," he said . "Our country's future is at risk because of the work he did," he added .
 "They phoned and phoned us and we cried and we were not ashamed of crying but we are ashamed of what had happened," says mother-of-one .
 Elvis Presley was terribly popular, more so after his death than while living . Presley's death was more popular after he died than when he was alive . Elvis was one of the world's greatest entertainers .
 Kennedy and Presley died five years after their respective deaths . To quantify the difference we can look at the number of articles written about them in the five years .
 His significance to the American psyche was different, deeper, greater, greater . He was a hero of American culture, but his significance was different .
 Presley's death was 20 years after Kennedy's . In the five years after Presley’s death, there were still more articles written about Kennedy than the King .
 JFK’s objective accomplishments or failings would be easily over-shadowed by the records of Harry Truman, Ronald Reagan, even Calvin Coolidge . JFK's objective accomplishments would be over-shadows by the likes of Truman, Reagan, Coolidge.
 He is not an objective heavyweight like Albert Einstein, Martin Luther King, or Jonas Salk, because his achievements are exiguous by comparison . He's not a heavyweight like Einstein, but he is not objective heavyweight .
 As a psychological heavyweight, he is probably the most preeminent American in the 20th century . He is probably most pre-eminently American in history .
 Kennedy may be one of the four or five most significant psychological figures in U.S. history . Rarely has this aspect of Kennedy been explored .
 Like Charles Lindbergh, John Litzgerald Kennedy became an object of American mass psychology, a fixation, an obsession . It is time we looked not just at the assassination drama and the attendant detective story, but at the psychological and mythological dimension of this story as well .
 We will address these matters in the final chapter of this book, but by way of introduction, let us get a preview of some of the issues .
 Leo Czolgosz, President McKinley’s assassin, is not remembered . Lee Harvey Oswald and John Wilkes Booth are remembered for their work in the White House .
 The pattern and vividness of these memory traces suggests that Kennedy and Lincoln have been adopted as archetypal figures; . McKinley and Garfield seem not to have satisfied the conditions, they seem to not match up to the paradigms .
 Many connections have been drawn between John Kennedy and Abraham Lincoln . Abraham Lincoln was assassinated by Abraham Lincoln in 1865 . Lincoln's assassination was the first presidential election in 18 years .
 John Kennedy frequently invoked Lincoln in his speeches, especially at important, emotionally significant, and historic moments of his presidency . John Kennedy drew connections himself himself, frequently invoking Lincoln in speeches .
 Harry Truman, one of his first visitors in the White House, asked him if he was ready for such a responsibility . It is in this spirit that we must go forth in the coming months and years j5 .
 One hundred years ago Abraham Lincoln, not yet President and under fire from veteran politicians, wrote these words . Abraham Lincoln was not yet president and was under fire .
 Abraham Lincoln said the question was whether this nation could exist half slave or half free . Lincoln said in 1860, the nation could be half free or half slave . Lincoln's election was held in 1860 and he was elected president of the Confederacy .
 In the election of 1960, and in the world around us, the question is whether the world will exist half slave or half free . Whether it will move in the direction of freedom, or whether the road that we are taking is moving toward slavery, is the question of the future .
 The parallels between the Lincoln and Kennedy tragedies are far more intricate and intriguing than we have ever appreciated . The parallels are more intricate than we've ever appreciated, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Obviously, some parallels and bridges were intentionally drawn, to boost Kennedy’s image . But the plethora of coincidental linkages is staggering .
 Each had a friend named Paine, with whom he spent time just before the assassination . The two men spent time together just before their assassination .
 Both stayed in New Orleans, visiting their uncles, shortly before the assassinations . Both stayed there, visiting uncles before the assassination .
 Both Kennedy and Lincoln were succeeded by their Vice Presidents named Johnson . Kennedy'Lincoln Correspondence: Both JFK and Lincoln succeeded by Vice Presidents .
 Lincoln tried and failed to be nominated for the Vice President in 1856 . Kennedy tried and unsuccessfully for the same office in 1956 . Lincoln was nominated for Vice President of the United States in 1858 .
 Booth was with a friend named Paine who was also held for questioning the night before he shot Lincoln . Booth shot Lincoln the day before Lincoln's assassination . Booth's friend, Paine, was also being questioned that night .
 Conspiracy theorists suggested the real Booth was not buried in his grave and asked that he be exhumed . Conspiracy theorists thought the same about Oswald and similarly called for his exhumation . Oswald was also thought to be buried in the same grave .
 Kennedy 's secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, was married to Kennedy . Kennedy's secretary was also a married woman .
 Sources include O'Donnel & Powers, Johnny We Hardly Knew Ye and Compendium of Coincidence, (Time, August 227,1964), 19 .
 This type of coincidence or correspondence can be fun, and can be drawn out further and further . This is a good example of a good relationship between the two men .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy met a real person named Abe Lincoln, the husband of his personal secretary, Evelyn Lincoln . Abe Lincoln was Abe Lincoln's husband of the president's personal secretary . Abe was Abe's real husband and the president of the Kennedy administration .
 Brutus, the assassin of Julius Caesar, is also a name associated with traitors; he is the historical, archetypal traitor . Brutus is also the name of Brutus .
 John Wilkes Booth was an esteemed actor but he had two brothers, one of whom was namedjunius Brutus Booth . One of his brothers, Brutus, was named Junius .
 John and his brother played together in a memorable performance of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar in March 1865 . John and brother played in the show .
 Junius Brutus Booth did not change his name to make it more theatrical, nor did he adopt “Brutus” as a name because he was about to play the role in Julius Caesar .
 Brutus appears on stage rather innocently in the psychodrama we are now studying . Brutus is neither manufactured nor manipulated; he is neither manipulated nor manufactured. Brutus seems to be neither manufactured or manipulated, says the author .
 John Wilkes Booth performed Julius Caesar alongside his brother in 1865, shortly before he assassinated Lincoln . One wonders what role John Booth played in Julius Caesar .
 This information is not available, but it would not be utterly surprising if he were cast in the role of Brutus .
 The story of the Kennedy assassination now like a surrealistic dream, tantalizing, intriguing, intriguing . The story is like a "surrealistic dream"
 "It has taken on a life of its own, as a cultural event, as piece of theater, so troubling to the American psyche that we are compelled to investigate further and even to seek some kind of mystical meaning in it," says author .
 The atmosphere is in fact created by the disturbing shadows they cast... and shadows are everywhere . We are like lost souls wandering 21 Conspiracy in Camelot around in some inverted Platonic cave .
 As the event has taken hold in our imaginations, it seems to take on new psychological dimensions . It seems to reflect on American society and our sense of who we are as a nation, author says .
 The last chapter of this chapter will focus on this dimension of American history . In order to have the widest and most comprehensive picture of this moment in American history, our last chapter will be focused on this .
 We must examine the myriad pages of assassination literature with fresh eyes and an unbiased, dispassionate objectivity . But first, we must examine these pages of assassinations literature .
 If we begin a dream interpretation, or start “free associating"" to draw out connections, we never cease to stumble on to interesting clues . So if we begin to dream interpretations, we will find interesting clues in our dreams .
 Brutus is also a name associated with traitors, the assassin of Julius Caesar, the historical, archetypal traitor . Brutus was also an assassin of Caesar, Julius Caesar . The name Brutus has been associated with a number of traitors .
 If one uses a dream-interpretation approach, and follows out these associations, sometimes we are very surprised indeed . Sometimes we can be very surprised if we follow these associations closely closely .
 John Wilkes Booth and his brother played together in a memorable performance of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar in March 1865 .
 Junius Brutus Booth was baptized Brutus, and took the name of his father, also named Brutus . Booth was born Brutus and took his father's name Brutus after his birth .
 Brutus appears on stage in this psychodrama rather innocently, unconsciously, if you will, neither manufactured nor manipulated . Brutus is neither manufactured or manipulated, but neither is manipulated by Brutus himself .
 John Wilkes Booth performed Julius Caesar alongside his brother in 1865, shortly before he assassinated Lincoln . It causes one to wonder what role he played in the Julius Caesar .
 This information is not available, but it would not be utterly surprising if he were cast in the role of Brutus in this play .
 Oswald shot President Kennedy, his wife Jacqueline, and Governor and Mrs. Mrs. Kennedy in 1963 . Oswald was a patsy . Oswald shot the president in the head on November 22, 1963, in the face of President Kennedy's assassination .
 Governor Connally heard one shot and was then hit himself . Connally was in front of the President at the time of the shooting .
 The President fell violently backwards and to his left, his head exploding in a halo of brain tissue, blood and bone . The President's head exploded in a blizzard of blood, bone, brain tissue and bone, killing him .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was the sole gunman firing from his sniper’s nest in that building . Oswald was shot to the head in the head by a sniper sniper . Oswald's killing was attributed to Oswald's sniper's nest in the building where he killed .
 The following is a list of the “best evidence’ collected against him these last 30 years . The list includes the best evidence collected against his crimes .
 Three empty cartridge cases were found in the sniper’s nest . Evidence against Oswald was found in a sniper's nest . Three empty cartridges were found .
 It was a bolt-action Mannlicher-Carcano Italian rifle of World War II vintage . The rifle is a bolt action rifle of WWII vintage .
 The rifle, stamped with serial number C-2766, had been ordered eight months earlier from a mail-order company in Chicago, Klein’s Sporting Goods Company . The rifle was ordered from the company eight months ago .
 Groden, Robert J., with Livingstone, Harrison E Higli Treason, Baltimore: Conservatory Press, 1989. Signet, 1992; Groden J. Groden and Livingstone co-wrote a book about the Treason .
 Four days after the assassination, the FBI found a palm print on the barrel of the rifle, and the print matched Oswald’s right hand . The print was found four days after Oswald was assassinated .
 Oswald and his Russian-born wife Marina were separated . Marina lived with Ruth Paine in Irving, Texas, where these possessions and the rifle were kept .
 Oswald brought a large paper bag to the Depository on the morning of the assassination . Oswald returned to Dallas with Frazier the next morning .
 Frazier says he had curtain rods in a paper bag . Frazier says curtain rods were among the items in the bag . He says he has some curtain rods for curtain rods .
 At the time of the discovery of the sniper’s nest, police found a brown paper bag large enough to have held the rifle . Police found the bag containing a rifle .
 Oswald's right palm print and left index finger print on the bag matched Oswald's . Later the FBI found a right palm . palm print . matched Oswald’s . finger print .
 The Warren Commission decided that the man in the photo was Oswald and the rifle in the picture identical to the murder weapon . The photo was taken at the time of the September 4, 1917, assassination .
 Oswald’s Russian-born wife, Marina, verified that she had taken the pictures with his Imperial Reflex camera some months earlier . Testimony from Marina confirmed that she took the pictures . Oswald's wife Marina said she took his pictures with her husband's Imperial Reflex .
 Many witnesses heard fewer than or more than three shots . Majority of witnesses in Dealey Plaza heard three shots, most of them three .
 The Carcano rifle can be operated with 2 seconds between shots, and the period of time of firing was 7. seconds . It is possible Oswald could have fired three shots in the required time by himself and with no other conspirators . Oswald was able to fire three shots at a time
 Oswald seen on sixth floor filling orders for books . Oswald was seen on the sixth floor shortly before noon, filling orders . Oswald has been seen in Washington, DC .
 He was sitting in the second floor lunchroom shortly after the assassination . Very shortly after he was assassinated, he was sitting there .
 Critics have argued that it would have been impossible for Oswald to kill the President and run down to the second floor lunchroom to establish an alibi in such a short 42 .
 The House Select Assassinations Committee decided the photos were authentic . The photos were taken at the request of the House of Representatives members .
 Another piece of evidence putatively signaling Oswald’s guilt is the neutron activation analysis of bullet fragments found in the limousine . The analysis of the bullet fragments suggests Oswald was involved in the assassination .
 These results lend support to the notion that the fragments also came from Oswald’s rifle . The fragments were found in the remains of Oswald's rifle .
 He watched spellbound as the gunman fired the final shot and then disappeared from view . He watched the gunman fire the last shot before disappearing from view of the scene .
 This completes the physical evidence that might be used against Oswald in a hypothetical trial for the crime . Oswald's physical evidence is the only physical evidence he might use against him .
 Evidence could also be persuasive in convicting this assassin . However, circumstantial evidence is also possible to convict him .
 Most curious individuals would have stayed, milling around the scene .
 Oswald departed from Dealey Plaza quickly, allegedly because there would be “no more work” that day . Oswald left the scene quickly, apparently because of the lack of work . Oswald was killed in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 .
 The bus he was on was stalled in heavy traffic, so he hailed a cab to take him past his house . However, when the bus was stalled, he hailed the cab to go past his home .
 This transfer from bus to cab occurred less than eighteen minutes after the assassination . This transfer happened less than 18 minutes after President Kennedy's assassination .
 Oswald wanted to size up the area and deliberately had the cabbie drive past it before he got out of the car . This suggests Oswald deliberately had his cabbies drive past the area before getting out . Oswald was shot in the head by Oswald in the early hours of the attack
 Officer Tippit was cruising on 10th Street and had passed the intersection of 10th and Patton . He was cruising along the street when he was killed .
 Oswald saw Oswald and pulled to the curb asking him to come over to his car . Oswald's car was parked at the curb of a busy intersection in New York City . Oswald pulled over to ask Oswald if he wanted to meet him, police say .
 Tippit then opened his door and stepped out of the car, walking toward the front of the vehicle . He then walked away from the vehicle and left .
 Oswald allegedly pulled a revolver from his pocket and fired several shots, four of which hit Tippit, killing him instantly . Four of the shots were fired by Oswald, according to a report . Oswald was killed instantly .
 Of twelve witnesses to the Tippit shooting, five or six identified Oswald as the man they saw . Five or six of twelve witnesses identified Oswald . Oswald was the only person to identify Oswald .
 Oswald was arrested in a theater with the revolver still in his possession . Oswald was later found dead of gunshot wounds to the head . Oswald had a revolver in his hand, which was still in possession .
 Oswald reached for his pistol with his right hand and punched the 43-year-old when arrested . Oswald was arrested in the Texas Theater in Dallas, Texas, Texas . Oswald punched Oswald when he was arrested .
 Oswald was captured less than forty-five minutes after the murder with the murder weapon in his possession . Even had there been no eyewitnesses to the Tippit shooting, the apprehension of Oswald was strong evidence that Oswald was the killer .
 Oswald, according to his wife, attempted to assassinate General Edwin Walker in the months prior to the assassination of Kennedy . Oswald's wife says he attempted to kill General Walker in months before Kennedy's assassination .
 If true, if true, it adds Texas Theater shortly after Oswald’s arrest 44 years after his arrest . Texas Theater was the last theater in Texas .
 27 Conspiracy in Camelot weight to the idea that Oswald was unstable and violent . Moore, ibid., 68 27 Conspiracy In Camelot, 68, adds to the notion that Oswald had a violent past .
 If 1 am alive and taken prisoner, the city jail is at the end of the bridge we always used to cross when we 46 went to town . "If 1 am . am alive, I am . taken prisoner," he says .
 Kennedy left his wedding ring in a porcelain cup on the day of the assassination of Kennedy . He left his wife's wedding ring on the same day of his assassination .
 He left his wife $170 on the morning of the assassination, as much if not more money than they had ever had in disposable cash up to that time . He left $170 to his wife, $170 .
 The day before the assassination, local Dallas newspapers first published the President’s route . Employees of the Texas School Depository were excited and buzzing that the President would be passing them the next day .
 Today, the evidence against Lee Harvey Oswald would be persuasive enough for an indictment . Today, evidence against Oswald would have been persuasive enough to indict him . Oswald's trial would be over in less than a year .
 There is strong physical evidence linking Oswald to the location of the crime scene, to the weapon used in the killing, and to a second murder that same afternoon where eyewitnesses positively identified him as the assailant . There were no unassailable eyewitnesses to the murder of the President .
 Oswald's weapon was on his person when he was arrested, and the pistol was used in the murder . Oswald’s weapon was found on his body at the time of his arrest . Oswald was shot dead by a White House officer in September 1945 .
 "The sum total of evidence against, both physical and circumstantial, is not just poppycock," says the author of the book . "It's the evidence against. The sum total evidence against ... not just poocock."
 Kostikov, ostensibly a vice consul at the Soviet Embassy, murdered Officer Tippit in cold blood . He then tried to take a second shot at an officer in the movie theater with the same 46-year-old .
 Some evidence has not been made public as late as thirty-eight years after the event . Indeed, some evidence was not made public until after the attack .
 Fie denied that he used the 'n word' under oath . Tape recording of an interview he had held months earlier where he is heard saying the ‘n word’ numerous times .
 "reasonable doubt" existed in the case of the "n-word and bloody glove . The jury believed that if he was willing to lie under oath about the “n” word, perhaps he also lied about the bloody glove; and thus “reasonable doubt” existed
 The Obsession Begins . The publication of conspiracy texts leaves the dispassionate observer astonished at the high level of detail that has been developed . The Obsessions Begins .
 Oswald could not have shot the President by virtue of the fact that he was seen by two witnesses sitting in the second floor lunchroom at 12:15m., fifteen minutes before the motorcade passed the President's motorcade .
 Oswald naively asked a fellow workmate why the crowd was gather47.47. In fact, Oswald was asked by a colleague to explain why the crowds were gathering .
 A total of four witnesses say they saw Oswald in the second floor lunchroom between noon and 12:15 . Oswald was in the lunchroom at the time of the shooting . Oswald is believed to have been Oswald's killer .
 Marion Baker ran into the Depository with his gun drawn, confronted Oswald in the second floor lunchroom . Baker then proceeded upstairs to confront Oswald .
 Summers: It was highly unlikely Oswald could have been in the lunchroom at 12:15, run upstairs to shoot the President, then run back down to be seen again at 12.31 to assure himself of an alibi . Summers: Oswald could not have been seen again in the
 The published program of the President’s itinerary indicated that he would pass the Depository at 12:25m .
 Oswald would not have known that fact and would have had to be in place five minutes earlier . Oswald would have been able to find Oswald five minutes before he shot .
 To attempt to establish an alibi by first placing himself in the lunchroom at 12:15 and hoping to place himself again after the killing at 12.30 without having exact and specific knowledge of when the President’s motorcade would actually pass is difficult and improbable . To attempt
 Assassins do need some set-up time, especially when they are targeting a head of state . Assassins need some time to get ready for the assassination .
 Arnold reliably placed Oswald on the second-floor lunchroom before the shooting, Baker reliably placed him there after the shooting . Baker consistently placed Oswald in the lunchroom, Arnold reliably did .
 The first of an infinite number of pieces of evidence begins to contradict the Warren Commission findings that Oswald was the killer . Oswald was not the killer, but he was the prime suspect in the assassination .
 Oswald put a nickel in the soda machine and selected a Coca-Cola . After the encounter with Baker and Truly in the lunchroom, Oswald (displaying icy calm, even though Baker was holding a revolver at his midsection)
 It may be that this single action on Oswald’s part holds the key to his guilt . Oswald's actions may be the reason for his guilt in the assassination of JFK .
 Oswald failed to select his soft drink of choice — he was nervous . Oswald was nervous to select soft drink choice . Oswald is the only person in the world to fail to select a soft drink .
 Gerald Posner in Case Closed argues that William Shelley, Eddie Piper, and Carolyn Arnold were all mistaken and were contradicted by other witnesses .
 Witnesses who placed him on the first and second floor prior to the shooting were not included in the Warren Commission report . He and others have interviewed 3 witnesses who said he was on the second and third floors .
 In establishing a case of “reasonable doubt,” one must take into account these witnesses who contradict the official view . No one incontestably identified Oswald as the sniper in the window, at least in the opinion of Jesse Curry, says Curry .
 Oswald frequently drank Coke, not only did Oswald frequently drink Coke, he liked Coke, and was not as thoroughgoing a habitue of Dr. Dr. Lee as well as Dr. Oswald . Oswald was not a thoroughgoing drinker, but he liked it .
 Many, like Gerald Posner, have argued that indeed it is time to close the case . Maybe? Maybe; but we should also observe that such a knot of hard-towerify details can drive us very quickly into an obsessive neurosis .
 To him, the evidence is clear and unambiguous, and all the obsessive talk about Coca Cola and Dr. Dr. Martin is not interested . To him he says, "Dr. Martin" is the evidence .
 Pepper merely obscures the “obvious’s truth that Lee Harvey Oswald, alone, shot the President of the United States . Pepper merely . obscures . the ‘obvious . truth’ that Oswald alone shot the president . Pepper .
 Before we accept Oswald’s guilt, however, it is time to present the case for the defense . Oswald's guilt is not proven, but the defense should be presented the case .
 The judge in this case has allowed any and all pertinent evidence, which suggests that the Warren Commission version of this case is not as clear cut and solid as it seems . We are happy to report that the judge in the case has .
 In the next chapter, we will bring into focus the best evidence collected by conspiracists for these last 40 years . The next chapter will be a look at conspiracists' best evidence gathered by conspiracyists .
 President Johnson eventually dropped the heaviest official hint that Lee Oswald was more than he appeared to be . President Johnson appointed the Warren Commission to investigate the JFK assassination .
 Former President George W. Bush felt he had said too much . That was quite an understatement, but the former President felt too much.
 It is doubtful that Lee Harvey Oswald could be convicted of the murder of the President . Oswald could not be found guilty of the assassination of the president .
 Perhaps he could be convicted of murdering Officer Tippit if eyewitness testimony could be provided to place him at the scene, to corroborate that he pulled the trigger, to identify the weapon as his own .
 There were witnesses who saw two men at the Tippit shooting and others who could not identify Oswald specifically . The weight of evidence would certainly have given the prosecution a very good chance at conviction .
 The only witness to have identified Oswald as the shooter in the sixth floor window of the Depository failed to identify the color of Oswald’s shirt properly . Oswald's shirt was the only one to identify him as the gunman .
 Oswald said he changed his shirt after leaving his apartment to go to the movie theater . Oswald says he changed the shirt after going to the theater . Evidence favors Oswald .
 Depository witnesses also identified the color of Oswald’s shirt as reddish in color, while he had been arrested after the Tippit murder in a white shirt . Oswald was arrested in the days after the murder of Tippits, but was wearing a different shirt .
 A tuft of cotton fibers found in the rifle butt matched Oswald’s white shirt . This suggests evidence was planted . Oswald was arrested at the time he was arrested .
 Oswald’s print was found on the bag, but the absence of any oil from the weapon was unusual . Oswald's print was also found on a bag . The absence of oil was unusual in the case, according to investigators .
 The print could only have been made while the rifle was disassembled . The print was made during the disassembly of the rifle .
 Oswald's print was not positively identified as Oswald’s until after his death . Indeed, the print wasn't positively identified until after he died . The print was only positively identified after Oswald's death .
 His mother contended that the FBI planted the print after visiting his coffin . His mother said the print was planted by the FBI after visiting the coffin .
 Dallas laboratory tests had failed to find any of Oswald’s fingerprints on the weapon . Oswald's fingerprints were found on the gun . Oswald had been involved in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 More recent information suggests a print was lifted in Dallas . By virtue of the process used, the same print was not visible to the FBI laboratory in Washington .
 Neither were any prints found on spent shells nor on the live round remaining in the chamber . Neither were found on any of the spent shells .
 Marina Oswald testified that Oswald owned that rifle and that she had taken that photograph herself with Oswald’s camera . Marina Oswald said she took the photograph with Oswald's camera herself .
 Oswald, as mentioned in the prior chapter, said that someone had pasted his face on to the photograph and that it was a fake . Oswald said that the photograph is a fake and that the photo was fake .
 Marina Oswald represents a highly important witness for the prosecution, but her testimony is dismaying . Reasonable Doubt Marina Oswald's testimony was dismaying. Marina Oswald is an important witness, but she is not a good example of the prosecution .
 Her “recollection’s of events has been documented as faulty to the extreme . Her ‘reassessment’ of events have been documented to be faulty, she says .
 For example, she said to the Warren Commission that she and Lee arrived in the United States by airplane . She also said that Lee died in a plane crash .
 One crucial piece of evidence linking Oswald to the rifle was a tuft of cotton fibers found in the butt of the rifle . Cotton fibers were found in a tussle of the butt .
 It was examined microscopically by the FBI laboratory and reported to match the fibers in the shirt Oswald was wearing at the time of his arrest . It was reported to have matched the fibers .
 Oswald had said that after leaving the Depository and before his arrest, he had gone home and changed shirts . However, before this information was developed, Oswald said he had changed shirts after the shooting .
 Officer Baker’s testimony (III.263, 257) does seem to corroborate Oswald's statement that he had changed into a darker shirt . Yet, Officer Baker's testimony (II.263 and III.263) seems to confirm that Oswald had changed his shirt .
 Gunman's shirt was not white or light-colored, but it was not light or white . Gunman reportedly wore a shirt that was the color shirt reported by those observing him .
 Oswald’s bus transfer ticket was found in his shirt pocket when he was arrested . However, Jim Moore, a pro-Warren Commission researcher, reports that Oswald's ticket was in his pocket .
 First, it has been argued that he was actually going to meet a contact in the Texas Theater . Second, it was argued that it was actually a contact .
 Others have said Officer Tippit beeped his car horn at Oswald’s house . Oswald was only partially privy to a glitch in the plot that Oswald only knew about .
 Oswald was on his way to Jack Ruby’s house, which was on the same street where Tippit was murdered, approximately 2/3 of a mile away . A third theory holds that Oswald was going to Ruby's house .
 One of the more intriguing theories suggested that his bus transfer could have taken him to a Greyhound station, where he might have caught a bus for San Antonio and the Mexican border . Another theory suggested that he had once made a similar journey to the border .
 If he changed shirts, as he alleged, it would be rather suspicious that the FBI laboratory would find fibers in the rifle butt which matched his shirt at the time of the arrest . This would not have been the shirt worn by the person who fired the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle
 Oswald fled about his shirt and did not, in fact, change it . Forensic evidence tying fibers in his second shirt to the rifle is suspicious . Oswald changed shirts, thus rendering suspicious the forensic evidence tied fibers to rifle .
 This would be a consistent explanation, but again, it would contradict forensic evidence tying his shirt to the rifle . The suspect's shirt would be consistent explanation .
 If he switched transfer tickets from one shirt to the next, he intended to use that transfer ticket in some way . Furthermore, it would ask us to try to determine his ultimate destination . It would be difficult to determine if he wanted to use the ticket in any way to get to the
 Marina, the single witness who could verify Oswald’s ownership of the weapon, is easily impugned . Marina, Marina, was the only witness to verify Oswald's ownership of a weapon . Marina was Marina's sole witness in the case .
 Handwriting experts have shown it to be Oswald’s script, but surely other handwriting experts could be found to allege the opposite if Oswald were to be tried for this crime .
 Oswald spent very little time in his apartment on Beckley Street and changed shirts but did not wash his face, he said . Oswald spent little time at his apartment and changed his face but didn't wash it off, he added .
 Second example of material evidence that would serve to exonerate Oswald involves eyewitness accounts, which place him elsewhere . Eyewitnesses Favoring Oswald would place Oswald elsewhere, according to evidence .
 At 11:50m., co-worker Givens saw Oswald in the domino room of the first floor of the Depository . Oswald was Oswald's last victim in the Texas State Department .
 Bill Shelly, a foreman, saw Oswald about ten minutes before noon in the same room . Shelly says he saw Oswald in same room at same time as Oswald .
 Warren Commission lawyer Wesley Liebeler noted that no one clearly saw the rifle nor could identify the rifle which was alleged to have been stored in the Paines’ garage . No one saw the alleged rifle nor identified the rifle .
 This is the rifle said to have been carried into the Depository disguised as a bundle of curtain rods . It is said to be the rifle that was carried out of the Texas school .
 Oswald was sitting in one of the booth seats on the right-hand side of the room as you go into the museum . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family, a friend of the late President Richard Nixon .
 D/ These comments also were not contained in the Warren Commission Report . D/
 Oswald was confronted in the second-floor lunch room, finishing a Coke, by superintendent Truly Truly and Dallas Police Officer Marrion L Baker . Oswald was in the lunch room at 12:31-12:32 .
 If Oswald were put on trial, there would be witnesses putting Oswald on the first and second floor of the TSBD both before and after the shooting . Truly Baker, Baker, Arnold, Arnold and Piper, Piper, Shelly and Givens would testify .
 If a “conviction’s” requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt, this phalanx of witnesses would certainly march in this direction . If a conviction requires proof, this would be enough .
 In terms of “material evidence, therefore, the case against Oswald is weak,’s lawyer says . Oswald is accused of being a Russian spy in the 1980s .
 Even the Warren Commission was unable to determine ‘motive’ and, if a trial were held then, many witnesses could have been brought forward to show Oswald genuinely liked Kennedy . Many witnesses, including many of the witnesses in the trial, could have brought forward .
 "Nobody’s yet been able to put him in that building with a gun in his hand," he says . "Nobody has ever been able’t put him into that building"
 Oswald was hired by outsiders to deliver a rifle to the Depository building, to be used by contract killers on the sixth floor while he dutifully waited in the lunchroom . Oswald may have been hired to deliver the rifle to kill his enemies .
 There are a number of “perhaps’s arguments, but the hard, material evidence, which would convict him of the assassination of President Kennedy, is absent . The hard evidence is not enough to convict him, but there is no hard evidence .
 Even at the time it was anything but an open and shut case, and since 1963, the evidence that “something else” 57.5 years ago was anything else’s . The case was anything more than an open-and-shut case .
 Oswald claimed he was eating in the first floor lunchroom at the time the President was shot . Oswald was under arrest when he was arrested for his role in the assassination . Oswald claimed to have been in the lunchroom when the shooting occurred .
 "There is, of course, circumstantial evidence that points the finger at Oswald," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There's circumstantially evidence that pointed the finger" at Oswald .
 General Walker may have tried to shoot General Walker, if his wife’s testimony can be believed . General Walker's wife testified that he may have shot General Walker .
 He left his wedding ring for Marina on the morning of the assassination, a ring he never took off . He left money for her as well, $170 — a meager sum, but still more than she had ever seen .
 He kept a Life Magazine photo spread on the Kennedys on his coffee table . He kept the Life magazine photo spread of the family .
 Oswald had fathered a baby that was born in October, and he loved his children — of that there seems little doubt . Oswald had a baby in October . Oswald's wife says he "loved his children" of that, of that .
 Oswald wrote to the IRS that his withholding exemptions should be altered to allow him more net pay . Oswald had written that his checks from the Depository would allow him to pay more net-pay . Oswald wrote that he wanted the changes to be made so he could pay more in taxes .
 This is clearly peculiar behavior for someone who does not plan to be around after November 22, much less for him to have premeditated the murder of a head of state . This is not the first time someone has been in trouble since November 22 .
 The bullet found in General Walker’s home did not match the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle Oswald allegedly used .
 Our next task is to review the evidence that some conspiracy may have existed in the killing of America’s 34th President. The next task will be to look at the evidence .
 The literature on this topic is so voluminous that it is easily the subject of an entire book, not a single chapter . The literature is so vast that it can be the subject to an entire chapter .
 Millions of pages of evidence, from the Warren Commission reports and appendices to the House Select Committee on Assassinations inquiries, are summarized here .
 In no case was significant evidence or data ignored for the purposes of a smooth, easy read . No significant evidence was ignored .
 The table in the middle of this chapter, for example, seems to go on endlessly . Yet it is important to present the seminal research without cutting corners, he says . It's important not to cut corners in this chapter .
 One minute after the assassination, spectators continue to run towards and look at the grassy knoll . Reasonable Doubt is the author of the book, "Reasonable Dictation"
 Photographic evidence from films shot at the moment show a number of spectators orienting themselves or looking toward the area of the grassy knoll to escape or shield themselves .
 Witnesses say they saw a man moving rapidly away from the knoll toward the railroad tracks . Jean Hill, who was standing across the street from the grassy knoll, said she saw the man move rapidly away .
 Dr. Robert Groden’s research on the strange autopsy results on the President is significantly at variance with the recollections of Parkland Hospital staff in Dallas . Groden: The results of the President's autopsy on him are significantly different than those of the Dallas hospital staff .
 The following table lists the witnesses Groden and Livingstone supply in Dallas who contradict the official autopsy findings out of Bethesda, Texas . Groden, Livingstone and Groden say the autopsy was wrong .
 Autopsy evidence was impugned by the following witnesses present at Kennedy’s admission to Parkland Hospital in Dallas 65 . Dr. Dr. Kennedy was admitted to the hospital with a gunshot wound to the head . Witnesses present at the admission of Kennedy were also impugnant .
 Diana Bowron, a British nurse who was with JFK’s body the entire time it was in the trauma room at Parkland, has been added to the list of witnesses . Livingstone has added another witness .
 Bowron contests the locations of the wounds in the autopsy photos with those she saw . Bowron contest the locations for the wounds she saw in autopsy photos .
 She said there was a gaping wound in the back of the head, suggestive of a frontal shot, and little brain was left in the skull . She said the victim was left with little brain left in her skull .
 Eisenhower Medical Center’s David Mantik subjected copies of government photos to a technique called optical densitometry . Mantik used the technique to test the authenticity of autopsy photos .
 The result shows “powerful and quantitative evidence of alteration to some of the skull X-rays.” The result of the study was published in the U.S. National Geographic Geographic magazine .
 A shot striking the President where the autopsy report placed it, at or near the hairline of the back of the head, would not, and indeed could not, have blown out the portion of the President's head which was blown away . Reasonable Doubt is that a shot striking
 Groden’s 1989 research on Parkland hospital inconsistencies has been corroborated by the most definitive study of this controversy, Groden says . Groden's 1989 research has corroborated his findings .
 This Board published five major findings, one of which speaks clearly to the issue of the autopsy . One of the major findings is that the autopsy was conducted on the wrong side of the story .
 Doctors who conducted the autopsy on President John F Kennedy may have performed two brain examinations in the days following his assassination, possi65. Doctors who performed the autopsy may have conducted two brain tests .
 Medical witnesses gathered from medical witnesses at Parkland Hospital deal not with autopsy inconsistencies but with the magic bullet and fragments thereof . Another piece of evidence gathered from witnesses is that the bullet fragments were found in the bullet casing .
 Anthony Summers reports that far more bullet fragments were removed from John Connally than could have possibly been attributed to this pristine bullet . Anthony Summers: More than could be attributed to the bullet fragments removed from Connally .
 Nurse Audrey Bell said she handled “four or five bullet fragments” after their removal from Connally’s arm . Bell was the operating room supervisor at the scene of the shooting .
 Two Parkland witnesses raise serious questions regarding whether the bullet found on the stretcher at Parkland could possibly have been the source of both Kennedy and Connally’s wounds . The bullet was found on a stretcher .
 Posner's Case Closed does not effectively deal with Bell’s and Finck's testimony . A recent, pro-government position on this issue is given in Posner’S Case Closed, but it does not .
 Medical staff handed ‘more than three’ other fragments to a patrolman guarding Connally’s room, Summers says . According to Summers, “... the Parkland medical staff handed more than three' other fragments .
 X-rays show that one fragment remained buried in Connally’s thigh . Connally was buried in his thigh, according to X-ray scans .
 The doctors chose to leave it there, and it was still in his body when he died in 1993 . It was still there when he was killed .
 The assumption that these suspicious autopsy issues have tried to cover up a frontal shot cannot be easily rejected out of hand . Clearly, the assumption that . these suspicious . autopsy issues are not easily rejected . The assumption is that the . autopsy .
 Ballistic analysis has led one researcher to conclude that different ammunition was involved . Howard Donohue: Evidence supports the idea that there was more than one shooter .
 The "pristine bullet" is a full metal-jacketed bullet specifically designed not to fragment or expand . Connally wound up on a stretcher in Parkland Hospital .
 The startling fact was that the bullet that hit Kennedy’s head had not behaved like a full metal-jacketed round at all at all . Kennedy was hit by a bullet that struck his head .
 We saw nearly forty fragments throughout the right cerebral hemisphere and embedded in the interior of the skull . The fragments were found in the right hemisphere of the brain and were embedded inside the skull.
 A lot of them were no bigger than the point of a pen, and the largest was about the size of the nail on your little finger . The largest of the collection was about a nail on a finger .
 Ballistics/Autopsy Inconsistencies are a problem in reconciling the ballistics evidence with official autopsy evidence . Ballistics evidence and autopsy evidence are at odds with each other's conclusion .
 The official bullets hit Kennedy and were certified as coming from Oswald’s rifle . They were heavy metal jacketed 6.5-millimeter rounds .
 One entrance wound in Kennedy’s skull measures only 6 millimeters by 15 millimeters . However, one entrance wound is only 6mm by 15mm .
 Oswald’s 6. millimeter bullet could cause an entry wound smaller in diameter than the bullet itself . The Warren Commission had to acknowledge an inconsistency that the commission had to admit .
 A smaller caliber bullet — like an AR-15 .223 bullet — might explain the contradiction .
 The significance of the putative fourth shot should not be underestimated . Acoustic evidence of a fourth shot can be found in the video .
 No one suggests that a lone gunman could have fired more than three shots in the time that elapsed . Even in an arena this rich in hypotheses that stretch credulity, no one says that .
 In its original tests, the Warren Commission used three professional marksmen and Oswald’s rifle to try to duplicate this feat . The Warren Commission has never been able to duplicate the feat .
 Only one was able to fire three shots within the required amount of time . Only one of the three shots fired within the time frame .
 Oswald, using this weapon, was the quintessential marksman, or not all the shots were fired by one gunman . This implies that either Oswald or Oswald shot at least one other person .
 If a fourth shot were fired in this same interval of time, no one has ever duplicated that feat . The existence of the fourth shot surely implies that there was more than one shooter . No one has duplicated the feat .
 JFK archivist Mary Farrel, of Dallas, gave to FISCA Chief Counsel Blakey an audiotape made from motorcycle patrolman’s Dictabelt . Farrel gave to Blakey: "Audiotape was made from a motorcycle Patrolman's Dict
 Farrel was uncertain what the recording might prove, but she hoped a well-equipped acoustics lab might make more sense out of it . Farrel is uncertain what it might prove .
 The FISCA sought recommendations from the Acoustical Society of America . The firm of Bolt, Beranek and Newman analyzed the recording .
 The firm concluded in 1978 that four detectible shots had been discerned from the tape . Four detected shots were discerned in 1978 .
 Oswald's weapon fired one more shot than the Warren Commission had found, but more significant was the fact that the third shot followed far too quickly after the second to have been fired by Oswald’s weapon . Oswald's gun was fired three times more than it had been previously thought .
 The tape seemed to prove that at least two gunmen fired in Dealey Plaza . The tape seems to show that two gunmen shot in the heart of the attack .
 A second, corroborating acoustical analysis was sought, and two other Acoustical Society of America scientists reviewed the evidence .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy studied echo patterns and concluded that not only were four shots fired, but that the third shot came from the grassy knoll . The researchers say that the fourth shot was fired from the knoll, not the Depository, but from the ground .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded its mandate shortly thereafter and issued its report with the conclusion that evidence for a fourth shot, and thus a conspiracy, was valid . The report concluded that evidence was valid and that a conspiracy was valid.
 The Justice Department and National Science Association later reviewed this evidence, however, and contradicted it . Justice Department later reviewed the evidence and said the evidence was wrong . The evidence was later found to contradict the findings of the Justice Department .
 They said a “delay effect’’ was noted on the tape, invalidating those conclusions of the committee . The committee said a delay effect was noted in the tape that invalidated those conclusions .
 The tell-tale visual “fingerprint” of a fourth shot which has over twenty points of correspondence linking it to a gunshot, has not been explained away . More recent reviews also challenge the findings .
 A final piece of evidence suggests that a fourth shot occurred comes from the Zapruder film . A fourth shot may have been captured on the night of the shooting .
 Zapruder filmed the assassination in its entirety and sold it to Life Magazine for $25,000 . Zapruders used his home movie camera to film the assassination .
 Reasonable Doubt film were ever permitted to be shown to the public until the mid'1970s . Reasonable Doubt film were never shown to public until mid'70s . The film was released in the 1970s .
 The President is thrown violently backward as part of his head explodes, and that the shot that killed him seems to have come from the front . It was precisely this printing “error” that obscured for over a decade the fact that the President was thrown violently backwards . The President was
 Great efforts have been made to allege that the President was killed by only one gunman, and thus very difficult matters needed to be explained . Great efforts were made to accuse the President of being killed by one gunman .
 Warren Commission concluded that the first shot did this remarkable feat . Warren Commission: The first shot was shot by the first bullet .
 The Warren Commission and the ""magic bullet” theory gained official credence and challenged Connally’s own memories . Still, the Warren Commission still questioned Connally's memory of the assassination .
 If only three shots could be fired and they had been fired by Oswald, then Connally had to have been hit by the same bullet that hit Kennedy . Connally was hit in the same way as Kennedy, according to a report .
 The theory has it that Kennedy is shot in the throat by the same bullet which entered Connally . Connally was shot by Kennedy's bullet, but Kennedy survived .
 frame-by-frame study of the film shows that Connally was not hit until between 1/2 and 1 1-2 seconds after Kennedy was . First, the study shows Connally did not get hit until 1.2 seconds before Kennedy was hit .
 Governor's wound came too late to be from the same bullet and too soon to have been a second bullet . Minimum firing time between Carcano shots was 2.2 seconds, governor's wound was too soon .
 According to the single bullet theory, the pristine bullet coursed through JFK and Connally’s torso and wrist . The pristine bullet was later found in virtually undamaged condition on a stretcher at Parkland hospital . The single bullet was believed to have coursed though JFK and
 The bullet to the right is identical to the one Oswald is said to have used and was shot into the wrist of a cadaver . Oswald's bullet was said to be shot into a wrist of the victim . Oswald is believed to have been shot at the wrist by Oswald .
 "It just couldn’t conceivably have been the first one because I heard the sound of the shot. Well, in my judgment, it just couldn't conceivably be the first," he said .
 "Any rifle has a velocity that exceeds the speed of sound, and when I heard the sound of that first shot, that bullet had already reached where I was, or had reached that far" "After I heard that shot, I had the time to turn to my right and start
 When governor comes into view from behind the sign, he turns slightly to his right and then again calmly faces forward, hat in hand, seemingly unhurt . When governor turns around, he calmly faces back and faces forward again .
 It is not until frame 238, a second and a half later, that Connally reacts to his wound . Connally reacted to the wound in frame 238 . It is the first time he reacts to a wound .
 If a single shot had penetrated Kennedy and Connally, how could this mysterious time lag between the two men’s reactions be explained? Critics therefore asked, if a single hit had penetrated .
 The single-bullet theory and all its ramifications have many evidentiary hurdles to mount if they are to be even marginally persuasive . It is unclear whether the theory is true or whether it will ever be accepted .
 Warren Commission appears to have had incentive to stick to the assertion that there was one shooter with only three shots . But the Warren Commission appeared to have been motivated by the fact that the shooter had only shot at least three .
 These inconsistencies have become more apparent over the years, as people have had more opportunity to think through the twists and turns of logic . These inconsistencies are becoming more apparent as more people have been able to understand them .
 The President fell backward in the limousine at the rate of many hundreds of feet per second when he was supposed to have been shot from behind . Other difficulties also had to be explained, particularly, why the President fell backwards . Reasonable Doubt is possible .
 The rationale provided was that a “neuromuscular reflex” propelled the President backward . The rationale was that the President was being pushed backward .
 Newton's second law of motion has remained inviolate for three centuries . Newton’s second law is that the rate of change of momentum is proportionate to the impressed force, and in the direction in which the force acts .
 Not even the advent of relativity and quantum mechanics has disturbed the validity of quantum mechanics . Not even Einstein's theory of relativity has disturbed its validity .
 The general direction of recoil will be away from — not toward — the marksman . If someone is shot, and the shot strikes bone, the recoil will go toward the shooter .
 In other words, if Kennedy was thrown backward, the shot had to come from his front . The shot would have to come out of the front of his head .
 A sizable piece of skull was found 10 to 15 feet to the left rear of the limousine . It was found near the left side of the vehicle . The skull is believed to have been found in the back of the car .
 A portion of President Kennedy's occipital region was found 25 feet to the left-rear of the vehicle’s path . Two motorcycle patrolman had their windshields covered with debris, also to the . left rear of the car, and a portion of . President Kennedy
 Kennedy crawled out of the back of the limousine to retrieve a piece of the President’s skull . The President's skull was part of the skull when Kennedy died in 1963 .
 If a piece of skull was found behind the car, and considerable material was, including a sizeable portion of Kennedy’s skull, then it is equally logical to assume this tissue came from a frontal shot . Similarly, if there was considerable material inside the car was found, it is
 In the last generation of inquiry, research has produced an impressive array of evidence pointing to the existence of a fourth shot and very likely a frontal shot .
 This represents the best physical evidence of the second shooter from the grassy knoll area of Dealey Plaza . This is the best evidence of a second shooter .
 Many have heard rumors of the loss of lives shortly after the Kennedy assassination . Prime witnesses who testified or were to testify before the Warren Commission are dead .
 Based on the deaths of twenty-one individuals, one actuarial firm calculated that the probability of their combined occurrence was some one trillion to one . The probability of the combined occurrence of their deaths was some 1 trillion to 1 .
 Any death that seemed to be directly or indirectly related to the assassination and its major participants is listed . The list of those who died in the assassination is also listed .
 A few of the examples are described below, to give the reader a sense of how names were included .
 Deaths associated with the Kennedy Assassination Deaths are coded M , S A or N 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 5 .
 Based on 78 deaths in which cause of death was determined . Zangretti,Jack a Based on . 78 deaths .
 Most of the deaths in the Kennedy sample occurred in the 1960s and 70s; thus, 1970 norms were used for this chart . The chart is based on the deaths of people who died in Kennedy .
 Some deaths were insufficiently documented or otherwise too tangential to be included . Some of the deaths were not documented .
 Henry Marshall, Agricultural agent, investigated wrongdoing in the case of President Johnson’s friend, Billy Sol Estes . Henry Marshall died in the early 1950s at the age of 50 .
 It is a death relevant to the Johnson-based conspiracy theory, but it was not listed here because it occurred before the assassination . It is not listed because it happened before the JFK assassination .
 Jose Aleman, a reluctant witness before the HSCA, committed suicide in 1983 . Aleman recanted his testimony that Santos Trafficante knew of a contract on JFK . Trafficante was convicted of racketeering in the 1970s .
 His death was not included in the list and subsequent statistical analysis, but probably should be . His death is not included .
 The author learned of this suicide after data analysis had been completed . He learned of the suicide after the data analysis was completed . The author also learned that this suicide was suicide .
 Antonio Veciana, a Cuban, told HSCA investigators that the CIA officer involved in the assassination and in numerous activities involving Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis was named Maurice Bishop . Bishop was a CIA officer, Veciana said .
 Richard Rudolf Carr saw a heavyset man in the Depository leave in a Rambler station wagon . Carr was told to keep quiet by the FBI . Carr saw the man leave in an empty station wagon; the FBI told him to stay quiet . Carr says he saw a
 His apartment in Dallas was searched; later two sticks of dynamite were found under his car . His apartment was searched in Dallas, Texas, and his car was found under it .
 Finally, two men attempted to kill him in Atlanta and he shot them both . Finally, he shot both of them in Atlanta .
 Dallas policeman Maurice “Monk"" Baker could have been included in this table but was obtained after the statistical analysis had been completed . Maurice "Monk" Baker was a Dallas policeman .
 Baker shot himself to death on December 3,1963, a few weeks after the assassination . Baker shot his own life in 1963 . Baker's death was the first of his own .
 He was a friend of Jack Ruby and lived in Oak Cliff on North Berkley, the street where Oswald lived . Oswald lived on the same street where Ruby lived .
 Kennedy, as will be shown later in this text, had numerous mistresses in the White House . Kennedy had many mistresses during his presidency, including several women .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer, Bobby Kennedy’s next-door neighbor, died in 1968 . She was one of Kennedy's last neighbors . She died at the age of 92 .
 JFK took up with Mary Meyer after he broke off ties with Judith Exner, the Mafia-connected bedmate of Sam Giancana . Mary Meyer was JFK's bedmate . JFK dated Mary Meyer in the 1960s .
 Mrs. Meyer visited Kennedy in the White House secretly about 20 times between January 1962 and November 1963 . Sometimes two to three times per week, she visited the president about two weeks a week .
 Reasonable Doubt juana with Kennedy in the White House shortly before a major conference on narcotics . Kennedy was in the midst of a drug war in the 1960s .
 She was related to Ben Bradlee of the Washington Post, who admitted that he read of Meyer’s clandestine visits to the White House in her diary .
 White House employee Traphes Bryant kept a diary about the White House liaisons . Bryant kept his diary about these liaisons and other White House staff members . Bryant's diary was published in 2009 .
 Her death was included in this table because it was either directly or indirectly related to the Kennedys or the assassination . This was the criterion used to determine whether her death was related to that particular event .
 Cheramie said she had been pushed from a car by two men, apparently of Latin extraction . A policemen who took custody of her, former Lieutenant Lrancis Lruge, told me in 1978 that she had said she was pushed from car .
 On the way to a hospital, Cheramie — Lruge — told me — mentioned that she had heard the two men discussing a plot to kill the President in Dallas . Lrouge told me that she heard the men talking about the plot .
 Lruge thought little of this — given that his charge was suffering from withdrawal symptoms — until he heard the news of President’s death .
 He then arranged to interview Cheramie in hospital in hospital as soon as possible . He arranged to speak to her in hospital soon after the interview .
 In essence her story was that, as a result of associations while working for Ruby, she was involved in a drug run from Louisiana to Houston, Texas, Texas .
 Cheramie overheard her two companions discussing an assassination plot, she said . It was before her companions dumped her that she overheard them discussing a plot to kill her . She said she overheard the two women discussing a possible assassination plot .
 In 1979 an Assassinations Committee report corroborated some aspects of the story . In 1979 a report by the Assassination Committee corroborated the story of the assassination .
 Dr. Victor Weiss, a former doctor at the hospital, recalled being told by a Dr. Dr. James A. Weiss . Weiss said he was told by Dr. Weiss that the hospital would not be able to treat the patients .
 Cheramie had stated before the assassination that President Kennedy was going to be killed, says Bowers . Bowers told Bowers that she had told him that she knew he would be killed . The president was killed in November 1963 .
 It is Cheramie's supposed comments before the assassination which are of course the most significant aspects of the episode . It is supposed to be her supposed comments about the assassination .
 Cheramie’s two companions appear to be a Cuban exile named “Osanto” and exile activist Arcacha Smith . linkage with the CIA and David Lerrie occurs between these names, and linkage with Lerrie also occurs .
 Carol Felsenthal, “Portrait of a Marriage,” Vanity Fair, February, 1993, published the book in 1993 .
 Hollywood was considering making a movie of the book, but there were pressures from organized crime not to go ahead with the project . Organized crime pressured Hollywood not to make a movie .
 The producer of this controversial film unexpectedly died in his Beverly Hills home, and the film was cancelled . The film was later cancelled after the producer died .
 Although this death occurred before the assassination of the President, it is included here as having a direct or indirect link to the Kennedys and a possible Mob involvement . It is included in this article as having been linked to the Kennedy family . The death of this man is included .
 Kilgallen from her frequent television appearances and daily newspaper column . Kilgallens is best known for her appearances on television, radio and radio .
 She had attended the Jack Ruby trial, and as a gossip columnist she had numerous inside sources on Washington matters . She had many inside sources, similar to the Jack Anderson-Drew Pearson columns .
 Kilgallen may also have been prepared to make revelations about Jack and Bobby Kennedy’s affairs with Marilyn Monroe .
 A related piece of testimony comes from Marita Lorenz, one-time mistress of Fidel Castro . Lorenz was later a CIA operative with anti-Castro forces in Miami. Lorenz is a former CIA operative .
 Lorenz Lorenz relates a rather chilling conversation she had with Frank Sturgis in 1977 . Lorenz tells how she met him in 1977 and how he told her about his work in the FBI .
 With Sturgis spilling the beans freely, Lorenz cranked up her nerve for the $64,000 question . Lorenz: "I don't know what I really want to do"
 David Ferrie and E del Valle Feme had severe alopecia and therefore had virtually no body hair . Reasonable Doubt David and E Del Valle feme both had severe body hair. Reasonable Doubt David Ferries and Edel Valle Fame had
 Ferrie was raised a strict Roman Catholic, had studied for the priesthood, and later became a very active homosexual and pedophile . Ferrie later became an active homosexual .
 Conspiracy literature argues that he was the pilot who brought Carlos Marcello back from Guatemala after Robert Kennedy had deported him . Some conspiracy literature says he was involved in bringing Marcella back to Guatemala after he was deported .
 Ferrie was closely allied to the Cuban anti-Castro movement . He was frequently seen entering Guy Banister’s office in New Orleans on Camp Street, the same address that Oswald used to pass out his literature .
 An associate of Guy Banister, Jack Martin, phoned in a tip implicating Ferrie in the killing of President Kennedy . Ferrie was questioned by the FBI shortly after the assassination because of his library card .
 He later came under the suspicion of Jim Garrison, the New Orleans District Attorney . Garrison was the suspect in the case .
 Garrison indicted in 1967 for the conspiracy to murder President Kennedy . Garrison indicted him for the murder of President Kennedy in 1967 . Garrison was convicted of conspiracy to kill Kennedy .
 Ferrie called Garrison’s office and said, “You know what this news story does to me, don’t you.” Ferrie said . Ferrie: When he heard of the indictment, he called Garrison's office and called .
 Ferrie was found dead of a massive brain hemorrhage four days after indictment . Ferrie died of massive brain damage .
 "I find nothing in it that is desirable, and on the other hand, everything that is loathsome," he says .
 Ferrie’s friend and employer E del Valle was found dead in a parking lot in Miami . That same day, less than 30 minutes later, Ferrie's friend and former employer was found killed in a Miami parking lot . Ferrie was the victim of a double homicide
 A curious state department officer who is unnamed in the literature went to Mexico to check out a story by an Elena Garro . State Department Officer is unnamed .
 Garro alleged Oswald and two companions attended a party at the home of her relative, Sylvia Duran, a secretary from the Cuban consulate in Mexico City . Garro alleges that Oswald attended the party at her relative's relative's house .
 Garro said she wanted to come forward with her story shortly after the assassination but was ‘sequestered” in a hotel by a Manuel Calvillo, she said . Garro says she was “sequestering” by a man who wanted to talk about
 One author has indicated that she is suspected of numerous liaisons with CIA sources . One author says she has been suspected of having liaisons .
 A State Department officer tried to investigate the Garro matter in 1964, apparently on his own initiative . The Garro case was investigated by the State Department .
 No further information is given about this death or even his name, but it likewise has been included in the above table . No further details are given about the death of this man .
 Marguerite Oswald, Oswald’s mother, died of natural causes . Margueritte Oswald, who was a prominent figure in the family, was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Jack Ruby, and Guy Banister, the leading suspect in Jim Garrison’s New Orleans inquiry, also died of natural causes . Jack Ruby also died in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 William Harvey, a leading CIA suspect, died during heart surgery . Harvey worked on anti-Castro covert assassination activities . Harvey died during surgery to treat Castro Castro .
 The photographer who developed the tramp photos from Dealey Plaza died of a heart attack the week after their publication . The photos were developed by the photographer who died a week after publication .
 Reasonable Doubt the major deaths by natural causes listed in the table . Reasonable doubt is that the majority of natural causes are caused by the deaths of people who died in natural causes .
 There are many accidental deaths, murders and suicides that deserve more serious attention . However, there are numerous accidental deaths and murders that deserve serious attention, says CNN.com .
 William Whaley, the cab driver who helped Oswald get away from Dealey Plaza, died in a freak car accident in 1965 . Whaley was the last man to die from a gunshot wound to the head .
 James Worrell said he heard a fourth shot and saw a man in a dark sports coat run out of the back of the Depository; he died in a motorcycle accident in 1966 . Worrell was a witness to the shooting .
 Karyn Kupcinet said she had foreknowledge of the Kennedy assassination, and was a friend of Jack Ruby . She was murdered two days after the assassination; she was murdered .
 William Hunter, a newsman, wrote a story about Jack Ruby and a year after the assassination he was found shot through the heart in Long Beach, California . William Hunter was shot in the heart after he wrote about Ruby .
 Koethe was later killed with a karate chop to the throat as he came out of a shower in his Dallas apartment, ten months after Kennedy’s murder . Koethe died ten months later in a Dallas apartment .
 James Richard Worrell said he was standing directly below the sixth floor window when he heard a shot . Worrell: "I was standing below the window when I heard a gunshot" Worrell says he heard the shot .
 After James had run around the Depository, he crossed the street and paused for a moment to catch his breath .
 He came out and bolted alongside the building parallel to Elm and then he cut to the right . He then cut to his right, running alongside Elm and cutting to Elm .
 James' motorcycle was parked on the kickstand and the motor was still running when they found him . One of his friends said James’ motorcycle was still on its kickstand when it was found . James' friend said the motorcycle had been parked and the bike was still in the kick
 Jack Beers of the Dallas Morning News took two photographs of the tramps arrested after the assassination . Beers took two photos of the Tramps arrested in Dallas .
 Beers died of a heart attack a week after the photographs were published . Weberman, ibid., 73. Beers was the subject of a series of photographs .
 Mariiyn Moore Walle, a dancer empioyed by Jack Ruby, had written a book on the assassination . She was shot to death September 1, i966. She was also a dancer .
 Another of Ruby's strippers, Teresa Norton, was shot to death in Houston ten months after the assassination . Teresa Norton was a stripper for Ruby's men .
 Harold Russel, a witness to Officer Tippit’s murder, said he was “going to be hit;” he was killed by a policeman in 1967 . Russel was killed in 1967 by a police officer in New Jersey .
 Lee Bowers, the railroad control tower official behind the grassy knoll, died in a car crash in 1966 . Lee Bower died in the same car crash that killed him .
 Nicholas Chetta, for example, performed the autopsy on David Ferrie and was prepared to testify at the Garrison investigation; prior to testifying, in 1968, he died of a heart attack .
 Mary Sherman, similarly connected to David Ferrie, was found shot in the head and set afire . Mary Sherman was also found shot and set alight in the same place .
 Gary Underhill, a former CIA agent, left Washington shortly after the assassination . Underhill: "It's not easy to say goodbye to the president, but it's a good thing"
 He said that the Far Eastern Group of the CIA was involved in the President’s murder . Mr. Obama said the Far East Group was responsible for the murder .
 Kennedy was shot execution-style in the left side of his head six months after Kennedy’s death . Kennedy was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 There is an incredible list of Mafia-connected murders linked directly or indirectly with the Kennedys . There is a long list of murders linked to the family .
 Johnny Roselli, the Mafia figure who is said to have quietly arranged a Kennedy divorce and had been in on the CIA-Mafia plots to kill Castro, was found floating in a drum off the coast of Miami .
 Sam Giancana who had personal contacts with Kennedy and visited him in the White House was shot to death . Action Jackson, Salvatore Granello, Jimmy Hoffa, John Martino, Leo Mocieri, and Charles Nicoletti also murdered .
 Jack Ruby called a Hoffa thug named Barney Baker shortly before the assassination . Baker, in turn, contacted Dave Yaras of Miami, Florida, on November 21 . Ruby called Baker, who was a member of the Hoffa gang, to contact Yaras .
 Each of these stories is really a novel in its own right, the seeds of a great murder mystery . Each story is full of intrigue, suspicion, drama, innuendo and, obviously, conspiracy .
 Such an anecdotal approach is of very little value in proving or disproving anything. However, such a little value is very little useful in proving anything, says CNN.com .
 Barney Baker made the calls after Ruby talked to him . The calls come from the calls made by Ruby to Barney Baker .
 Bobby Kennedy suspected Yaras of corrupting a Teamsters’ local in Miami area . Yaras had been suspected by Bobby Kennedy of corruption in the area .
 Howard Brennan, who saw Oswald fire the fatal shot, lived twenty years after the assassination . Howard Brennan saw the shooting, and saw the moment Oswald fired the shot . Brennan survived the assassination, and Brennan was able to see Oswald again .
 Phil Willis may have taken the most important photo related to the assassination . Willis, who took the photo, is still alive and well . Willis took the picture of the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Statistics are often misleading, and a naive interpretation of the evidence will not prove whether there was a conspiracy . Statistics often misleading and will not be able to determine if there was an alleged conspiracy .
 Deputy Sheriff Roger Craig killed himself; he was a major figure in the assassination inquiry . Craig was a deputy sheriff in the investigation into the assassination of President Richard Nixon . Craig's death was the subject of a major inquiry .
 CIA officer in charge of high-ranking KGB defector who crossed sides to say Oswald was not a Soviet mole killed himself under mysterious circumstances . The defector was a CIA officer who crossed both sides of the political divide . He killed himself in mysterious circumstances in 1963 .
 These pieces of evidence are the stuff of enticing television programs, but they do not constitute any serious evidence proving a conspiracy . The evidence does not prove a conspiracy, but does not constitute evidence proving it .
 We could also make a table of witnesses to the assassination who are still alive, and such a table would neither make news headlines nor be of much interest . Such a table wouldn't make headlines or be of interest, such an example would not be of any interest .
 The assemblage of data in the table takes on significance only through statistical analysis . Statistical Analysis is required for the table to take significance .
 If these deaths were related to the Kennedy assassination only as ‘coincidences’ or artifacts of some sort, the statistical analysis would reveal the lack of genuine connectedness . The analysis would at some point reveal that the deaths were not connected to the assassination .
 There were 29 murders, 19 accidental deaths, 13 suicides, and 17 deaths from natural causes . There were also 29 accidental deaths and 19 suicides .
 When these deaths are compared to mortality rates in the general population, they add up to one of the leading pieces of circumstantial evidence that Kennedy was killed as part of a conspiracy . The deaths of Kennedy's friends and family are the leading piece of evidence that he was killed in a
 If we put together lists of 78 individuals randomly selected from obituary columns across the nation, sta87.87 would have been more accurate . By comparison, we could have put together a list of 78 randomly selected individuals .
 Natural causes are the least dramatic causes of natural causes, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . Natural causes include natural causes .
 The national average was 89% from natural causes but only 22% died of natural causes . Only 22% of people in the sample died in natural causes, compared to 89% national average .
 This is not only startling; statistically, it is enormously atypical and significant . This is the first time that a black person has been in the U.S. for more than a decade .
 They are directly or indirectly related to the Kennedys and the assassination . They are either related or indirectly to the Kennedy family .
 The measure by which we calculate ‘differences’ from what is normally expected is called Chi Square . Chi Square is a measure of "differences" from what we normally expect is Chi Square.
 The Chi Square statistic reveals that the Kennedy sample is tremendously at odds with national norms . The Kennedy sample was significantly higher than the national average of Americans . The sample size of the sample is higher than national averages .
 The probability that this variation could simply be the result of coincidence, chance or random occurrence is less than one in 10,000 . The probability of this variation is one in ten,000 more than coincidence .
 This suggests there is some anomalous factor, something extraordinary, that would account for the distribution of the causes of these deaths . This suggests that there is something extraordinary that would explain the distribution .
 Sheriff Roger Craig’s suicide in 1966 may have been the result of depression and alcoholism, unrelated to the Kennedy matter . Craig's suicide was unrelated to Kennedy's assassination . Craig was found dead in 1966 .
 David Ferrie’s death may have been caused by a brain hemorrhage and have had nothing to do with the ruminations of Garrison's conspiratorial obsessions with the Kennedy killing . Ferrie's death may not have been linked to Garrison's conspiracy theories .
 Reasonable Doubt cide may have been the result of a long, slow, and gradual unfolding of a personality disorder, which had little to do with Kennedy’s assassination or any international or national conspiracy .
 Statistical analysis of these and the other deaths in question shows that they share an anomalous feature that is statistically significant . They share some common characteristic that sets them apart from ‘normal"" deaths .
 Gerald Posner’s Case Closed makes the best attempt at that . However much we might like to explain away each death individually or idiopathically, it points to something aberrant .
 Kennedy’s death is the single best circumstantial evidence that it involves a conspiracy . These deaths in toto are wholly at odds with the pattern of death that occurs in the U.S.
 The cause of death of individuals who had a direct or indirect link to the Kennedys sketches a pattern that is so unusual, so atypical, so statistically significant, that it suggests a conspiracy . The pattern of deaths of people who had links to the Kennedy family is so at
 There are many unstudied and un-researched parameters in this table of suspicious deaths . There are also un-explained parameters in the table . The list is a long list of people who have died in suspicious circumstances .
 Average age at time of death in a random sample of 78 Americans in that time period would have been close to the mid-60s and 70s . But few of the people in this sample reached their normal life expectancy .
 Jerry Wald was 48; Marilyn Monroe was 36; Jack Ruby was 54; Jack Jack Ruby, 54; James Worrel, 23. Jerry Wald died at age 48 . Marilyn Monroe, Jack Ruby and Marilyn Monroe were both 36 .
 The mean age at time of death is a dozen years earlier than what might be expected based on actuarial data . The average age at death is 12 years younger than expected .
 If the sample were “normal” or “neutral,” that is, if the fact of being linked to the Kennedy assassination did not increase the likelihood that they would have an early death . We can compare the sample to any other set of people who just happen to
 Elvis Presley's life span spans six decades . Presley died at the age of 60 at age of 50 . Presleys' life span spanned more than 30 years . Elvis' funeral was held at Graceland in Memphis, Tennessee, on June 14 .
 Let us assume that 78 of these friends, neighbors, acquaintances, doctors and advisors had died over the last two decades . Let us further assume that many of these people had died in the last 20 years .
 Marilyn Monroe allegedly died by suicide prior to the Kennedy assassination . It seems rather ludicrous to consider her death part of the assassination conspiracy . Marilyn Monroe's death is not a suicide .
 William Sullivan, a major advisor to J 59 Conspiracy in Camelot, died in a hunting accident . Sullivan was suspected of being part of the FBI’s own cover-up operations .
 Lieutenant Commander William Pitzer had taken photos of Kennedy's autopsy . Pitzer committed suicide in 1966 after taking photos of the autopsy .
 Marilyn Monroe had no association with Mr Sullivan and probably never met Commander Pitzer . Marilyn Monroe never had any association with him .
 Taken together, the deaths all belong to a very skewed, significantly atypical statistical sample that is extremely unlikely to occur at random or by coincidence . However, taken together, their deaths belong to an extremely skewed sample that in itself must raise questions .
 Nationwide, about 9% of deaths per year are expected to arise from accidents, mostly auto accidents . About 9% per year will die from car accidents, most of them from car crashes .
 accidental deaths represent 23% of the entire sample — three times the national average . They are statistically statistically statistically atypical and unusual, even freakish, in nature .
 Hugh Ward, the partner of Guy Banister, was tried to indict him for the murder of President Kennedy . Hugh Ward belongs to the same group as Jim Garrison, who was trying to indict Banister for JFK murder .
 Garrison was killed in a private plane crash just before Garrison could question him . Garrison was trying to question Garrison when he died in the crash . Garrison died in a plane crash shortly after Garrison was able to interview Garrison .
 Maurice Brooks Gatlin, another associate of Guy Banister, was the legal counsel to the Anti-communist League of the Caribbean . He was also a lawyer for the League of Caribbean .
 Just an accidental death, but one which would cause a statistician or an investigator to begin raising an eyebrow . The death was an accident, but it was not an accident .
 James Milteer, a right-wing fanatic, was planning the assassination of the President, according to information gathered by FBI wiretapping . He died when a heater exploded in a house explosion .
 This information raises questions about the circumstances surrounding Pitzer’s death . Pitzer was found dead at the scene of his death in 2007 .
 William Sullivan died when someone mistook him for a deer and shot him . Reasonable Doubt William Sullivan, the FBI official already mentioned, died . Sullivan was shot in the head by a passer-by who thought he was a deer . Sullivan died in the shooting .
 Thomas Davis, a gunrunner who had a connection to both Jack Ruby and the CIA, told his wife that he knew who killed Kennedy . Thomas Davis had connection to Jack Ruby, CIA and Jack Ruby . Davis' wife says he knew Kennedy's killer .
 He died by electrocution while trying to steal wire from a supply dump . He died trying to take wire from the dump .
 A Dallas bus hit Mona Saenz, the Texas employment clerk who interviewed Oswald, 17 months after the assassination . Saenz was hit by a Dallas bus 17 months later . A Dallas driver hit Saenz in the head with a tire tire .
 The deviations from statistical probability in this sub-sample alone paint a picture that is very far from “normal” in any sense . The deviations in statistical probability alone paint the picture that paints a picture far from normal .
 Airline disasters, particularly commercial airline fatalities, are extremely rare . Airline accidents are extremely rarely reported worldwide .
 The probability in 1973 of dying in a commercial airline accident was 1/10,000 . The probability of dying from a plane accident in 1973 was 1.2 million . In 1973, the probability of a fatal accident in a plane crash was 1% .
 Congressman Hale Boggs and Dorothy Hunt both died in separate crashes . Hunt died in two separate crashes in the 1950s and '60s . Hunt was the first woman to die in a plane crash .
 Hale Boggs was the only Warren Commission member to reject the Commission’s findings . He demanded that a footnote be placed in the report before he signed it . Hale was only member of the Warren Commission to reject its findings .
 Dorothy Hunt was the wife of E Howard Hunt, the Watergate conspirator and former CIA agent . Hunt was a CIA agent and wife of Hunt's Watergate co-conspirator . Hunt is also a former CIA operative .
 Hunt was the CIA station chief in Mexico City at the time Oswald allegedly went to Mexico before the assassination . Hunt was in Mexico when Oswald allegedly visited Mexico City . Hunt worked for the CIA in the late 1960s .
 One conspiracy researcher alleged that Dorothy Hunt was carrying papers that implicated Richard Nixon in the JFK assassination . Hunt was also accused of carrying papers linking Richard Nixon to the assassination of JFK .
 The plane crash that took her life occurred at the time of the Watergate episode that involved her husband . Her husband died in the crash .
 Jack Ruby had stated to Ray McKeown that he was planning on entering a deal with Davis . Ruby had said he planned to enter a deal . Jack Ruby later revealed that he had been working with Davis for years .
 Davis was a charming, tall Texan who was entangled in anti-Castro efforts . Davis was known for his efforts to oust Castro Castro .
 In September 1973, Davis was attempting to steal three-quarter-inch copper wire from an abandoned rock yard . Davis was electrocuted and died in September 1973 when he was trying to steal copper wire .
 What is argued here is the dizzying improbability of these two events occurring in a single sample of 78 people . What is said to be the most unlikely thing to happen is the fact that these two things occurred in a one person's lifetime .
 If an epidemiologist were hired to look at the pattern of death in a particular neighborhood to see if there were any toxins or unusual pollutants which might be affecting the community’s health, the first thing he or she would do would be to investigate causes of death and patterns of mortality
 If children were dying from kidney failure at rate 10 percent greater than national norms, or developing leukemia 20 percent more frequently than expected, experts would try to find out what was wrong . They would seek to isolate the particular toxin that was affecting the community, experts said .
 In the Kennedy context, there is also something “wrong,” and “conspiracy” is the best term anyone has come up with to describe the unlimited possibilities of just what that is . “Conspiracy’s” best term is ‘cons
 In the Kennedy sample, the patterns of mortality and accidental mortality are incredibly skewed from normal expectations . "No epidemiologist would call this data a statistical fluke," says epidemiologist .
 "To walk away from this sample and dismiss it as some kind of statistical artifact would be quintessential epidemiological malpractice," says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In 1977, the House Select Committee on the Assassination of President Kennedy was formed under the chairmanship of Henry Gonzalez . The committee issued its final report in 1979 .
 It called a number of witnesses, many of whom were never called by the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was never called, but called many of the witnesses .
 Prior to this, the Senate Intelligence Committee held similar hearings . Prior to the hearings, the committee had similar hearings in the past .
 In the course of these investigations, many of the witnesses died — in fact, an astonishing number, and rarely were the causes of death natural . In fact, the deaths were often not natural .
 Our third criterion of “best evidence” that the Kennedy assassination involved a conspiracy involves the untimely death of these individuals . The Kennedy assassination involves the deaths of those individuals .
 Lee Harvey Oswald made a friend after he had returned from the Soviet Union . George deMohrenschildt was a friend of Oswald's after returning from the USSR .
 The deMohrenschildts helped the Oswalds re-orientate to the United States after their arrival . Oswald and the “Baron” often had quiet chats about politics and the international situation at the "Baron"
 According to deMohrenschildt, Lee was an admirer of Kennedy and never said anything hostile or derogatory about the President in all the time he knew him . Lee was a fan of Kennedy .
 Reasonable Doubt DeMohrenschildt had numerous prior involvements with the CIA and U.S. Army Intelligence . Reasonable Doubt had prior involvement in CIA and Army Intelligence operations .
 He was an eccentric and toward the end of his life appeared to become increasingly emotionally labile . He was also an eccentric . He appeared to have become increasingly emotional labile.
 The Baron did not believe Oswald shot Kennedy and had prepared a manuscript entitled I'm a Patsy . The Baron believed Oswald shot JFK and had written a book entitled I’m A Patsy about the assassination .
 Baron was found dead in his home, shot through the mouth with a 20-gauge shotgun . An investigator for the Assassinations Committee calfed to arrange an interview .
 Carlos Prio Prio was alleged to be a top Mafia figure . He had been the President of Cuba from 1948 until 1952,when he was deposed .
 He had also been linked to Jack Ruby and former Watergate conspirator Frank Sturgis . Jack Ruby was also a CIA operative and CIA operative, according to reports .
 He was listed as a witness the Assassinations Committee wanted to interview . The committee wanted to question him about his role in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Baron deMohrenschildt’s suicide was a suicide suicide attempt . Baron Prio also killed himself a week after Baron de Mohrenschildts' suicide . Prio's suicide was the second suicide attempt by Baron Prios .
 Prio was seated in a chair, with a pistol beside him, outside the garage of his Miami home . Prio sat in the chair with a gun beside him outside his home .
 The Assassinations Committee staff had also listed Charles Nicoletti as a witness to interview . The Assassination Committee staff also listed him as an interview witness .
 He may have been connected to Eugene Hale Brading, who was held for questioning on November 22, 1963 . Brading may be connected to Brading .
 On the day before the Assassinations Committee planned to contact Nicoletti, he was found in a Chicago parking lot with three bullet wounds in the back of his head . Nicoletti was found with three gunshot wounds to the head in a parking lot .
 His foot was jammed against the accelerator, causing the engine to overheat . The car was driven by a man whose foot jammed into the accelerator . His foot jammed the accelerator causing the car to over-heat .
 The car burned and obliterated any possible fingerprints or other material evidence that could have been of use in solving this murder . The body was found in a burned-out car .
 By the early 1960s, he had ascended to be one of the most powerful Mafia dons in the U.S. The Mafia boss was known for his role in the 1960s .
 He received between $65,000 and $300,000 in monthly proceeds from gambling operations in Las Vegas alone . He had his hands in many more criminal activities as well .
 Giancana is alleged to have had many contacts with JFK’s father Joseph Kennedy . His girlfriend, Judith Exner, was also involved with President Kennedy .
 Giancana putatively attempted to kill Fidel Castro; the Senate Intelligence Committee had asked to question him about the CIA’s scheme .
 A few days after that interview, Giancana was found dead, shot once in the back of the head and six times in a neatly stitched circle around the mouth . The interview took place in New York City, New Jersey .
 Sam “Mooney’s” Giancana had already been talking about the incident . The incident took place in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Leo Moceri told a government agent that Giancana and Hoffa were murdered in order to stop them from talking about CIA-Mafia plots and associations . Leo told an agent he told the government agent they were killed to stop talking about the CIA and mafia ties .
 Moceri was an Ohio syndicate figure who had one meeting with a government agent . He was one of a number of syndicates involved in the drug trade . He had a meeting with government agents .
 After his second meeting, Moceri vanished, and his car was found abandoned . He was found dead in the early hours of his disappearance .
 Moceri, like Nicoletti, had been in Dallas and allegedly was associated with Eugene Hale Brading97 John Roselli Roselli was a Las Vegas gangster . Roselli is alleged to have taken a leading role in CIA assassination plots .
 Hoffa, Trafficante, Roselli and Marcello were very disturbed over Bobby Kennedy’s attacks on organized crime . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Numerous rumors persisted that a Mafia contract had been ordered on the President, primarily to remove Bobby from his aggressive role as Attorney General . Bobby Kennedy was the Attorney General of Florida .
 Roselli had informed the government that he believed his former associates in the Castro assassination schemes had gone on to murder President Kennedy . Roselli told the government he believed former associates went on to kill President Kennedy.
 After these meetings, Roselli dined with Santos Trafficante . Reasonable Doubt after these meetings .
 When the Senate Intelligence Committee sought to reach Roselli, he was out of reach in Costa Rica . Roselli was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Costa Rica.
 Roselli was last seen alive on a boat owned by an associate of Trafficante's associates . Roselli's last known body was found on boat belonging to Trafficante associate .
 In July 1976, 1976, Roselli’s body was found floating in a container near Miami, shackled, stabbed, quartered, and squashed into an oil drum .
 Regis Kennedy Kennedy was a senior agent in the FBI assigned to New Orleans in 1978 . He informed the Assassinations Committee in 1978 that Carlos Marcello, the alleged Mafia boss in New Orleans, was not affiliated to organized crime and was a tomato salesman . Kennedy Kennedy told the Assass
 He was scheduled to be questioned by the Assassinations Committee in 1978 . He was due to be interviewed by the committee in 1978.
 As mentioned earlier, he was found shot dead having been mistaken for a deer . He was found by police officers after being mistaken for an animal .
 He had been head of FBI’s Division Five, which handled the King and Kennedy investigations . He was head of the FBI's Division Five .
 William Pawley was a former American diplomat who had allegedly collaborated with Mafia figure John Martino in the CIA operation to prove that Soviet missiles were still in Cuba . Pawley worked with the Mafia figure to prove the existence of Soviet missiles .
 Pawley was instrumental in persuading Clare Boothe Luce of Time Life to finance anti-Castro operations in Cuba . Pawley helped fund Time Life operations in the 1970s .
 Pawley shot himself during the Congressional inquiry into the Kennedy assassination . Pawley was a member of the Congressional committee that investigated the assassination of Kennedy .
 John Paisley was a CIA operative who had been in charge of KGB defector Yuri Nosenko . He had been working for the CIA in the 1980s and '90s .
 Paisley died under mysterious circumstances at the time of these hearings, but his death was ruled a suicide by suicide by a suicide . The hearings were held in his honor .
 Martino died at this time of an apparent heart attack; his wife disputed that conclusion . Martino was an associate of William Pawley .
 Oswald was to meet his contact at the Texas theater in what appears to have been a setup to kill him while he would try to escape . Oswald was scheduled to meet with his contact in the theater . Oswald would then be killed by a bomb blast .
 All these witnesses were to testify, had already testified, or were to he called back for additional testimony . All of the witnesses were either to testify or to testify .
 No statistical argument is raised here, but the curious nature and timing of the timing seems noteworthy .
 Paisley was a CIA executive whose wife alleges that he had been placed in charge of Soviet KGB defector Yuri Nosenko . Paisleys was an executive who worked for the CIA .
 In 1978, the House Assassinations Committee broke the story of Nosenko’s defection . The House of Representatives broke the news of the defections .
 A body washed to shore, which was badly bloated; it was identified as Paisley . It had been weighted down with ballast, and it was weighted down .
 Paisley's son found his father’s apartment badly disturbed and ransacked . His father's apartment was found badly disturbed by the incident .
 Paisley disputes the claim, even alleging that the body that floated to shore was not that of her husband . The body was found floating in a shallow spot on the shore of the shoreline .
 Her husband had a beard, whereas the badly bloated body was bald and had no beard; furthermore, it was not the right height . Her husband was not right height, and she was bald .
 The story of John Martino has taken on greater significance in recent years . Martino's story has taken greater significance since his death in 2010 . He was a member of the National Suicide Prevention Council .
 Martino had been in touch with former U.S. ambassador William Pawley, a champion of Cuban exiles . Martino: "I'm glad to have been able to work with the Cuban people"
 Martino also worked closely with Trafficante’s liaison with the CIA, John Roselli . Martino worked with Roselli and Trafficante's liaison to the CIA .
 We were talking about President Kennedy; and he said ‘Flo, they’re going to kill him.’ He told her he was going to be killed, she said .
 Florence questioned her husband briefly, got no meaningful response, and went out for a while . Florence questioned him briefly, but he didn't respond to her questions .
 She was home again by the time Edward, who was 17, heard the news of the assassination on television . Edward was 17 at the time, when he was killed by the assassination .
 Martino's version is that Oswald was involved with another shooter who was in the Texas Theater when Oswald was arrested . Martino’s version of the story is that another shooter was involved in the shooting .
 Martino told him “he had himself met Oswald several weeks before the assassination, in Miami . Martino said he met Oswald in Miami, Florida, weeks before his assassination .
 It's doubtful that American history can produce any other comparable concentration of deaths of witnesses called before a government committee . The committee will hear testimony from witnesses before the Senate .
 There is physical evidence suggestive of a frontal shot to the President . The causes of death of over 78 individuals connected with JFK or the assassination are statistically anomalous . A startling sum of eleven deaths are clustered about two sets of government hearings on the assassination in the mid-1970s .
 The fourth pillar supporting the theory of the existence of the conspiracy is more psychological in nature . The theory is more likely to be true than it would otherwise be true, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 It is fair to assume that if one invests a great deal of time and energy defending oneself and/or covering up one’s tracks, there is probably something genuine to defend against or to cover up .
 The fact that there was a cover up after the assassination indicates that something existed that needed to be shielded from view . A significant cover-up effort becomes an indirect piece of evidence that a conspiracy existed . The fact of a significant cover up is indirect evidence of a conspiracy .
 This database is so large and wide in scope it is almost impossible to summarize . It is so wide and wide that it is impossible to describe it .
 Cover-up activities, witnesses who refuse to testify or speak, can be found from Flollywood to Washington, from the CIA to the darkest circles of the underworld .
 In the following table only the most reliable data has been included . Many wilder, more irresponsible assertions have been omitted from the table . The table includes the most accurate data available .
 The table is generally representative of what is contained in the most widely recognized ‘conspiracy’ texts . The table includes the most commonly recognized “conspiracy theories .
 The information is merely summarized here; this author does not maintain that it is inherently corroborated or valid . The information does not reflect any of the information being independently corroborated .
 A discussion follows some of the ways this data might be sifted to render some meaningful conclusions . We try to determine what is bona fide and reliable .
 Newspaper columnist, aware of Kennedy infidelities, did not disclose such information for many years after Kennedy’s death . Newspaper columnist was not aware of such infidelity .
 Haldeman to have erased all connections between CIA and Oswald . Suspected of shredding document which showed Howard Hunt (of Watergate fame) present at Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Angleton also crossed paths with Mary Pinchot Meyer .
 Meyer visited the White House on numerous occasions and was mysteriously murdered in 1964 . Meyer visited White House numerous times . Meyer was mysteriously killed in 1964 after visiting White House several times .
 Meyer Meyer and a correspondent for the Washington Post reported that her diary had been destroyed by CIA official James Angleton . Meyer reported that Angleton had destroyed her diary . Meyer said Angleton destroyed the diary .
 Angleton is thought to have withheld information on the death of John Paisley . Angleton also thought to be withholding information on death of the singer . He is believed to have also withheld information about Paisleys death .
 Winston Scott, former CIA station chief in Mexico, was killed in Mexico . Winston Scott was the CIA's station chief at the time of the incident .
 Angleton personally removed the contents of Winston Scott’s safe from his safe . Angleton removed the safe from Winston Scott's safe after his death .
 Angleton also alleged to have had access to or possessed a photo of J Edgar Hoover having oral sex with his longtime companion, Clyde Tolson . Angleton aware that mob figures used this information to ""fix"" Hoover from persecuting mob—never revealed to Warren Commission or subsequent inquiries .
 Senior FBI agent who wished to have his identity concealed, admitted to author Summers that the FBI removed telephone numbers from Marilyn Monroe’s bill . The FBI removed the numbers from the bill .
 Bureau personnel, who normally wouldn’t have been there, were there . Agents from out of town were there for the first time . Bureau personnel were in attendance at the event .
 They were on the scene immediately, as soon as she died, before anyone realized what had happened . The police say she died in a car crash on Sunday .
 Arledge, Roone, past president of ABC, and executive producer Av Westin both played a role in censoring a ‘20/20’ documentary on Marilyn Monroe and her relationship to Kennedy . Arledge and Roone played a part in the decision to censoring the
 The specific parts they wanted cut were references to Kennedy and Giancana, and Kennedy’s relationship with Judith Exner, among others . Kennedy's relationship with Exner is also said to have been cut .
 Suppression of this program became national news . Suppression was national news in the U.S. Suppression is national news.
 David Belin, David, Chief Counsel to the Warren Commission; numerous witnesses accused Belin of changing their testimony for the final report, including Dallas policeman Roger Craig . The Warren Commission's final report was released on August 18, 1995 .
 He was apparently responsible for failing to include Hale Boggs’ objection to the Warren Commission conclusions in the form of a footnote in the final draft of the final version of the Warren Report .
 One of those fired by Kennedy after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, along with Allen Dulles and General Cabell, was one of those who were fired after the fiasco .
 Bissell recruited Roselli, Giancana and Trafficante to assassinate Castro offering $150,000 bounty . Bissell was CIA’s deputy for planning, had recruited the men to assassinate the Cuban leader .
 CIA liaison officer with HSCA fired for trying to steal autopsy photo from files . Blahut, Regis, was a CIA liaison to the CIA . He was fired for allegedly stealing autopsy photos from files from autopsy photos .
 Knew of Kennedy’s liaisons with women, including Mary Pinchot Meyer, yet never revealed this information at the time of the assassination or during later government inquiries .
 Was aware that James Angleton of the CIA broke into Meyer’s apartment after her death and similarly did not come forward with this information at the time of the Senate and House investigations . Was aware of the break-in after Meyer's death .
 Buckley, William F. Buckley, a conservative columnist, is historically negative toward any conspiracy theory of the assassination . Buckley, Buckley, was a conservative conservative columnist and conservative columnist . Buckley was critical of conspiracy theories .
 Conspiracy literature cites Buckley as allegedly having undisclosed CIA ties, and ties with Howard Hunt . Buckley worked “on a deep-cover operation in Mexico in the early 1950’s.”
 Whether Buckley withheld information or sincerely was opposed to the perceived paranoia of conspiracists is a matter of debate . Buckley withheld info or sincerely opposed to perceived paranoia, it's not clear whether he did .
 George Burkley, George; Navy admiral to whom autopsy notes were ultimately forwarded; also was present at autopsy and aware of photographic evidence . Burkley was the Navy's most senior admiral .
 The President’s missing brain, failure to preserve film and photos taken at autopsy, pressures on Dr. Donald Trump . The President's missing brain is the subject of a series of questions about his autopsy .
 Admiral Burkley ordered Humes to destroy his notes . Humes had authority over autopsy doctors to destroy autopsy notes, he says .
 Burkley has never been called to “answer any questions about anything” k 11.11. Burkley says he's never been asked to answer any questions .
 Charles Cabell was mayor of Dallas at the time of the assassination and was in the motorcade with the President . Charles was involved in CIA plots to kill Castro; his brother, Earle Cabell, was mayor . Charles fired by Kennedy; fired by JFK; was involved with CIA
 Cabell may have been the CIA operative who canceled the air strikes in support of the Bay of Pigs operation for which Kennedy ultimately took blame . Other texts dispute this assertion, but other texts dispute it .
 Assertions of Cabell’s role in withholding any information are not considered reliable . Assassertions of his role in withholding any information from the public are considered not reliable by the court .
 Cesar Diosdado is a known anti-Castro exile with allegedly important CIA contacts . He is an ex-Cuban exile with alleged CIA contacts with the U.S.
 De Brueys, Warren; New Orleans FBI agent denied he had contact with Oswald; facts were subsequently proven otherwise . FBI agent had denied he was involved in Oswald's shooting .
 Dulles, Allen, former CIA Director, member of Warren Commission, refused to testify for Garrison on Clay Shaw, David Ferrie . Also kept mum on work of Cuban Study Group that reviewed the ill-fated Bay of Pigs operation in 1961 .
 CIA employee handled Oswald’s files for the last 3 years of his life . Ann Egerter, Ann; CIA employee who handled Oswald's files for last three years .
 She refused F1SCA requests to interview her in the mid 1970s and was threatened with a subpoena . She refused to be interviewed by the FSCA in the past .
 Newman's Oswald and the CIA considers her quite informed but one of the more unwilling people he has encountered . Newman’s Oswald and . the CIA considered her quite . informed but . one of them more unwilling .
 Flynn Charles, FBI agent who had over 9 meetings with Jack Ruby beginning in March 1959; did not disclose that he used Ruby as an informant . This information was released only in 1975 n 18 .
 T Ford reportedly was privy to Jack Ruby’s 9 contacts with the FBI in 1959-1960 . The correspondence was only released to the public 11 years after the Warren Commission closed its business T Ford .
 Recently released records show that Ford played an ‘editorial’ role in shaping the final Warren Commission report . Ford played a ‘key role’ in shaping it, records show .
 Ford is trying to make the single-bullet theory more tenable, a longtime critic of the Commission said . Flarold Weisberg, a long-time critic of Ford's Commission, said Ford is "trying to make" the single bullet theory tenable .
 Gill, G Wray; personal attorney for gangster Marcello, in New Orleans . Also represented David Ferrie, who was arrested on August 11,1961 for indecent behavior with a 15-year-old boy . Many writers consider that he had significant information about these individuals
 Hall, Loran; CIA connections with Cuban activities; gave disinformation about Odio evidence . Hall: CIA connections to Cuban activities were CIA connections; gave disinfo on Odio .
 Helms, Richard, former CIA Director admitted withholding information on Clay Shaw’s involvement with CIA . Helms thought to have withheld significantly more information from the public on CIA-Mafia plots to kill Castro, Project ZRRIFLE, Howard Hunt .
 At the time of the assassination, Oswald was carrying Feme’s library card . In the mid 1970s’ Helms admitted Ferrie had ties to the CIA .
 Guy Bannister’s associate, Jim Martin, called the FBI to inform that Ferrie played a role in the assassination . Ferrie was a member of the family who had been involved in the shooting . Guy's associate Jim Martin was the FBI's last survivor .
 Feme’s association with Cuban anti-Castro exiles as well as his investigation by the FBI four days after the assassination were not disclosed by the Warren Commission, nor to the public . The Warren Commission also did not disclose Feme's association with the Cuban exiles .
 Helms was the first CIA director to be sentenced to a maximum of two years in prison for lying to Congress . Helms is the first director of the CIA to be sent to prison for two years .
 Journalist Seth Kantor saw and spoke to Ruby at Parkland Hospital, but Ruby denied it, and Kantor’s testimony was rejected by Warren Commission . Warren Commission rejected Kantor's testimony .
 Kantor investigated, tried to get copies of his own phone records made in the hours after the assassination . Kantor's phone records were made in hours after his assassination .
 On the day of the assassination, Hendrix already had a great deal of information on Oswald and was disseminating it to the media . He was unable to obtain them until 1975 and discovered the reason they were withheld for so long was that he had called Hal Hendrix at 6 pm on
 Hoover withheld information on Mob contracts on Kennedy from the Warren Commission . Hoover, J Edgar, withheld information from Warren Commission on Kennedy . Hoover withheld info from Warren about Kennedy's involvement with Mob .
 Hosty claimed that reports on Oswald in Mexico had been removed from the FBI’s Dallas office after the assassination . Hosty also claimed that the FBI had removed reports from the Dallas office of Oswald from Mexico .
 Hosty finally wrote his memoirs in 1996 . Long held to be a major figure in the cover-up, Hosty wrote his book .
 Hosty corroborates much in the conspiracy literature identifying individuals implicated in various elements of the cover-up . Gordon Shanklin told Hosty about the Oswald note .
 Hosty also implicates the FBI’s Johnnie Mohr, close to Hoover, Gerald Ford, Jim Malley, Harlan Brown, andim Gale . Hosty implicates Winston Scott, FBI's Johnnie . Mohr and Gerald Ford .
 Dr. J M.D; primary forensic pathologist who worked on Kennedy autopsy at Bethesda . Dr. M.J. J.M.D. was primary pathologist at the scene of the Kennedy's death .
 Michael Baden who reviewed the autopsy results said “the qualifications of the pathologists.. . the failure to inspect the clothing ... . the inadequate documentation of injuries, lack of proper preservation of evidence, and incompleteness of the autopsy” were areas of major deficiency .
 Commander Humes was involved in the discovery of a fourth bullet . Humes admitted that his preliminary draft notes of the Autopsy Report he burned in his fireplace . Another less credible source cites Commander Hume as involved in discovery of the fourth bullet.
 Humes’s explanation of these allegations is that he burnt his notes of the autopsy because they were stained with blood and likely to be put on public display . Humes says he burnt them because they are likely to have been put on display .
 CIA employee spent a week with Marina Oswald prior to her testimony before the Warren Commission, allegedly prompting and/or coaching her responses . Don Levine is the CIA employee who spent the week with Oswald .
 Argued with Kennedy on Thursday evening Nov. 21,1963 in Kennedy’s hotel suite . Argued in Kennedy's hotel suite in 1963, then went on to argue with Kennedy again .
 Johnson wanted his friend, John Connally, governor of Texas, to be in another car and his nemesis, Senator Ralph Yarborough, to sit in Kennedy’s car . Yarborough was in the other car and was seated in Kennedy's car .
 Johnson denied the story, but it has been documented by Kennedy advance-man, Jerry Bruno . Johnson may have also withheld far more information on the Billy Sol Estes and Bobby Baker scandals .
 New Orleans FBI agent investigated Oswald prior to assassination but did not inform Warren Commission . When approached by Kennedy researcher, he says he was approached by JFK researcher . New Orleans police chief says Oswald was not a credible source .
 Many individuals associated with Kennedy have published allegedly historical treatments of his life withholding significant information about national security, anti-Castro assassination efforts and personal data such as his Addison’s disease, promiscuity, etc. etc., while many had knowledge of these matters .
 Arthur Schlesinger, Kenneth O’Donnell, David Powers, Ted Sorensen, Pierre Salinger and Ted Salinger, Walt Rostow, Evelyn Lincoln, and Theodore White are among the "Camelot school" of idolater-publicists .
 The Kennedy family is likely far more familiar with Kennedy associations with Exner, Giancana, and Joseph Kennedy’s connections with the Mafia than have ever been revealed to the American public .
 Kennedy is alleged to have known about her husband’s liaisons with her press secretary, Pamela Turnure; may also have known Baron deMohrenschildt, friend of Oswald . Kennedy is said to have also known Baron DeMohrenscht .
 Kennedy was personally responsible for attempts to suppress numerous articles and books on Kennedy or forcing, through litigation, through . litigation . William Manchester’s family-commissioned book, particularly the portion describing the argument between Lyndon Johnson and Kennedy the day before the assassination, was published .
 Caroline Kennedy has also been quoted as asking the media to leave her father’s memory alone . Caroline Kennedy is also quoted as saying that her father's memory should be left alone .
 Kennedy's only son has also taken a position that inquiries are of no interest to him . Kennedy’s only son also said he is not interested in inquiries into Kennedy .
 Max Kennedy, son of Robert, has steadfastly refused to open these papers for inspection . Several historians have requested permission to examine this material .
 Beverly Oliver claims she took an 8mm film of the assassination which she alleged FBI agent Kennedy took it from her . Beverly Oliver is known in the literature as the “Babushka Lady’s .
 George Lardner, George, is consistently negative about the Garrison inquiry . Garrison inquiry is ongoing . Garrison is a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA .
 Allegedly Lardner was with David Ferrie, Garrison’s principal witness, the day Ferrie died . Allegedly was with Ferrie the day he died . Garrison's principal witness .
 President Kennedy’s brother-in-law allegedly arranged numerous soirees for the President while Kennedy was in office . He was unavailable for testimony on the death of Marilyn Monroe and was sequestered at the Kennedy estate in Hyannisport .
 Lawrence, David; of the Herald Tribune . provided information on Oswald apparently before the authorities possessed such details of his life . Lawrence, Lawrence, of the . Herald Tribune ; disinformation; provided information about Oswald .
 His article appeared in the Christchurch Star within the first moments following the assassination . It was published in Christchurch's first moments after the assassination of George Osborne .
 Prouty suggests Lawrence couldn’t have known what he knew at that time and implies Lawrence had advance knowledge on Oswald .
 Life published a memorial edition of the Kennedy assassination captioned “All of Life’s Pictures,” yet key frames of the Zapruder film were withheld .
 Former Director of the CIA admitted that he knew of Maurice Bishop, the mysterious figure in Kennedy assassination literature . McCone, John, said he knew nothing about Bishop .
 McCone said he believed that Bishop was a senior agency employee . He said he had met Bishop 2-3 times, but could not identify who he was . McCone: "I believe he is a senior employee"
 Bishop was a pseudonym and his name appears in virtually all Kennedy assassination literature . Bishop's name is often used in connection with CIA complicity and the Cuban connection .
 McMillan, Douglas, FBI agent, compiled reports on Frank Sinatra and his dealings with Sam Giancana . Kennedy, Sinatra, Marilyn Monroe and Marilyn Monroe .
 Secret Service Director Lewis admonished two agents for speaking to a reporter about JFK’s extramarital activities in the White House .
 CIA agent knew and cleared George deMohrenschildt to associate with Oswald when he first came to Dallas . This fact was never disclosed to Warren Commission .
 Pat Newcomb was a friend of Marilyn Monroe, described as a person who knew more about Monroe’s association than anyone else . Newcomb, Pat, said he knew more of Monroe's association than any other person .
 Richard Nixon ordered attorney General John Mitchell to withhold ballistics evidence from the Kennedy Assassination “on the grounds of national security” acl Denied being in Dallas on the day of the assassination, but later admitted it .
 O’Neal was an assistant to James Angleton, the CIA counterintelligence molehunter . He worked for the CIA in the 1970s and '80s . O'Neal worked for Angleton during his time as a counterintelligence agent .
 John Newman’s Oswald and the CIA, a review of recently released records, states “O’Neal is possibly the person most knowledgeable about Oswald's CIA files alive today”
 Marina and Lee visited Guy Banister’s office in his office, his secretary said .
 David Phillips, David, CIA chief of Western Hemisphere Division in Mexico City, allegedly said no photos of Oswald visiting Soviet embassy in Mexico city existed . Phillips allegedly said there were no photos .
 Tapes of conversations inside the embassy were “routinely destroyed” said Phillips . Tapes were ‘routineally destroyed’ by the embassy, Phillips said .
 Was considered such an unreliable witness the HSCA considered indicting him for perjury . He was considered such a unreliable witness that he was considered to be indicted .
 Quigley, John, FBI special agent interviewed Oswald in New Orleans on Aug 10, 1963 . Quigly, John was a special agent for the FBI .
 Oswald's Navy file was reviewed by the FBI in 1961 after his arrival in the Soviet Union . Oswald was born in New Orleans, the city of his birth, in 1961 .
 Frank Rogano, Frank; attorney for Jimmy Hoffa and is reported to have knowledge that Hoffa, Carlos Marcello, and Santos Trafficante plotted the JFK hit . Stayed mum until early 1990s and then wrote a ‘tell-alT expose’ Stayed
 Rankin had been told that the FBI had contacted Jack Ruby nine times in 1959-1960 . Rankin failed to ask Hoover about any of these contacts at the Warren Commission hearings .
 Dan Rather, Dan; CBS; first and only journalist to view Zapruder film in mid-70s who incorrectly said President “fell forward” with considerable violence — disinformation — disinformation . Dan was the only journalist who saw the film and said it was a mistake . Dan
 Jack Ruby had told his psychiatrist that he was framed to kill Oswald . Ruby told Dr. Jack Ruby that he had been framed for his part in the assassination of Oswald .
 Rocca was the CIA individual who was assigned to investigate Buchanan and/or discredit his work . Rocca worked for the CIA in the 1980s .
 William Buckley published an article attacking Buchanan’s book as well . William Buckley also published a piece attacking Buchanan's book .
 Mafia figure allegedly passed false information on to Jack Anderson on Oswald's acting as Castro's agent in the killing of Kennedy . Roselli, John; Mafia figure .
 Salinger, Pierre, Kennedy’s press secretary, TV journalist, has not publicly revealed Kennedy's liaisons and promiscuity while in the White House . Salinger was aware of some of this activity although he was not aware of it .
 Kennedy withheld information about the frequency with which President Kennedy used a cane and crutches . Kennedy also withheld information on the frequency of his use of them .
 CIA delivered only a photograph and typewritten reports from Mexico . Said CIA delivered from Mexico only photograph and reports . CIA had delivered only photos and reports to Mexico .
 FBI Director Hoover made mention in a five page document to the fact that these agents had listened to a sound recording . Hoover also made mention of the recording in the document .
 Shanklin was warned before the Judiciary Committee that he might be open to prosecution for perjury . Shanklin is accused of perjury in his testimony before the committee .
 Robert Jones of the 112th Military Intelligence Group was killed in the attack . Robert Jones was the son of Robert Jones, a former CIA officer . He was killed by a British intelligence officer in 1998 .
 Sinatra was a frequent partygoer with JFK, also allied to Mob figures, and Marilyn Monroe . Sinatra, Frank, Frank was a member of the Mob . He was also a friend of JFK, who was also allied with Mob figures .
 'Did not reveal what he knew of these matters in any significant detail prior to his death' 'Didn't reveal what was known to him prior to death'
 Frank Sturgis, Frank; CIA linked anti-Castro militant, Watergate burglar, spread false story to Jack Anderson . Jack Anderson, Jack Anderson claimed Oswald was linked to pro- Castro intelligence . CIA linked Oswald to an alleged Cuban militant .
 James Buchanan wrote an article on Oswald’s Miami Fair Play for Cuba actions; the story was false, and Buchanan said Sturgis was the unnamed source of the story . Buchanan said that Sturgi denied it; Sturgs is deceased . Buchanan wrote the article; St
 Surgeon General, United States Navy, threatened all present at the Kennedy autopsy with court martial if they revealed the nature of the events surrounding the autopsy . Surgeon general, U.S. Navy, made the threats .
 Warren Commission investigator, Griffin, had been assigned the Jack Ruby portion of the investigation . Griffin was assigned to investigate Ruby's murder .
 Oswald felt that Sergeant Dean in charge of basement security where Oswald was shot had made false statements . He felt that he felt Dean had made a false statement about Oswald's shooting .
 Griffin felt Ruby may have come in to the basement area where Oswald was shot by another entrance . Griffin felt that Ruby came in by an entrance to Oswald's basement .
 Pressure from Henry Wade’s office got Griffin off the back of Sergeant Dean . Griffin was forced to resign from his post after the incident .
 Westin, Av; ABC TV executive producer; see discussion of Roone Arledge . Arledge: "I'm glad to be able to talk to Roone"
 The Luce Family and spokespersons for Life sharply dispute that Zapruderfilm ever showed the president falling forward . Clare Boothe Luce had any role in obtaining or publishing the pictures .
 Mr Stolley was apparently acting on behalf of the Luce family when he replied to my query . He replied: 'I'm not sure what happened to Mr Luce al. al. Luce' al. He was apparently working for the family of the deceased .
 Much Kennedy assassination literature is unreliable, says author . Much of it is based on circumstantial evidence that the assassination was an assassination attempt .
 Much of it is self-published, or virtually so, and has not been verified or vetted to any degree by any outside editor . Much of the content is not vetted or vetted by an outside editor.
 Nixon’s men funneled money to the Nazis, and Nixon himself voiced admiration for Albert Speer . Nixon's aides funneled the money to Nazi sympathizers .
 The sometimes overpowering bias of various writers obviously requires we maintain a healthy distance and skepticism about the assertions that come from these sources . We need to be skeptical of the assertions made by various writers .
 The suggestions of a cover-up need to be sifted through in an effort to separate gossip, rumor, and innuendo from genuine hard evidence . The suggestions are not the only ones revealed in our table above .
 FBI agent Hosty. Hosty is one of the most reliable evidence of cover-up activities . Hosty was an FBI agent in the late 1980s and early '90s for the federal government . Hosts is a former FBI agent who served in the 1990s .
 Hosty destroyed a letter written to him by Lee Harvey Oswald, complaining of his attempts to talk to Oswald’s wife, Marina . The letter was written to Hosty under the direction of his superior, Gordon Shanklin, who ordered him to destroy .
 The destruction of this letter was revealed years after the Warren Commission report . It was destroyed by the destruction of the letter years after it was destroyed .
 Members of the Warren Commission may have known about the deletion of Hosty’s name from the notebook, but this fact was not revealed to the public . Hosty's name was deleted from the book .
 FBI withholds information on Jack Ruby’s “informant’ status from 1959 onward . FBI cover-up activities in withholding information on Ruby from 1959 onwards . Ruby was an informer for the FBI .
 Ruby met with FBI agents nine times, and admitted this fact to Warren Commission counsel Rankin . Hoover asked that in the interests of national security, the information be withheld; it 103. Hoover asked for that information to be withheld, but it was withheld . Ruby met nine times with FBI
 Hoover successfully hid one of his own memos to the State Department from the Warren Commission . It did not surface until many years later after he was dead . Hoover hid the memo from the commission, and it was never found .
 Hoover warned that someone might be using Oswald’s identity in June 1960 . Oswald was in the Soviet Union at the time of the incident .
 Evidence existed of an Oswald imposter even before Kennedy became president . Evidence existed even before JFK became president, evidence existed of imposter .
 There are numerous other instances of FBI activity to cover up evidence in this case . This is one of the most incontrovertible examples, well documented, and admitted by Agent Hosty himself .
 It is incontrovertible confirmation that cover-up activities were carried on within the FBI . That in itself is reason enough to question the credibility of the Warren Report . The Warren Report was published by the FBI in 1998 .
 The “under-publicized’s story of Regis Blahut is another irrefutable piece in the puzzle, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 The brain, along with other autopsy materials, including X rays and photographs, was apparently delivered to President Kennedy’s former secretary for safekeeping . The brain was delivered to the former secretary of the late president .
 In 1966, after the materials had passed into the care of the National Archives, it was discovered that the President’s brain was missing . President's brain was discovered missing in 1966 .
 Also absent were tissue sections, blood smears, and slides, and a number of slides . Also absent are tissue sections and blood smear .
 No photos of the interior of the President’s chest survived, even though the chief autopsy doctor and an official photographer remember them being taken . Nor have any photographs of the inside of the . President's chest survived .
 In 1979 the Assassinations Committee failed to discover any trace of the missing brain or of the other material . In 1979 it failed to find any trace .
 The theory is that the President’s brother Robert Kennedy disposed of it to avoid tasteless display in the future .
 The Assassinations Committee Chief Counsel possessed X-rays and ballistic evidence that were housed in a separate safe in a special room for the hearings . The HSCA was holding its hearings at the time .
 This was granted separately on each date of access, and items studied were meticulously logged in and out . Items studied were carefully logged into and out of the room .
 One day in June, 1978, an interloper found a loophole in the precautions . The incident occurred in June 1978 .
 Staff member on legitimately taking photographs to a nearby office left the safe closed but not locked . The safe was left open, but the safe was not locked.
 By the time the researcher returned, the safe had been opened and the sensitive material seriously disturbed . The researcher returned to find the material had been disturbed by the incident .
 A folder was taken out of the safe and one photograph of the dead President ripped out of its cover . A folder had been taken from the safe . One photograph had been ripped from its cover.
 A fingerprint check showed that the only unauthorized person who had handled the files was a CIA employee . The files were handled by an employee of the CIA .
 Regis Blahut was a liaison officer who had been assigned to supervise and assist with secret CIA material stored in the Committee premises . He was assigned to assist with and supervise the CIA material .
 He worked in a secure area quite separate from the room where the photographs were held and had no business being in that room at all .
 Blahut initially denied the whole thing, and then — faced with the incontrovertible evidence — maintained there was an innocent explanation . At first he denied the entire thing, then he said he didn't know what happened .
 One of the pictures which had attracted his specific interest was a photograph of the late Presidents head .
 The matter was to have been further investigated in Congress, but has since been quietly forgotten . The matter has never been heard from Congress .
 White House photographer Robert Knudsen believed to have taken pictures of Kennedy’s wounds . The pictures were taken during or after the autopsy at the National Naval Medical Center .
 David Lifton: "It's of tremendous significance that there’s another camera and its existence ... concealed all these years"
 We've got a credible paper trail about another camera and film, but no pic . We’ve got credible paper trails about another film and film but no photo . We've also got evidence of tainted “composite” photographs, disclosed government 109 .
 Reasonable Doubt admissions that autopsy photos are missing and clear evidence that CIA personnel attempted to steal autopsy photos from a Congressional Committee — all this points to a conspiracy . Reasonable Doubt .
 It was withheld from the Warren Commission and kept secret for 13 years . The Warren Commission kept the secret of its findings secret .
 The document reported that Jack Ruby had visited American mobster Santos Trafficante while he was in prison in Havana under Castro . Ruby visited Trafficante in prison under Castro under Castro in Cuba .
 Trafficante was linked in numerous texts to Mob plots to assassinate the President, and his linkage with Giancana is copious . Trafficante has been linked to numerous Mob plots, including assassination plots .
 JFK’s sexual liaison with Judith Exner, her closeness with Giancana, and her connections with Trafficante . Trafficante's relationship with Ruby led to the assassination of President Kennedy, author says .
 Oswald’s Military Intelligence file was destroyed by the CIA . Oswald's military intelligence file was also destroyed . The files were destroyed in 1963 .
 Robert Jones of the 112th Military Intelligence Group (based in San Antonio, Texas) urgently requested information from his men at the scene of the crime .
 Jones was interviewed by the Warren Commission and found to be a credible witness . Jones was a witness to the Warren commission . Jones has been married for more than 20 years .
 We do not know who is most culpable here, but it's indisputable that many writers, historians and Kennedy associates purported to write objective biographies while withholding significant information about this period .
 Kennedy’s liaisons with women in the White House, his machinations with Giancana in particular, his argument with President Johnson the night before the assassination . Even his singular luncheon meeting with J Edgar Hoover — where he was confronted about his affair with Judith Exner —
 CIA Counterintelligence Chief James Angleton admitted that he destroyed the diary of one of Kennedy’s mistresses shortly after her murder in 1964 . Angleton also admitted to destroying the diary after Kennedy's death .
 How personal relationships played into the assassination is unknown, but to consider them irrelevant is quite another matter . How many personal relationships in the assassination played into it is unknown .
 Neutron activation analysis allows for precise definition of ballistics evidence . Neutsur activation analysis is a form of analysis that can be used in ballistics cases . The results of this analysis can be compared to that of a single gunshot .
 At the time of the assassination, this process was new and few had heard of it . But if we had the results of the tests that were performed, they could tell whether the bullet fragments in Kennedy’s brain came from the same source .
 In 1973 a previously unknown letter from J Edgar Hoover to J Lee Rankin, chief counsel for the Warren Commission, surfaced . Hoover's letter was sent to Rankin by Rankin in 1973 . Rankin was Rankin's chief counsel .
 The letter, dated July 8, 1964, revealed that in addition to spectrographic analysis, another kind of test had been conducted on the bullet fragments . The bullet fragments were found in 1964 .
 This was an extraordinarily precise and, at the time, relatively new procedure known as neutron activation . This was the technique used to activate neutron activation, which is now used in a new type of technique .
 The process involved irradiating organic or inorganic materials with nuclear particles . The bullet fragments were used to create the bullet fragments . The process was carried out by a team of scientists .
 The specimens emit gamma rays which could be counted, compared, and analyzed to reveal the exact composition of the substance down to parts per billion . The specimens would then emit a gamma ray which could then be counted and analyzed .
 Hoover’s 1964 letter blandly noted that “minor variations” were found in some of the Dealey Plaza bullet fragments . The letter noted that the fragments differed from those recovered from the limousine as well as those removed from the brain of Kennedy . Hoover�
 These specific test results, beyond Hoover’s suppressed letter, were never disclosed . Hoover's suppressed letter was never disclosed by Hoover .
 All of the above casts doubt on the government/Warren Commission conclusions .
 Evidence that spectrographic evidence as well as neutron activation tests on fragments in Kennedy's brain were completed but never released is widely accepted as strong evidence of a government conspiracy to cover-up important evidentiary material .
 That the government would hold what appears to be an innocuous memo secret for so long shows the degree to which a forced unanimity was sought in the Warren Commission Report .
 These pieces of “hard evidence’ for a cover-up are presently not disputed,’s lawyer says . “Hard evidence” is not disputed by the public, he says. “These pieces of 'hard evidence' are not disputed .
 "They occurred; they have been documented, and they do not constitute rumor, innuendo or hearsay evidence," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 President Kennedy's death is not merely tangential to an objective inquiry into the death of the president . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 . President John Kennedy was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Each conspiracy theorist tends to assemble his or her own 'best evidence', 1 and this chapter has tried to get as close to all this evidence as possible . This chapter tries to get the best evidence possible .
 If we do not disabuse ourselves of the notion that Lee Harvey Oswald killed President Kennedy and Officer Tippit, there is still a vast body of literature with which any objective scholar must deal .
 The motorcade was five minutes late from its published arrival at Dealey Plaza . There is considerable doubt that Oswald could have effectuated this assassination and yet be in the lunchroom fifteen minutes prior to and one minute after the killing .
 Substantial evidence exists that a fourth shot struck the President . A Fourth Shot was shot by President George H.W. Bush .
 A fourth shot could not possibly have been fired from Oswald’s rifle . And a fourth shot was not fired from the rifle . Oswald's rifle was found to have been Oswald's .
 Zapruder film, long censored from the American public by Life Magazine, shows President accelerating backward as result of the frontal headshot . Life Magazine censored the film from the public .
 The evidence for a frontal shot on the President is substantial and persuasive . It is an important clue that others in addition to or in place of Oswald may have been involved in the shooting .
 A second rich source of evidence for a conspiracy is statistical, and involves the study of over 84 deaths occurring with individuals directly or indirectly related to the Kennedys and Dealey Plaza .
 The pattern of these deaths is statistically significant and at extreme variance with the natural profile of mortality etiology in the U.S. The pattern was statistically significant, the study says .
 From an empirical analysis of this data, it is far more absurd to assume the deaths arose from random and unrelated causes than to assume they arose from a systematic process, i.e., a conspiracy of some sort, which obtains to this assassination .
 A sub-sample analysis of the accidental death of two individuals in this study also shows a probability of occurrence of one in 33,000 that such deaths could have occurred by chance alone . Corroborating this finding is a sub-sampling analysis of two deaths .
 In addition to this statistical data, another table presents eleven deaths, mostly of Mafia figures contacted by the Senate Intelligence and House Assassinations Committees in the mid-1970s . The table includes a table of deaths associated with Congressional witnesses .
 This also points dramatically to an underworld conspiracy of silence on this matter . This also pointed dramatically to the underworld conspiracy to silence this matter of silence .
 No set of Congressional inquiries in all of U.S. history can detail such a clustering of witness deaths . Witness deaths occurred either shortly before or shortly after testimony was sought or taken .
 The pattern of ""cover-up"" that has manifested itself over the last 30 years also suggests a conspiracy . Cover-up Actions as a Predictor of Conspiracy as a predictor of Conspiracy .
 Flouse Select Assassinations Committee concludes with the same conclusion as the committee . Conclusion: We conclude that the committee is investigating the assassination of President Obama .
 We do not yet know who is involved in any conspiracy, to whom any alleged conspiracy may be attributed . But that there was a conspiracy in the killing of President Kennedy is a well-founded conclusion .
 To hold otherwise, to cling to the notion of a single assassin, is scientifically untenable . To hold . otherwise, it is scientifically . untenable, to hold . to the . notion of an assassin is scientifically unfenable .
 That the pattern of these 78 deaths happened by “coincidence,” as a statistical anomaly, has one chance in ten thousand of being valid . The pattern of this 78 deaths has a chance in 10,000 of being true, the author says .
 The argument that a fourth shot did not occur has less than a 5% chance of being accurate . The argument against a 4th shot is less than 5% likely to be accurate than that .
 To say that FBI cover-up activities were motivated out of director Hoover’s vanity and urge to protect the ‘image of his agency,’ or that Regis Blahut stole an autopsy photograph merely because he was “curious,” would smack of
 The absurd “crackpots” whose speculations are the most outlandish and scientifically unforgivable are not paranoid malcontents . They are precisely those mainstream protagonists of the status quo, i.e., those who have historically backed the Warren Commission findings .
 Oswald acted alone, that no conspiracy ever existed, and that magic bullets, strange neuromuscular spasms, and sheer coincidence should be the working concepts used to explain the contradictory data . This is the group that holds stubbornly to what is improbable, unsupported and untenable .
 There is simply too much contradictory data to dismiss on those terms, and too much psychic energy is needed to engage the denial process for very long . Reasonable Doubt.
 The world has been asked to naively and innocently accept, as ""unfortunate” trifles, that the president’s brain was never examined, his throat wound was ignored, autopsy physicians were sworn to secrecy . His brain is mysteriously missing from the National Archives,
 We are asked to believe that another bullet exploded on impact, leaving over 40 fragments in Kennedy’s brain; and that another one left a hole in his skull which was smaller than the diameter of the bullet itself . Yet all the bullets were from the same gun and the same assassin
 For a generation, the public has been asked to dismiss the notion of a ‘conspiracy to cover-up” the assassination as nothing more than a symptom of cynical and paranoid writers trying to make money by exploiting this national tragedy . Furthermore, for a generation the . public has
 The fact that Sam Giancana testified before the Senate Intelligence Committee and then was found slain with bullet holes neatly stitched around his mouth should not convey to the average American that “silence is golden” when it comes to discussing conspiracy .
 The CIA concealed from us the fact that they were involved in efforts to assassinate Castro which could have been of extreme importance to us, says President Obama . The CIA was involved in the assassination of Castro Castro, President Obama says .
 Warren Commission members Hale Boggs, Senator John Sherman Cooper, and Senator Richard Russell also expressed doubts about the conclusions .
 A CBS poll taken in November, 1993 revealed that 81% of Americans believe there was a cover-up . 89% believe JFK died as a result of a conspiracy, according to a CBS poll .
 Evelyn Lincoln was the discreet personal secretary of JFK . JFK's personal secretary was a member of the Kennedy administration .
 The most impressive anecdotal evidence supporting a conspiracy comes from none other than j.j. Still, the most impressive evidence supporting the conspiracy came from none else .
 Hoover was an advocate of the conclusions on the Warren Commission . Hoover was the author of the report . Hoover is a supporter of the findings of the commission . Hoover's work was published by the FBI in the 1950s .
 Hoover died in the mid-1970s, but in 1994 a researcher, Anthony Summers, released a stunning story purporting to describe a conversation between Hoover and a trusted friend . The story was published by Summers in 1994, and Summers claims to have spoken to Hoover .
 "If I told you what I really know, it would be very dangerous to this country," says President Obama . "It would be a very dangerous thing to do," says Obama .
 Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994, 92, 92 . Anthony Summers: ‘Ghost of November’
 A more recent CNN poll conducted by CNN and broadcast on the History channel on November 18, 1998 continues to show a majority of Americans believe JFK died as the result of a conspiracy .
 Liz Smith on Evelyn Lincoln, “Grapevine,” San Jose Mercury News, May 12, 1997. Liz Smith: “Evelyn Lincoln’s life is in its prime .
 Summers, Anthony &r Robbyn, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December, 1994, 100, 100. Summers.
 It seems that a conspiracy in the assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy is a very plausible, rational, and tenable conclusion to draw . Reasonable Doubt is a reasonable conclusion to consider .
 The next task that faces us is to look at the origin of the conspiracy, to review the most salient theories, and to see if anything conclusive comes from our efforts .
 Some assert it was a “get-even-with-Bobby” vendetta, featuring the Mafia in the lead role . Some assert the Mafia was involved in the murder .
 There is a more Dostoyevskian drama, emphasizing the themes of retaliation and perfidy . The CIA and angry anti-Castro Cubans are spotlighted in the drama .
 Fidel Castro endured eight separate assassination attempts before striking back . Fidel Castro is said to have endured eight attempts to kill him . The former Cuban leader is now the leader of the Cuban revolution .
 This chapter will confine itself to examining the most persuasive theories . The next chapter will examine the most compelling theories of the universe .
 Lyndon Johnson: "I’m a gamblin’ man, darlin’, and this is the only chance I got"
 It is only when you pause to look at what the theory does not explain that shortcomings emerge, it's only when the theory doesn't explain that they do not .
 Craig Zirbel, author of the Texas Connection, has a few unfilled holes in his latest theory . Craig's theory is both convincing and yet has quite a few holes . The Texas Connection is based on a series of theories .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson gained the most from the assassination of President Kennedy . The president was assassinated in 1968 . The assassination was the first assassination of the president .
 He rose to power from the comparatively impotent position of Vice President . He rose from the position of President Obama to President Obama .
 Prior to Kennedy’s victory, Johnson had been majority leader in the Senate, one of the most powerful in government .
 President Obama made up for the lost time in his Vice Presidential post . He says the office could be exploited far less than his prior positions .
 LBJ made more money as president than any other president in history, Goldwater said . Goldwater crowed, finally, that LBJ had made more . money than anyone else in history . LBJ was the only president to make more money .
 He is known to have used his office on many occasions for his own private gain . He has been accused of using his office for personal gain .
 The FCC for decades refused to allow any other televisions stations in Austin (aside from LBJ's), thereby protecting LBJ’s television monopoly .
 There were few important appointments he could make — except for the Secretary of the Navy .
 Johnson’s major appointment, in other words, was a clear act of patronage, and a criminal one, to boot . Johnson's major appointment was in fact the appointment of a Cabinet minister of state .
 There were clear signs that Kennedy was not going to have him on the ticket in 1964 . Not only did J. ohnson lose some of his power base as Vice President .
 Last words Kennedy dictated to his secretary, before his assassination, were to that effect . In fact, the last words Kennedy wrote were to her secretary . Kennedy's last words were to say, 'I'm sorry for you'
 Johnson's own political career was increasingly threatened as Kennedy’s presidency marched forward . Further, Johnson was also threatened by Kennedy's presidency .
 Billy Sol Estes, a personal friend of President Johnson, was arrested in March of 1962 and charged with defrauding the government . Estes was arrested by President Johnson in March 1962 . He was arrested on charges that he defrauded government .
 He had been blessed with government contracts to store surplus grain in his warehouses . He had government contracts with government agencies to store grain .
 Johnson attempted to intervene on January 31, 1961, defending Estes’ practices . Johnson tried to defend Estes' practices in 1961 .
 On June 3,1961, Marshall was found dead in a ditch in Franklin, Texas, with five bullets in his head from a bolt-action rifle . Marshall had been shot five times in the head .
 Marshall’s widow remonstrated against ‘Texas justice’ for years afterward . Marshall's widow remonsstrated for years after her husband was found guilty .
 Billy Sol Estes refused to talk, thus protected Johnson from exposure . Estes died of a heart attack in the early hours of the day .
 Estes was never charged with the murder of Agent Marshall, which was later determined not to have been a suicide . Estes did not ultimately escape jail, but he was never found guilty of murder .
 The results showed that Marshall also received a severe blow to his head, and was asphyxiated with carbon monoxide . Marshall was shot five times in the head before he died .
 23 years after Marshall Marshall's death it was determined that the suicide story was a cover-up for murder . While this did not solve the question of who killed Marshall Marshall, it was at least determined that he was murdered .
 In March of 1984, one year after his release from prison, Estes was subpoenaed to testify before a grand jury concerning the death of Agent Marshall in 1961 . Estes had been released from prison a year later .
 Grand jury testimony is secret . Only reports of his testimony and not actual transcripts are available . The transcripts are not available .
 Estes linked Vice President Johnson and two other men to the execution of Henry Marshall . Estes’ sworn grand jury testimony shows that, decades after the murder, Estes implicated Johnson and three others .
 It is entirely possible that Estes in his old age decided to lie about the death of Johnson . It is also possible that after years of silence, Estes perhaps decided to tell the truth .
 Another death related to the Belly Sol Estes scandal was his accountant, George Krutilek . Another death was the death of Estes' accountant and his accountant .
 Krutilek was found dead in the town of Clint, Texas with a hose from his exhaust stuck in the window . Interviewed by FBI agents on April 2,1962, on April 4, 1962 .
 This death was not listed in the prior chapter’s table on suspicious deaths since it occurred prior to the assassination of President Kennedy . The death was listed as suspicious .
 He was involved in influence peddling related to a vending machine company servicing federal contractors in California . He was also involved in influencing influence-peddling .
 The media began publicizing stories of Johnson’s direct links to Bobby Baker . The media then began to publicize stories of Baker's links to Johnson .
 The Senate Rules Committee voted to continue pursuing the investigation . The investigation will continue into the allegations .
 Baker resigned on October 7, 1963; Johnson flew to Dallas, Texas, and remained there in seclusion . He did not return to Washington until after Novemher 22, 1963 . Baker resigned from the White House .
 On the day of the President’s assassination, the Bobby Baker scandal was still one of the leading headlines of the Dallas Herald Tribune and other papers throughout the country . The scandal still was still a top story of the day .
 If Jack Kennedy had not been murdered, the Baker investigation would not have ended . Baker was found dead at the scene of the murder of Jack Kennedy .
 Baker scandal would have either destroyed or tarnished Johnson’ image so completely that he would not have been on the 1964 ticket . If Jack Kennedy had not been murdered, the Baker scandal .
 Some wonder why JFK asked him to serve as Vice President in the first place . JFK asked JFK to serve Vice President .
 Seymour Hersh, in The Dark Side of Camelot, contends Johnson knew of JFK’s sexual excesses and threatened to expose him if his name were not on the ballot . Hersh: JFK knew of his excesses .
 Recent conspiracy literature alleges Estes implicated Malcolm “Mac” Wallace, an LBJ crony, in numerous murders . Estes was a prominent LBJ supporter of LBJ . Wallace .
 Conspiracy Zirbel, in The Texas Connection, provides a startling array of facts to buttress his case . Conspiracy Zorbel provides an array of fact facts to support his case. Conspiracy Zsirbel is a fascinating new book, "The Texas Connection"
 Kennedy wanted to remove John Connally from the President’s limousine and have Senator Yarborough sit in Connally's seat instead . Connally wanted Kennedy to remove him from the president's limo and have Yarborough in his seat .
 E Howard Hunt and Clint Murchison were the co-conspirators in the film "E Howard Hunt" Hunt is the son of E Howard and Clint Hunt . Hunt is also an industrialist . Hunt was also the father of the late actor and director of the first film "
 The actions of the Dallas Police Department . . . defy all logic and common sense . The Dallas police department's actions defy common sense, police chief says .
 In addition to personality problems, Johnson had major personality problems . Some of his aides felt he was not merely a buffoon but mentally unbalanced .
 Two had privately consulted with a psychiatrist about his mental stability . Two of the men had also consulted with psychiatrists about their mental health .
 LBJ's dogs and household as well as his ranch in Texas all fell under the LBJ logo . LBJ was known for his dogs, household and ranch as well .
 After he became President, the Space Center in Texas was named the Johnson Space Center .
 When J ohnson visited the Vatican, he presented the Pope with a bust of himself . The Pope gave him the bust of his own .
 This author has never visited the Johnson estate, but a friend related the story to a friend . The Johnson estate is located in New York, New Jersey .
 The vastness and emptiness of the Texas landscape impressed him on his drive from California to Florida .
 A two-lane road became a major freeway with stunning and impressive directional signs, overpasses, etc. etc. Suddenly a two- lane road becomes a major highway with stunning directional signs .
 The sign pointed passing drivers to the exit leading to the Johnson ranch . The ranch is located in Texas, Texas, and is located on the ranch .
 A few miles later, the expressway suddenly ended and the driver was back on a two-lane road passing through vast, empty stretches of landscape . The driver was soon back on the road again .
 This freeway was likely another of Johnson’s pork barrel adventures in the service of his megalomania . This freeway is one of many of the things Johnson did to build .
 The two LBJ aides who sought advice from a psychiatrist about LBJ were Goodwin and Moyers 98 Chapter 4 . Goodwin: The two aides sought help from a Psychiatrist . Moyers 1998 Chapter 4: Goodwin and Goodwin sought help with a psychiatrist .
 The first was a woman named Alice Glass, and their affair began in 1938 after he had been married for four years . He had an affair with Glass after he was married to a woman he met in 1938 .
 Brown claims that she had a son by Johnson and that Johnson supported her for decades . Brown claims she has a son with Johnson . She says she had an affair with Johnson and Johnson .
 Not infrequently, he would order his secret service men to form a shield around him so that he could urinate outside during a White House gathering . He would often order his Secret Service men to protect him from being urinated .
 Since grade school he had told his friends he wanted to be President of the U.S. He had told them he had always wanted to do so .
 As Vice President, Johnson would have his chauffeur drive him to the White House each morning, whereupon he would walk through the House, 133.5 feet wide .
 He actually met with President Kennedy for less than two hours in the entire last year of the Kennedy presidency .
 Jackie Kennedy was removed from the White House by the Monday following the assassination . President Johnson had Jackie Kennedy removed by the day following his assassination .
 Johnson wanted to be sworn in as Chief Executive on “Texas soil,” so the plane carrying the grieving widow was held up for 90 minutes . A federal judge conducted the ceremony in Texas .
 Johnson took over Air Force One rather than return to Washington in the vice presidential plane . Johnson took the presidential plane over to Washington rather than Washington .
 He told the Warren Commission that Kenneth O’Donnell told him at Parkland Hospital to take Air Force One back . He said he was told to take the plane back by Kenneth O'Donnell .
 O’Donnell: "A lawyer for the Warren Commission pointed out to me that Johnson’s testimony that I told him to board Air Force One was wronged by his own testimony before the commission about our conversation at the hospital"
 Johnson egoism, megalomania, and drive for power are well documented and provide good reason to consider him a prime suspect . Johnson's egoism and drive-for-power is well documented . The Johnson family is said to be the prime suspect in the JFK assassination .
 His dealings in government for personal profit, his waning political prospects just prior to the assassination, JFK’s desire to dump him as Vice President, and his ascent to power after the assassination would lead any outside observer to consider Johnson to have both motive and opportunity .
 There has been much controversy about the autopsy in Bethesda Naval Hospital vis-a-vis results obtained at Parkland Hospital in Dallas . The autopsy was conducted at the hospital in Dallas, Texas .
 Conspiracy argued that a proper autopsy should have been conducted in Dallas, not Washington . Conspiracy said the autopsy should be conducted in Washington, not Dallas .
 Earl Rose, had to be physically restrained by Kennedy aides to get the President’s body out of Dallas and onto Air Force One . Earl Rose was the President of Texas, who died in Dallas .
 The major decision maker in permitting the body to be taken to Washington was the District Attorney Elenry Wade . Wade was a personal friend of Lyndon Johnson . Wade is a longtime friend of LBJ .
 Zirbel makes an excellent point in his analysis of the make-up of the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was created by President Richard Nixon .
 If there was anyone in a position of power to defuse, defeat, and squelch any inquiry into Johnson’s involvement, it was Johnson himself . Johnson himself could have defused, defeated or squelted inquiry into his involvement .
 Robert Kennedy could have headed inquiry into his brother's assassination . Inquiry could have been headed by his brother Robert, Attorney General .
 By creating the Warren Commission, Johnson placed the investigation under his own authority and removed it from Bobby Kennedy’s control . The Warren Commission was created by President Johnson .
 By making Allen Dulles the CIA liaison on this Committee, Johnson further rigged the Committee in his own favor . Dulles was a man Kennedy had recently fired, and had Kennedy fired .
 Johnson was never deposed, never considered a suspect, and never had to testify under oath before the Commission . He was never considered deposed and never considered suspect .
 Another strong point favoring this theory has appeared only recently with the release of documents withheld by the government for over 35 years .
 One conspiracy-based newsletter reports on how LBJ might have had Oswald placed in the Texas School Depository .
 DeMohrenschildt also had personal associations with LBJ and wrote to him on April 17,1963 . DeMohranschildt wrote to LBJ on that date .
 George Brown, LBJ’s chief financial sponsor, had previously employed deMohrenschildt . George Brown was LBJ's chief financial backer .
 Oswald-the-patsy may have been in the right place at the right time . Such associations provide ample room for an LBJ plot to be hatched . Oswald's association with LBJ provides plenty of room for a plot .
 Connally, Korth, the billionaire Hunts, Chief Curry, District Attorney Henry Wade, and wealthy Texans like Clint Murchison are all listed as part of the conspiracy .
 If Connally were implicated as one of the plotters, it would seem ludicrous for him to disagree with the Warren Commission findings that there were only three shots . Connally would be the sole voice disagreeing with the findings .
 If Connally conspired with Johnson, and the Warren Commission was simply Johnson’s personal ‘clean up’ brigade, then Connally‘s disagreement with the Commission makes little sense at all . Connally's disagreement with Warren Commission seems to make little sense .
 Connally did not waver on his insistence that the magic bullet theory was harebrained . Connally: "I don't believe in magic bullet theories. It's a mistake"
 Oswald would have had to move of a ton of book cartons in the Depository to create his sniper’s lair . Zirbel says others would have been needed to create the nest .
 Author Jim Moore has shown that these book cartons weigh less than 50 pounds each and has himself accomplished the task with ease . Author Moore has himself done the task using a book carton that weighs under 50 pounds .
 Overall, Zirbel’s case against Johnson is very interesting and not easily dismissed . Overall, the case against him should be seen as very interesting .
 Fred Korth represented Lee Harvey Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, in a divorce action . Korth was indicted for conflict of interest as Secretary of the Navy . He represented Oswald's mother in divorce .
 Texas District Attorney Henry Wade and Dallas Police Chief Curry botched the case against Oswald . Wade and Curry were personally close to Johnson, the DA and police chief .
 The 12-page letter reiterates Ruby’s theory that Johnson was involved in the assassination . Ruby wrote the letter to a Dallas police officer friend named Joe . Ruby is believed to have been involved in Johnson's assassination .
 Conspiracy For Europeans suspected President Johnson engaged in a coup d’etat from the very beginning . It is curious that the American effort to examine this idea took over 30 years before an indictment ever reached the book seilers .
 There are many twists and turns of intrigue and machination here, however, however . There is a lot of intrigue in the story here .
 Kennedy’s father, Joseph Kennedy, is said to have made over $100 million in the stock market crash of 1929 by selling short . Joseph Kennedy sold short bets on the 1929 stock market . Kennedy's father sold short-selling stocks in 1929 .
 He had multiple contacts with bootleggers and illegally imported scotch whiskey during Prohibition . He illegally imported illegally imported illegal whiskey during the Prohibition .
 When JFK became a Congressman from Massachusetts, Joseph Kennedy maintained a low profile . Joseph Kennedy became a congressman from Massachusetts .
 His son was in touch with him constantly, often many times per day even when he was President . His son, however, was in contact with him frequently, often often times a day .
 Joe Kennedy was a major force in priming and securing the vote for his son . Joe Kennedy is actively involved in all his son’s campaigns .
 One “deal” made behind the scenes was to get the Illinois vote for Kennedy over Nixon . One ‘deal’ was made with Kennedy to win Illinois vote over Nixon.
 Kennedy beat Nixon with fewer than 200,000 votes nationally, in one of the closest presidential races to that date . The Illinois vote, particularly the Chicago vote, was engineered by notorious Mayor Richard Daley .
 John Kennedy may or may not have been aware of his father’s actions on his behalf . John Kennedy was not aware of the actions of his son .
 There is also a possibility that Johnson may have some connections to Carlos Marcello of New Orleans . Johnson may also have connections to Marcella of New York .
 A Texas mafia figure named Jack Halfen allegedly contributed a portion of Carlos Marcello's Texas slot machine profits to Tyndon Johnson’s political campaigns . A portion of the money allegedly went to Johnson's political campaigns.
 Judith Exner claimed she was used as a courier between the White House and Sam Giancana . Exner became the mistress of both President Kennedy and Chicago mobster . She claimed President Kennedy had gone so far as to meet mobster Sam GianCana .
 Exner: "I lied when I said that President Kennedy was unaware of my friendships with mobsters" Exner says she lied about Kennedy's friendship with Mobsters . Exner said in testimony to the Senate Intelligence Committee that Kennedy knew about mobsters .
 Exner said she repeatedly carried envelopes from the President to Giancana and Roselli . Exner: For eighteen months in 1960 and 61 Exner carried envelops from President to Italian officials .
 There were some ten meetings between the President and the Chicago mobster, one of them at the White House .
 Joseph Kennedy had a massive stroke from which he never fully recovered . Kennedy told his father, and within a few days Joseph Kennedy died of a stroke . Kennedy never recovered fully .
 John Kennedy had been accused of adultery in a California divorce suit in 1961 . In 1961, John Kennedy was accused of infidelity in a divorce suit .
 Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General and J Edgar Hoover’s boss, had very difficult relations with Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was the attorney general and J. Edgar Hoover's boss . Hoover was the FBI Director in the 1960s .
 Hoover placed a red phone directly on the Director’s desk and ordered him to answer it whenever he called . Bobby had difficulty even reaching his star employee . Hoover was frustrated at constantly having to deal with his secretary .
 Hoover's fiefdom was only temporarily interrupted by Kennedy’s presence on the scene . Hoover was only briefly interrupted by the presence of Kennedy's presence .
 Hoover did not believe in a “Mafia” and always placed the term in quotes in any communications . Hoover believed the term was a Mafia and placed the word in quotes .
 Bobby Kennedy was making a concerted effort to wage a war on organized crime through the Justice Department . Bobby Kennedy, on the other hand, was making an effort to fight organized crime .
 Racketeering prosecutions were up by 300% over 1961 rates, and 700% over 1960 rates . The prosecution of racketeering was 300% higher than 1961 rates .
 Robert Kennedy was massing a phalanx of federal agents to put Hoffa, Giancana, and Marcello behind bars . It is odd indeed, if true, that Giancrano helped the President win Illinois .
 RFK served on the McClellan Committee investigating organized crime, prior to the election of his brother to the presidency, Giancana was placed in the position of having to take the Fifth Amendment over thirty three times . RFK's brother was elected president in 1968 .
 President Kennedy and Bobby were both attempting to force J Edgar Hoover to resign . An added factor here is that President Kennedy was trying to force the FBI chief to resign from office .
 As late as March 15,1963, Hoover said he had no intention of submitting to their requests . Hoover said in March 1963 that he would not submit to the requests .
 ELSUR and COINTELPRO wiretapped J. Edgar Hoover . Hoover wiretapped Mafia figures . The information was held in his personal files .
 Until the commission meets and puts its foot down, things will be at a standstill . The commission will meet again this week to decide what to do .
 Gilbert Beckley, functionary of Eddie McGrath, spoke to a woman identified as Jeane . Jeane was a member of the McGrath family .
 "If I could just hit Bob Kennedy.... some kind of bomb that will explode I would gladly go to the penitentiary for the rest of my life," he says .
 Hoover's report was summarized for FBI files and withheld from Attorney General by Mr Hoover . Hoover withheld from the Attorney General .
 The first plan, the one Hoffa's then leaning toward, involved fire bombing Hickory Hill, Robert Kennedy’s Virginia estate, with extraordinarily lethal plastic explosives . Robert Kennedy's Virginia estate .
 Robert Kennedy would be shot to death from a distance away; a single gunman would be 149 . Robert Kennedy's death would be the first of 149 people killed in Kennedy's assassination spree .
 Philadelphia FBI ELSUR wiretap records Angelo Bruno in a conversation about Carlos Marcello of New Orleans . The Philadelphia FBI recorded Bruno talking to Marcella in a wiretap .
 Bruno reveals that Marcello had again approached Sinatra through Trafficante, calling upon him to use what influence he had had with President Kennedy’s father . Bruno also reveals that Sinatra had been approached by Trafficante .
 This recording reconfirms the close relationship shared by Marcello and Trafficante . Trafficante was the first man to be recorded in a recording of the pair together . Marcella was married to Trafficante, who is now a successful businessman .
 An FBI report on Frank Sinatra’s Mob associations is sent to President Kennedy . Sinatra's associations with the Mob are linked to organized crime .
 President Kennedy breaks all contacts with Sinatra from that moment forward . President Kennedy was forced to break Sinatra's contact with President Kennedy .
 Sinatra is reportedly so angry that he personally destroys the helicopter-landing pad he had installed at his Palm Springs home for JFK’s occasional visits . Sinatra reportedly destroyed the pad at his home in Palm Springs .
 Sinatra meets with Giancana and Roselli in 1962 . Some time later, Sinatra is seen with the couple .
 Marcello associate Trafficante is recorded by ELSUR on four occasions . Trafficante expresses tremendous bitterness toward the Kennedys over the disruption of his gambling operations . The Mafioso is recorded expressing tremendous bitterness .
 Hoover receives information showing President Kennedy leaving the house of Pamela Turnure at 1m. Hoover received information showing him leaving Turnure's house at 1.30am . Hoover received the information from Turnure and Hoover .
 Hoover keeps the information, but does not share it with the Attorney General or the President . Hoover keeps it confidential, but doesn't share the information with the President or Attorney General . Hoover: "It's important to keep the information from the public"
 John Roselli, Sam Giancana and Santos Trafficante were recruited by the CIA to assassinate Castro . They were recruited to kill Castro . The CIA recruited them to assassinate the Castro .
 They mutually had an interest in the prior gambling, drug, and prostitution operations they had enjoyed prior to Castro . Castro and Castro had previously enjoyed gambling, drugs and prostitution .
 He considered Trafficante’s Sicilian family as the key element in Mafia circles in Tampa . Trafficante's family was considered key to Tampa Mafia circles, he said .
 Trafficante told Aleman Trafficante that Kennedy would not make it to the election . Trafficante said Kennedy will not be able to run for president in 2016 .
 Aleman says he informed the FBI of the impending fate of the President prior to the assassination . Aleman claims he told the FBI that he knew about the President's fate .
 Aleman says the FBI didn't take him seriously until it was too late . Aleman: The FBI, says Aleman, did not take him serious until he was taken seriously . The FBI is still investigating the case .
 Mark North suggests, in his book, that Hoover wanted this hit on Kennedy to take place and did nothing to stop it . The FBI denied the accuracy of this story, but Mark North says Hoover wanted Kennedy to be assassinated .
 Marcello was the head of the Mafia (or Cosa Nostra) in the southern United States . He was born Calogero Minacore . He is one of the most prominent figures in the Mafia in the world .
 His syndicate was estimated to be grossing $1.1 billion annually . In effect, it was the largest industry in the state of Louisiana .
 He lived on a 3,000 acre estate outside New Orleans called Churchill Farms . He lived there with his wife and children .
 On the personal orders of Bobby Kennedy, he was seized, handcuffed, rushed to the airport, and flown to Guatemala . Since his forged birth certificate made him a Guatemalan national, he became an American citizen .
 Marcello was disoriented in Guatemala and, walking through the jungle in suit and tie, he fell and broke a rib . He broke his rib in the jungle while walking through Guatemala .
 He returned surreptitiously to his estate outside New Orleans to fight extradition . He said to three friends, 159.5 people, including three women, were arrested .
 Marcello left no doubt about his meaning as he talked on in his Sicilian-accented Southern drawl . But he left no . doubt about the meaning of his words .
 Referring to the Kennedys, he said “The dog will keep biting you if you only cut off its tail,” he said . If the dog’s head were cut off, the entire dog would die, the owner said .
 Becker says that is the way it is done in Sicily all the time . Becker: "It's the same thing that happens in Sicily every time" Becker: 'That's how it happens all over Sicily'
 The leading theorist of the Mob School is Chief Counsel of the HSCA Committee, Professor Blakey . The Mob School was founded by Dr. Blakey, a professor at the University of Cambridge .
 This theory also does not definitively answer who killed Kennedy, but it comes far closer than many of the others . This theory does not answer the question: Kennedy was killed .
 Christian David’s information, given in Chapter 1, provides a plausible hypothesis . Christian David's information, . given in . Chapter 1 of this article, provides the . hypothesis .
 Marcello, in this theory, conscripts sharpshooters from the Corsican Mafia . The theory is based on the fact that he conscripted the mobsters from Corsican mafia .
 Antoine Guerini, the Corsican boss in Marseilles, accepts the contract . Guerini has been in charge of the Ligue 1 side since 1998 .
 One of the shooters was Lucien Marti, who was shot dead in Mexico in 1972 . One of Marti's victims was killed in 1972 in Mexico .
 Sarti used an explosive bullet; his was the third shot, and it struck the President in the head, killing him . The President was killed by the bullet .
 When he was released from prison, he quietly retired to Metairie, Louisiana where he progressively succumbed to Alzheimer’s disease .
 Conspiracy Christian David was asked who could corroborate the story, and he named Michele Nicoli . Nicoli is a member of the conspiracy conspiracy Christian David, the author of Conspiracy Christian Christian David .
 Author Steve Rivele finally found Nicoli and met with him over many months . Nicoli is a father-of-two who has been married for more than 20 years .
 Nicoli finally told Rivele that Christian David’s rendition of the story was correct . Nicoli: "Christian David's story is correct. Christian David's version is correct"
 Oswald was arrested in New Orleans for passing out “Fair Play For Cuba’’ leaflets . His uncle Dutz posted bail; his uncle had contact with two Marcello associates .
 Oswald associates Nofio Pecora was present at Oswald's bail hearing . Oswald's associates were present at the bail hearing for Oswald . Oswald was charged with murder in November 1963 .
 Pecora was one of Marcello’s oldest friends, phone records show . Phone records show that three weeks before the assassination, three weeks earlier, he called a friend three weeks prior to the assassination . Marcella's friend was killed in a car crash in New
 David Ferrie, too, has been linked to the Marcello organization as well as to Oswald . Ferrie has been accused of being a member of the Oswald organization .
 Ferrie was in the courtroom during Marcello’s acquittal in New Orleans on the very day JFK was shot, and drove to Texas later that day . Ferrie traveled to Texas that day to attend the acquittal .
 Ferrie piloted an aircraft out of Guatemala, returning Marcello to New Orleans after Robert Kennedy deported him . Ferrie flew the plane back to Guatemala after Kennedy's death .
 Oswald was set up to be the patsy for the contract hit . Oswald was a link between Oswald and the CIA . Oswald is now being investigated for his role in the assassination of JFK .
 Even if the Sarti assassination connection is untrue, there were other underworld figures present at Dealey Plaza that day .
 He was arrested at the Dal-Tex building and gave a false name . His true identity was not discovered until the late 1960s . He was later found to be a serial killer .
 Trafficante: Brading was associate of Meyer Lansky, the Mafia kingpin to whom Trafficante reported . Trafficante says Brading had ties to Lansky . Brading is a former associate of the Mafia boss .
 Information suggesting that Oswald’s second uncle also had underworld ties is recent and comes from Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December, 1994 .
 David Feme's presence at Carlos Marcello’s acquittal is corroborated in R Goldfarb, Perfect Villains, Imperfect Heroes, ibid. Feme was at the acquittal of the convicted murderer .
 In all likelihood the actual assassins of John Kennedy were contract kihers . Contract kihers brought in from other parts of the country in typical gangland fashion .
 Marcello, Trafficante, Giancana, and Lansky were the common thread between men who were connected to gambling network functionaries like Saia, Campisi, di Piazza, Nolan, Beckley, Ruby, Me Willie, and McGrath . These people may
 A third assassination scenario is proposed in a book written by the younger Sam Giancana and his godson . The book was written by a younger son of the late actor and author of the book, Sam .
 This plot involves virtually everyone, including Sam "Mooney" Giancana . Johnson and NLxon as well .
 In this text the assassins were Charles Harrelson and Jack Lawrence, two unnamed Cuban exile friends of Trafficante, plus Richard Cain, Chuckie Nicoletti, and “Milwaukee Phil,” Giancana’s men from Chicago .
 Ruby’s role was to take out Oswald after his arrest and clean up what Tippit failed to do, namely to hit the patsy, Oswald . Ruby was the man who took out Oswald and cleaned up his role in the assassination .
 The government of this country was overthrown by a handful of guys who did their job so damned well... only one American even knew it happened . Only one American in the U.S. even knew the overthrow .
 A derivative of this scenario was presented by Floffa’s personal attorney, Frank Rogano, on the occasion of Carlos Marcello's death in March 1993 .
 Floffa took Rogano aside and said, “I told you they could do it.” Rogano said .
 In this variant of a Mob hit, Oswald continues to be the patsy, conscripted for the assignment by his uncle Dutz from New Orleans . Dutz was a father figure to Oswald, and at the same time a lieutenant of Marcello and bookie .
 Roselli arrived at 6:30 m.m. that morning on a private flight from Miami, flown by Robert “Tosh” Plumlee, a CIA pilot . Roselli was the last person to arrive in the U.S. that day .
 Mr Plumlee testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on August 2, 1990 and his testimony was held as Top Secret .
 The Mob was behind the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy . The Mob is believed to have been involved in Kennedy's assassination . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 He is not the assassin at all — thus his presence in the lunchroom before and after the hit . He is in a lunchroom at the time of the assassination .
 Oswald had recently appeared on New Orleans TV, debating the cause for Cuba . The Mob does not typically use highly visible, vocal players for its contract hits . Oswald had appeared on TV debating the issue of Cuba .
 He rushed home, took a cab past his own house, went inside, grabbed his revolver, and ended up shooting Officer Tippit . He rushed to his own home and grabbed a revolver, police say .
 Rather than acting like an assassin on the run, it seems he realized that he had been set up . The police would be looking for a “commie kook” in a matter of minutes, thus the panicky behavior .
 The Kennedy brothers may not have been fully cognizant of the paradoxes in their own behavior . President Kennedy’s association with Giancana, plus his father Joseph's past relationships, define a scenario in which .
 John was sleeping with Giancana’s girlfriend, while Bobby was trying to put ‘Mooney’ in jail . Bobby was also sleeping with “Mooney,” while John was in the process of getting a restraining order . Bobby is trying to get John
 Joe Kennedy had used Giancana to secure the Illinois vote, but Bobby arrested him at O’Hare International Airport . Joe Kennedy was arrested at O'Hare Airport .
 Roselli helped Kennedy cover up an embarrassing divorce suit and had worked with the CIA plots against Castro, but Bobby similarly persecuted him . Kennedy also persecuted Roselli, who had worked for the CIA .
 Trafficante had been involved in CIA sponsored plots to murder Castro Castro . Trafficante was rewarded by the relentless tactics of Bobby Kennedy . The extremely private and elusive Trafficante .
 He did not like the Kennedys, did not . like the racial overtones of the . liberal administration . He certainly did like being pressured into retirement in his generation-long job .
 There is good evidence that the Mafia also had compromising information on Mr Hoover, which he did not want exposed . Hoover’s campaign against the Mob threatened Hoover at an even more personal level . Hoover's campaign was against the Mafia at a personal level, says Hoover .
 Richard Cain, Action Jackson, Chuckie Nicoletti, Milwaukee Phil, and Dave Yaras. Milwaukee Phil is the host of the Milwaukee Phil .
 The organized crime program just stopped, and Hoover took control back . Hoover took over from organized crime in the 1980s .
 The best “patsy” is a dead patsy, and in this scenario Oswald had to be silenced . Oswald had been silenced . The best "patsies" are a dead, and Oswald was silenced .
 Ruby operated a striptease club; his association with organized crime is not at all difficult to establish . The Warren Commission concluded that it “could not establish a significant link between Jack Ruby and organized crime .
 Following is a partial list of Ruby’s more significant contacts, which have come to light in research since the 1964 Warren Commission report . Ruby's contacts have been revealed in the Warren Report .
 When Bobby Kennedy learned that the CIA had used Giancana, Bobby was visibly upset . Arthur Schlesinger reported that Bobby Kennedy was upset when he learned of the CIA's use .
 Ruby's picture appeared in the Chicago Tribune in connection with the unsolved murder of Cooke . Cooke was later murdered and Ruby’s picture was published in the newspaper . Ruby was later arrested for the unsolved killing .
 Jones and Alex Gruber met with Ruby, both associated with organized crime and ex-convicts . Jones and Gruber held meetings with Ruby . Ruby is an ex-convict who has been involved in organized crime in the past .
 Jones was found guilty of attempted bribery, and convicted in Kansas of murdering a state’s witness . Jones was convicted of murder, attempted bribery and attempted murder .
 Gruber had a police record, was born in Chicago, met with Ruby a few days before the Kennedy assassination . He had a longdistance conversation with Ruby minutes after Kennedy was pronounced dead .
 Patrick had a long record, was a convicted bank robber, and had been arrested many times on suspicion of being a triggerman in numerous gangland killings . Patrick was a bank robber and a suspected bank robber .
 Baker called Victor Emanuel Pereira, on Oct 9,1963. Baker called David Yaras in Miami, Miami . Yaras called Victor Pereira in Miami in 1963 . Baker called Yaras, who died in 1963, in 1964 .
 Earl Shieb was a machine-gun toting leader in the extreme-rightwing military movement, the Minutemen . He was the father of Philip Earl, who was a member of a national chain of auto paint shops and was father of a machine gun-toting leader
 The other partner was Eugene Hale Brading, who hooked up with Pereira in El Paso, Texas, in 1950 . The two women were married in the 1950s .
 On the day of the assassination, Milteer was allegedly photographed in Dealey Plaza at the assassination site . On the same day, he allegedly was allegedly pictured at the site .
 Frank Rogano’s revelations in 1992 were featured in a PBS Frontline documentary . Nick Pileggi, a Mafia historian, brought the revelations to a focus for a documentary .
 Rogano was Jimmy Hoffa’s attorney and later became closely involved with Santos Trafficante and Carlos Marcello . Rogano became involved in the Hoffa gang in the early 1950s .
 Rogano confirms that Hoffa, Trafficante, and Marcello all had independent motives for wishing Kennedy removed . Rogano: "Hoffa and Trafficante" were motivated to remove Kennedy from office .
 Floffa had been under two indictments at the time of the assassination . He was under indictment for the assassination of the late president .
 Trafficante, Marcello, and Rogano met at the Royal Orleans Hotel in New Orleans . Rogano told both men that Hoffa wanted Kennedy hit . Trafficante met with Rogano at the New Orleans Hotel .
 Rogano's impressions were that Trafficante and Marcello acted as if the matter was already in progress . Rogano: Trafficante acted as though the matter had already been in progress. Rogano was disappointed with Trafficante .
 Ed Becker, a Las Vegas promoter, recalls being with Carlos Marcello in New Orleans and discussing the Kennedys . Ed Becker says he was with Marcellos and Marcelles at the time .
 On the day Kennedy was assassinated, Rogano came to his office in New Orleans and all his secretaries were crying . Rogano: "On Kennedy's day, all his secretary was crying"
 That evening Rogano met Trafficante at the International Inn in New Orleans accompanied by his wife Nancy . Trafficante met Rogano that evening . Rogano's wife Nancy was also at the hotel .
 Trafficante wanted to toast the assassination, was very happy, and Mrs. Trafficante was happy, she said . Trafficante: "I'm very happy" Trafficante died at the age of 92 .
 Rogano, feeling he had something to do with it, couldn't take the party atmosphere and left . Rogano felt he had to do it and left the club .
 Four days before Trafficante died in 1987, Rogano went to speak to him . Rogano spoke to Trafficante just days before his death .
 To Rogano that meant Carlos Marcello should have killed Bobby instead of having killed Jack . Rogano: "To Rogano, that meant that Carlos Marcee should have . killed Bobby" Jack .
 Professor Blakey of Notre Dame believes Rogano's story to be the single most credible explanation of the assassination . Rogano is believed to be a key figure in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Three independent witnesses corroborate much of what Rogano says, FBI informant, Jose Aleman, Johnny Roselli, a mob figure murdered in 1976, and Ed Becker, a Las Vegas promoter, still living .
 Trafficante's widow says he was in his north Miami Beach home when he was killed . The widow of one of his associates says Trafficante was in the home at the time of his death . Trafficante has been charged with murder in Miami .
 Jack Hodus, a pharmacist, also places the mobster in Miami on that day . The mobster was in Miami at the time .
 Hospital records show Trafficante treated for dialysis the prior day; thus Rogano's alleged meeting with Trafficante is questionable . Trafficante had dialysis prior to the alleged meeting .
 Rogano says he has three other witnesses to this event which he will produce if necessary or if he is sued for libel . Rogano replies in turn that he has four other witnesses which he says he will show .
 Also Summers, "The Ghosts of November," Vanity Fair, December 1994, 106 . Summers: "The ghosts of November" is November 1994 . Summers' book is published by Vanity Fair .
 Despite Bobby Kennedy's heroic efforts to put Hoffa away, he was released from prison on December 23,1971 . Hoffa was released in 1971 from prison .
 Ruby was a longtime friend of Lewis McWillie, a gangster whom he visited in Havana . Ruby was also a friend of a pit boss in the Tropicana gambling casino in Havana, Cuba . Ruby died in the hospital after being shot in the head with a gunshot wound to
 Case Closed attempts to make the case that Ruby was not significantly involved with the underworld . Gerald Posner in Case Closed tries to make a case for Ruby's involvement in the underworld.
 Obviously Ruby’s behavior changed from September through to the assassination,’S. ‘Ruby’'s behavior changed between September and the assassination.’ ‘‘’� said a spokesman for the president of the U.S. State Department .
 His contacts with mobsters accelerated significantly in the 1960s . His use of the telephone increased, and his contacts with the mobsters increased .
 Just eleven days before the assassination, Ruby signed a power of attorney over to his lawyer . Ruby signed the power of power over to the lawyer just 11 days before he was assassinated .
 Ruby actually had two chances to kill Oswald, perhaps even three . The first was a “silent” press conference where Oswald was paraded in front of reporters but not permitted to answer questions . Ruby had a chance to kill him, perhaps as many as three .
 The most plausible explanation for the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby was the Ruby had stalked him on behalf of organized crime . Ruby had been trying to reach Oswald on at least three occasions in the forty-eight hours before he silenced him forever . Oswald's murder is the most plausible theory
 Oswald ran into Oswald as he was being transferred from the hospital . Oswald was transferred to the hospital after finishing his work . Oswald died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head .
 If he had stayed in line at Western Union another 30 seconds, he would have missed Oswald altogether . If he'd stayed in the queue, Oswald would have been missing altogether .
 Oswald asked to change shirts just before leaving his cell, he would have been transferred while Ruby was still at Western Union . Ruby was transferred while Oswald was still in his cell at the time of the assassination .
 He also told his tax lawyer on November 19,1963 that he expected to receive money soon to cover his debts .
 Oswald applied for unemployment compensation twice in 1963 after losing two separate jobs . Oswald applied twice in the same year after losing both jobs .
 When he needed bail after his arrest, the $10 fine was paid by his uncle Dutz . When he was arrested in New Orleans, he was charged with $10 .
 Oswald's complicity in this affair does not seem to have earned him any pay-off . Oswald’s complicity in the affair did not seem as well as his complicity in it .
 Oswald is reputed to have known Ruby in some Mob-based theories . Ruby is believed to have been a member of the Mob . Oswald is thought to be the son of Oswald and Ruby .
 Oswald was really walking to Jack Ruby’s house less than a mile away, researcher says . Oswald was walking toward the theater when he was killed, according to a report .
 He didn't drink, he didn’t smoke or go to nightclubs and besides he was sitting home with me all the time, he said . ‘He didn”t drink,” he said. ‘Besides that, besides that, he’s
 The various bestsellers promoting Mob-based assassination scenarios reveal confessions of various parties . There is considerable inconsistency when these books taken together .
 This theory is a leading alternative to the explanation offered by the Warren Commission . Clearly, this theory is an alternative to Warren Commission's explanation .
 Like the Johnson model, the Mob attack on Kennedy shows motive, method, and opportunity . Kennedy was attacked by the Mob in 1968, killing him and wounding him . Kennedy's murder was the result of an assassination attempt by the mob .
 When Sam Giancana was found shot to death with five bullet holes around his mouth, Santos Trafficante said, “Now there are only two people who know who shot Kennedy.” Trafficante says .
 The CIA Thory Time magazine and CNN conducted a survey in January 1992 . Time magazine, CNN and CIA Time magazine conducted the survey .
 73 percent of the American people believed there had been a conspiracy to assassinate the president . 50 percent believed that the CIA was responsible for the murder of the president, according to the poll .
 A certain person is said to have known or associated with another, who, in turn, worked for Mister X, a former employee of Mister Y, and so on, ad infinitum . The most recent example of the relationship between Mister X and Mister Y is that of Mister X
 The theory reads like a Russian epic novel, and guilt by association is everywhere . It reads like an epic novel . The theory is based on a theory that the victims are innocent .
 Frank Sturgis, for example, worked at the Tropicana Hotel in Havana and thus has a Cuban connection . He worked there in Havana, Cuba, and is a Cuban citizen .
 Sturgis’ real name was Fiorini, and his contacts with the Tropicana and Jack Ruby’s friend, Lewis McWillie, give both gentlemen a connection to Santos Trafficante and the Mob . Jack Ruby's friend Lewis Mcwillie also worked at the
 Sturgis, however, worked for E Howard Hunt, and so had a CIA connection . Sturgs worked for Hunt, but worked for the CIA, not Hunt .
 Oswald was arrested for passing out FPCC leaflets in New Orleans on August 10, 1963 . Oswald arrested for carrying out the leaflets . Oswald was a member of the FPCC .
 Oswald’s fine was paid on August 12, 1963 . Uncle Dutz was joined by Nofio Pecora at the hearing where Oswald's fine was issued .
 Sam Termine, another underworld figure, was friendly with Oswald’s mother, Marguerite . He was also friendly with the mother of Oswald, who was murdered .
 Termine had served as a bodyguard and chauffeur for Carlos Marcello and was a close friend of Dutz . Termine was close friend to Dutz and served as bodyguard .
 Dutz was married to Marguerite’s sister, Lilian, and was involved in illegal bookmaking activities . He was also involved in the death of his sister Marguerita, who died in 2011 .
 IRS identified Sam Saia as one of the most powerful gambling figures in Louisiana . He was very close to Carlos Marcello. He was an associate of Sam . Saia .
 Oswald may connect to Marcello through his uncle and his uncle’s associations with Emile Bruno, Nofio Pecora, Sam Termine, and Sam Saia . Oswald may also connect to his uncle, who was involved in the works of Marcella .
 Sturgis is linked to Trafficante, Nixon, the Mob, the CIA, and even to Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby is Jack Ruby's killer .
 An individual falls under suspicion because he knew someone who knew someone else who was implicated in some kind of wrong doing by yet another third party . An individual is suspected of wrongdoing because he knows someone who knows someone else .
 This theory is so complex and interwoven that it is very difficult to keep the facts and personalities in any kind of perspective . The theory is very complex, and it's very difficult for the public to understand .
 Some of Tolstoy’s novels help the reader along by listing all the characters up front, and it might help if we did the same . We should list the characters in order to make sure we get the best out of the novel .
 There are generally considered to be 39 major players involved in this scenario . There are thought to be more than 39 players involved .
 Former Chicago FBI and Military Intelligence agent, Guy Banister, Guy, heavily involved with anti-Castro Cuban exiles; accused by Jim Martin of plotting the death of the President . Banister is accused of plotting to kill President Castro Castro .
 Banister abhorred the United Nations and was a rabid anti-communist . Banister was also a member of the John Birch Society and of the paramilitary Minutemen . He abhorred United Nations .
 Bissell was a high-ranking CIA officer fired by JFK after the Bay of Pigs . Bissell is a former CIA officer who worked for JFK in the CIA .
 Barnes was involved in covert operations against Castro and was connected to E Howard Hunt . Barnes worked for Hunt and was involved with the CIA .
 Newman’s Oswald and the CIA does not link Tracy Barnes in any significant way, other than to corroborate that he worked for the CIA under Bissell . Newman: “Tracy Barnes worked for CIA under . Bissell. He was a CIA operative under .
 On the one hand it is an extraordinarily dramatic fictionalized work, and one would be hard pressed to believe it was true . On the other hand, it is a dramatic dramatic work of fiction, but it's not true .
 There are very “testable’s assumptions one, for example, is the mention of Tracy Barnes as Robert Morrow's CIA case officer . On the other hand, there are very "testable" assumptions .
 Oswald gave Bringuier his Marine Corps manual and attempted to convince him that he was trained in guerrilla warfare and willing to train Cubans to fight against Castro . Oswald gave him the manual of the Marine Corps .
 Veciana was involved in Alpha 66, the largest active anti-Castro operation the CIA has identified . Veciana worked for the CIA in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Several CIA officials admit to knowing that Bishop was a CIA senior agent . Bishop is a senior CIA official .
 Maurice Bishop played David Phillips, thought by roles in the assassination attempts on Castro, and in some t0 be Maurice Bishop efforts to remove Salvador Allende in Chile . Bishop played the role of David Phillips .
 David Phillips said he had never heard the name of Maurice Bishop . HSCA says he has never heard of Bishop's name .
 A major Cuban exile leader with Pedro Diaz Lanz, and a member of the secret Operation 40 unit, an assassination squad, originally formed by the CIA in 1960 .
 General Charles Cabell was involved in anti-Castro CIA operations, the Bay of Pigs, and fired by Kennedy after the fiasco . Cabell, General Charles, was fired from the CIA after the CIA operation .
 It is alleged that General Cabell was rabidly right wing, and that his brother Earl, mayor of Dallas, was instrumental in arranging the motorcade route . It is also alleged that he was the brother of the Dallas mayor .
 First Hand Knowledge accuses General Cabell of criminal involvement in continuing to counterfeit Cuban currency to destabilize the Cuban economy . A fictionalized text on the assassination, First Hand knowledge, also accuses general Cabell .
 Richard Cain, Richard, was an operative of the CIA and simultaneously connected to the Mafia . He was implicated by Giancana as one of the shooters in Dallas . Cain was a CIA operative and a member of the Mafia, but was not a Mafia .
 She was also linked to Alexander Rorke, Gerry Patrick Flemming, and Frank Sturgis . She has also been linked to the likes of Gerry Plemming .
 Newman’s Oswald and the CIA suggests Cobb might have been a double agent . But precisely what could have been her role in the assassination drama is unclear .
 Fie befriended the Oswalds, joined with the Dallas Russian community in helping them, but reported to J Walton Moore of the CIA on his contacts . deMohrenschildt shot himself to death as soon as he learned the F1SCA wanted to interview him .
 DeMohrenschildt had other CIA contacts, however, which have only come to light in the last ten years . He had other contacts with the CIA, but they have only been made public .
 Nicholas M Anikeef acknowledged that he had a close and continuous friendship with Nicholas M. Anikeew . Nicholas M
 In 1992 Anikeef “stubbornly refused to disclose what part of the Agency he had worked for, even when told it was publicly known’s publicly known. Still, in 1992, he refused to reveal what he worked for .
 DeMohrenschildt also had a business contact in Fiaiti named Charles Thomas named Charles . Charles Thomas was also a contact with DeMohranschildt's business partner .
 George deMohrenschildt was a Russian emigre who innocently helped the Oswalds in Dallas, Texas . The government's position is that he was an innocent bystander .
 These latter two names only became known since the release of JFK records in 1992 . JFK records were released by JFK Records in 1992, and JFK records released in 1994 .
 Cuban exile implicated by Marita Lorenz as on the JFK assassination team . Cuban exile was implicated in JFK assassination . Lorenz is a Cuban exile .
 Dulles played a role in overthrowing the left-leaning Arbenz government in Guatemala . Dulles was a key figure in the overthrow of the Arbanz government .
 Oswald had checked out a library book describing the Arbenz operation in Guatemala . Two weeks before the assassination, Oswald wrote a letter to Mr Flunt and checked out the book .
 David Ferrie was an anti-Castro right-wing soldier of fortune, CIA contract agent, and affiliated with the Marcello crime syndicate . Ferrie is a former CIA agent and a member of the mafia . He is accused of being involved in the murder of Fidel Castro
 Accused by Jim Martin, Banister associate, of plotting to kill the President . Accused of plot to kill President Obama .
 Ferrie was making telephone calls from an ice rink in Galveston on the day of the assassination . Ferrie may have been a co-conspirator, and may be making phone calls .
 Oswald was in the Civil Air Patrol and Ferrie had once served as an instructor . The only evidence supporting such contact was that Oswald was an instructor in the Air Force . Oswald was Oswald's instructor, Ferrie was an Air Force pilot .
 Gerald Posner, in Case Closed, argues that Ferrie and Oswald’s connection is sheer fantasy . Posner: Ferrie's connection to Oswald is a fantasy .
 Oswald and Ferrie were involved in the Civil Air Patrol in 1956 . A photo of the two was published by Posner in the past week .
 Another source believes David Ferrie was the most important single individual to know the truth of the assassination conspiracy . Ferrie is believed to be the only person who knows the truth .
 Ferrie, a homosexual pedophile, lived with Raymond Broshears from August 1965-1966 . Ferrie was a homosexual .
 Broshears, whose testimony has been impugned, said Ferrie admitted to him his participation in the conspiracy, said that four shooters were involved (from the grassy knoll, from behind, and from a sewer opening) and that Oswald did not kill the President .
 Hall knew Trafficante in prison in Cuba and left Cuba with him when released by Castro . Hall left with Trafficante when he was released from prison . Trafficante was a friend of the former Cuban president .
 Trafficante also worked in the Capri Hotel, in Havana, controlled by Trafficante . Trafficante was also a key figure in Trafficante's Cuba .
 Harrelson was on probation for armed robbery and embarked on a new career in the execution-for-hire business . The actor's new career is the execution for hire .
 In 1980, Harrelson had taken an overdose of cocaine and confessed to killing Kennedy and a Judge Woods . In 1980 he had taken a drug overdose and admitted to killing himself .
 Conspiracy was successfully prosecuted for the contract killing of Woods and is currently in prison . Conspiracy was successful in successfully prosecuting for the murder of Woods .
 He is alleged to be a CIA contract agent who worked with Charles Rogers as one of the two grassy knoll gunmen . Charles Rogers allegedly worked with him as a sniper .
 A major suspect in planning the assassination of Kennedy, according to author Anthony Summers . Author Anthony Summers says Kennedy was a major suspect .
 Harvey was a member of the CIA’s Executive Action Program . Harvey was closely in touch with people like Lucien Sarti . He was a CIA member .
 He was head of Task Force W, which was involved with anti-Castro operations, and with mobsters Roselli and Trafficante . He was also involved with Operation W in the 1970s .
 During the height of the 1962 missile crisis, he sent commando teams into Cuba without the President’s knowledge . He was transferred to Italy because he was transferred because of the Cuban missile crisis .
 As late as June 1963, Harvey was still meeting with Roselli in the United States and had even visited anti-Castro camps in Florida . Harvey had been in contact with the Cuban government for decades .
 Former Director of CIA; is alleged to have attempted to cover up Hunt’s presence in Dallas . Also alleged to be uncooperative with the Warren Commission in the eyes of many conspiracy writers .
 Associated with James Jesus Angleton, Director of Counterintelligence, and known to have incarcerated KGB defector Yuri Nosenko . Known to be associated with James Angleton .
 Angleton destroyed important assassination-related documents and a tape of Oswald held in the personal files of CIA Mexico station chief Winston Scott . The tapes were found in Scott's personal files in his personal files . Angleton also destroyed important documents about Oswald .
 Angleton removed Scott’s personal effects and no such tapes were ever found . Angleton took Scott's personal effects to remove them from Angleton's home .
 Angleton destroyed the diaries of Mary Meyer, a JFK mistress, and former wife of CIA official Cord Meyer, Jr. Angleton also destroyed Mary Meyer's diaries . The diaries were also destroyed .
 Helms was more than likely aware of at least some of Angleton’s activities as well as the alleged debriefing of Oswald by CIA Domestic Contacts Division agent Andy Anderson . Helms most recently denied in a 1993 interview on Frontline .
 Holt said to be one of the three tramps arrested in Dealey Plaza . Holt has been an informant and was said to have been a tramp . Holt was one of three people arrested in the incident .
 Marita Forenz is one of the members of the JFK assassination team . She was allegedly involved in the assassination of JFK JFK . Forenz has been linked to the assassination .
 Hemming was also, through Interpen, an associate of Frank Sturgis and Loran Hall . Hemming also was an associate with Loran and Frank Stargis .
 Anthony Summers mentions a “Gerry Hemming,” a man who knew Oswald and had worked with Naval Intelligence . Whether it is the same person as Gerry Patrick Hemming is unknown .
 Gerry Patrick Hemming is connected to the same military base in Japan to which Oswald was assigned . Gerald Posner, a friend of Oswald, wrote that Hemming was a member of the Hemming family .
 Hunt was CIA station chief in Mexico City in August-September, 1963, when Oswald visited the area . Hunt, Howard Hunt, was the station chief at the time of the attack . Hunt was Hunt's first station chief, and Hunt was in charge of the CIA in Mexico .
 Hunt is alleged to have been the “old man tramp” arrested at Dealey Plaza on the day of the assassination . Hunt is accused of being the man who was arrested at the scene of the shooting . Hunt was arrested on the same day as President Kennedy .
 Hunt holds these allegations are defamatory, has sued, and says that he was in Washington, DC at the time of the assassination . Hunt has sued for defamation . Hunt says he was not in Washington D.C. when the assassination took place .
 Weberman deposed Hunt and asked some telling questions . The litigation resulted in Weberman’s ability to depose Hunt and ask questions . Weberman's deposition was part of the deposition process .
 Maheu, Robert, former employee of Howard Hughes, later operated detective agency, allegedly had close ties to CIA and Charles Cabell; implicated by Giancana as part of the Kennedy assassination conspiracy . Maheus, Robert was former employee . Howard Hughes' detective agency .
 French mercenary and assassination expert alleged to have been on the CIA hit squad with Jean Soutre; that is highly speculative accounting by an unreliable conspiracy author . The author of this article is an unreliable author .
 FBI agent suspected by FBI agent James Hosty of being connected to right-wing interests and the Sylvia Odio incident . Hosty said he was suspected of being involved in the incident .
 Roberts, Delphine, the secretary of Guy Banister, was interviewed by author Anthony Summers . Roberts was a member of the Cabinet at the time of the assassination .
 Roberts indicated to Summers that Oswald frequently came to Banister’s office on Camp Street and that Oswald and David Ferrie had spent considerable time together .
 Alleged to have been the grassy knoll gunman and CIA contract operative operating under various aliases . Also alleged to be one of the three tramps arrested near Dealey Plaza .
 Rogers lived with his parents in Houston and disappeared for many weeks after the assassination . Rogers disappeared from his parents' home in Houston, Texas, in the weeks after his assassination .
 His parents received strange calls leading them to believe their son had had a hand in the assassination . His parents were shocked to discover he had been involved in the murder .
 Rogers allegedly killed both his parents and tried to dispose of their bodies . Rogers allegedly tried to kill both parents and dispose of the bodies of them .
 It is by no means certain that Delphine Roberts has told the whole truth or revealed all she knows . Roberts has not revealed all that she knows about the truth .
 Shaw, allegedly acting under the alias Clay Bertrand, tried to find Oswald an attorney . Shaw allegedly tried to get Oswald to find an attorney, but Oswald was found dead .
 Shaw was found innocent of conspiracy to kill JFK, but in the late 1970s CIA Director Flelms allegedly admitted Shaw had CIA connections . Shaw found innocent in the 1970s but was later found to have CIA connections with the CIA .
 Gerald Posner argues that Clay Shaw was entirely innocent of any association with the assassination and that Garrison destroyed him . Posner says Garrison destroyed Shaw's reputation in the wake of his assassination .
 Jim Garrison tried to get him extradited to New Orleans . Governor Connally of Texas refused Garrison’s request . Smith remained under the protection of Texas authorities .
 Later Sturgis was a Watergate conspirator along with Howard Hunt; this team was originally put together under Nixon . Hunt was later involved in the Watergate conspiracy .
 Sturgis is alleged by Weberman and Canfield to be one of the “tramps” arrested in Dealey Plaza . Weberman, Canfield and Weberman alleged to be the ‘tramp’ arrested in the Plaza .
 Rather stunning photographic similarities are provided between Sturgis and one of the tramps . Rather stunning photographs are provided by the photographer who took the pictures .
 He leaked two stories, one to Jack Anderson, the other to author James Buchanan . He was a CIA anti-Castro Cuban exile .
 In each case, an "unnamed source" said Oswald was a pro-Castro agent . In each of the cases, the source said he was an agent for the CIA .
 Sturgis denied his involvement as the unnamed source, but both Jack Anderson and James Buchanan independently said he was . Jack Anderson, James Buchanan and Jack Anderson independently said that he was.
 Veciano was shot in the head but survived to testify at the HSCA . Veciano still fears for his life. Veciano remains at risk of his own life .
 One approach points to anti-Castro Cubans, another to the power brokers of the Vietnam War . Another is to power brokers in Vietnam War. One approach to the Cuban government is to blame the Castro Castro regime .
 Conspiracy the Weberman-Canfield scenario, the intrigues proposed by Mark Lane and Mark Lane, and another scheme presented by Craig and Rogers . The scheme is based on a proposal from Mark Lane . The plot is presented in the following article .
 Garrison was the New Orleans prosecutor who indicted individuals for the assassination . Garrison was also a prosecutor in the case of the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Craig and Rogers base their work on three informants, two of whom remain secret . Two informants remain secret; two of them remain secret.
 The works of Summers, Groden, Livingston, Livingston and Posner, Newman, and Mailer are also included .
 Top-secret U2 flights originated there, and Oswald had security clearance . Oswald had a security clearance and U2 had a top-secret clearance . U2 and U.S. Air Force Secretary of State Gen. Gen. Michael Hayden was assassinated in March 1968 .
 It could fly at an unprecedented 90,000 feet on secret photographic missions . Could fly at a record high speed on photographic missions, experts say .
 During Eisenhower years, U2 flights regularly invaded Soviet airspace, flying well into the heartland of the country . The U2 planes regularly invaded the Soviet airspace .
 Francis Gary Powers was the first pilot shot down . Powers was shot down just before the failed summit meeting between Eisenhower and Khrushchev in 1960 . Powers is credited with saving the lives of his life .
 At the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, he renounces his United States citizenship . At the United States Embassy in . Moscow, Russia, the Russian Republic of Uzbekistan is headquartered in Moscow .
 The Soviets sent him to Minsk, Byelorussia, where he worked in a radio plant . He married a pharmacy student named Marina Prusakova . He was sent to work in Minsk and married a pharmacist student .
 With his apparently desultory personality, he changed his mind about the USSR rather quickly and sought to return to the U.S. with his wife in tow .
 He experienced almost no difficulty coming back, despite his security clearance, his defection, and his renunciation of his citizenship .
 Oswald was granted access to the two top floors of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow . Only individuals with clearances were ever permitted to access the top floors .
 Access to the top two floors of the embassy was tightly restricted . As noted earlier, I know from personal experience that access to the embassy is tightly restricted.
 Conspiracyists accept the idea that Oswald’s leftist FairPlay-for-Cuba image was a CIA cover . Oswald's FairPlay for Cuba image is a cover for the CIA, conspiracyists say .
 It was the position of his mother Marguerite, and of Mark Lane in his books Rush to Judgment and Plausible Denial . It was, however, a position of the mother of Lane, and Mark Lane .
 In Minsk, Marina noticed that he had photographs and a ground plan of the radio plant . Marina said he had photos of the plant, ground plan and photographs .
 He would not let her near the papers and refused even to say what he was doing . To make matters worse, he would not even let her see the papers .
 George deMohrenschildt befriended the Oswalds upon their arrival in Dallas . The Oswalds were killed in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Fie was friendly with the Shah of Iran and a personal friend of “Papa Doc” Duvalier, the corrupt leader of Fiaiti . Fie also had a personal friendship with ‘PapaDoc’ Fie’s wife .
 Baron George deMohrenschildt appeared to be that of a casual friend with Lee . Baron was a representative of the Dallas Russian community which took an interest in helping them . In the early years after the assassination, the role played by Baron George was that of an informal friend .
 deMohrenschildt’s suicide in the mid-1970s. This image changed at the time of his suicide .
 Shortly before killing himself, he admitted to killing himself that he was asked by the CIA’s Walton Moore to contact and befriend the Oswalds .
 Some help from the U.S. Embassy in Haiti would be greatly appreciated by him, he suggested to Moore . Moore: Some help would be appreciated by the United States Embassy .
 Some have asserted this text is not credible and question Johnson-McMillan’s objectivity . Some have also questioned the objectivity of the text .
 Epstein interviewed by House Select Committee on Assassination also wanted to talk . House investigator left his card at Epstein's residence the morning of the interview .
 He had written a book on Oswald, entitled I’m a Patsy, which he turned over to the HSCA shortly thereafter . His wife turned over the book to the agency .
 “Never have contacted Oswald in a million years if Moore had not sanctioned it,” he explained to me . “The conspiracy would never have happened without Moore’s approval,’ he said .
 Moore had interviewed him numerous times over a course of years and prepared reports based on this information . Moore said he had interviewed Moore numerous times and prepared his own reports .
 Moore testified that he had "periodic” contact with deMohrenschildt for “debriefing purposes” Moore said he could not recall any discussion about Oswald . Moore acknowledged these contacts may have extended to 1962 .
 deMohrenschildt kept J Walton Moore closely apprized of events almost immediately after Oswald’s return to the U.S. Moore kept close eye on Oswald's attempt to kill General Walker .
 Paine was alleged to have had a CIA connection through the Agency for International Development, a suspected CIA front organization . Her father was employed by the CIA at the time of her alleged connection to the CIA .
 Oswald went to New Orleans, the city of his birth, and stayed with his cousin Dorothy Murret . Oswald was born in New Orleans . He stayed with Dorothy, his cousin, and his wife .
 Oswald passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets, he used the Camp Street address . Oswald used Camp Street to pass out the leaflets . The address was used by Oswald during his time in Cuba .
 Gerald Posner believes the Paines’ involvement with Oswald was innocent and unfortunate . Others suggest that since their background is still classified, there must be something of interest there .
 Banister and Oswald present quite an unusual juxtaposition of left-and-right-wing politics to be occupying neighboring offices . Oswald and Banister are both members of the Republican Party .
 Martin called the FBI and reported that David Ferrie, an associate of Banister, was involved in the Kennedy assassination . Martin, in turn, told the FBI that Ferrie had been involved . Ferrie was arrested and charged with the assassination .
 The only admission Banister ever made to the FBI was that Arcacha Smith of the Cuban Revolutionary Council had an office there . Banister admitted that Smith's office was in Cuba .
 Recently released documents show that the CIA funded the CRC, but that Kennedy stopped CIA support for it as of May, 1963 . Kennedy stopped support for the CRC in 1963 .
 Jim Garrison claimed the shadowy Clay Bertrand was really Clay Shaw, a well-connected businessman affiliated with the International Trade Mart in New Orleans . Garrison claimed that Clay Shaw was really a businessman . Garrison: "Clay Shaw is really a well connected businessman"
 Garrison indicted Shaw as part of a conspiracy to assassinate the President, but was unable to prove Shaw was Bertrand . Garrison indictment found Shaw was a member of a plot to assassinate President John Kennedy . Garrison was able to convict Shaw of being Bertrand, but failed to prove he was Bert
 Over a decade later, Victor Marchetti, a former assistant to the Director of the CIA confirmed that Clay Shaw was indeed Clay Bertrand . The CIA has never been able to confirm the identity of Clay Shaw or Bertrand.
 Banister, Ferrie and Shaw became Jim Garrison’s leading conspirators in the assassination . Shaw, Banister and Ferrie were among Garrison's top conspirators . Garrison was killed in November 1963 .
 Ferrie died mysteriously four days after Garrison indicted him . Banister died within ten days of the conclusion of the Warren Commission hearings . Shaw was acquitted many years later, and Helms admitted Shaw was a CIA agent .
 Oswald chose this address only to rile Banister and Arcacha Smith . Gerald Posner, author of Case Closed, believes Oswald chose the address only because of his anger at Banister .
 He told Bringuier that he wanted to be an anti-Castro freedom fighter and gave him a copy of his Marine Corps training manual .
 Oswald passed out leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Bringuier saw Oswald pass out leaflets . Oswald was a member of the committee .
 Oswald’s arrest provides us with more information about the nature of activities on behalf of Castro, says historian John Sutter . Oswald's arrest provides more information, he says . Sutter: Oswald was a key figure in the Cuban government .
 Oswald sent clippings about the incident to the chairman of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee to enhance his credibility with them . Oswald sent them to the committee chairman to boost his credibility in Cuba .
 Bringuier, however, was linked to David Ferric, according to a 1961 New Orleans police report . Police report: Ferric and Banister were linked to Banister and Arcacha Smith, but not Bringuiers . Police: David and David were connected to each other,
 Ferrie’s friend and employer Eladio del Valle was found shot dead on the same day Ferrie died . As mentioned in a prior chapter, Ferrie's friend and boss was found dead on same day .
 Ferrie appears to have lent his library card to Oswald and came into money both before and after the assassmation . Ferrie is believed to have borrowed Oswald's library card from him .
 Ferrie had an office in New Orleans and that Eugene Hale Brading had a office next door . Note that Ferrie's office was next to Brading's office .
 A prior defector from the U.S., a man under scrutiny by the FBI, and undesirably discharged from the Marines had no difficulty getting a passport within 24 hours . The man was released from the Marine Corps without a passport .
 This, in turn, fuels those conspiracists who think Oswald had some covert intelligence function all along . This, of course, fuels conspiracy theorists who think he had a covert role .
 Floward, the CIA agent (and future Watergate burglar) is alleged to have been the station chief in Mexico City at the time of Oswald’s trip . Floward blunt, the future Watergate burglary burglar, is said to have visited Mexico City in 1964 .
 This period is totally omitted from his autobiography . All that is known about it is that he was CIA Chief of Station in Mexico City during August and September, 1963 .
 Cuban officials told Oswald he could get a visa to Cuba if he first got a visa from the Russians . The Cuban officials said he was able to get the visa from Russia if he got the visa . Oswald died in Cuba in 1945 .
 He then called upon the Soviet Embassy and was told there would be a delay of four months . The Soviet Embassy in Moscow was told it would be four months long .
 His strident behavior, however, made an impression on the staffs of both embassies .
 "It twists and turns at every corner, laced with innuendo, impostors, suspicions, and intrigue," says the author .
 Oswald attempted to pose an anti-Castro soldier of fortune in his contact with Bringuier . Oswald's attempt to pose as a soldier of good fortune in contact with the French diplomat .
 Bringuier knew and associated with David Ferrie, and Oswald knew Ferrie . Oswald was a friend of Ferrie's and associate with him . Oswald is a former member of the Board of Governors .
 The CIA was apprized of Oswald’s comings and goings all along by George deMohrenschildt, a man who posed as a friend of the Oswalds’ in Dallas, yet met regularly with a CIA contact named Walton Moore . The facts were never
 Sylvia Odio, a credible witness, reluctantly came forward to disturb the momentum the investigation was gathering . The Odio Incident and Loran Hall were the subject of a series of conspiracy theories .
 She declared Oswald was the lone assassin and had leftist, prO'Castro sentiments . She declared that Oswald was a lone assassin .
 Many have considered the Odio incident as the best proof of a conspiracy to kill the President . The Odio Incident is considered the best evidence of a plot to kill President Obama .
 Silvia and Annie Odio were living in the Crestwood Apartments in Dallas, Texas, in September 1963 . Annie and Silvia Odio lived in the same apartment as Silvia in Dallas .
 The daughters were wealthy daughters of a prominent Cuban family that had been involved in revolutionary politics . They were wealthy girls of a wealthy Cuban family .
 Their father supported Castro, but was a democrat, and when Castro’s revolution devolved into Marxism-Leninism, he worked against the regime .
 Silvia, 26, and Annie, 17, were part of the growing exile community in Dallas . Silvia and Annie are part of a growing community of refugees in the city .
 This group was against Castro and Communism, but was made up of nonviolent social democrats . This group of social Democrats was against the Communist Party and Castro .
 Two Latinos and an American stood at the door as Annie opened it a crack . Annie opened the door to a group of strangers . Annie says the door was opened only a crack.
 Annie's father's underground name in Cuba, so Annie let them in . They said they were supporters of JURE; they also knew her father’s underground name . Annie's dad was in Cuba; her father was in the military .
 The young women wanted to translate into English a number of fundraising letters addressed to American businessman . They wanted the young women to translate a fundraising letter to the businessman .
 Her father warned her to take the utmost care in the Byzantine intrigues of exile politics, and she was leery of dealing with strangers . Her father had warned her not to deal with strangers in Byzantine politics .
 The men left, in their red car, supposedly about to embark on another long journey . They left in the car, seemingly embarking on another journey .
 He brought up the request for help again, but he also seemed keen to discuss something else else .
 Odio, thinking how quiet the American had been, said she had not really formed an opinion . Odio said she was surprised by the quietness of the American .
 Leopoldo made a number of remarks which — even at the time — Odio found chilling . Odio: "Leopoldi's remarks were chilling. He made a series of remarks that — even though it was not clear what they were, they were chilling"
 Both sisters realized that the American who visited their apartment in September was Oswald . Both sisters were shocked to learn that Oswald had visited their home .
 They were terribly frightened and decided not to say anything about it . They decided to stay silent and not say anything to anyone .
 "I do not have any friend who might be here, through Dallas, so reject this friendship until you give me his name," she says . She says she does not know any of her friends in Dallas .
 Warren Commission had to struggle with the veracity of the Odio testimony just at the time it was concluding its business . The Warren Commission struggled to determine whether the testimony was true .
 J Edgar Hoover reported that his agents had found Loran Hall, “a participant in numerous anti-Castro activities,” who said he was the man who visited Odio along with two of his colleagues .
 The Warren Commission report went to the printers with Loran Hall’s story impugning Odio as part of the final copy . Hall's story was impugned by Odio .
 FBI agents traced down the two other men Hall named as his companions . Both men said they knew nothing about Hall's story .
 Loran Hall was reluctant to give evidence to the House Assassinations Committee . Hall later admitted he had lied to the committee .
 Hall maintained he had never claimed to have visited Silvia Odio . When he eventually did so, on a basis that assured him against prosecution arising from his testimony, he maintained he didn't claim to have seen her .
 He was a leading member of ‘Interpen,’ a tough anti-Castro group made up of exiles and CIA contractors . He was the leader of Interpen, a group of ex-CIA contractors .
 David Ferrie was a member of the International Anti-Communist Brigade that trained Cuban exiles at Lake Ponchatrain outside of New Orleans . Oswald is supposed to have traveled with Ferrie at the camp .
 Hall had a connection with Santos Trafficante, who was detained in Cuba with him, and released at the same time . Hall had been detained with Trafficante and released from Cuba at the time of his arrest .
 Hall had been arrested towing a trailerload of arms to the Interpen training camp at No Name Key in Florida . It was part of the anti-Castro guerrilla activity Kennedy was trying to stop .
 She was shown photos of Loran Hall and his two associates and said these were definitely not the men who visited her .
 Odio also told her priest about the incident, and through painstaking research, Weberman and Canfield tracked him down in a Florida nursing home . Odio's priest corroborated her testimony yet again, corroborating her testimony .
 Silvia Odio, the daughter of a Cuban millionaire, attended Catholic school in Philadelphia . Odio is a daughter of the Cuban millionaire who lives in Miami .
 FBI spent much time looking into her past mental health record, particularly her proclivity to fainting spells . FBI spent time looking at her mental health, particularly after she suffered from a series of mental health issues .
 The agent who interviewed Odio and helped to put the Hall fabrication in place was James Hosty . Hosty is a man whose name has appeared earlier regarding destruction of evidence, erasures from Oswald’s notebook, etc. Odio was interviewed by Hosty and helped with the
 She has written no bestsellers, never sought publicity or monetary gain, and her testimony has been consistent and corroborated, she says . She says she has never sought money or publicity or publicity .
 Loran Hall’s effort to discredit the Odio sisters adds to the intrigue . Loran . Hall‘Sisters’ are accused of sexual misconduct .
 He testified under immunity from prosecution before the HSCA that “rightwing radicals in league with CIA operatives offered him money to take part in the Kennedy assassination’s assassination”
 Posner takes the position that Odio is not credible and that Oswald had no connection with Ferrie, Bannister and Shaw . Posner says Odio was not credible, and that he has no connection to them .
 A lengthy review of this controversial text as well as these allegations and counter-allegations is provided in Ch. as a sidebar . Ch. 1 is a review of the text .
 After the assassination the "cabal" decided it was better to peg Oswald as a lone assassin rather than as a communist conspiracy . One answer to the Loran Hall fabrication is still consistent with a CIA plot .
 Loran Hall testimony was offered to help establish the “lone nut’s approach . The Loran . Hall testimony is offered as part of the ‘Lone Nut’ approach .
 Allen Dulles, the former CIA director who sat on the Warren Commission, passed out a book to each member of the panel . Dulles passed out the book to all of the members of the commission .
 The book was a historical accounting of prior presidential assassins, and the thesis was that each assassin was a lone nut acting on his own passions . It was published in 1998 .
 Dulles’ distribution of this book show that the CIA was already invested in the ‘lone nut’ hypothesis . Dulles distributed the book to CIA members, who were already interested in the idea . The book was published by Dulles in 1961 .
 One of the cases described was an attempt on the life of President Roosevelt in Florida in Florida .
 The assassin missed Roosevelt, and hit the former mayor of Chicago instead . Roosevelt was shot at Roosevelt, but hit Chicago instead.
 Giancana’s book explains that the man who was the “lone nut"" in that assassination attempt was in fact in debt to the Mob . He never intended to kill Roosevelt at all, only the other passenger, whom he succeeded in killing .
 The tale of a cabal of anti-Castro Cubans and right-wing CIA contract agents — and perhaps Mob affiliates — is not easy to dismiss .
 Anti-Castro Cubans felt betrayed by Kennedy during the Bay of Pigs invasion . Kennedy was president of Cuba during the 1960s and '60s .
 The Cuban missile crisis was resolved — in their minds — by Kennedy again betraying their cause by making a secret deal with Khrushchev never to invade Cuba . Kennedy again betrayed their cause, saying he made a deal to avoid invasion .
 Since the CIA bankrolled most of these organizations, this may have become the seedbed for the assassination . The CIA may have been involved in the assassination, the author says .
 Oswald’s trip to Mexico City in September, 1963 is a problem . Oswald was in Mexico City at the time of the trip . Oswald's trip was in September 1963 .
 Evidence shows Oswald, or someone posing as Oswald, visited the Cuban and Russian consulates . Possibly Silvia Odio was mistaken with respect to the dates Oswald visited her, but considerable evidence shows Oswald .
 The nature of the interview, who taped it, and to whom it was given, are not clear . It is not clear who taped the interview .
 The source of this information is Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” I bid. “I bid.”
 A CIA photo said to be of Oswald leaving the Soviet embassy is not Oswald’s image . Oswald's image is not that of Oswald, but it is said to have been of Oswald .
 A tape recording of Oswald talking on the phone with a Soviet diplomat is not Oswald’s voice . Oswald's voice is not that of Oswald, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A Cuban diplomat who had three angry confrontations with Oswald said repeatedly and in detail that Oswald of Mexico City was not the Oswald of Dallas . The diplomat says he had three confrontations in the face with Oswald .
 The one eyewitness who said she saw Oswald in the Cuban consulate could not describe him correctly to investigators . The other eyewitness said he saw Oswald at the consulate in Havana, Cuba .
 Oswald had applied for a passport to leave the country, visited Silvia Odio to announce assassination plans, applied for visas to Cuba and Russia in Mexico City . Oswald's obstreperousness would be remembered by all, says author .
 We don’t know if Oswald went to Mexico or was represented by an imposter . Oswald was represented in Mexico or represented by a fake, imposter, according to the FBI .
 Marina did not disclose to the FBI that her husband had been to Mexico, but later she said he did make the trip . Marina initially said he made the trip but later said he had been there .
 Tier most prized possession from her husband was a miniature straw donkey, she says . She says he brought her from Mexico .
 We have barely scratched the surface of this mercurial conspiracy theory . Anti-Castro Cubans or not, Sylvia Odio or not . Or not, Mexico City or not. Mexico City is Mexico City .
 One of Oswald's strongest suits may be the evidence he brings supporting Oswald’s trip to Mexico . One of his strongest suits, however, may be that he brings evidence to the evidence .
 Posner cites Soviet personnel in Mexico City, Nechiporenko, Vatzkov, and Kostikov, Cuban employees Sylvia Duran and Alfredo Diaz, and another witness, Oscar Contreras, all testify they saw the man they saw arrested for the assassination .
 Posner’s case is convincing, and his evidentiary rationale is impressive . Posner's case is compelling, and he's got a strong case to support his argument .
 FBI agent James Hosty is another source of evidence on the issue of whether Oswald went to Mexico City . Hosty was an FBI agent who worked in Mexico City in the late 1960s . Hostsy is a former FBI agent and author of a book about Oswald's experiences in Mexico
 Another version of a CIA-based plan to assassinate Kennedy focuses on the significance of Vietnam in the overall motive . Conspiracy The Vietnam Connection is based on the Vietnam Connection .
 In Oliver Stone’s film JFK, a mysterious figure provides Jim Garrison with inside details of the machinations of the plotters . Garrison: "A mysterious figure" provides Garrison with details of JFK's assassination .
 Fletcher Prouty served as Chief of Special Operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Kennedy years . He served as Special Operations Director for the U.S. Armed Forces in the early 1960s .
 The CIA, Vietnam and the Plot to Assassinate T.N. F Kennedy, implicates Richard Nixon, but takes a very different approach from Weberman and Canfield . Flad Kennedy lived, asserts Prouty, the U.S. would not have become embroiled in Vietnam
 Kennedy’s intentions were to remove 1,000 troops from Vietnam initially and to begin a full-scale withdrawal prior to the 1964 elections, to be completed by the end of 1965 . The withdrawal was planned to begin prior to 1964 elections .
 P Cabell, who was fired by Kennedy after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, was a zealous CIA right-winger . Cabell was fired from the CIA in 1968 after the CIA failed to find a way to get around the world .
 Cabell had interests in Textron Corporation’s acquisition of Bell Helicopter Company . Textron profited greatly from the ‘Huey’ and other choppers used in Vietnam . Cabell's interest in the Textron acquisition led to his interest in Bell helicopters .
 Lyndon Johnson’s appointee, Fred Korth, was indicted for conflict of interest trying to secure the contract for General Dynamics . General Dynamics in Fort Worth, Texas was the leading contender, and was indicted .
 To the chagrin of many Texans, General Dynamics was not given the TFX contract . General Dynamics won't receive the contract .
 Another drama opens with the assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem, the first president of South Vietnam, on November 1, 1963 . The film is based on Diem's assassination of the country's first president .
 Kennedy favored the removal of Diem, but not by murder; he was very disturbed by the news . Kennedy himself favored Diem .
 His inability to get control of the Bay of Pigs and the Diem assassination bothered him, he says . He says he was unhappy with his inability to control the country's political situation .
 Robert Kennedy authorized a Cuban Study Group, an outgrowth of the Bay of Pigs . The highly secret study was chaired by Robert Kennedy .
 His directives were quietly placed in the bureaucratic files and forgotten . His directives have quietly been quietly placed into the bureaucracy files .
 There have been few times in the history of this nation when the limits of the power of the President have been so nakedly exposed . The limits of President Obama's power have been exposed .
 I was the briefing officer for the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to whom NS AM #55 was addressed. I was briefing officer . I was briefed officer for chairman of JCOs .
 I know exactly what he was told about that series of documents, and I know what he said about them during that meeting . "I know what I know about them," he says .
 During that meeting, 1 was told to have them put in the chairman’s file, where they remained . The chairman of the committee put them in his file .
 On the day of President Kennedy’s assassination his entire Cabinet departed for Hawaii on an unprecedented trip to Japan . President Kennedy's Cabinet was on a trip to Hawaii on the day he was assassinated .
 Prouty does not provide a very perspicuous theory but an array of facts, spiced with ample amounts of conjecture and innuendo .
 It is not easy to deduce whether it was Nixon or Johnson behind the 'high cabal' or how the conspiracy enunciated itself in the person of any specific assassins .
 The question of who actually shot the President generates four very different responses — all quite hypothetical and convoluted . In reviewing the CIA-based theories of the assassination, the questions of who killed the President are very different .
 A disturbed CIA agent known as William Harvey had been a “can-do’’ operative involved with anti-Castro activities, Summers and others say .
 Harvey sent a team of commandos into Cuba without Kennedy’s knowledge or consent .
 He cozied up to organized crime in his desire to see Castro assassinated . He may have been part of the so-called Corsican contract hit on President carried out by Lucien Sarti 245 .
 Harvey may have been the “rogue CIA officer” David Phillips referred to when he died . Harvey may be the ‘rogue’ CIA officer .
 How Harvey is supposed to have set up Oswald as the patsy stretches the imagination . How Harvey should have been able to get Oswald to be set up as patsies stretches imagination .
 Oswald thinks he is part of a covert operation to “infiltrate” Cuba once his pro-Castro credentials have been developed . In this model, Oswald thought he was part of an operation to infiltrate Cuba . Oswald: "Infiltrating" Cuba would be
 He starts a fictional Fair Play for Cuba chapter, gets arrested passing out pro-Cuban leaflets . He has a made-for-TV fist fight with an anti-Castro exile . He appears on television debating the socialist cause for Cuba .
 This is one explanation of how the crime was carried forward under the rightwing banner of anti-Castro Cuban exiles and disaffected, rogue CIA officers . This is the one explanation for the crime being carried forward in Cuba .
 Oswald served as the dupe, the patsy, who sat out the assassination in the second floor lunchroom of the Depository building . Oswald was unaware that sharpshooters had killed the President and left his rifle on the sixth floor to incriminate him . Oswald sat out
 Nixon was in Dallas on the day of the assassination and lied about it, before finally admitting it . Nixon also lied about being in Dallas, Texas, before admitting it to the assassination .
 Watergate involved the arrests of Howard Hunt, Frank Sturgis, and others . Watergate involved arrests of Hunt, Hunt, Sturgs, and other .
 This was not the first time Nixon used this team, and his involvement in covert activities can be dated to his time as Vice President under Eisenhower . Nixon was Vice President of the U.S. under Eisenhower.
 E Howard Hunt was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, according to these authors . Hunt was killed in Dallas, Texas, on November 23, 1963 . Hunt died in a car crash in Dallas .
 Marita Lorenz testified under oath in 1975 that she had driven from Miami to Dallas in November of 1963 with Frank Sturgis . Both Hunt and Hunt denied it, but Marita testified in 1975 under oath .
 One of Banister’s secretaries, Mary Brengel, was tracked down by Anthony Summers . Anthony Summers tracked down one of the secretaries in the days before .
 She told him that one day when she was taking dictation from Banister, he referred to his work in helping Marcello fight deportation . She said one day she told him about his help in helping him fight deportation.
 This leaves open the connecting links between CIA Harvey, Marcello, Banister, Ferrie, and ultimately to Oswald . The CIA Harvey led the way through the CIA Harvey and the CIA .
 Hunt's photo appears as an acetate fold-over which seems to exactly fit over the face of the tramp on the right . Hunt’s photo appears to fit exactly into the right tramp face .
 Hunt sued Weberman for libel for his allegations . Weberman welcomed the litigation because it would finally give him a chance to depose Hunt under oath . Hunt is now suing Weberman .
 Hunt later dropped his suit and this, in turn, continued to fuel conspiracy theories that Hunt was involved in the case . Hunt dropped the suit and the conspiracy theories continued . Hunt later later dropped the conspiracy theory .
 After the assassination three individuals were arrested and later released by the police . To summarize, the assassination was an assassination attempt .
 TV program A Current Affair announced that the three tramps had been tracked down . Three tramps were tracked down by the program .
 CIA agent Howard Hunt, Frank Sturgis, and Daniel Carswell are alleged to have been involved . Hunt and Carswell turned out not to be involved in the alleged tramps .
 The photographic forensic evidence they cite is uncanny, especially in relation to Howard Hunt . Howard Hunt was shot in the head by Howard Hunt at the time of his murder .
 A book by Craig and Rogers — based upon anonymous informants — gives another twist . The book is based on anonymous informants .
 Rogers was the ""imposter" who used Oswald’s identity papers in Mexico City . Rogers vaguely resembled Oswald and was the 'imposter' who used his identity papers . Rogers used Oswald's identity papers to get into Mexico City, Mexico .
 The only difficulty was that Oswald’s Russian was excellent, but Rogers’ was very poor . Oswald's Russian was better than Rogers' Russian .
 Sylvia Duran, the Cuban Counsel, said that the obnoxious Oswald she had met at the Consulate in Mexico City did not resemble Lee Harvey Oswald . She said she met Oswald at the Cuban Consulate, but he was not Oswald .
 Cuban Counsel, Eusebio Azcue, also told the HSCA that the man who was so obnoxious with him was not Oswald . The Cuban Counsel said the Cuban Counsel also said the man he was obnoxious with is not Oswald.
 Oswald had taken a car for a test drive with Lee Oswald . Oswald was investigated and documented by the Warren Commission . Oswald had a car test drive .
 He behaved obnoxiously, drove the car through Dallas at high speeds . He left an “unforgettable” impression on the car salesman, Albert Bogard .
 Bogard could not remember what his Oswald looked like, but his boss, Frank Pizzo, said that Lee Harvey Oswald who had come to the car dealership was not the Oswald arrested for the assassination .
 Rogers and Harrelson met Chauncey Holt and planned to take a train out of town . After the assassination, they met Holt and decided to go to the airport . They planned to leave the town on a train .
 Holt was to meet Eugene Hale Brading and Morgan Brown at the Cabana Hotel and get a plane out of the country . Holt was scheduled to meet with Brading, Brown and Brading .
 Rogers and Harrelson were to have another plane waiting for them, presumably David Feme's . Feme was at an ice rink in Galveston at the time of Kennedy’s death . The two men were to be on another plane .
 The Grassy Knoll Gunman gives such detail as to dates, times, motel safe houses, bus numbers, etc., that either the informants were very much in the know or were highly skilled writers of dramatic fiction .
 The Gerharts reported the incident to the FBI twice after the assassination, but nothing was reported . The Gerhartts reported it twice after it was reported to them .
 His parents became concerned when he did not show up for a number of weeks after the assassination . His parents were worried he would not be able to attend school for a period of weeks .
 They received mysterious phone calls and began to conclude their son had a hand in the assassination . They received phone calls from people who thought their son may have been involved .
 Charles finally returned home and confronted by his mother about her suspicions, he murdered both his parents . Charles murdered his parents when he returned home to find out about his mother's suspicions .
 He dismembered both bodies, attempting to destroy the evidence of the crime, but left town without completely cleaning up the home . He left town with the bodies, but not completely cleaned up .
 Rogers has not been seen since, is still thought to be alive, and is wanted for the murder of his parents in Houston . Rogers is believed to be still alive and wanted for his parents murder .
 The origin of the conspiracy is unclear in this model, and one is left in the murky waters between the CIA, the Marcello organization, anti-Castro Cubans — or some combination of the above .
 Rogers worked for the CIA as a contract agent and had worked with David Ferrie and Guy Banister . Rogers worked as a CIA contract agent .
 Ferrie had contacts with the CIA and the Mob . Banister had these same contacts in addition to his membership in the Minutemen .
 Even if Rogers was the grassy knoll gunman, we still have no idea who hired him . Rogers was not the grass-knoll gunman . Rogers is the suspect in a federal investigation into the shooting .
 Marita Lorenz testified that she left Miami, Texas, in one of three cars heading for Dallas . She testified in court that Lorenz left Miami in the middle of the night . Lorenz is accused of leaving Miami for Dallas, Texas .
 Gerry Patrick Hemming said Guy Banister in New Orleans offered him a contract to assassinate President Kennedy at the request of the CIA . Hemming gave very scanty corroborating testimony to the CIA. Hemming says Banister offered him contract to kill Kennedy .
 Lane speculates that the Cuban brothers were Guillermo and Ignacio Novo — both later sentenced for crimes related to the murder of two Chilean officials in Washington . Lane says the brothers were later convicted of crimes in Washington related to a murder case .
 These four different CIA assassination scenarios leave many questions unanswered . Oswald's assassination scenarios have many unanswered questions . Oswald was the only person to be involved in the CIA's assassination .
 Oswald mastered Russian but had a spelling deficit, which caused writing errors and dropped a trail of clues along the path we are trying to follow . Oswald’s Dyslexia was born with dyslexia, a learning disability .
 This is an atypical mistake and one that implicates him in the writing of a strange letter that appears after the assassination . This is one of many mistakes made by the president of the United States .
 On November 8, 1963, he misspelled this word in a mysterious letter written to a Mr Hunt . Mr Hunt wrote to a mysterious man in a letter to Mr Hunt in 1963 .
 The letter surfaced in 1975 and was sent to Kennedy assassination researcher Penn Jones, by an unknown source . The letter was sent by unknown source in 1975 .
 Dear Mr Hunt, November 8, 1963 . I would like information concerding my position. I want to know more about my position .
 I am asking that we discuss the matter fully before any steps are taken by me or anyone else . I'm not sure if we will take any further action, but I'm sure we will discuss it fully .
 Nixon resigned August 9, 1974 . Watergate matters were concluded in 1975 . Nixon resigned in 1974 .
 Howard Hunt’s wife, Dorothy, died in a mysterious plane crash in December, 1973 . Hunt's husband, Howard Hunt, was killed in the crash in 1973 .
 Dorothy Hunt was carrying documents that linked Nixon to the Kennedy assassination . Hunt is believed to have been carrying documents linking Nixon to Kennedy's death . Hunt was also carrying documents linked to the JFK assassination .
 We do not know if Dorothy Hunt was carrying such documents, but we do know that the plane went down under mysterious circumstances . We do know if she was carrying documents .
 Hunt was carrying $10,000 in cash, allegedly “hush money” for the Watergate burglars . Hunt was found with the cash in his car . Hunt is the son of former President Richard Nixon .
 If we speculate that the letter was to E Howard Hunt, the Mexico City CIA liaison, we begin to see the faint outlines of Oswald as a CIA functionary, an aspiring spy, a low-level CIA contract agent or an unwitting fool being set up as a patsy for
 He sought clarification — “I am asking that we discuss the matter fully before any steps are taken by me or anyone else” — two weeks before the assassination . “We discuss that matter fully,” he sought to clarify two weeks later .
 Oswald checked out a number of books from the Dallas Public Library on November 6, 1963 . Oswald had checked out several books at the library in Dallas, Texas .
 The books should have been returned on the 13th to avoid late charges, but one was still overdue months later and was not found among his effects . The books were not found in the man's effects .
 Eventually, someone anonymously returned it, and who that person is remains one of the infinite number of mysteries surrounding the assassination .
 Arbenz, the overthrown Guatemalan leader, was close friends with Arevalo, the author of the book . He was overthrown Guatemala's president, who died in 2009 .
 Posner asserts the library card issue was a rumor started by Jim Garrison . Posner says Garrison started a rumor about library card issues .
 The case of the missing, classified, or non-existent library card remains open . Garrison based his arguments on selected Secret Service documents . Garrison in turn based his argument on documents .
 Oswald’s favorite television show as a young boy was, “I led three lives,” a serial drama of an FBI informant who had joined the communist party . Oswald's favorite TV show was, "I led . three lives," a serial . drama of a .
 Phillips played a leading part in the overthrow of the anti-American, left-leaning Arbenz government in Guatemala . In 1954, Phillips was in association with the CIA team, including Howard Hunt as Political Action Officer . Phillips was a CIA political action officer .
 It was a remarkably cunning operation in which Arbenz panicked into resignation as much by propaganda as by actual force of arms . It was the most cunning operation to get the dictator panicked into resigning from his post .
 Oswald’s reading is a list of spy thrillers fictional and real — some of them engineered by CIA officers who were now possibly his associates . Oswald: Some of them are fictional or real . Some of the books Oswald has read are now fictional .
 Oswald's library card was used by David Ferrie, the owner of the library card he used . The list was recommended to Oswald by Ferrie by the very owner of his library card . Ferrie was a member of the public library staff at the time .
 Arevalo book would be tantamount to advising Oswald to read about an event Feme’s colleagues had carried off with pride and precision nine years earlier .
 Oswald supposedly makes a trip to Mexico City in late September . David Atlee Phillips and E Howard Hunt have recently been there recently .
 Oswald wrote a letter to Howard Hunt asking for more information before any further steps were taken . Hunt had played a role in the overthrow of a Guatemalan president in which he had a role . Oswald wrote the letter on November 6, 1963 .
 The official versions of history, and particularly of these associations, begin to come apart at the seams . The official . versions of . history, especially of these . associations, come apart from the . seams of history .
 The issue of the overthrow of the Arbenz government has now been corroborated by the government . The issue is now confirmed as the case for the overthrow has been confirmed . The government overthrew the government in 2008, but has not been overthrown .
 In 1997 the CIA released 1,400 pages of classified material, some of which indicated that the CIA actively planned assassinations and had specifically tried to train and create military force of exiled Guatemalans to overthrow Arbenz government .
 The propaganda efforts against Arbenz were sufficient to topple the regime . The propaganda effort against the regime was sufficient for it to topple .
 Oswald checked out The Shark and the Sardines, a book about the collapse of the Arbenz government . Oswald checked the book out, and Hunt, who allegedly was the propaganda mastermind for the CIA project to oust Arbenez . Hunt is alleged to have been the mastermind behind the
 The official version of the myth insists on leaving this trail of unlikely concurrences to sheer coincidence . Anything else impinges on the credibility of the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission has been widely criticized for its findings .
 Oswald left his job at the Reily Coffee Company across the street from Banister’s office . He made a friend at the garage, Adrian Alba, who he met at the coffee shop . Oswald and Alba are friends in New Orleans .
 He was a former pilot for Eastern Airlines and lost his job because of charges of homosexual pedophilia . He was accused of being a homosexual pedophile .
 He was a CIA contract agent — of that, there is little doubt, in the literature . He made such a vile speech 259 years ago, the author says . He says he was a contract agent .
 For the coincidental times of Ferrie and Oswald’s New Orleans demonstrations, see Summers, 301, 301. For the timing of the demonstrations in New Orleans see Summers .
 Conspiracy that he had to be removed from the podium by those who had invited him. Conspiracy that the . had been invited to the podium, he said . Conspiracy that . he had been removed from . the podium . conspiracy that he . had to . been removed by those . who had
 Gerald Posner, a member of the Warren Commission spirit squad, lambasts Jim Garrison’s case against Clay Shaw, David Ferrie and Guy Banister as totally off the track . Posner: Oswald did not know Ferrie, and Garrison didn’t know him .
 The issue of whether Oswald knew the adventurer David Ferrie is equally important . Ferrie had extensive anti-Castro Cuban contacts and did some work for an attorney for Carlos Marcello .
 Dean Andrews, Jack Martin and Delphine Roberts are among those who contacted the FBI after the assassination . They include Banister’s secretary and mistress .
 The reliability of these witnesses has been the subject of debate for two decades, but finally the question was solved with a single photograph . A single photograph shows the reliability of some of the witnesses .
 Of the dozens of issues and debates, this is one appears to be ended, with Gerald Posner the loser . Posner is the loser of the debate, with Posner losing his seat .
 Oswald posed as a pro-Castro mercenary, according to testimony of Sylvia Odio . It looks very much like Lee Harvey Oswald was linked with this CIArelated group . Oswald’s James Bond books, a book about Hunt and the CIA undermining a leftist government .
 The first is his original letter to the American Embassy written in 1959 renouncing his citizenship . The original letter was written to the U.S. Embassy in 1959 .
 The letter is found in the original Warren Commission Report on page 24 of the original report . The letter was found in Warren's original Warren Report .
 EtSCA investigators said the handwriting similarities show that the Nov., 1963 letter to Mr Hunt was Oswald’s handwriting . Investigators said it was Oswald's handwriting .
 Photograph of a facsimile copy of a hamhvriten letter to Mr Hunt . Mr Hunt. letter .
 We can still see his spelling deficit in “concerding” in the 1963 letter . Furthermore we can still . see the spelling deficit . in the letter .
 Hunt, Weberman and Canfield hold that it was sent to E Howard Hunt, the CIA station chief in Mexico City in September and October, 1963 . Hunt and Weberman hold that the CIA sent the document to Hunt, who was in Mexico at the time .
 Hunt was one of the Watergate burglars, was a high official in the CIA under General Cabell . His wife had recently perished in a mysterious commercial airline disaster in 1973 when the letter surfaced . Hunt's wife died in the crash .
 Hunt is said to have had a close relationship with Guy Banister in New Orleans . Hunt is believed to have been close friends with Banister during his time there .
 Oswald checked out a book by Juan Arevalo, The Shark and the Sardines, in part about the overthrow of the Guatemalan government in 1954 . Oswald had checked out the book weeks before the assassination .
 Howard Hunt was a CIA operative at the time played a role in overthrowing the government . Hunt played a key role in the overthrow of the U.S. government in 1953 . Hunt was an operative for the CIA and helped overthrow the government of Guatemala .
 Oswald wrote this letter to Hunt two days after checking out the Arevalo book . Oswald was assassinated two weeks after the book was published . Hunt was Hunt's first contact with Oswald .
 The CIA overthrow of the Arevalo government was directed by Allen Dulles, then head of the CIA . Dulles was a critical member of the Warren Commission investigating the assassination of JFK .
 Dulles and his brother, John Foster Dulles, were alleged to have ties to United Fruit Company . Dulles' brother was accused of having ties to the company . The company was founded in 1945 .
 Oswald writes to a CIA agent who participated in the same covert operation which Oswald is reading about in his library book . The man who would later sit on the Warren Commission to investigate the assassination was Hunt’s boss . It is a notable coincidence therefore that the man Oswald wrote to was
 Between October of 1962 and April of 1963, President Kennedy's behavior becomes suspicious, secretive, and hard to track . His behavior became suspicious and secretive .
 At that time he sends $10 in cash from Mercedes Street and follows it with a money order for $9.71 on September 5, and another $10 on October 10,1962 . The picayune total of $39.71 eked out over 14 weeks eked
 As soon as we take away $396 for the State Department debt, he is now $118 in arrears . Even this figure depends on there being no other expenditures than those that were noted by the Warren Commission .
 It is highly unlikely that every cent he spent in those three months was recorded .
 The reference to Oswald’s talking in his sleep is from McMillan-Johnson, 161, and Mailer, 558 . Mailer: Oswald talked to Oswald while he slept .
 A more telling incident occurred later, the week after he received his passport, June 24, 1963 .
 Lee was sitting in the dark with his arms and legs wrapped around the back of a chair and his head resting on top of it . Lee was sat with arms, legs and arms wrapped around back of chair and head resting in dark .
 Marina held him for about a quarter of an hour and he told her between sobs that he was lost . Marina held her son for a quarter-an hour before he could be reunited with her .
 If he had wanted to tell her about his problem he would have, she said, but it was better not to ask . Recalling that night thirty years later she said that if he had told her about it, she would have .
 There was something so heavy he had been carrying, and she didn’t know what it was . She didn't know what was .
 Oswald’s emotional behavior is not evidence, but it tells us that much is unknown and unexplained . Five months before the assassination he was teeming with anxiety, fear, and trepidation . It was sad, she said .
 He decided to ask the Soviet Embassy if he could return, with Marina . He decided that he would ask for permission from the embassy .
 On the weekend of June 29th, together they wrote Comrade Reznichenko of the Soviet Embassy in Washington, saying they wanted to go back . Together, they said they wanted a trip back to the Soviet Union .
 He obviously trusted her enough to confide such issues to her, but this time he avoided telling her what was going on . He trusted her much more than she trusted him .
 That suggests something else was too big for him to handle himself, something too big to confide in Marina . He confided to Marina that he was too scared to tell her about his troubles .
 Table attempting to summarize and condense the material may be useful . Although perhaps repetitive, a table attempting to summarise the material might be useful.
 Teachers, wives, and dependents of embassy employees were never allowed to enter these highly restricted floors . Teachers and wives of embassy staff were never permitted to enter the highly restricted areas .
 Elis cousin, Dorothy Murret, with whom he stayed in New Orleans, allegedly had a CIA connection . Murret allegedly had an alleged CIA connection with the CIA .
 Oswald knew Michael and Ruth Paine and George deMohrenschildt in Dallas, Texas . Oswald knew Paine, Paine family members . Oswald also knew George and Ruth de Mohrenschildts in Dallas . Oswald is believed to have known Paine's family for decades .
 DeMohrenschildt, particularly, but the Paines as well, had intelligence connections . The Paines also had connections with intelligence connections with the CIA .
 De Mohrenschildt admitted that he befriended Oswald for the government and reported to the CIA about his contacts . He admitted to befriending Oswald and reporting to CIA about contacts .
 This information was not known to the Warren Commission and only came out after De Mohrenschildt’s suicide . The Warren Commission was not aware of this information .
 Walton Moore, Domestic Contacts Division, Nicholas Anikeef, from the CIA’s Soviet Russia Division, and Charles Thomas, a CIA covert operations agent, were interviewed .
 Charles Rogers was confronted by his parent’s suspicions of involvement in the assassination . He murdered them and has been a fugitive ever since . Charles Rogers is now a fugitive .
 These individuals are Marita Lorenz, Sylvia Odio, Annie Odio and Carlos Bringuier . They are the women behind the scenes in the U.S. National Guard .
 She now suspects he was involved in intelligence gathering in the USSR, too . She also suspects he may have been involved in Soviet intelligence gathering .
 Oswald appears to have checked out a book about Elunt’s CIA triumph . The book implies that the two had prior contacts . Oswald wrote a letter to a Mr. blunt .
 Oswald knew David Ferrie in the Civil Air Patrol and likely met him in New Orleans, New Orleans . Oswald likely met Ferrie during his time in the Air Force . Conspiracy: Oswald knew Ferrie and likely knew him in the civil air patrol .
 Oswald was said to have been working for Guy Banister when he was distributing Fair Play for Cuba leaflets .
 He used Banister’s Camp Street address, an address which housed CIA-sponsored anti-Castro organizations, most notably the Cuban Revolutionary Council .
 Years later Richard Helms, Director of the CIA, made admissions that these individuals did have a relationship to the CIA . Victor Marchetti, former CIA Assistant Director, corroborated Ferrie’s CIA associations .
 If Oswald can be linked with Ferrie in 1963, he can also be linked to the CIA, anti-Castro Cubans, and/or the underworld . Ferrie and Banister were connected to all three .
 President Kennedy was disturbed over CIA planning of the Bay of Pigs operation, and over his inability to get control of the organization . President Kennedy sought, after his re-election, to dismantle it after his election .
 CIA-backed anti-Castro Cubans, whose bases Kennedy tried to shut down, are behind the scenes . This would be motive enough, within the agency; but motive also comes from the CIA, which tried to close down Cuba's bases .
 Cubans felt betrayed by his secret dealings with Khrushchev . They felt the U.S. would no longer support their efforts to overthrow Castro . Castro was overthrown by the United States .
 The CIA itself, the CIA officers fired for the Bay of Pigs fiasco, and CIA-sponsored anti-Castro exiles all may have shared a desire to remove the President . The CIA may have a desire for removing the President from Cuba .
 The Mob lost a great deal of gambling, narcotics, and prostitution revenue when it lost Cuba to Castro . The Mob was being persecuted on dozens of fronts by Attorney General Robert Kennedy, as well .
 The relationship of William Harvey, an unstable CIA figure who worked under General Cabell, and Harvey’s repeated contacts with John Roselli, Giancana, Marcello, and Trafficante, makes a Mob-CIA plot plausible . The relationship between Harvey and Cabell makes
 There were plenty of assets to carry out such a crime, including a motive and opportunity . Not only was there motive for the crime, but plenty of opportunity to carry it out, say police .
 The CIA’s history of generating disinformation, withholding real information, loss of documents, and recalcitrance in dealing with investigative committees is indicative of something . The CIA has a history of withholding information and withholding information, and losing documents, to investigators .
 CIA officer Regis Blahut’s attempt to purloin autopsy photos from the HSCA is the most stark example of how strenuously the CIA attempted to disassociate itself from Oswald . The CIA officer's attempt to steal autopsy photos is one stark example .
 CIA had a compelling interest in creating the impression that Oswald was working for someone else . Efforts to deny any contacts, any relationship, any debriefings with Oswald show that the CIA had an interest .
 Frank Sturgis, a CIA contract agent associated with Howard Hunt, leaked two stories to jack Anderson and author James Buchanan . Sturgs was an anti-Castro Cuban exile, and a Cuban exile .
 In each hew as an ‘unnamed source’ that said Oswald was a pro-Castro agent . In each case, an unnamed source claimed Oswald was an agent for Castro .
 Sturgis denied his involvement in circulating these rumors, but both Jack Anderson and James Buchanan independently said he was . Jack Anderson, James Buchanan and Jack Buchanan independently confirmed he was involved .
 John Roselli, a Mafia figure working closely with CIA agent William Harvey, was also a source of disinformation about Oswald . Roselli worked closely with Harvey, a CIA agent, and worked with the Mafia .
 Loran Hall came forward to say it was he, not Oswald, who visited Sylvia Odio . Hall came to say he visited Odio at the request of Oswald .
 Hall was an anti-Castro exile and CIA contract agent who made these admissions under immunity from prosecution . Hall made the admissions in order to avoid prosecution . He made the admission in exchange for immunity .
 Richard Helms was suspected of withholding information from the Warren Commission and other investigative agencies . Helms became Director of the CIA after the assassination .
 His most recent denial centered around an alleged ‘debriefing’ by CIA agent Andy Anderson . Anderson is alleged to have been involved in the alleged “debrief’s” by the CIA .
 The CIA long held that despite Oswald’s defection to the USSR and his Fair Play for Cuba activities, it did not have any files on him at the time of the assassination . The CIA has said that despite his activities, the CIA had no files on Oswald .
 The debriefing memo discovered only in 1993, the event which occurred prior to the assassination, still looms as a contentious issue . It was discovered in 1993 .
 Lyndon Johnson’s mistress, Madeline Brown, said that Johnson had fathered a child with her after their long association . She asked him if he had had anything to do with the assassination, she said .
 This theory is based chiefly on conjecture and does not give us much more than anecdotal testimony, innuendo, and associations to form a basis for suspicion . Weak Elements: This theory does not provide enough evidence to support it .
 There isn't enough to successfully prosecute anyone for the assassination . Conspiracy Bosch, perhaps James Angleton and/or Richard Helms, could do so .
 The mistress of Lyndon Johnson, Madeleine Brown, related a chilling anecdote to author Dick Russell on August 4,1992 regarding this implication . Brown said the implication was an implication that LBJ's mistress had an influence .
 As 1963 passed into history, they were together at a New Year's Eve party . They were together for the first time .
 Madeline Brown was a former mistress of Johnson . She was a friend of Johnson's mistress . Brown was described as "mainly credible" by Johnson's biographer .
 Brown has, in the past, maintained that LBJ told her that John Kennedy was going to be assassinated in advance of it happening . Brown has maintained she was told by LBJ that JFK would be assassinated .
 She confirms the portrait given in The Texas Connection, and then some . In her talks with her, she confirms that she confirms her portrait of the Texas Connection .
 She says that Johnson was a totally amoral man who slept with any woman who came along, betrayed all his women, and who was often drunk and abusive . She says he slept with many women, betrayed them and often abused them .
 As the author of this text, I have attempted to base all conjecture and speculation on evidence gleaned from one published sort or another . I have tried to base my speculation on some of the most recent published reports to date .
 In the matter of Kennedy mistresses I felt a need to be particularly careful about making claims of affairs, which others had published, and I tried to independently confirm some of these allegations . In the . matter of the Kennedy mistress I felt . felt a . need to . particularly careful
 One text suggested that Pierre Salinger’s secretary slept with Kennedy, so I wrote Salinger about this . Salinger wrote about this in a letter .
 Salinger denied JFK slept with his secretary, but did acknowledge JFK's womanizing . Salinger also acknowledged JFK had a history of womenizing .
 One of LBJ's employees took up with LBJ after the assassination . At the same time, he revealed that one of his employees had an affair .
 Kennedy pushed me to have mistresses, which convinced me he was having mistresses . Kennedy pushed him to have a mistress, and I convinced him he had mistresses. "I'm not a guy who has mistresses," he said .
 During the campaign, I got side information from journalists (who in those days were not interested in publishing that information) John F Kennedy was having an affair with Pamela Turnure .
 There were rumors in the White House about Fiddle & Faddle, but I did not get specific information . Fiddle and Faddle is a popular music duo .
 "No employee assigned to my office had an affair with the President," she says . "And, finally, no employee in the office had a affair with President Obama," she adds . "No one in my office ever had affair with president," she writes .
 Madeline Brown s allegations first given to author Dick Russell, therefore, seem to be corroborated in part, at least, by two other independent sources, Harrison Livingston and Pierre Salinger . The allegations were first made by author Russell .
 Jack Anderson's early writings linking Castro to a Soviet plot . Frank Sturgis, the unnamed disinformation source, is also a suspected conspirator from the right .
 We should also remember mobster Roselli as another deep-throat source for articles linking Oswald to a leftist conspiracy originating with Castro . Roselli was also a source for many of the conspiracy theories .
 Hunt, Sturgis and Roselli each contributed disinformation to support the hypothesis of a leftist conspiracy to kill the president . Hunt and Rosellan each contributed to the theory that the president was killed by a left-wing conspiracy .
 Sturgis threatened Marita Lorenz, but did not seek to litigate while he was alive . He threatened her, but didn't seek a legal action . Lorenz died in 2008 .
 Others, like David Phillips, clearly could have initiated defamation suits but did not do so . Others could have started a defamation suit against David Phillips .
 "The entire aura of obsessiveness about this event has caused the original players in the drama to become larger than life," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Ruby might have been a small-time Dallas striptease hawker who was $39,000 in arrears on an IRS debt . Ruby, the great “Mob chieftain,” might really have been just a small, time-hoard stript
 Oswald, the “super-assassin, double-agent, and James-Bond-master-spy, earned $1.25 an hour, and his 1962 tax return revealed an income of less than $1,000 . Oswald, who was the James Bond master
 Mailer has brought convincing evidence that Oswald’s expenditures were greater than his earnings . There is still considerable difficulty showing him ever having more than a few hundred surplus dollars . Oswald's expenditures are greater than those of his earnings, Mailer says .
 The characters of our drama tend to be magnified and are probably far less interesting than collective fantasies make them out to be . The characters are probably not interesting, as well as our collective fantasies, we say .
 No one could have known Kennedy’s motorcade route prior to October 4, and that was after Oswald met with Odio . Oswald met Odio, and the motorcade was the last known route .
 Gerald Posner is wrong to suggest that this line of inquiry should be dropped . Yet to take the position of Posner, Posner says, is nonsensical .
 Until a thorough-going inquiry is made into the actions of Richard Helms, Howard Hunt, James Angleton, Richard Bissell, Tracy Barnes and Tracy Barnes, James Hosty, the entire cast of the anti-Castro Cubans and their CIA-associates, 265
 In Dallas the Oswalds were invited to a Christmas party organized by deMohrenschildt . The party was held in Dallas, Texas .
 By 1995 researcher John Newman meticulously analyzed the paper trail on Oswald reviewing some 2 million pieces of paper . The paper trail was reviewed by Newman in 1995 .
 Flere is a brief synopsis of his major findings which may not be incorporated elsewhere in this text . Flere's findings may not have been incorporated into the text above .
 State Department requested a list from the CIA of American "defectors" in Eastern Bloc countries . In November, 1960 the State Dept. requested list from CIA of Americans who had defected to the East Bloc .
 Bissell signed this letter with the defectors list attached . Bissell's letter was signed on November 21, 2013 .
 In 1964 during the Warren Commission the CIA continued to assert it had no information on Oswald before the assassination . This correspondence occurred in 1960, but in 1964, the CIA said it did not have any information .
 Oswald’s New Orleans behavior was the subject of a new study . Oswald's behavior in New Orleans was a major factor in the study .
 It is here that he cultivates both a pro-Castro and an anti -Castro identity, he says . It is in the midst of his pro- and anti- Castro identity .
 Oswald insisted on seeing an FBI agent while in jail, to supply him, Oswald said, with information on his FPCC activities . Oswald was arrested for disturbing the peace in his confrontation with Carlos Bringuier . Oswald said he wanted to see a FBI agent in jail to supply the agent
 They withheld the fact that Special Agent Quigley had interviewed Oswald in jail (p.m. 1963) They withheld this fact from the public for quite some time .
 Newman's greatest contribution seems to be unprecedented, namely that Oswald did go to Mexico City and so did an impostor . Newman’s greatest contribution is to the fact that Oswald and an imposteror went to Mexico . Newman: "Oswall went to the Mexico City
 Newman sorts all of the documentary information and transcripts into a table . Newman interviews witnesses, cites declassified portions of the still-classified Lopez Report . Newman quotes surviving, fugitive sections of deceased CIA officer Winston Scott's manuscript which James Angleton took from Scott’s safe after his death
 Flis conclusion is that the Soviet and Cuban consulates were dealing with two Oswalds, the real one and the impostor . Flis concludes that the real Oswalds was the imposter . The real Oswald was the real and imposter.
 There may be weak spots in the theory, but it certainly deserves the most serious attention, especially the Oswald-David Ferrie link discovered in 1993 . The link between Ferrie and Ferrie was found in 1993, but there may be a few weak spots .
 That is perhaps the most significant research breakthrough in a decade, says Dr. John Defterios .
 It's not preposterous to assume that Oswald, through them, could have been connected to the CIA, Mob or anti-Castro Cubans . Banister and Ferrie had their fingers in many pies, including the Mob, CIA and Cubans, all at once .
 Oswald’s relationship to the Soviet Union, his activities, marriage, and departure from that country paint a picture sharply divergent from my own experience there . Oswald's relationship to Soviet Union and activities, including his marriage, are sharply different from his own experience in the country .
 A firstperson account may be of interest, at least in the early part of this section . This article includes a firstperson version of this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 In the mid-1960s, I had just received my Masters degree in psychology and not yet earned my doctorate . In the 1960s, he had just earned his doctorate in psychology . He says he is proud of his work in the psychology field .
 Moscow Diplomatic School is part of the United States Embassy school system . I thought that teaching abroad might give me valuable experience, so I applied for numerous teaching positions .
 I earned a salary of $4,500 plus free round-trip transportation from the United States . I thought it would be a great adventure — my first trip to Europe. I earned the salary of . $4.500 plus . free round trip transportation .
 Life in Moscow was extremely difficult for the spoiled American bachelor . Life in Russia was difficult for him and his family .
 It snowed on October 11, but the heat in my building was not turned on until November . The heat was turned on in the building after the snow .
 For a few days in February, the thermometer dipped to 37 degrees below zero . The temperature dropped to 37 below zero in February .
 When 1 went to work, a chauffeur-driven embassy car picked me up in the dark . Conspiracy When 1 goes to work: "When 1 went for work, an embassy car was picked up in dark" Conspiracy When One went for the work, 1 was driven by a
 "When I left school at 3:30, the embassy car dropped me off at my apartment, and it was dark again," she says . "It's dark again. When I leave school, the car drops me off," she writes .
 Teachers told on orientation day that teachers had no diplomatic immunity . The embassy could do little to rescue us if we got in any compromising situations, she says .
 If they were not part of the diplomatic community, they could get us in serious trouble . Fraternizing with members of the opposite sex could get them in trouble, and we were apprized early .
 Close to the end of my teaching contract, I fell in love with a Soviet citizen, Anya. She was a Russian citizen, and she died in the arms of Soviet citizens .
 Anya is now a fully Americanized wife and the mother of our two children, Anya and Maya . "Things did not go quite as easily for us as they did for Lee Harvey Oswald," she says .
 "I was told my contract was almost up and said they wanted me out of the country as soon as possible," she says . She says she was asked to leave the country by the U.S. Embassy .
 The consul said my chances of marrying this woman were virtually nil, and if I did succeed in getting the Soviets to permit it, it was a solid impossibility . If I managed to get her out of the country, I would have to take her away, he said .
 Only three Russians were let out of the Soviet Union in the prior year, he said . He said only three were not on some sort of official mission .
 Oswald had emigrated to Texas six years before Helsinki accords . Oswald had married Marina and emigrated with her to Texas . Oswald emigrated six years later to join Marina .
 I finished up my contract and left injune, 1966, returning from Paris, in August, no longer affiliated with the embassy . Undaunted, he finished up his contract and returned to injune .
 I thought my fiancee and I could be married now that I was just a plain old American tourist and not part of a diplomatic mission; not quite . Not quite. I thought that I could marry now that . I'm not quite sure .
 One of the myriad Catch 22s was that if one wanted to marry a Soviet citizen, it had to be done in the legal residence of the bride . The Catch 22 was that one must marry a Russian citizen in a legal residence, the bride had to live in that home .
 My bride-to-be lived ten miles outside of the Moscow City limits — an area closed to foreigners . The area is closed to foreign visitors .
 Since I could not legally visit the area where the marriage bureau was located, there was no way to permit a wedding . Since I couldn't visit the wedding bureau, I was not allowed to legally visit it .
 The bride had to have notarized permission from both her parents . Another obstacle was that she had to get permission from the bride's parents .
 Any notary "authorizing" a Soviet citizen to marry an American was placed in a dicey situation . Furthermore, any notary “authorizing’s” marriage to an American would be placed in dicey situations .
 After thirty exasperating days, my visa expired and I had to leave the country, unsuccessful and disappointed . After 30 exasperated days, I was unable to stay in the country for 30 days . After that, I tried to get a visa but it expired .
 I returned to the United States to start my doctoral program and vowed I would figure out this system and return . I vowed to return to the U.S. and return.
 With help from a Moscow attorney, I received permission to enter her “forbidden city” in the Moscow suburbs . I was married to her in her ‘forbidden’ city .
 Two trips in and out of the USSR were necessary to get that far, but we finally succeeded . Over a year had passed, and two trips into and out were necessary, to reach that far .
 Permission to leave the cloistered fortress of Soviet Russia involved OVIR, the dreaded passport agency . The passport agency was a key part of the Soviet Union's passport policy .
 OVIR would refuse an application to leave the USSR on virtually any technicality . The USSR would refuse to accept a request to leave on a technicality, the official said .
 My wife secured a pejorative letter of recommendation from her job, her mother’s notarized permission, and, from my side, a few letters from congressmen and senators .
 In the USSR of old, if your husband or wife had served in the military in the prior five years, indeed, if they worked for the telephone company — any reason could be construed as a security reason for refusing to issue an exit visa . In the old Soviet Union, any reason
 The only telephone book in existence in Moscow was a small handbook published by the U.S. embassy .
 In reading the literature about Lee Harvey Oswald, I find myself experiencing high levels of disbelief regarding his Russian years and his marriage to Marina Marina . Oswald was married to Marina, Marina, and Oswald had a daughter .
 The woman who married us, for example, said that she had once married a foreigner to a Soviet citizen under Stalin . The woman married us. She said that .
 When she was finally ‘told from above’ that she had to marry us, she read off a paragraph in Russian . She then informed us we were now man and wife and abruptly asked us to leave .
 In this short ceremony, she broke out in hives and her eyebrows, cheeks, and forehead turned puffy and red .
 Our entire marriage ceremony was a secular, ten-minute reading of a passage in Russian, two signatures, and a taxi ride back to Moscow . We were married in a secular ceremony .
 Oswald’s marriage to Marina, the niece of a lieutenant colonel in the Ministry of the Interior, raises some issues for me . Conspiracy Oswald's marriage raises issues that someone without this kind of experience might overlook, he says .
 Oswald’s connection to Russia is one of the more “curious aspects” of his Russian connection . Oswald's connection to the Russian Embassy in Moscow is a mystery . Oswald is a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA in the 1960s .
 The Office of Naval Intelligence attempted to recruit as many as forty young men who might be sent into the Soviet Union . The Office tried to recruit 40 young men to be sent to Russia .
 The operation was managed primarily from Nag’s Head, North Carolina . They were trained at various naval installations, but the operation was mostly from Nag's Head .
 When I worked as a schoolteacher in the mid-1960s, I had no diplomatic immunity . When I was a teacher, I was not allowed diplomatic immunity. I had to work as a teacher in the 1960s, he says .
 This is where the more official embassy business was conducted, and it was highly protected . The embassy is where most official business is conducted, but it is also a highly protected area .
 In the ten months I was associated with the diplomatic mission, I was never invited in this area, even though I knew quite a number of people attached to the embassy and, in fact, had their children in class . Two Marine guards stood out in front, and in the 10 months
 Oswald went to the American Embassy in Moscow only once, visiting only the consular office on the ground floor . The official story has it that Oswald defected from the U.S. Embassy in Russia .
 The widow of the assistant naval attache, Joan Hallet, who worked as a receptionist at the embassy, says Consul Richard Snyder and the security officer 267 . Yet the widow says the consul and security officer have been found dead .
 If there is a reasonable explanation for the ease of the marriage, it may have been that Uncle Ilya believed Oswald genuinely wanted to stay in the USSR, and thus he supported the marriage . The marriage may have occurred in the Soviet Union .
 He did not support the Oswald’s leaving the USSR, however, and expressed concern that his pension might be affected . However, he said he was concerned about his pension .
 A visitor would never ever get up there unless he was on official business . A visitor to the room would not be allowed to enter . The room is full of visitors, but the room is filled with visitors .
 Oswald came to the embassy “several times” in 1959, Hallet says . According to Hallet, Oswald visited the embassy several times in 1959 . Hallet: Oswald came at the embassy in 1959 and 1959 .
 She was “never” up there, even to visit her husband, and neither was I . The consular offices were on the ground floor, as she mentioned . If Oswald did, in fact, enter the two top floors, he certainly had a status far different than those
 Even after I announced my intentions of marrying a Soviet citizen, the U.S. embassy never thought my particular situation warranted a trip to the two top floors . The United States embassy never visited the embassy because of the couple's relationship .
 One member of HSCA was quite concerned about the nature of this attempted call, however . One of the members of the public was concerned about it .
 Oswald entered the Soviet Union as a military intelligence “plant,” thus perhaps perhaps the North Carolina connection . Oswald may have been a ‘plant’ for military intelligence in the USSR .
 Marina Oswald's widow Marina says she has no proof of Oswald's murder . Oswald’s widow Marina in 1996, Marina says, but says she doesn’t have any proof . Marina: Oswald's wife, Marina, says she believes Oswald was murdered in 1963 .
 Oswald learned in Moscow that the Russians did not want him . Oswald was seeking to renounce his citizenship and remain in the USSR . Oswald's Soviet Diary is published by the Conspiracy Conspiracy .
 He was rescued by Rimma Shirokova, his Intourist guide and taken to Botkin Hospital . He was taken to the hospital in Botkin .
 Based on my own experience, this diary seems glaringly inauthentic. Again, based . based on . own experience . This diary seems to be glaringly . Inauthentic, it seems to have been a diary diary .
 My wife still has trouble with it after 30 years, despite her incredible fluency in English and having earned an American doctorate . Despite her fluency, despite having earned a doctorate in English, she still struggles with English .
 Oswald's wife's habitual mispronunciation in Oswald’s diary smacks of forgery . It strongly suggests that the diary was composed by an English-speaking Russian . Oswald's diary was written by a Russian .
 It would be uncharacteristic for Oswald to compose such a tear-jerker (and if he did, it would be 272) "It would be a surprise" for him to write such a piece .
 The term “petty official” is often used in Russian parlance and on the tongues of virtually all Soviet citizens, but not a phrase frequently used by Americans . Suspect as well is the term ‘petty . official,” so often used by Russians,
 It sounds especially peculiar and arcane in the vocabulary of a man from the South . It's especially peculiar to the South, it's a peculiar thing to say .
 There are simply too many literary allusions, a vocabulary far too complex, to have been written by someone with such bad grammar and spelling as the diary attempts to portray . The diary uses such words as splendid, abound and abound, unobtainable, especially enthusiastic .
 Oswald's handprinted diary is clearly fake . Alongside numerous known letters and handwriting samples of Oswald’s, the handwriting samples are found to be fake .
 After the assassination, some wanted to exhume his body to make sure that the signs of this suicide attempt were still there . The assassination attempt was a suicide attempt . Some wanted to exhum his body .
 Either the diary itself is suspect and replete with errors or his wound was little more than a scratch . The only reasonable explanation would be how almost a whole day could pass before he was taken to the hospital .
 Contrary to the findings of conspiracists, the HSCA felt the diary to be genuine . This author believes the diary was genuine .
 There are also many other problems with the descriptions of the descriptions, dates and times in his diary . Conspiracy .
 He referred to getting paid, for example, in “new rubles,” but the ruble was not revalued until a year later . The ruble has never been revalued since it was revalued .
 Rimma gave him a copy of Dostoyevsky’s The Idiot when he first arrived in Russia . Rimma also gave him Dostyevsky's "The Idiot" when he was in the country .
 At that time Dostoyevsky was very difficult to get and was considered highly anti-Soviet . It was rarely sold in bookstores and would have been an extraordinary gift for a new acquaintance .
 His salary in Minsk was greater than the director of the factory’s . And his salary was higher than the factory's director .
 Oswald was given an apartment in Minsk overlooking the river, at a time when people lived doubled up in communal apartments shared by two to four families . Oswald was also given a flat overlooking the Minsk River .
 As a bachelor in Moscow, as a bachelor, I was given a one-bedroom apartment in the embassy compound . Indeed, when I was in Moscow as a . bachelor, as I was . given a . one-bed apartment .
 The few Russians who ever visited were amazed that a single man could have such splendid accommodations . The few Russian visitors to Russia were amazed .
 He had no domestic passport and was formally a “stateless person,” meaning that he had approximately no rights at all . He was formally known as a ‘stateless’ person .
 Georgian paid $10,000 to a woman to marry him so he could get the requisite documentation on his domestic passport to legally qualify to live in Moscow . He paid the ruble equivalent of the equivalent of $10k to get the required documentation on a domestic passport .
 He applied to get married as a stateless person and was granted permission to marry within 10 days . He applied for the marriage to be granted to stateless stateless people in 10 days after being granted permission .
 Oswald applied to join a gun club, and in no time at all had a hunting rifle . Oswald, again without benefit of a domestic passport, applied to the club . Oswald was able to buy a rifle from a local gun club without the help of a passport .
 He was an engineer and a lieutenant colonel in the Ministry of the Interior . He served in the British military .
 The MVD was a highly sensitive bureau; Prusakov was a party member of high standing . The bureau was the most sensitive bureau in the country .
 It was unimaginable that someone could get an exit visa in the early 1960s, in only four months’ time, with a relative in such a high position .
 If her uncle had merely been a private in the infantry four years earlier, that would have been sufficient grounds for OVIR to refuse Marina’s departure entirely . Marina's uncle was merely a private soldier in the Army .
 Marina was permitted to depart the Soviet Union while her uncle was in the MVD . Marina's uncle was a member of the Russian MVD, according to reports . Marina was allowed to leave the USSR at the time of her uncle's arrest .
 She stopped by on her way home from work and was informed that both she and her husband had been granted exit visas . She was told she and husband had both been granted visas .
 When I was in Moscow, faculty from my school would go to the embassy, shop at the PX, buy American cigarettes, have a hamburger at the cafeteria, and share the latest news .
 He left Russia for a book fair in Helsinki, Finland, and wanted to have his picture taken at the border . He wanted to be photographed at the Finnish border .
 As he turned around to smile for the camera, he was arrested by Soviet border guards . He was captured by border guards in the 1980s .
 This “imperialist spy” spoke no Russian at all, and was imprisoned in the Soviet Union for 18 months . This ‘imperial’ spy’s no Russian, he was imprisoned 18 months in Soviet Union .
 Prison life was so unbearable that when he finally got permission to go to the bathroom alone, on a prison train, he slit his throat . When he was finally allowed to go there alone, the prison guard was not looking . He slit the throat when the guards were not looking.
 His body was delivered to the embassy grounds for shipment back to the U.S. One Saturday when we were gossiping over our weekly hamburgers, he delivered his body .
 The ability of a young pharmacist in Minsk, Belarus, to secure permission to marry an American defector and simply leave with her husband is mind-boggling . The ability to marry a defector in the relatively cosmopolitan, international capital of Moscow but provincial Minsk is
 The fact that she lived with her uncle, a colonel in the MVD, and neither his career nor her exit visa was compromised, is baffling . Neither his career or her visa were compromised, she says .
 Norman Mailer makes the point that both Uncle Ilya and his wife Valya told Marina that this would make things difficult for them . Mailer made the point in a letter to Mailer that both  Irina and Valya said they would be difficult for Marina .
 Ilya promised the KGB that he would continue working to convince Oswald and his 278. KGB report also shows he promised to continue working for the KGB . Ilya told the KGB he would work to convince the Soviet Union that he was behind the assassination .
 These tidbits make the story more human, but the hard facts remain extremely abnormal .
 The poet Yevtushenko got permission to leave the USSR for poetry readings in the West only on the condition that he leave his wife and children behind . The poet was allowed to leave his family behind in the USSR .
 It was common practice for the Soviet Union to treat one’s spouse and children as hostages in order to guarantee that famous . ballerinas, poets, or sports personalities would not defect .
 For Marina to simply come home one day with a visa is entirely outside the range of the normal . Marina's visa is not a normal visa for a woman in the U.S. to come home from abroad .
 If the Soviets saw no way to exploit Oswald in an intelligence function and thought he was mentally unstable, then the most likely response would have been to place him in a psychiatric hospital . Oswald was not a target for the Soviets, but he was a valuable asset in the U.S.
 Under Yeltsin, Americans were discovered who had been tucked away in Soviet mental institutions for the majority of their lives . Some of the Americans had been in institutions since the 1950s .
 The next most likely reaction would have been to expel or imprison him, but certainly not to let him emigrate with his wife, the niece of a colonel in the Ministry of the Interior .
 There are other incongruities to mention, but whether they, in toto, add up to a conspiracy theory is another matter .
 Marina was offered lucrative book contracts and apparently signed some . After the assassination, Marina reportedly signed some of the best-selling books .
 She rapidly became wealthy, remarried, and lived on a 15-acre estate near Dallas . She never wrote her account, but never wrote it .
 In 1963, she barely had money to feed her children, but as early as she 1964 was reported to be worth over $250,000 .
 There are several documents about Marina’s wealth and relationship with her attorneys that are still classified . Marina's wealth is still classified, according to documents .
 Marina Oswald may have received up to $70,000 in donations from Americans concerned with her fate and future . Marina Oswald was found dead at her home in New York City, New Jersey .
 Marina Oswald 280. 280. The overall, composite, historical picture of Marina Oswald is a composite picture of her .
 He informed them that he had instructed Marina to conduct herself in the United States in a worthy manner and not to partake in any anti-Soviet propaganda .
 Even U.S. Ambassador Thompson testified to the Warren Commission that it was highly unusual to get it so quickly . Even United States Ambassador Thompson .
 There are very many unanswered questions about how she left the USSR, how she obtained her wealth, and most important, why she testified before investigative committees with such unreliability .
 Marina told an acquaintance that her husband had defected to the Soviet Union after working at an American exhibition in Moscow . Marina told a friend that she had been told by an acquaintance her husband defected .
 Marina’s memory had gone wholly blank at a public hearing a few weeks later . Marina's memory was completely blank when she attended the hearing .
 Marina Oswald could not remember the time that Oswald had asked for her hand . Marina Oswald said Oswald asked her to marry him at the age of 18 . Oswald had been married for more than a decade .
 Later she identified the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle as her husband’s . She also said her husband had wanted to kill General Walker and Richard Nixon .
 She said nothing about the Walker shooting until confronted with a note found among Oswald’s effects . Oswald's note was found among his effects .
 Marina said she stopped Oswald from shooting Nixon by locking him in a bathroom . Marina says she locked Oswald in the bathroom to prevent him shooting Nixon .
 Warren Commission investigators found that the bathroom locked from the inside, not the outside . Flowever, there were no published itineraries showing Nixon coming to Dallas, Dallas .
 Marina was born in Severodvinsk, Russia, in 1941 . Unfortunately, the city had not been named Severodviinsk until 1957 . She was born to Marina in 1941 and died in 2007 .
 The CIA found no references to Prizentsev in their computer, but his address at Kondratyevsky Prospect, 63 was the same as a former Navy man who defected shortly before Oswald and returned at the same time as Oswald .
 Marina denied any knowledge of Lee’s trip to Mexico, although soon afterwards she told what she knew about that, too . On November 29,1963 and again on January 17 and 22,1964, she denied knowledge of the trip .
 She said she loathed the FBI for pestering her, and, in her bad moods, she could not refrain from showing it . She explained her reluctance on this .
 She lied on her visa application, saying she had never been a member of the Communist party, but had in fact been in the Komsomol . She said she never was a Communist party member, but was in the Communist Party .
 Marina Oswald is an important witness in the State’s case against Lee Harvey Oswald . Marina Oswald was a member of the conspiracy conspiracy to kill JFK .
 If the State were unable to connect Oswald with the rifle, its case against him would dissolve . Oswald's murder conviction would be quashed .
 The bullets found in General Walker’s home could not be matched with the Mannlicher-Carcano . General Walker's bullets were found in his home . The bullets were not found in the home of General Walker .
 The validity of the photographs tying Oswald to the rifle similarly requires that her testimony be believable, since she said she was the one who took them . She said she took the photographs of Oswald and the rifle .
 Had Oswald gone to trial, his defense attorney could easily have impeached this allimportant State’s witness . She left a legacy of inconsistent testimony trailing behind her .
 To believe a woman was introduced to her future husband by a man who’s name she forgot, that he proposed to her on a date she cannot remember, that she emigrated from her country but could not recall whether it was by plane or by ship . Such matters are simply
 If her testimony is not judged credible, then the photos of Oswald with the rifle, the attack on General Walker, and the Mannlicher-Cancano rifle all become questionable . And if the photos are not judged .
 The Yuri Nosenko Affair occurred in 1964, but the Warren Commission made no reference to it . Another suspicious episode emanating out of Soviet Russia was in 1964 . The Warren Commission did not mention it .
 It used to be unthinkable, unimaginable, that a person could be held without trial, without bail, in fact held hostage in a building for over three years, often deprived of food and water or any contact with the outside world, including reading materials .
 Two months after Oswald was killed, a high-ranking KGB officer defected to the U.S. from Geneva . Two months later, a top KGB official defected from Geneva to the United States .
 Yuri Nosenko was 36, in the prime of his career in Soviet Intelligence, and held rank in the KGB’s Second Chief Directorate, counterintelligence . He was 36 when he died .
 Nosenko left his wife and children behind and claimed that he had been compromised, that a cable came from KGB headquarters ordering him home . He wanted to defect to the United States rather than risking prison . CIA had no choice but to honor his request .
 According to Nosenko, the KGB knew nothing about Oswald until he was already in Moscow . Oswald was the leader of the Soviet Union during the Second World War . Oswald's assassination was one of the biggest assassinations in American history .
 When Oswald threatened suicide in order to stay, the KGB “washed its hands” of him . Oswald threatened to kill himself, but the KGB was able to keep him alive .
 The fifteen documents the Soviets forwarded to the Warren Commission exonerated them from any involvement . The documents were obviously exonerated the Soviets of any involvement in the war .
 Nosenko’s defection produced the same effect, but senior CIA officers did not believe the story . The defection was not the first time the CIA defector had defected to the U.S.
 U.S. agencies had capability to intercept all cables between Moscow and Geneva . United States agencies had a capability of intercepting all cables from Moscow to Geneva .
 Nosenko admitted that he had made it up to make the United States accept him . Finally, he said he had lied to the U.S. in order to get accepted .
 A second KGB defector, Major Anatoli Golitsyn, told the CIA Nosenko had been in the KGB but was not the lieutenant colonel he made himself out to be .
 Nosenko gradually admitted this, too, and said he exaggerated his rank to enhance his chances of getting asylum . He has since admitted to exaggerating his rank .
 Nosenko brought documents with him showing him to be a lieutenant colonel . However, he had brought documents showing he was a lieutenant Colonel . The incident took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Nosenko handled the case of an American military attache in the early fifties . He said he handled an incident in the U.S. in the 1950s .
 If Nosenko was the KGB officer-in-charge, he certainly would have known that . If he'd known that, he would have been a KGB officer .
 He provided U.S. information about two Soviet spies, a British clerk and an American Army soldier . He provided the United States information about 2 Soviet spies and a British soldier .
 CIA analysts felt both of these sources had already been compromised and he was not passing on information of genuine value . CIA analysts said both sources were already compromised .
 CIA team groped its way across this minefield of Soviet falsehood and bluff and looked in vain for a definite motive . Conspiracy The CIA groped their way across .
 None of this dealt with the immediate problem in the wake of the Kennedy assassination, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The problem became submerged in feuding within the U.S. intelligence community . The problem is now a national security crisis .
 J Edgar Hoover liked what Nosenko had to say, but one faction within the CIA was extremely suspicious . One faction theorized that he had come to quash suspicions that a Soviet mole existed within the intelligence community .
 For up to four years, Nosenko was treated more like a prisoner of war than a prize defector . He was treated like a POW for four years before defecting to Japan .
 He was kept in a single room, watched 24 hours a day, and often forbidden to he down during the daytime .
 The HSCA heard of these interrogation techniques, as did a few politicians, and shock waves rippled through Washington . The CIA is accused of using the techniques to interrogate prisoners .
 Nosenko never cracked and stuck to his story . "Nosenko was a good guy," he says. "I'm not sure what happened to me"
 Virtually all intelligence analysts say it is implausible, indeed impossible, that the KGB would not have interrogated Oswald extensively . The KGB is said to have interrogated him extensively .
 Nosenko’s insistence that Oswald was not questioned at all is transparent nonsense . Either way, it's not clear whether Oswald was questioned or not questioned .
 Moscow's embarrassment in the wake of the Kennedy assassination is an inadequate explanation . We can still speculate at Moscow’s reasons for priming Nosenko with a phony Oswald story .
 The Cuban missile crisis concluded a year prior to Kennedy’s assassination, and it was not until a year after that Khrushchev was ousted from power .
 Even Castro felt Khrushchev backed down, and accused the Russian of cowardice . Castro felt the Russian backed down and accused him of being cowardly .
 The global perception of the Russian-American confrontation was that the U.S. had won and the Soviets lost . The global view of the confrontation was the United States had won, the Soviets had lost, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Kennedy agreed to remove U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey in return for Soviet compliance in removing missiles in Cuba . Kennedy, in fact, had made a deal with the Soviets, agreeing to remove the missiles .
 Without resolving the contradictions, the CIA later hired him as a consultant . The CIA never resolved the contradictions and hired him again as consultant .
 The secret protocol also promised that the U.S. would stop its efforts to overthrow Castro . It also promised to stop efforts to oust Castro .
 Kennedy had great difficulty getting control over covert operations, and attacks on Cuba continued well after the missile crisis agreements were in place .
 Khrushchev might have ignited a fire of revenge in revenge in the Soviet Union . Humiliation, embarrassment, and betrayal might have been the catalyst for revenge .
 In almost all other respects, the Soviet conspiracy theory makes no sense . In almost everything else, it's impossible to imagine a Soviet conspiracy .
 Oswald as a mole called upon to shoot the President on orders from Moscow, a la the “Manchurian Candidate,” is absurd . Oswald is not a mole, but a mole was called upon by Moscow . Oswald was a mole for the CIA, a CIA operative
 When the KGB wanted to ‘hit’ a diplomat in England, a man with an umbrella walked behind him, nonchalantly touched his leg, excused himself, and walked on . The KGB wanted the diplomat to “hit” a diplomat .
 The diplomat died from shellfish toxin that had placed on the tip of the umbrella . The toxin was placed on a tip of an umbrella .
 KGB hits were high-tech, very discreet, and often carried out under layers of cover . KGB hits are high- tech, very . discreet, with many carrying out under . layers of . cover .
 To have him carry out the assassination using a World War II vintage rifle moves it from indiscreet to stupid, and to select a man who cannot drive a get-away car brings it into the territory of demented, demented .
 The KGB operated through Bulgarian intelligence services and then hired a Turkish extremist as the shooter . The KGB then hired the Turkish extremist to carry out the attack . The shooter was killed in the attack in 1998 .
 "assassin" had never succeeded in shooting anyone before in his life . If caught, he would have pointed directly to them, and besides, this ‘assassin’ had never tried to kill anyone before .
 Oswald could not put film in a camera without help; he pulled out the wiring in a new radio because he put the batteries in improperly . Oswald couldn't tune in the Voice of America without Pavel 288 .
 Oswald's contact with Valerie Kostikov in Mexico City may have been a Soviet hit man . Those who believe Oswald was a hit man may have had contact with Soviet hitman .
 Norman Mailer's Oswald’s Tale confirms Kostikov was a KGB officer assigned to “wet jobs,” i.e. ‘Wet jobs’, Mailer says . Mailer: ‘Odd’’ was a
 John Newman garnered a precious interview with historically recalcitrant James Hosty, who corroborated this . Hosty's interview with John Newman was conducted by John Newman, the author of the book, "John Newman"
 Hosty said that Kostikov was the “Soviet officer in charge for Western Hemisphere terrorist activities including and especially assassinations. Hosty: Kostickov was in charge of Western Hemisphere terrorism . Hosty says that he was the "Soviet officer" in charge .
 Oswald was not simply visiting the consular at the desk when he visited Mexico City . So, when Oswald visited the city, he was not just visiting a consular . Oswald's visit to Mexico City was not the first time he had visited the country .
 That Oswald could have been a Soviet mole or a KGB hit man is a farfetched notion that cannot be taken seriously . Oswald was a hit man, not a mole or mole, according to the book .
 Soviet behavior does not compute, and for that reason suspicions are justified . But it is also true that Soviet behavior doesn't compute, says author .
 One possible explanation is that the Russians felt vulnerable after the assassination, embarrassed, and wanted to provide evidence for their non-involvement . Another possible explanation could be that they felt vulnerable .
 Oswald’s diary was forged by the Soviets to defuse any anti-Soviet attributions of guilt . Nosenko was sent over to help defuse the accusations of Soviet guilt . Oswald's diary forged by Soviet agents .
 Nosenko did not have enough time to prepare (less than two months), and forged diary was also done in haste . The forged diary also was forged in haste, and the forged diary is also a work of haste .
 The Soviets wanted all this information in the hands of the Warren Commission, and it was their haste that explains why the diary and Nosenko were so unpolished . The Soviet Union wanted all of the information from the public .
 Not only is this a reasonable explanation, but also it allows us to come to an innocent conclusion . It's not the only explanation, it's also a good way to explain what happened to the victim .
 The Soviets had nothing to do with the assassination, but out of embarrassment swiftly created a few documents and witnesses to save face . The Soviets quickly created a document and witnesses after the assassination . The Soviet Union was embarrassed by the embarrassment .
 If we grant this possibility, it answers a great number of questions, but there are still problems . If you grant this . possibility, you can still find out what happened in the U.S.
 The Helsinki book salesman who slit his throat happened five years after Oswald’s adventures in Minsk . Oswald was in Helsinki when the Helsinki incident occurred .
 He may also have provided the USSR with vital information, and he was sympathetic to the communist philosophy . After all, he was a defector who may also provide vital information .
 Minsk has a 5,000-ruble bonus, including permission to marry . The bonus includes a bonus of $5,000 per marriage .
 Lee gave the Soviets precious U-2 secrets, enhancing their ability to shoot down Gary Powers . If he gave them precious secrets, they were so grateful they granted Lee his most whimsical fancy, even if 289 .
 Oswald’s Tale, ibid. for more information on Oswald's life in Minsk . See Oswald's Tale for more details on his life .
 If Oswald was an intelligence asset, it is doubtful the Soviets would have let him return . The Soviets would never have let Oswald return, if only to protect secrets they obtained .
 Oswald would give the Americans an opportunity to find out what Oswald had told them . Oswald's return would give them a chance to learn what he had said to the Americans .
 This question has never been satisfactorily answered and, to anyone who has experienced Soviet bureaucracy for both marriage and exit, makes little sense . The explanations which have been given are not typical of cold war Soviet behavior and make little sense, the author says .
 Oswald was "exchanged" for someone, and that is if Oswald were “exchanged” for someone . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the 9/11/11 attacks .
 There is no proof for this, but if that were the case, it could explain some of the incongruities . There is absolutely no proof that this, of course, is true .
 If there was a secret, high-level exchange, Oswald in the USSR for “someone” held in the U.S., then we can understand why he was allowed to take his wife to Dallas . Oswald was in the Soviet Union for ‘someone’ held in
 The idea of an exchange also explains why he received State Department help, even though he was a defector who had tried to renounce his citizenship and may have surrendered American secrets .
 This hypothesis handles a few inconsistencies, but it also generates problems of its own . This hypothesis is a good idea, but there are many inconsistencies .
 This would also explain how he was able to take his wife out with him . But then, once again, new problems are created .
 Going undercover in the USSR, collecting data in Minsk, and getting out alive in a swap would be risky business worthy of rewards .
 To be working the Reily Coffee Company for $1.25 an hour while receiving an undesirable discharge from the Marines would be a curious reward for valiant service .
 Oswald applied for unemployment compensation twice after he arrived back in the U.S. after he returned to the United States . Oswald applied to receive unemployment compensation three times .
 The “exchange for an ‘intelligence asset’ has problems, too, too; but no exchange at all has even more problems . No exchange for an intelligence asset has more problems than the "exchange" scenario .
 Lee Harvey Oswald effortlessly left Russia with the niece of a MVD Colonel . Oswald was able to leave Russia with a relative of a Colonel .
 A U.S. Marine, with a security clearance, defected, and possibly given U-2 secrets to the Soviets, came back to the United States without being arrested, interrogated, or debriefed . The State Department gave him a $480 advance from the State Department .
 The Soviet conspiracy theory is admittedly weak, but a communist conspiracy originating in Cuba is quite another matter . The Cuban Communist Conspiracy originates in Cuba, according to the theory .
 Source: Source says one of his clients had sensational information . Source: Washington lawyer reported sensational information to CNN . CNN.com: Source: One of his client's clients has sensational information.
 Fidel Castro, learning of the American plots against his own life, had retaliated by having President Kennedy murdered . Fidel Castro learned of the U.S. plots against him, and then killed him . President Kennedy was assassinated by the Cuban government in 1961 .
 In March 1967, President Johnson ordered an FBI inquiry into the allegations . The allegation came to the attention of President Johnson, and he ordered an investigation .
 The investigation failed to come up with hard facts or names, but President Johnson was clearly impressed . Johnson was impressed by the results .
 Fie later confided to one newsman, “I will tell you something that will rock you.” Fie confided that he would tell him something “will rock you,” he said .
 Daniel's reaction was that Castro was genuinely astonished and set back by the news . Daniel’s reaction to the news was that he was genuinely set back . Daniel says Castro was shocked by the revelation .
 Let us be skeptical for a moment and rephrase the communist conspiracy model in Cuban terms, see how the data organizes itself . Let us rephrase it in Cuban language .
 Conspiracists long considered FBI agent James Fiosty, the man who interviewed Oswald before the assassination, as a key figure in the cover-up . James Hosty’s account is published in the New York Times' new book, "James Hosty"
 Fiosty corroborates what most of the conspiracy community always suspected, namely that a systematic cover up and destruction of documents within the FBI about Oswald, Ruby, etc. etc., all are not fabrications . The documents were destroyed by the FBI .
 Fiosty raises important points about the ease with which Marina Oswald left the country . Marina Oswald is a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA in the 1960s .
 Marina supposedly learned that Lee desired to return to America shortly after their wedding . Marina learned of Lee's desire to return shortly after they married . Lee reportedly said he wanted to return home to America .
 In amazingly short order, the Soviet immigration agency, known as OVIR, approved Marina’s exit visa . The agency was part of the MVD and known to be under the control of the KGB . Marina's exit visa was approved by the agency, which was known to
 In a similar case, an American, James Mintkenbaugh, lived in the Soviet Union in the late 1950s . In the 1950s, he lived in a Soviet Union apartment .
 When he said he wanted to return to the United States, the KGB approached him . They asked if he would marry a young Soviet woman and take her back with him to America . The KGB asked him to take her to the U.S. and marry her .
 Fiosty makes a similar suggestion about Marina Oswald with the suggestion she may have been originally targeted to be a “sleeper agent’s” agent . Marina Oswald was originally targeted as a ‘sleeper’ agent .
 Oswald probably read the Dallas Times Herald article that Kennedy was virtually inviting a Cuban coup . Oswald probably had read the article that JFK was inviting a coup .
 Fiosty does not believe the Soviets or Cubans would have co-conspired with such a malcontent to carry off the assassination . He says the Soviets and Cubans are unlikely to have been involved in the plot to kill JFK .
 Fiosty’s theory is interesting except that some of his most salient quotes, especially those attributed to Calderon, seem based on unreferenced documents, apparently CIA materials Hosty has been exposed to but which are unavailable to anyone .
 Oswald's theory is that Oswald already hated JFK on Sept 23, when he left for Mexico, but the Dallas article about Kennedy inviting a Cuban coup did not appear until November 19 . One flaw is that the article about JFK inviting a coup was not published until Nov 19 .
 Hosty's suggestions do not add much to this compilation . Indeed, there is a dearth of evidence that Oswald hated JFK, and Hosty’s suggestions add little to this .
 Oswald left New Orleans for Dallas in September . He walked out on his rent when he left for Dallas, Texas . Oswald's rent was cut short when he moved to Dallas .
 It is not plausible that an assassin in search of an effective cover would call attention to himself in this way . It's not likely an assassin would have been surprised by the attention attention .
 Hosty’s text is laudable for its admissions about the cover up, but it seems to have been conditioned by all-too familiar and historic anti-communist rhetoric, which skews many of its interpretations in that direction . Hosty's text seems to be conditioned by
 Conspiracy Castro conveniently had a Western journalist present at the time that the news broke so the journalist could credibly inform the world of Castro’s surprised reaction . Conspiracy Castro had a journalist present to tell the world what happened .
 Castro also made statements to a hushed public hearing which he recorded, vehemently condemning the murder of Kennedy . Castro recorded his statements to the public hearing in which he vehemently condemned Kennedy's murder .
 John Roselli disseminated the rumor about Castro killing the President . Roselli was himself murdered shortly after it became known he was the source of the rumor .
 Castro had a relationship with Mafiosi Santos Trafficante, who had smuggled guns to him during his fight against Batista . Add to this scenario that Castro had an affair with Trafficante .
 Trafficante's prison accommodations were plush, and he was allowed to leave Cuba with relative ease . Trafficante was imprisoned by Castro, but was able to leave the country with ease . Even though Castro had Trafficante imprisoned, his prison accommodations are plush .
 Castro was the object of assassination and poisoning attempts and may have beheved Kennedy could not be trusted to honor his commitments to Khrushchev . Kennedy may not have been trusted by Castro .
 The Mafia wanted nothing more than to see Kennedy and his brother Bobby put out of commission . In his anger, he found an unexpected ally in the Mafia, which wanted to see the Kennedy brothers out .
 In Efimov’s view, Castro began a sinister relationship with the Mafia through Trafficante . Trafficante was a key figure in the Mafia . Castro's relationship with Trafficante led to his assassination .
 In 1982, four Cuban officials were indicted on drug smuggling charges; one of them was a Cuban admiral . One of the officials indicted was an admiral, who was also a Cuban official .
 Castro was not above being involved in the U.S. drug trade, and his ties to the drug cartels also suggest that Cuba maintained significant Mafia connections .
 It is Efimov’s conjecture that Castro, through agents Pino Machado and Moleon Cassera, plotted the assassination of Kennedy and may have used the Trafficante connection to accomplish it .
 The Mafia never was very serious in its so-called association with the CIA in trying to hit Castro Castro . One piece of evidence from the Mafia that supports this hypothesis is that the Mafia was never very serious .
 Tie simply agreed to go to jail for them allowing them to think that fellows risked their lives infiltrating Cuba, that their boats are sewn through by bullets and all such fucking shit . Tie just agreed to do it for them. Tie simply .
 Castro's man in Dealey Plaza was Miguel Cassas Saez, a friend of Castro’s brother Raul . Efimov relates another alarming tale, namely that on the day of the assassination, Saez was Saez's friend .
 An Air Cubana plane out of Mexico City was delayed in departure for Havana for five hours until Saez allegedly arrived and boarded . Saez is accused of causing the plane to be delayed for more than five hours before it was boarded .
 He sat in the pilot’s cabin for the entire flight to Havana on the day of the iqt. assassination . He sat there in the cockpit for the whole flight .
 John Roselli was killed not by Castro’s agents, but by the Mafia, says Efimov . Roselli's death may have been the result of a Mafia assassination .
 Suppose that Roselli, through his attorney, was sincere in his attempt to “leak’t information that Oswald worked for Castro . Roselli's attorney says he was sincere .
 That is the conventional conspiracist interpretation of Roselli’s behavior, he says . Roselli's behavior was not conspiracist, but it was a mistake, he adds .
 Maybe what he leaked through his attorney was true, and that Castro was indeed behind the hit . Maybe it's true, maybe Castro was behind it, and maybe he leaked it .
 If Trafficante hit Kennedy not only for his own reasons, but for Castro as well , then killing Roselli to keep him quiet about the Cuban-Mafia plot could be a logical Mafia maneuver .
 Castro may have had a double-agent, Rolando Cubella, informing him that the CIA was trying to kill him . Cubella may have told Castro that he was being targeted by the CIA .
 Cubella met with his CIA contact, Desmond Fitzgerald, in Paris on November 22, 1963, the very day Kennedy was assassinated . Cubella was originally a CIA hit man and met with Fitzgerald on that day .
 Cubella was tapped by the CIA to assassinate Castro Castro . Cubella accepted the assignment and accepted it . She was tapped to kill Castro .
 Cubella made sure that Robert Kennedy knew of the arrangement to kill Castro . Before meeting with Fitzgerald, Cubella tried to make sure that Kennedy knew .
 If Cubella needed to know that Bobby had approved of the hit against Castro, Cubella was sending this information back to Castro . It's plausible that Castro 293 could have approved the hit, and Cubella sent it back to him .
 This getaway plane's behavior is partially corroborated in Hosty’s Assignment Oswald, ibid. Hosty. Oswald . Hosty's assignment Oswald is partially .
 Conspiracy was seeking ‘confirmation’ that indeed Kennedy, not just the CIA, was behind the attempts on his life . Conspiracy sought "confirmation" of Kennedy's assassination that CIA was behind attempts on him .
 One of the strongest elements of this theory is motive . The motive for the suspect's killing is motive, according to investigators .
 Cubella's "contract" was proof to Castro that nothing would stop the Kennedy brothers from trying to kill him . Cubella’s “contract” was proof of the threat, Castro said .
 If one can suppose a Castro-Mafia ‘shared desire’ to eliminate Kennedy, one can also see that the Mafia had the means to carry this off more easily and could operate more effectively on American soil than Castro .
 Oswald makes no sense here . If we conjectured that Castro with the U.S. Mafia conspired to hit Kennedy, Oswald would make no sense . Oswald's weak point is that he may have been involved in the assassination .
 Oswald may have been a sharpshooter, but the KGB or the Cubans would have used someone with more experience, and would have equipped him with far better shooting gear . Oswald's shooting gear would have been far better equipped than Oswald's .
 Johnson thought Castro was to blame for JFK’s death, but that any retaliatory strike would invite a nuclear confrontation with the Soviets . The Johnson White House Tapes, 196T64, by Michael Beschloss, reveals that Johnson believed Castro was responsible for JFK's death .
 The man charged with the crime looks too much like a Castro sympathizer who was on television passing out leaflets in support of Castro back in New Orleans . There is no cover, no subterfuge; the man charged has been charged with Castro sympathizing .
 Oswald was in no way supposed to be a patsy for the crime . So either Castro was not involved or, if he was, then Oswald was a paty . Oswald was not supposed to have been involved in the assassination .
 Either we reject the Cuban origination of this plot or our next best assumption would be that Oswald, one of the triggers, was just not supposed to be caught .
 Perhaps he was supposed to be on the plane that left Dallas, headed to Mexico City, and then went on to Cuba, the same one that carried his alleged co-hit man, Miguel Saez, to Havana . The plane that took Saez to Havana was the same plane that
 If Oswald was an actual assassin, then this model still makes some sense . Oswald was a real assassin, according to the FBI .
 The Texas theater was a reconnoiter point and part of the getaway plan . Officer Tippit foiled the plan by foiling a getaway from the Texas theater .
 The only way out of this dilemma is that we suppose that Castro was in league with the Mafia . Without a Mafia source, it is unlikely Castro would have such early information on the travel itinerary to Dallas .
 Most of the evidence developed in Chapter 3, pointing to a conspiracy, would be hard to explain if one assumed the origin of the conspiracy was in Havana . The evidence would be difficult to explain to one assume the origin was in Cuba .
 An association between the two might be logical in the 1980s, but back in 1963, Castro and the Mafia were not on the friendliest of terms . Back in the 1960s, cocaine cartels were operating from Columbia, Panama, and throughout the Caribbean .
 Cubans and Mafiosi make inimical bedfellows, despite their shared desire to see the Kennedys eliminated . Cubans want to see their country's leaders eliminated .
 Cuban army and navy units had been placed on alert on the evening of 296 . Cuban army, navy and army units were on alert at the time of 296.
 Oswald was on his way to meet his fellow-trigger at the Texas Theater, but officer Tippit got in the way . According to Martino, Oswald was shot in the head by a police officer . Oswald was killed in the July 4, 1945 .
 When Oswald was arrested, the other “trigger” was in the theater and escaped . Oswald escaped from Oswald's arrest and escaped from the scene . Oswald was the only person to escape Oswald's capture .
 Oswald was to meet a CIA anti-Castro Cuban, not an agent of Castro, says Martino . Martino says the man Oswald was going to meet was a CIA agent, not a member of Castro .
 Castro appeared “frightened, if not terrified,” after the assassination, according to the report . Castro felt it could trigger a United States invasion of the island, the report says .
 There is only circumstantial evidence that Castro was the mastermind of the plot, but it is inconsistent with the view that he was involved in the plot .
 There are many intriguing aspects to a Cuban plot and particularly a Cuban-Mafia plot, but it is still very hypothetical and sketchy to warrant much cred' ibility .
 The theories presented in this chapter generate a panoply of potential conspirators, co-conspirators, disinformation and cover-up figures, plus a horde of assassins . The theories present a variety of possible conspirators .
 We have treated these theories as relatively separate and discrete, but there is room to develop synergies . There is room for room for synergies to develop, say experts .
 Giancana, Roselli, Trafficante, and Trafficante were enlisted by the CIA to assassinate Castro . The CIA enlisted the trio of men to kill Castro .
 Mooney stood up from his chair, cigar in hand, and marched across the room . Mooney said, "I'm not going to let it slide down, I'm going to get my hands on it"
 There was a deadly silence in the room as Mooney [Sam Giancana] stalked back to the comfort of his chair . There was the deadly silence .
 He finally knew for certain what he’d secretly feared all along; his brother had been right . The government and the Outfit were really two sides of the same coin .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, like Ruby, had ties to both the CIA and the Outfit . Oswald had been connected to the New Orleans Mob from the time he was born . His uncle was a Marcello lieutenant who had exerted a powerful influence .
 Oswald had formed a powerful alliance with the U.S. intelligence community early in life, Mooney says . Mooney said he and Marcello frequently used to fly drugs and guns out of Central America .
 Oswald attended a series of intensive intelligence training sessions run by the Office of Naval Intelligence in a top secret Japanese spy base . Oswald attended the sessions during the late fifties, when serving in the Marines .
 Mooney said both Richard NLxon and Lyndon Johnson knew about the whole damned thing . Mooney also said both Nixon and LBJ knew about it .
 The CIA and the Mafia may have played simultaneous and mutually advantageous roles . Giancana suggests that the CIA and Mafia played a mutually advantageous role together .
 Of course, one wonders what the motive might have been for a combined CIAMafia plot against Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1993 .
 The Mob, at least in the person of Sam Giancana, felt double-crossed by the Kennedys . "The Mob" was the Mob's biggest hit in the 1960s .
 CIA motives have never been well established other than resentment over the moves Kennedy made to dismantle the organization after the Bay of Pigs fiasco . However, CIA motives for the CIA are never established .
 Right-wing former CIA officials were embittered by Kennedy’s action with Khrushchev and his failure to proceed properly during the Bay of Pigs invasion . A few right-wing ex-CIA officials have expressed their displeasure with Kennedy's actions .
 Allen Dulles, General Cabell, and Richard Bissell were three CIA figures fired by Kennedy over the Bay of Pigs . The CIA figures were fired over the attack on the Pigs .
 William Harvey, the rogue CIA operative who became cozy with organized crime, was 298 . Harvey was 298 years old when he became an associate of organized crime in New York City .
 Cuban television reports that “the same group of mobsters and right-wingers that tried repeatedly to kill Fidel Castro” was behind the assassination of President Kennedy . Also, Cuban television reported that ‘mobsters’ and ‘right-wing’ were behind the
 Three American mobsters and two anti-Castro Cubans were identified as responsible . Three Americans and two Cubans killed in the attack .
 Conspiracy demoted and transferred for unauthorized covert operations against Cuba against Cuba . Controversy demoted members of conspiracy demoted .
 Organized crime and embittered elements of the CIA could have joined white and black hands in this historic unfolding of events . Perhaps, when we view this list of disgruntled, demoted, or demoralized CIA figures, we can construe a motive, and to that extent there is
 "On close inspection, this book is simply far too dramatic, if not fictionalized, to merit serious, scholarly attention," says author. "It's simply far more dramatic than fiction," he says .
 There is a scene, for example, of Morrow picking up $250,000 in cash from a Bimini bank, being followed by two tails . Morrow picks up a stray motorcycle with the key left in the ignition, and fleeing to the airport where a waiting plane takes him off
 Morrow arrives in Puerto Rico at the lavish home of a United States Congressman and is greeted by a sultry house guest . Later meets Francoise, who later meets him for a rendezvous in Miami — where she is murdered .
 Morrow makes a daring flight with David Ferrie deep into Cuba, measures wave emanations from a hard Soviet missile silo, and then steals off to Florida from a deserted airstrip . Morrow makes the daring flight .
 Morrow is an expert scientist, inventor of the VCR and accomplished counterfeiter . Ferrie is wounded and faints, yet Morrow takes the controls from Ferrie and finishes the mission . Morrow is also a pilot and a counterfeiter.
 The James Bond-like elements of this text suggest that much of it was written with a Holly wood screenplay in mind .
 Oswald is treated as a government plant during his stay in Minsk . He is alleged to have been working for the United States all the time . Oswald is believed to have worked for the U.S. during his time in the Soviet Union .
 He includes a considerable amount of ostensibly factual material . On the other hand, he includes a significant amount of material that is not factual .
 Some of the essential points of his work in linking CIA and Mafia forces to the Kennedy assassination are summarized below .
 They have not been included in the body of this text because they are simply too suspect . They have been removed from the main body of the text .
 The James Bond-like elements of this text suggest that much of it was written with a Holly187 Conspiracy in Camelot wood screenplay in mind .
 If true, Cabell’s behavior is treasonous since Kennedy issued orders specifically discontinuing all counterfeiting operations against Cuba . Cabell's actions are treasonous . Kennedy issued a specific order to stop counterfeiting .
 Barry Goldwater is alleged to have known about the counterfeiting operation . Goldwater was accused of knowing about the operation . He is accused of being involved in the operation in the 1970s .
 Helms informed neither the Attorney General, the head of the CIA, nor the President of his actions . Helms told neither the attorney general nor the CIA head that he had been informed .
 Thomas Luchese, a Mafia don, played a role in the Mafia-CIA plot against Kennedy . He played a key role in a plot to get Kennedy to the White House .
 He ordered Morrow to purchase four 7.35 surplus Mannlicher-Carcano rifles intended for use in the JFK hit . Morrow ordered the purchase of the rifles . The rifles were intended to be used during the JFK assassination .
 Ferrie's close associate Eladio del Valle was murdered in Miami on the same day that Ferrie died . His close associate is much more fully developed in this text than in most others .
 William Harvey became the coordinator for CIA plans for assassinating Fidel Castro . According to Morrow, Harvey was also the coordinator of CIA plans to kill Castro .
 Clay Shaw is alleged to have recruited other hit men from the Minutemen . Clay Shaw allegedly recruited other members of the hit squad . Shaw is accused of recruiting more hit men for his hit men .
 Jose Aleman, an FBI informant, was told by Trafficante of the impending hit . Trafficante told Aleman that Trafficante was planning to kill him . Aleman was an informant for the FBI .
 Conspiracy mation went to Aleman’s FBI contacts, George Davis, and Paul Scranton . Hoover learned of the plot on November 4, 1963, and Hoover later learned of it .
 The topic of discussion was what would happen if Kennedy were assassinated . The topic was discussed at Kennedy's memorial service in Washington .
 The bullet was handed over to FBI special agents Francis X O’Neill and James W Sibert . The bullet has been found at the scene of an apparent suicide .
 Morrow says O’Neill and Sibert his escorts took the shell, signed a receipt for it, and gave it to Humes . Morrow says that “O'Neill and . Sibert’s escorts signed a . receipt for Humes. It was not
 She married Jack Valenti, now the president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences . She married Lyndon’s sidekick, now Oscar-winning director Lyndon's wife .
 Morrow suggests that the reason Kennedy was killed was to inspire the U.S. government to attack Cuba . Morrow also suggests that Kennedy's death inspired the American government to go on attack Cuba. Morrow: The reason for Kennedy's killing is that he was killed is to inspire a U.
 Oswald was set up as a pro-Castro figure; the thought was that he might lead to a declaration of war against Cuba . Oswald was also set up in Cuba as a Marxist figure .
 The Mafia, CIA, and anti-Castro Cubans were very interested in that outcome . The Mafia and CIA were also interested in the outcome of the outcome .
 No text has ever addressed how her murder might have been related to the assassination . Morrow says that her former husband was involved in her murder .
 Meyer allegedly became friendly with Bobby Kennedy after the assassination and wanted to pass on information to him . Meyer allegedly wanted to share information with Kennedy after his death . Meyer was a friend of Bobby Kennedy, who died in 1963 .
 None of the tables have been included in the tables in the present text, but might be included in future, pending verification . None of these tables has been included .
 Harold Eugene Orr, president of Amarillo Text company, was found dead of carbon monoxide poisoning . Orr had played a key role in Estes’ finance frauds .
 Howard Pratt, the Chicago office manager of one of Estes’ fertilizer suppliers, was similarly found dead of carbon monoxide poisoning . Pratt and Pratt were found dead in the same manner .
 O’Hare killed Quesada and Gilberto Rodriguez Hernandez because they were suspected of forwarding information to the Kennedy Administration regarding the counterfeiting operation .
 None of these deaths have been listed in the tables presented in this text . The deaths of these people have not been listed on the tables .
 Further research verifying these murders might eventually lead to their inclusion . Further research may lead to the inclusion of these murders .
 Conspiracy research literature is heavily laden with defamation, innuendo, and guilt by association, and that factual, hard evidence is lacking to the extreme, says author .
 Nikita Khrushchev arranged through Trafficante via Marcello for Castro; hit man Miguel Cassas Saez Castro Pino Machado/ Moleon Cassera Lee Harvey Oswald, perhaps aided by Valerie Kostikov . Fired or transferred by Kennedy after Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Two assassins not listed above come from a source deemed too fantastic and unreliable for inclusion . Two assassins were deemed too unreliable and unreliable to include .
 The assassins were alleged to be part of a CIA conspiracy, French mercenary, John Michael M ertzand Jean Soutre . The assassins are alleged to have been part of the CIA conspiracy .
 An intricate controversy emerges from some of the substance of this text when compared to the work of Anthony Summers . Conspiracy Appendix Appendix .
 In September, 1963, an African diplomat contacted Attwood and informed him that Castro wanted to talk to Kennedy . Attwood says he was told by the African diplomat that he was invited by Castro to Kennedy to meet him .
 Kennedy instructed Attwood to approach these discussions with great respect for secrecy . Kennedy told Attwood not to appear to be soft on Castro or seem to be seeking a rapprochement with him .
 Attwood was in contact with the Cubans as late as November 19; only RFK and the President, along with very few others, were aware of these discussions . Attwood and RFK were in contact late November 19, but were not aware of this .
 The meetings were coordinated through the help of ABC correspondent, Lisa Howard .
 While these steps were being taken, the CIA was involved in another, quite opposite, set of actions . The CIA has been involved in the CIA's actions in the past .
 CIA sought to enlist Cubella in an effort to kill Castro in September 1963 . CIA contacted Cubella and sought him to help kill Castro . Cubella was a key CIA operative in Cuba .
 Efimov argues that Cubella was a double agent and was informing Castro of these machinations against him . Cubella is accused of telling Castro Castro of his machinations .
 Anthony Summers, who interviewed Cubella, disagrees and says he never informed Castro of his CIA connections . Summers says Cubella never told Castro about his connections to the CIA . Summers: Cubella was never told of his connections with CIA .
 RFK knew nothing of these events and Desmond Fitzgerald was a CIA official . RFK would not have known about the events .
 He met with Cubella in Paris on November 22,1963 and gave him a poison pen with which to assassinate Castro .
 Cubella says CIA pen was returned and that he did not want to personally assassinate Castro . Cubella: "I didn't want to assassinate Castro. I wanted to kill him"
 Others argue the pen was requested by Cubella and that it contained a very lethal poison . Others argue that Cubella requested the pen be used to write the poison .
 Cubella was never charged with any crimes prior to 1964 . Ultimately, Castro arrested Cubella, but never charged him with any crime prior to that date .
 From a psychological perspective, it is of interest to note the paradox of these events . The paradox is that these events are of interest from a psychological standpoint, says author .
 We know for certain that Castro was aware of Attwood’s efforts, but we do not know if Castro knew of the CIA-Cubella plot to kill him at this time . Attwood was a member of the Communist Party in Cuba .
 For a discussion of this interesting twist to the whole conspiracy matter, the reader is directed to Summers, ibid., pp 344, 395,401-402 and Efimov, Igor, 258. For a further discussion of the matter, please visit Summers' blog .
 If true, then the Kennedy brothers were playing both ends against the middle, negotiating a peace through Mr Attwood and initiating an assassination plot against Castro all within a few days of each other and similarly within days of Kennedy's assassination .
 Rusk seems to imply that the Kennedy brothers knew of both the coup and the peace effort and were behind both . Rusk suggests that the brothers may have been involved in both .
 Rusk: "It was just an either/or situation" Rusk says it was “the height of duplicity” Rusk said .
 Omar Khayam is the author of a new book, "Arabic Spring Awakening" He has been in talks with the U.S. government to discuss his work on the book . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a London-based publisher, and was published by
 Lee Harvey Oswald may have shot President Kennedy, but he may not have shot him . Oswald may never have shot the president, but may have killed JFK . Oswald shot JFK in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 . Oswald is believed to have been involved in the shooting .
 Full facts of the Kennedy assassination have not become known . Some mysterious set of events has lurked behind the scenes .
 A conspiracy from some quarter is a very sound and reasonable hypothesis, says CNN.com's John Sutter . A conspiracy is a good idea, he says .
 Any other scenario is unlikely, problematic, and contrary to the best evidence on the subject, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The most likely conspiracies involve the Mafia or the CIA and anti-Castro Cubans, the author says . The Mafia or CIA are most likely to be involved in the conspiracy, he says .
 A plot originating with President Johnson, the Soviets, or a conspiracy born in Havana are plausible but have significantly more difficulties to overcome to be more credible . A plot originated with the Soviets is plausible but has significantly more difficulty to overcome than any other conspiracy .
 Interpreting The Facts: "Speculation must take over. Once the homework is done, speculation will take over"
 Having added up what can be known, the next step is to draw out implications and associations, engaging in creative thinking .
 Let us try to look at the material without being limited by any inherited, vested interest of one conspiracy “school” or another . Let's not be limited to any inherited vested interest, or another. Let's try not to be limited by the vested interest .
 By taking a closer look at the cover-up, we ought to be able to get closer to the source of the conspiracy . By looking into the cover up, we should be looking for the truth .
 The media has been a leading source of cover-up and disinformation, but it is also a source of genuine, valid, and compelling information . The media is an important part of the world's history, writes Andrew Hammond .
 After alf, many mainstream sources as well as underground literature on the Kennedy assassination have published very incisive pieces . Mainstream sources and underground literature have also published very interesting pieces .
 This media sample is probably an artifact of information dissemination and not to be weighed too heavily . Thus, this media sample was probably a media sample .
 The Mafia does not regularly use publicists and has limited disinformation capabilities . Another disclaimer is that the Mafia has limited publicist publicists .
 "Its modus operandi is to enforce silence through intimidation and murder," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Mafia-related murders, therefore, have been included as examples of cover-up even though they were not originalfy listed in the table in Chapter 3 . Mafia-themed murders have also been included in Chapter 4 .
 If the intent is to enforce silence, then such murders ought to be tabulated . If such murders are intended to silence, such murders should be recorded, he says .
 Categorizing the leading sources of deception leads us back to the FBI, the CIA and the Mob, again, again . Each is about equal to the others, according to the author .
 If there is a conspiracy of silence, then these three are the major players, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 We already know that the FBI, the CIA and the Mob have an interest in keeping the truth about many events buried . The Mob has a history of trying to keep the truth from being revealed .
 The conspiracy to cover up the truth about this event originated from inside the U.S. The conspiracy was created by inside the United States, the author says .
 Paradox “Cover-up” includes murdering people to prevent them from talking . Paradox ‘Cover-ups’ include murder to prevent people from talking. Paradox "cover-up" includes murder .
 Included in the figure are the Mafia-related murders of Sam Giancana, John Roselli, Carlos Prio, Jimmy Hoffa, Charles Nicoletti, Leo Moceri, Richard Cain, and Salvatore Granello .
 Circumstances make two of the “suicides” questionable and the heart attack as well . The heart attack is also questionable .
 All of the murders had some connecting point with the Kennedy assassination . The murders were connected to the JFK assassination .
 The names of all the assassins in some order might be placed in an order order . Dealey Plaza is the site of the most recent events in the U.S. history .
 Joseph Milteer, the ultra right-wing leader of numerous racist groups, was on the phone to FBI informant William Somersett . He was reported to be knowledgeable of the upcoming assassination .
 Some say he was photographed in Dealey Plaza among the spectators; others dispute that . Others dispute that he was there .
 Howard Hunt, Frank Sturgis, and Daniel Carswell are alleged by Weberman and Canfield to have been the tramps arrested in the railroad yards . Marita Lorenz implicated them, but both denied being there .
 Possible Assassins in Dealey Plaza, November 22, 1963 a Lee Harvey Oswald . Joseph Milteer Eugene Brading Morgan Brown Howard Hunt Howard Hunt Frank Sturgis Daniel Carswell Lucien Sarti .
 Eugene Hale Brading did not come out until 1969 when a television producer discovered his true identity . His true identity was discovered when a TV producer discovered it in 1969 .
 Brading stayed with his associate Morgan H Brown at the Cabana Hotel in Dallas . Brading's associate Morgan Brown stayed with him .
 Brading was also associated with the Mob and Marcello through connections with Nofio Pecora and James Dolan . Brading's connections to the Mob included connections with Dolan, Pecor, PECora and Dolan.
 James Powell was found in the Dal-Tex along with Eugene Hale Brading building after it was sealed off following the assassination . Powell has not been accused, in existing literature on the assassination, but he was found . He was not accused of any wrongdoing, but his body was found at
 He was an army intelligence officer, and what he was doing there has never been fully explained . He was a member of the British Army's intelligence staff .
 Harry Wetherford was a Dallas police officer on top of the Dallas County jail during the motorcade . He was one of the first officers to stand on the top of Dallas County Jail .
 Decker had a crackshot rifleman — Harry Wetherford — on top of the Dallas County Jail Building during the motorcade . It was close by Oswald's alleged sniper’s nest, close by the alleged sniper's nest .
 A young researcher tried to talk to Wetherford once and asked if he had shot at Kennedy . The young researcher asked him if he'd shot Kennedy .
 J Marita Lorenz said Bosch and Diaz Lanz accompanied Frank Sturgis to Dealey Plaza, plus two Cuban brothers who she could not identify . Lorenz: Two Cuban brothers also accompanied Sturgs to the plaza .
 All were part of Operation 40, a secret anti-Castro guerrilla group formed by the CIA in 1960, an assassination squad . Operation 40 was part of the CIA's covert operation to kill Fidel Castro .
 The two Cuban brothers Marita Lorenz could not identify might be linked to Sturgis, Pedro Diaz Lanz and Eduardo . The two brothers may have been linked to each other, she said .
 Others say Rorke was deceased by this time and could not possibly have been in this entourage . Others say he was not in the entourage at the time of the incident .
 Desmond Fitzgerald, a CIA employee, was listed in a conspiracy-based assassination newsletter as the grassy knoll gunman . Fitzgerald used a directionally silenced rifle designed by Mitch WerBell .
 The same periodical, citing testimony by Billy Sol Estes, implicates Malcolm Wallace, a LBJ crony, as the assassin . Wallace was LBJ's crony .
 He confessed to the killing of John Kennedy and a Texas judge . He later retracted it, saying he was on cocaine . He said he was not guilty of the killings .
 Harrelson’s confession about JFK was dismissed as the ramblings of a maniac . Yet his confession involving the judge led to a successful prosecution; and he is currently serving time for that murder . He confessed to the murder of JFK JFK .
 Authors Craig and Rogers say that CIA contract killer Charles Frederick Rogers and Harrelson were the two sharpshooters at the grassy knoll who assassinated Kennedy .
 Two tramps were arrested and then released; the other was Chauncey Holt, who did not take an active part in the assassination but confessed his involvement . They were two of the three tramps arrested, then released .
 In 1994, private investigator Joe West was alerted by an ‘anonymous FBI source’ to a man serving a 50-year prison sentence in Joliet State Penitentiary .
 The man finally consented to an interview, after the death of investigator West . The man was finally interviewed after his death of West .
 A full and uncensored version of this video 7 was distributed in 1996, based on a lengthy interview held in March of 1994 . The full interview was released in 1996 .
 The publishers of the video remain elusive and are listed as MPI Home Video and UTL Productions . The video was released in 2007 .
 He alleges that he was the loyal assistant, bodyguard and driver of Chuckie Nicoletti, Sam Giancana’s primary hit man . Nicoletti is accused of being the primary hitman for Sam . He says he was a loyal assistant bodyguard, driver and bodyguard
 He met Lee Harvey Oswald and said Oswald was not likely aware of any plot against the President . Oswald was likely not aware of a plot against President Obama, he said .
 Oswald did not have a driver’s license, but he had driven military vehicles and could drive a car, he says . Oswald also had a military vehicle and was able to drive military vehicles, he adds .
 West says he was a “back up” hit man who was to shoot Kennedy if the shots which came from behind did not succeed in killing him . West says that he was to be a ‘back-up’ hit man for Kennedy .
 The major CIA person who liaisoned with the Mafia for this hit was David Attlee Phillips . Phillips was a CIA liaison between the Mafia and the CIA . Phillips' role in the Mafia hit was to liaise with the CIA and the Mafia, Phillips says . Phillips is a former CIA
 He saw JFK had been hit, but that the headshot had not been accomplished . JFK was hit by a bullet, but not a headshot, he said .
 He believes he and Nicoletti hit JFK from the front almost simultaneously . He believes that Nicoletti's death came from the back of the plane .
 He knows that David Ferrie was murdered but also refuses to identify his killer . Ferrie's killer is still refusing to identify the killer .
 His lack of intelligence and erudition makes his story surprisingly credible, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He did not mention or appear to implicate Roscoe White, Charles Frederick Rogers, Loran Hall, Howard Hunt, Daniel Carswell or other notable figures .
 He did implicate deceased Mafiosi Giancana, Roselli and Nicoletti, however, however . He also implicates deceased MAFiosi Giorcana and Roselli .
 Cuban exile Frank Sturgis was also present at Dealey Plaza, he said . Furthermore, he added that Cuban ex-Cuban exile Frank Sturgis was also present .
 There are no murder weapons associated with any of these individuals, no fingerprints or empty cartridge casings, 8 no physical evidence of any stature, no witnesses observing their shooting . No witnesses observed their shooting. No murder weapons .
 Conspiracy theories simply have not come up with physical evidence needed for any prosecutions or convictions . Apart from some sworn testimony, conspiracy theories have not been found with any evidence .
 On the one hand, it is clear that some kind of conspiracy is an extremely likely possibility; on the other, there is little evidence to indict or convict anyone for the century’s greatest crime . On the other hand, some of the world's greatest crime is a conspiracy,
 This drama is deeply frustrating, almost as if it unfolded according to a plan that inherently generates the mystery that foils all attempts to solve it . This drama unfolded in such a way that it unfolds according to the plan, almost like a plan, it unfolds .
 Eugene Hale Brading was one of the 26 suspects in Dealey Plaza that day . Among the 26 suspect individuals, Brading might be the only one to identify an alternate assassin .
 Jim Moore, who spent over 10 years going over Dealey Plaza, holds that the first bullet fired actually missed . Moore: "The first bullet actually missed"
 It hit the curb on Elm Street and ricocheted, splattering a spectator, James Tague, with concrete . It hit Elm Street, ricocheting off the curb, splattering a spectator with concrete. Tague was struck by the bullet .
 Moore points out that there were five witnesses to Tague’s injuries . Tague was injured and reported the matter to the police . Moore says Tague reported the incident to police .
 Most people thought the first shot hit Kennedy in the throat, but Moore says it missed and hit Tague . Moore: "The first shot missed"
 President’s head and shoulders hit the curbstone back to a position within a circle with an eighteen-inch diameter around him . The President was hit by a curbstone at the time of the incident .
 If we project that line back to some firing point, we have placed that gunman in a window on the second floor of the DalTex Building, behind the President’s car . The gunman is believed to be in a second floor window of the building .
 Fletcher Prouty does not make the next logical deduction . It is unfortunate that Fletcher prouty doesn't make the most logical deduction, he says . Fletcher's decision is unfortunate, he said .
 Some of the shots may have come from the DabTex building where Brading was arrested, according to the HSCA . The scientific acoustic evidence also shows that some of the gunshots may have been fired from the building .
 Shieb was the person called by Barney Baker of the Teamsters shortly after the assassination . He was called by the teamsters after the shooting .
 Paradox convict only recently released from prison; Jack Ruby had called him a few weeks before the assassination . Paradox convict was recently released and had called Jack Ruby several weeks earlier .
 Brading is tied in with the Teamsters, the Mob, and the right-wing Minutemen . Brading has a third-party association with Jack Ruby .
 Brading stayed at the Cabana Hotel in Dallas the night before the assassination . He stayed in the hotel the night prior to the shooting .
 Ralph Meyers was an Army Intelligence agent with a crypto-clearance who had been stationed at a top-secret base in Turkey . He was staying in that hotel — an Army intelligence agent . Meyers had been staying in the hotel when he died .
 Another military intelligence figure appears with Brading as well —James Powell — since both were caught in the Dal-Tex building after it had been sealed . Brading and Powell are seen together in a photo .
 Brading can be linked with Ruby, the right-wing Minutemen, and the Mob, and via two circumstantial linkages, with military intelligence . Brading has been linked to Ruby and the right wing of the Mob . He has also been linked with the Minut
 James Tague had stopped his car at the location indicated on the map and stood on the south curb of Main Street . Tague stood on Main Street at the time .
 A piece of cement from the curb flew up and injured Tague, who reported the incident . Tague was injured when a piece of the cement flew from a curb .
 He was hit after the first shot, by his recollection, but before the last shot . He said he was hit before the end of the shot .
 It is 22 feet over the President’s head and as much as 33 feet off to the right to the left . It's 22 feet .
 Eugene Hale Brading, an ex convict, was arrested and then let go . Brading was arrested in Tague on the second floor of Dal-Tex building where he was arrested .
 TV investigative reporter Daniel Schorr put an “Agent X’’ on CBS in silhouette . Schorr also put an "Agent X'’s’ in silhouette.
 He said he fought in the mountains of Cuba with Frank Sturgis and Loran Hall . He said they fought in Cuba in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Hall was in Dallas on November 22 and was part of the assassination squad directed by Eugene Hale Brading, he says . Hall was killed in Dallas, Texas, in November 22 .
 So Brading has been linked with anti-Castro Cubans, via Schorr’s anonymous informant . Brading is linked to anti-Cuban Cubans in Cuba .
 Hunt’s son, Nelson Bunker Hunt, partially paid for a full page black-bordered advertisement in the Dallas Morning News attacking the President as a pro-communist traitor . Hunt's son, also paid for the ad, attacked the President in the same way .
 David Ferrie and Frank Sturgis connect with anti-Castro Cubans through their experiences . Hunt, Earl Shieb and the Minutemen, yet manages to find the time to connect to Cubans .
 The result of our inquiry is that we have a pastiche of associations and innuendo, and little else else . We have been asked to make a list of associations with the Queen of England .
 Brading was a charter member of the La Costa Club, located twenty miles south of San Clemente, California .
 Meyer Lansky’s front man, Moe Dalitz, is owned by the Teamsters . The teamsters are the front man of the show . The show is based in New York City .
 La Costa was frequented by many organized crime figures as well as Nixon’s close friend Murray Chotiner . La Costa is known for his connections to organized crime .
 Haldeman met to get their stories about the Watergate cover-up synchronized . The two men met in Washington, D.C. to discuss their stories . They met in order to get the stories synchronized .
 Hunt was a very close personal friend of LBJ’s and a major supporter of his bid for the Presidency . Hunt was also a strong supporter of the LBJ's bid to become the President .
 We have incredible associations, phenomenal opportunities for guilt by association, but no proof of anything . We have no evidence of anything. We are guilty of anything, but there is no proof, no evidence, no proof .
 The Kennedy assassination is certainly a paradox, but it is also like a fractal image, in which each portion of any detail of the figure seems to contain a view of the whole figure . The assassination is like fractal images in which every detail of a figure is seen as a view
 Instead of looking at Dealey Plaza, let us focus on metropolitan Dallas as a whole . Instead of focusing on the Plaza, focus should be looking at metropolitan Dallas . The city is a city of Dallas .
 It took some time before all of these names were properly identified in the literature, but that they were all present on the eve of the assassination now seems well established .
 Hunt is the Big Man in Texas, the richest and the stingiest, the most powerful and the most solitary of the oilmen . Hunt is known as the "Big Man" and "The Giant" Hunt .
 One curiously suspicious quote came from this event and is often touted in conspiracy circles . The quote is often cited as a reason for conspiracy theories .
 Madeline Brown, LBJ’s mistress, said he was at the party with Nixon, Hoover, Hunt and Murchison . LBJ was LBJ's mistress . He was also a member of the Cabinet .
 As with so many facts and quotes in this drama, one must be critical of the veracity of each piece of the assassination puzzle . One must also question the authenticity of the quotes and facts .
 More recent conspiracy literate also implicates LBJ-appointed Warren commission member, John J McCloy, as also present at that party . McCloy was also a member of the Warren commission .
 Paradox Hunt made much of his fortune from the oil depletion allowance, and Kennedy had threatened to remove it .
 Kennedy threatened to retract the depletion allowance, the rightwing-John Birch hate machine was cranked up against him . Kennedy was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives in 1964 .
 Conspiracy authors have implicated Hunt, either directly or through innuendo . Hunt has been accused of murder in the past . Hunt is the subject of numerous conspiracy theories .
 Hunt watched John Kennedy ride towards Dealey Plaza, where fate awaited him at 12:30 . Hunt watched the Kennedy ride on the way to Dealey plaza . Hunt died in the line of duty for the first time .
 Hunt left the center of Dallas without even stopping by his house . Hunt was escorted by six men in two cars, escorted by 6 men in 2 cars . Hunt left without stopping by any of his home .
 At that very moment, General Walker was in a plane between New Orleans and Shreveport, Louisiana . General Walker is in Louisiana at the time .
 Mr Hunt joined Mr Hunt in one of his secret hideaways across the Mexican border . He joined him in a Mexican hideaway across the border .
 Hunt, Walker and their party returned to Dallas on Christmas Day . Hunt and Walker were in Dallas at the time of the alleged shooting .
 If Hunt were involved in the assassination, it would seem his behavior would have been far more discrete than it was . Hunt's behavior was far more discreet than it should have been, according to the report .
 Madeline Brown, a former mistress of Johnson, was a former lover of the former president . She was a friend of Johnson's mistress . Brown's biography, "Madeline Brown" was published in 1993 .
 As the author of this text, I have attempted to base all conjecture and speculation on evidence gleaned from one published source or another . The author has tried to base his speculation on all available evidence .
 Hunt was reported to be the wealthiest American in 1966 . Hunt was associated with sponsorship of extreme right-wing causes . Hunt said that Kennedy should be shot . Hunt is reported to have been the richest American in the country .
 It has always been a speculation that one of the shots fired at JFK came from the DalTex building . It is believed that the shots were fired from the building .
 George Butler, a Dallas police officer with some responsibility for Oswald’s transfer, was also once once once head of security for Hunt . Butler was also a Dallas officer who oversaw Oswald's transfer from Hunt .
 Butler was described as an extreme right-winger who gave the “all clear” to transfer Oswald just before he was killed by Jack Ruby .
 Richard Nixon Grodin and others intimate that Richard Nixon and J Edgar Hoover were also present in Dallas the night before the assassination . Grodin says Nixon and Hoover met with Texas industrialist 25.
 Nixon went to great lengths to be oblique about his whereabouts on November 22 . Nixon went on to say he was in Washington, D.C.
 He was a lawyer representing Pepsico at a Carbonated Beverages Convention and Great Southwest Corporation at the time of the incident .
 Warren Commission exhibit 1973, on page 280, contains a little white lie . Warren commission exhibit 1973: "Warren Commission exhibit" Warren Commission .
 Not much in conspiracy literature covers Clint Murchison, but there is enough to raise eyebrows . Not much of the conspiracy literature has been written about the former CIA operative .
 She was hidden away in a motel owned by the Great Southwest Corporation . The Wynne family of Dallas, Dallas, was partners of Clint Murchison . She was hiding in the motel .
 George deMohrenschildt traveled to Haiti with a large sum of money shortly after the assassination . He traveled with large sums of money to Haiti .
 Haiti’s notorious Papa Doc Duvalier remarked, before the assassination, that Kennedy would not be in power long . And it was Haiti's notorious . Papa Doc duvalier .
 A more recent text corroborates that this party at the Murchisons’ did in fact take place . The text confirms the party took place at the family home .
 Madeline Brown and Penn Jones Jr. are the major sources for this information . Penn Jones is the author of a new book, "America's First Lady"
 Bobby Baker, Johnson’s right hand man, lobbied in Washington for the interests of this racetrack . Murchison, in fact, was about to be investigated with respect to his relationship to Baker .
 Senate investigators hint that the Murchison brothers of Texas might be called upon to testify about the activities of Bobby Baker . Baker was a protege of Johnson’s protege .
 If we graph the known associations of suspect individuals who were in Dallas on the eve of the assassination — Nixon, Hunt, J Edgar Hoover, and Clint Murchison — in the same way that we graphed the known associates of Jim Braden, the resulting figure reproduces virtually the
 No one has come up with an explanation of a plot involving all of these elements . It does make it all the more difficult to dismiss the idea of some conspiracy .
 Given the apparent contradictions, the usual approach to the situation has been to do more detective work . The usual approach is to find out more about the situation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It is human to feel that, if we gather more data, one day the controversy will be resolved . It's human to think that if more data is gathered more data will resolve the controversy, it will .
 Marina was questioned over 48 times by the FBI; testified on Dec 26, 1963, and was under constant FBI "protection" during this time . Marina was also under constant "protection"" from the FBI during this period .
 With the Kennedy assassination, the more we discover, the less we know . The more we learn about the assassination is the less that we know about it .
 New twists, revelations, indeed whole new conspiracies seem just waiting in the wings to be born, Suzy Chang and Maria Novotny say . One new theory could be embedded in the Profumo affair .
 War Minister of Britain, John Profumo, was embroiled in a sex scandal with Christine Keeler, a call girl who also happened to be consorting with a Soviet spy . She was under the wing of Stephen Ward, who had a penchant for introducing powerful men to attractive women .
 The second encounter with Kennedy occurred with two other prostitutes on West 55th St. Tier second encounter occurred with Kennedy in the early hours of the morning .
 Ele did not record all phone conversations, only about 12 hours in toto . Ele didn't record all conversations recorded . Ele recorded only 12 hours of phone conversations .
 One call recorded was from Arthur Schlesinger, his historian, who spoke to him about the Profumo scandal .
 FJK did not know why he was being recorded, nor why he would be interested in the Profumo case . He said he had no idea why he had such an interest in Profumo .
 The FBI sought to question Kennedy about these interludes, but he was assassinated first . One might put quite a spin on the Soviet-Profumo-JFK trysts and turn it into a conspiracy theory .
 As it stands, at the time of this writing, it is an almost irrelevant piece of trivia, nothing more than a footnote in the present compendium of literature .
 Another theory could be woven around Kennedy’s last lover . M ary Pinchot Meyer and the CIA .
 An American socialite, blond, intelligent, risk-taking, is married to a senior CIA official in Washington . She is a risk-taken socialite .
 After divorcing him, she takes up with the President of the United States . She secretly enters the White House two to three times per week when the First Lady is away .
 She introduces the President to marijuana and hashish, perhaps even LSD, in her torrid afternoon escapades . She introduces him to the President .
 Her roommate, also a former mistress of the President, is involved as well . Her roommate is also involved in the case .
 Her diary details her affair with the President and a senior CIA Director becomes privy to the documents . The diary details the affair with President and the documents are revealed .
 He destroys the diary, and keeps these secrets to himself for well over two decades . He destroys his diary and keeps it secret for years .
 It sounds like a preposterous tale from the National Enquirer, but the scenario happened . It was true, and it's not a joke .
 William Safire, “Kennedy Set Flistoric Precedent,” NY Times News Service, December 27,1994. William Safires, ‘Kennedy’s ‘Flistoric’ precedent .
 Only one JFK conspiracist, Robert Morrow, held out the theory that Mary Meyer was ready to turn over important documents from her former husband, Cord Meyer, a high ranking CIA officer, about the assassination and that that that is why she was murdered .
 Morrow, however, has been considered reckless in his speculations, certainly by this author and others as well as others . Morrow has a reputation for being reckless in some of his speculation .
 She was married to a career CIA officer, Cord Meyer, and divorced in 1959 . She was also married to another CIA officer .
 Kennedy’s press secretary, had an ongoing White House tryst with Kennedy . Kennedy's press secretary had an affair with Kennedy, who was married to his wife .
 She moved into Mary Meyer’s Washington apartment after her former landlady photographed the President leaving the apartment late at night . She moved in after she was photographed leaving Turnure's apartment .
 She met Kennedy between twenty and thirty times at the White House, her art studio, and in the homes of friends . She met him between 20 and 30 times, she says .
 After his assassination, Mary Meyer was found shot to death in Georgetown, not far from her studio . Meyer was shot in the head and head .
 Her diary was discovered by the wife of Washington Post publisher Ben Bradlee . The Washington Post was publisher of the Washington Post .
 The Bradlees brought it to the attention of CIA official James Angleton . Angleton was a CIA official who helped bring the Bradlees to Angleton's attention .
 The Warren Commission report published even a speck of this information at the time . One wonders, of course, what the reactions might have been if the report had been published even more .
 In 1995, Ben Bradlee published his memoirs, corroborating firsthand most of what has been said . The former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's memoirs was published in 1995 .
 She was grabbed from behind, wrestled to the ground, and shot just once under the cheekbone as she struggled to get free . She was walking along the towpath by the canal .
 Two telephone calls that night from overseas added new dimensions to Mary’s death . Mary's death was the result of two telephone calls from overseas from overseas . Mary was found dead at the scene of her death .
 Anne asked if we had found any such diary, and we told her we hadn’t looked for anything, much less a diary, she said . Anne asked us to look for a diary and we said we hadn't found anything .
 "We didn’t start looking until the next morning.. . when Tony and I walked around the corner a few blocks to Mary’s house. The next morning, Tony and Mary went for a walk . The next day, Mary's house was empty .
 It was locked, as we had expected, but when we got inside, we found Jim Angleton . Angleton told us he, too, was looking for Mary’s diary .
 James Jesus Angleton was an extremely controversial, high-ranking CIA official specializing in counterintelligence . He was also a friend of Mary Meyer’s close friend Cicely Angleton .
 We felt his presence was odd, to say the least, but took him at his word . We searched Mary’s house thoroughly, and with him, we searched the house thoroughly .
 Later that day, we realized that we hadn’t looked for the diary in Mary’s studio, which was directly across a dead-end driveway from the garden behind our house . The diary was found in the garden of Mary's home .
 CIA’s most controversial counterintelligence specialist caught in the act of breaking and entering, and looking for her diary . Never mind that she had been caught in a break-in, and was looking for a diary .
 The story said that Mary and Jack had met twenty to thirty times in the White House during their romance from January 1962 to November 1963 . Mary had kept a diary of the whole affair .
 This incident is at best considered minor, irrelevant, a mere footnote to the whole story . This incident should be considered minor and irrelevant, says CNN.com .
 Kennedy assassination is another illustration of the Kennedy assassination as a riddle that can iterate an infinite array of new edges and interpretations . The assassination is an example of the riddle, which can be solved by a new set of interpretations .
 Mary Meyer did exist; the only questionable assertion in this whole litany is whether she and Kennedy smoked hashish in the White House . Meyer and Kennedy did exist, but the only question is whether they smoked .
 From Ben Bradlee’s long withheld revelations, it all happened as stated . Perhaps her diary could corroborate that, but it is gone . Perhaps she could have corroborated that .
 A black laborer was apprehended at the scene of her murder, but was acquitted of all charges . Her murder remains unsolved . A black man was acquitted in her murder .
 Ben Bradlee said she not only saw the diary but also surrendered it to Angleton . The diary was found in Angleton's home .
 He was the officer in charge of investigating KGB defector, Yuri Nosenko . He was involved in investigating defector's defection to Russia .
 At his level, he would have known far more about the assassination than was ever revealed . He would have been at his level of intelligence .
 Angleton connects to many segments of this mystery, to the KGB, to Oswald, to Nosenko, to Mary Meyer . Angleton: CIA intrigues with anti-Castro Cubans and to assassination plots against Castro .
 None of these names even appears in the index of the Warren Report . Yet, other than Oswald, none of the names appear in the report .
 The National Enquirer broke the story of the Mary Meyer-JFK liaison in the late 1970s . Meyer was married to JFK's wife .
 Bradlee was a major player in the forced resignation of Richard Nixon during Watergate . Bradlee played a key role in Watergate's forced resignation .
 Woodward and Bernstein virtually brought down the President; but when it came to matters that might disturb memories of JFK, there was only a deadening silence . Woodward and Bernstein, virtually bringing down President, virtually brought him down .
 There were no wild voices in the CIA of complicity in the murder of Mary Meyer or its cover up, and few credible voices breaking the truth .
 Ben Bradlee finally ’fessed up in a very circumscribed revelation in 1995 in his memoirs .
 "I am appalled by the recklessness, by the subterfuge that must have been involved," he writes . "I'm appalled by [the] recklessness of the recklessly [and the substantive submissions] involved, [he writes].
 Bradlee was profiled by Vanity Fair in 1995, and it's remarkable how few seem to hold him in contempt for his silence .
 His indignation over Kennedy’s behavior and shock at discovering his affair with his sister-in-law were not new in 1995 . His indignation was not new to 1995 .
 Bradlee knew of the affair in 1964 and was privy to the diary found in Meyer’s 42. 1 bid., 376. 1 .
 Bradlee’s sense of shock and outrage do not seem to surface in his books on Kennedy which appeared a decade later . It was Bradlee himself who caught James Angleton breaking into her apartment .
 Fie was paid $36,000 for the hit and was accompanied by Johnny Roselli and Nicoletti, who were in the Dal-Tex building at the time of the hit .
 Nicoletti and Johnny Roselli were in the Dal-Tex Building and hit the President from behind . Nicoletti, Roselli hit the president from behind, hitting him in the face .
 Tony Accardo had final orders to quash the assassination had to come from the CIA, not the CIA . Accardo did not cancel the assassination, however, and Accardo didn't cancel it .
 Three Interviews with Inmate N-14006 are excerpted from three interviews . Excerpts of three interviews follow, with the author’s comments to assist the reader .
 A “Nicoletti used only one rifle, 7.62 or 30.06, which is basically the same caliber . A ‘Nicoletta’s’ rifle was used only once .
 Sam Giancana took his orders from Tony Accardo, who worked for Sam Nicoletti . Tony Accardard took orders from Sam Giancaana, who was Sam's boss .
 Tony Accardo still gave the orders and no one shit without his permission and that is a fact . I don’t give a shit what all of your so-called crime specialist say, but I don't give a sh**t what they say .
 When Sam’s daughter, Antoinette, tried to tell me that it was her father who gave all the orders and called the shots I told her that she was wrong . Her new husband, the old Mob lawyer [Robert McDonald] was with her and he also told that
 I asked him about a number of figures mentioned in assassination literature and asked that he comment on them . He said he would not comment on any of the figures mentioned .
 Brading was arrested on the day of the assassination in the Dal-Tex building . Brading gave a false name to the Dallas police . He was arrested and gave a fake name .
 Richard Cain's death has nothing to do with the JFK Assassination, says JFK's widow . Richard Cain was a well-known friend of JFK assassin Richard Cain . Cain was assassinated in 1968 .
 Nofio Pecora says he knew who he was, but only met him on two occasions and only said hello and shook hands . “Yes, I knew who I knew, but I met him two times and said hello,” he said .
 Paradox knew Jack Ruby, but more importantly was a person present at Lee Oswald’s bail hearing in New Orleans . Paradox knew Ruby, and was present at the bail hearing for Lee Oswald . Paradox also knew Ruby .
 Pecora's drug dealing is not mentioned in assassination literature . Conversely, assassination literature generally does not mention drug dealing .
 Murret was described by the Warren Commission as not in any way connected to organized crime . But subsequent research showed connections to Carlos Marcello . Murret is believed to have connections to Marcella .
 Ruby was the first person to visit Ruby in his Dallas jail cell after he killed Oswald . Campisi was a Dallas mobster and was first person who visited Ruby in jail cell .
 I was with'in 2 feet of him, but he never knew that I was there with Roselli. I was 2 feet away from him, he said . Roselli never knew he was there, and Roselli was never there with him .
 Due to the fact that there is no statue of limitation on murder, I cannot give you that name, as he is still alive . The name of the murdered man cannot be given to the public as he's still alive, he says .
 Mainstream writers believe Ferrie committed suicide after Jim Garrison indicted him, but conspiracy writers believe he was hit, along with his associate, by Garrison . Conspiracy writers believe Garrison was hit by Ferrie and his associate . Garrison indicted Ferrie on a charge of murder .
 I will try to make a copy of the paraffin test that was givin to Oswald and send it along with this if possible . I will also try to send the test back to Oswald .
 Analysis of JFK's skull shows a bullet hole that is 6 millimeters by 15 millimeters . JFK’s skull was found to have been hit by a bullet bullet .
 Oswald's bullet was 6. millimeters, and thus the hole is too small to have come from that bullet . Oswald’s bullet was . 6.5 millimeters long, and therefore the hole was too small .
 The entrance wound showed it could not have come from Oswald’s rifle above the President . The author also said that the entrance wound had to come from close to ground level and from directly behind the President.
 The author suspected that a secret service agent “accidentally” shot the President from that location . The author even suspected that the President was shot from that spot .
 The DalTex building where Nicoletti and Roselli were allegedly shooting is consistent with the skull wound, police say . The skull wound was consistent with a skull wound .
 The diameter of the shell is larger than the measured wound in JFK's skull, so we have the same problem of veracity as with Oswald . With Oswald’s gun or Nicoletti's, the . shell is much larger than . the skull entry wound, so . with Oswald
 Eugene Brading was the one who got them inside the Daltex building . Brading would have to ask Brading that question, as he was one of the ones .
 Barney Barker was an associate and bodyguard of Jimmy Floffa . Clay Shaw was indicted for the conspiracy to kill JFK by Jim Garrison . Morgan Brown was the individual with whom Eugene Flale Brading was staying in Dallas .
 The fact that he doesn't have anything to say adds to his credibility — in this author’s view . He says he doesn’t have anything else to say .
 Fie clearly is not familiar with much that is written about the assassination and yet his answers have an uncanny consistency . Fie's answers have been uncanny consistency throughout the interview .
 I selected the weapon for Nicoletti when 1 took everything to Dallas and had no idea Oswald even knew what was happening . "I selected the . weapon for . Nicoletti and Oswald," he says .
 Oswald got his job at the Depository through Ruth Paine, a friend of Marina Oswald . Paine was the friend of Oswald's wife, Marina Oswald, who died in Dallas, Texas in November 1963 .
 His testimony at the HSCA was so inconsistent that the committee considered citing him for perjury . He testified so inconsistent his testimony that he was considered perjury .
 His name is not well known except among those who have studied the assassination in detail . He is believed to have been assassinated in 1968 .
 Bonar Menninger, author of Mortal Error, suggests that both frangible and non-frangible bullets were used .
 Frangible bullets explode on impact, leaving numerous fragments, while non-frangible bullets pass through the victim unscratched . Frangible bullet fragments are often less punctured than bullets that hit the victim .
 The bullet that hit JFK and was supposed to have hit Connally too was non-frangible, yet Menninger says that at least one frangible bullet hit JFK, leaving fragments in his skull . The bullet left fragments in JFK's skull .
 Remington headshot, over right eye, by temple, and yes, frangible, and Remington brand . Yes, headshot . Remington .
 Flowever said that a non-frangible heavy metal jacketed bullet also hit Kennedy . Flowever, he said, said that the bullet was not only a bullet, but also a jacketed heavy metal bullet .
 A bullet would pass right through the tissues and not explode on impact . Such a bullet would not have exploded on impact on impact, experts say .
 JFK seems to have been hit by at least one bullet that exploded and another that went through him . Likely the favored "pristine" bullet, that passed through Connally as well .
 Sam’s daughter was here to visit me and asked me that and 1 also told her that it was Johnny . Sam‘s daughter also visited me and said that she thought Johnny would be Sam . Sam's daughter was also here to see Johnny .
 She told friends of mine he she thought that 1 took part in her father’s death . But she left here and told friends she thought she thought it was a part of her father's death . She said she believed she was killed by 1,000 people .
 In the case of JFK, he said that a bullet casing should be found in a particular location with bite marks on it, and in the early 1980s such a casing was found and identified, where he said it would be .
 Flowever, such a branch was never identified and it always remained a conjecture . Flowever never identified a branch of Flowever that was never found .
 Altgens’ photo of the motorcade shows some windows apparently open . These are the thoughts of one Kennedy researcher; however, the photo shows some open windows .
 It is possible that he hopes that his testimony and promise of evidence might help him win early release . If that is the case, the testimony he currently provides to authors like myself must be seen as suspect .
 Dostoyevsky novel is not and never was a detective story . The Brothers Karamazov is not the only detective story in the world . It's not a detective novel, it's a Russian novel .
 To read this great work as a whodunnit will never reveal more than a superficial meaning . The suspense of a murder mystery exists in The Brothers Karamazov, but to read it as a mystery will never be revealed .
 "The novel conveys a far deeper meaning than the mere solution of a murder," the author says . "It's a far more important novel than a solution to a murder. It conveys an important message," she says .
 There were rumors that Nixon accepted a hefty donation from the Teamsters for his presidential campaign in return . Well, it took Bobby Kennedy years to put Floffa away, but Nixon pardoned him .
 If we agreed that Carlos Marcello killed Kennedy for Hoffa, there are a few other implications to tease out . And if we agreed, there were a few more implications .
 Floover’s FBI agent in New Orleans was suspiciously adamant in saying Carlos Marcello was a tomato salesman . For example, James Flosty, Floovers’ FBI agent was adamant that Marcella was a salesman .
 Attention would shift to yet another President, Gerald Ford, who, in turn, pardoned Nixon of all crimes . Ford also sat on the Warren Commission, and served a major disinformation function . Nixon pardoned all crimes and sat on Warren Commission .
 He perennially argued that Oswald alone killed JFK and that no conspiracy existed, past or present . He also claimed that Oswald was the only person to kill JFK .
 Prosecutorial tentacles would reach out to those involved in lying to Congress, withholding information from investigative committees, and obstruction of justice . Those involved would be charged with obstructing justice .
 Indictment would touch J Edgar Hoover’s accomplices, former CIA Directors, and perhaps James Angleton for breaking and entering . New indictments would touch former CIA Director J. Edgar Hoover's accomplices and perhaps CIA Directors .
 George Burkley swore his staff to secrecy about the autopsy, well into their retirements . The Navy Admiral seems to have lost the President’s brain, but still had the presence of mind to swear his staff secrecy .
 All of these could be served and indicted by our fantasized grand jury as well, as well . All of this could be done by our fantasies grand jury .
 Dan Rather’s rendition of the Zapruder film, in 1975, about the President being thrown violently “forward” would come under intense scrutiny . Dan Rather might finally be required to answer a few questions about the film .
 There were other passengers aboard that aircraft, and prosecutions, indictments, and trials would extend ever outward . There were also passengers aboard the plane .
 Hale Boggs did not want to sign the Warren Commission report . He spoke out courageously about Hoover bugging the phones of congressmen . Shortly thereafter his commercial plane crashed in Alaska, taking the lives of a few others with him .
 It is more than a fantasy fantasy, more than the childish wish of a naive believer in the American way . But it is not only a fantasy, but it is a real American dream, it's a dream .
 To fall into a trance, a vindictive reverie of the impossible, is absurd, doomed, and futile . To fall in a trance is absurd and doomed, says the author .
 Hunt, William Sullivan, David Ferrie, Guy Banister, Chuckie Nicoletti, Dave Yaras, James Milteer, Jack Ruby, Roscoe White, James Angleton, David Phillips, John Roselli, Jimmy Hoffa, and Lee Harvey Oswald .
 Robert Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, Peter Lawford, Hale Boggs, Billy Sol Estes, John Paisley, Dorothy Hunt, John Connally, Joseph Kennedy, George de Mohrenschildt, Clyde Tolson, Jose Aleman, General Walker, Earl Warren, General
 Most of those who are hypothetically responsible are dead, and most of the witnesses whose testimony would be crucial to convict them are dead as well as well . Most of the people who were hypothetically involved in the crime are also dead .
 "After 38 years of research and effort, we are no closer to a solution now than we were in 1963," says author . After 38 years, "We are still no closer" to solving the problem than in 1963, he says .
 'Like the Brothers Karamazov, this mystery forces us to swim in a sea of paradox,' says author . 'Icy' is the story of a mystery that has never been solved .
 The less we knew — back in 1963, the more we sensed and believed intuitively that something fishy was happening and some conspiracy was afoot in the assassination of President Kennedy . The next week marks the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination .
 The more we have come to know and learn of this conspiracy, the less able we are to find the truth, much less see justice done, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Well, we have done our homework, but this is not a convenient realistic solution . Well, it's not a drama that will yield a convenient real solution, we say .
 Lyndon Johnson’s mistress says that on New Years Eve, a drunken LBJ told her the CIA and Big Oil did it . LBJ's mistress says he told her on New Year's Eve that the CIA, Big Oil and the CIA were responsible .
 The use of the terms conspirator and “potential conspirator” in this text should be perhaps defined .
 Sufficient evidence exists to indicate these individuals had information about the events which were not fully released by the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission released a report into the events in 1992 .
 Nixon, for example, was never queried extensively about his presence in Dallas and his “alleged” meeting with Hoover . Nixon was never questioned extensively about the meeting .
 Giancana’s godson said that Sam told him that he had met Nixon in Dallas, but certainly Nixon never admitted to any such meeting . Sam said he met Nixon, but he never said anything about it .
 Evidence that Nixon met with some unsavory characters and was present in Dallas before the assassination is hearsay . Thus, the evidence that Nixon was in Dallas was hearsay, but hearsay.
 To call Nixon a “conspirator” would be inappropriate, based merely on such evidence, but to call him a ‘potential conspirator" groups him with others who, like him, should have been questioned under oath in order to clarify substantial questions .
 This text does not seek to proliferate libel, but to point to the vast number of individuals who have been insufficiently questioned and investigated regarding the assassination . The text is intended to point out that the assassination was not properly investigated and investigated .
 Thomas Eli Davis III told his wife he knew who killed Kennedy . Davis III was killed by Kennedy's killer .
 John Martino, on his deathbed, confessed that he was the paymaster and that anti-Castro Cubans did it . He said he was paid to do it by anti-Cuba Cubans . Martino confessed to the deathbed that he paid for the deaths of
 Marita Lorenz swore under oath that Eloward blunt was the paymaster and Frank Sturgis did it . Gerald Posner insists that Oswald and only Oswald did it. Marita . Lorenz said that Elwyn blunt was paymaster .
 The FBI has not revealed how its investigation of the gun was concluded . In spite of repeated Freedom of Information requests by California researcher Bill Adams .
 A second gun was found at the scene of the crime . It is a scandal that the public had to wait 30 years to learn that a second gun had been found .
 The Kennedy assassination refuses to be closed and defies any efforts at resolution . Kennedy assassination defies efforts to close and resolve any efforts to do so .
 We need to recognize that this as an ouroboros eating its own tail, leaving us exactly where we started . We need not to recognize this as a mistake, it's a mistake to blame the government .
 The psychological profiles of the main characters in this drama will be considered in depth . Before that, however, there is another way to look at this, and that is to consider in depth the psychological profiles .
 Dark secrets relating to this historical event are held not only in the heavily redacted CIA documents sealed away from the prying public, but in the deeply twisted, secret personal lives of the major figures .
 Now, we will peer down those dark alleys to see what answers can be found . We will look for answers in the dark .
 In this chapter we examine the psycho-biographies of the main characters . We also examine the psychoanalyms of the characters .
 Here is a world of secrecy, liaisons, and psychosexual intrigue; it may hold more clues . Here is the world of secrets and liaisons .
 No review of the assassination can dispense with this aspect of the drama . Here are some of the most poignant reminders of the deception, lies and cover-up that permeate the event .
 The Kennedy myth is the most difficult to surmount in teasing out the truths behind the Kennedy myth . The greatest difficulty is the questionable literature one has to review, one says .
 Thomas Reeves, in A Question of Character, refers to the latter as the “Camelot School” of 45 . Thomas Reeves refers to him as the author of A Question Of Character, in his book, in a question of Character .
 I watched him go out of the room, stopping and looking back at us rather wistfully, as if he was reminding himself that this was the end of his last carefree night on the town . This was the last time that he would be able to enjoy himself in a public
 The President thanked him and drove away smiling to spend his first night in the White house sleeping in the Lincoln bedroom .
 Angie Dickinson was there, along with actress Janet Leigh and actress Kim Novak . The event was held in New York City .
 When he returned to Jackie, he looked rather sheepish and carried a copy of the Washington Post under his arm .
 Later, at the end of festivities on Inauguration Day, Jackie returned to the White .
 Jack carried on alone, attending two more balls and a party at the Georgetown home of columnist Joe Alsop . Jack attended the Georgetown party alone .
 Kennedy enjoyed a brief sexual encounter with a beautiful young woman . The young woman wept as he left, fearful that her relationship with the president was finished forever . Kennedy left the young woman in tears .
 In this way, more like an irresponsible playboy than a mature and idealistic chief executive . In this case, he is more like a playboy rather than an idealistic CEO .
 Kennedy took Angie Dickim son as his lover sometime before the Inauguration . Angie was Angie's lover before the inauguration .
 J Edgar Hoover monitored JFK’s relationship to Dickinson and other dalliances including Marilyn Monroe . Hoover confronted Kennedy with this information in 1962 .
 The first author covers the inaugural period as if Kennedy longed for the days of his youth . Kennedy dutifully accepted his heroic responsibilities, ever mindful of the need .
 O’Donnell mentions church and, of course, sleeping soundly in the Lincoln bedroom with the First Lady . O'Donnell says she and the Lincoln family are going to church .
 Angie Dickinson: "Frank was Frank’s pimp and Frank was Jack's. Frank was Frank's pimp"
 Jack invited Judith Campbell Exner, another Kennedy mistress, to sit next to his family on Inauguration Day . Exner was another mistress of the late President Kennedy .
 Kenny O’Donnell recorded and monitored detailed logs of White House visits, including Exner’s . Exner visited the White House several times in the past year .
 O’Donnell and Powers would seem to have been privy to far more information about Kennedy’s trysts than their ‘discrete” historical treatments ever had the courage to discuss .
 President Kennedy attended two more balls and a party at the home of Joe Alsop . Before calling it quits, he attended two balls and two parties .
 The Alsop ‘do’ was also the last stop for a halfdozen Hollywood starlets imported for the inauguration by Peter Lawford . Lawford brought in a half dozen Hollywood stars to the inauguration .
 Conspiracy School makes very bold claims, while Camelot School completely denies it all . This menage a trois brought his first day in office to a resounding close .
 One text says Kennedy was alone with a woman, and another alleges that he finished the evening in a menage a trois . Another alleges that Kennedy finished the night in a 'menage a . trois'
 Posner appears as a Warren Commission advocate and heavily criticizes conspiracy schools for omissions and factual misstatements . Posner, in Case Closed, appears as an advocate of Warren Commission .
 Harrison E Livingstone, a more conspiracist writing in the 1990s, also accuses his conspiracist cohorts of manufacturing and spreading false information .
 When this author queried Janet Leigh about her relationship to JFK and that evening, she became livid at any suggestion of inappropriate behavior . This author asked her to share her thoughts about the relationship with JFK .
 She claimed she was with her husband, Tony Curtis, and never alone with the President that evening . She claimed to have been with her .
 Kennedy and Hoover met on March 22, 1962, in Washington, DC . JFK and Hoover were both at the center of the anti-Hoover controversy . Hoover and Kennedy met in 1962 .
 J Edgar Hoover had never spoken to the President on the phone and had not visited the White House since the Inauguration . According to Kennedy’s secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, Hoover had not spoken to Kennedy on a phone .
 The Kennedy Library says it has no record of what was said at the lunch . The library says it does not know what happened at lunch with the president .
 FBI does not write a memo following a visit to the White House . FBI doesn't normally write such a memo after a White House visit .
 Hoover confronted Kennedy with his knowledge of the GiancanaJudith Exner connection . Hoover allegedly confronted Kennedy about the connection between JFK and Exner . Exner died in 1964 .
 Conspiracy authors often have credibility problems with respect to credibility . Conspiracy authors also have problems with credibility .
 "It offers a tantalizing historical treatment replete with made-up dialogue and cleverly suspenseful writing" The novel is set in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The book claims that Sam Giancana masterminded the murder of Marilyn Monroe, Jack Kennedy, Bobby Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa . It also claims that he met with Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson in Dallas, to boot .
 The braggadocio of the work is awe-inspiring, and yet it is persuasive, since many of the names which pop up in conspiracy literature are appropriately linked . The work is published in the UK and Australia .
 There is a remarkable internal consistency in this book, which suggests that either the authors are telling the truth, firsthand, or they have mastered the conspiracy literature so well that they are able to piece together a suspenseful “fiction”
 Maybe Giancana’s relatives are not bound by the same oath of silence; or, maybe, they are masterfully generating disinformation . Maybe Giancanas’ relatives aren’t bound to silence; maybe they’re masterfully creating disinformation .
 Even if we assume this was simply a venal effort to sell books, then we must assume these and many other conspiracy texts are wantonly flawed . We must assume this and many of these conspiracy texts, like many others, are flawed .
 Judith Campbell Exner’s 1977 My Story, now virtually unobtainable, opened a door that had been closed for fifteen years . Exner: "My Story" opens door that opened door that was closed for 15 years. Exner's story is now virtually impossible to find
 After this work, people started to come forward with ever more damaging revelations about the President . People started to be more honest about their involvement in the White House .
 Kitty Kelly, author of Jackie Oh! does not enjoy a reputation for reportorial accuracy . Kitty Kelly: "Jackie Oh!" is the author of a new book .
 We will consider the psychology of the main protagonists . Bearing that in mind, we will look at the psychology behind the scenes .
 J Edgar Hoover’s Homosexuality and Paranoia is central to the story . Hoover is one of the major players in the story, and his background is central .
 He became director of the FBI in 1924 and continued to head that fiefdom until his death in 1972 . He became FBI director in 1924 .
 He was directly involved in investigating the Kennedy assassination of 1963 and the Lindbergh kidnapping thirty years earlier . He was also involved in the investigation of the kidnapping of Charles Lindberg, who was kidnapped by the Lindbergs, in the mid-century .
 Hoover was hidden, inaccessible, a mysterious paranoiac — a voyeur, it would seem, who lived in a very dark cavity of the American experience . Hoover lived in the very dark cavities of American experience, the author says .
 Hoover was idolized and worshipped by a small but vocal minority of right-wing Americans . Hoover was a man of courage and decency, a freedom loving, loyal, “true” American, Hoover said .
 Hoover never voted; he failed to demonstrate even that minimal interest in democracy . Hoover never showed any interest in voting . Hoover failed to show that he was interested in democracy. Hoover was a failure to demonstrate that . Hoover was never a member of Congress .
 In 1938, Hoover took up with Clyde Tolson, and the two enjoyed a lifelong association until Tolson’s death . Hoover and Tolson were married in 1938 .
 Tolson was a high official in the FBI, lived near Hoover, ate lunch with him practically every day . He probably also knew the vast spectrum of secrets Hoover kept in his personal files on most major American public officials during those fifty years . Tolson lived with Hoover and probably knew the
 Shadows and Secrets ‘homosexuals’ never seemed to dawn upon anyone in the media nor the public . Washington insiders must have had their suspicions .
 Ruffin said that Hoover was fearful about being discovered and did not see the psychiatrist for a long while . Hoover did see Ruffin as late as 1971 for treatment . Ruffin says Hoover was afraid of being found and did see him again in 1971 .
 Hoover’s homosexuality was common knowledge in the underworld, however . Frank Costello, Meyer Lansky, Jimmy ""the Weasel" Fratianno, Frank Bompensiero and Carlos Marcello all knew .
 John Roselli, the West Coast representative of the Mob, learned of Hoover's homosexuality . Hoover was arrested in the 1920s on a homosexuality charge, and Roselli learned of it .
 Bugsy Siegel was murdered under Meyer Lansky’s orders in 1947 . Nothing came of it when Bugsy was murdered .
 Anthony Summer’s research indicates that CIA counterintelligence chief James Angleton also had a photograph . Angleton was also a member of the CIA, according to Summer's research .
 Hoover’s head was captured on a close-up shot of Hoover's head . Hoover was shot in the head by a team of photographers .
 Cohn was the lead counsel for Senator Joe McCarthy’s notorious persecution of the media and the “communist menace” in the 1950s . Cohn was also a key counsel for the McCarthyism movement . Cohn is a former White House counsel .
 Cohn, described by many as a sleazy opportunist, died of AIDS . Cohn used to arrange homosexual trysts for Hoover . Cohn was described as an opportunist .
 He was wearing a fluffy black dress, very fluffy, with flounces, and lace stockings and high heels . He was also wearing a black curly wig .
 "It was a very short skirt, and he was sitting there in the living room of the suite with his legs crossed," she says . "He was sitting in the room with legs crossed. It was a short skirt," she said .
 I couldn't believe it, that I should see the head of the FBI dressed as a woman. I couldn’t believe it. I was shocked to see the FBI chief dressed up, he said .
 That same evening Hoover was joined by two boys, one of whom read from the book of Leviticus, while the other manipulated his genitals . Hoover was later joined by the boys to perform the act .
 Kennedy’s administrative assistant was harangued first about the way a leading newspaper was supposedly infiltrated by Communists . Then about Adlai Stevens’ alleged homosexuality, she was asked about his alleged homosexuality .
 For the first time, perhaps, men in power dared voice the notion that Hoover was not entirely sane . Hoover was never entirely sane, says Hoover's aide .
 The relationship of Hoover to RFK, the Mob, and both President Kennedy and his father’s alliances with the underworld is very poorly understood . Hoover's emotional instability as an outgrowth of Robert Kennedy's anti-Mob crusade is even less understood than his relationship with RFK .
 Waiting for him were a phalanx of FBI agents, including Bill Roemer, one of the mobster’s most dogged pursuers . The mobster was found dead at the scene of his murder .
 He knew, he told the agents, that everything he said would get back to J Edgar Hoover . He told agents, "Everything he said was getting back to him"
 Giancana piled abuse on both brothers, then snarled, “Listen, Roemer, 1 know all about the Kennedys, and Phyllis knows more . One of these days we're going to tell all,” she snarls .
 Hoover’s long-time companion, Clyde Tolson, suffered serious health problems in 1962 . Clyde Tolon, Hoover's long-term companion, also suffered health problems . Hoover's stress was compounded by the deaths of Tolson and Hoover's wife .
 Hoover knew about the Mob contract on Kennedy and did nothing to stop it, author says . Hoover feared Kennedy’s vendetta against the Mob might expose his homosexuality, he says .
 The official mask was of a J Edgar Hoover, the titular head of the Boy Scouts of America, a man every American could trust, and a dedicated soldier in the eternal struggle against the powers of darkness .
 J Edgar’s ‘G men’ would track down the ten most wanted and bring them before the bar of justice, of that all America could be sure . J Edgar's 'G men' would track and bring down the most wanted criminals .
 Summers makes reference to another incident of Hoover in drag, in Washington, in 1948 . Summers says another incident occurred in Washington in 1948, when Hoover was in drag .
 The most powerful police official in the United States of America at the time of Kennedy’s assassination was a woman, mentally unstable, sexually dysfunctional and sexually dysfunctional, paranoid over the insidious menace of communists and “pederasts”
 Hoover bugged the homes of Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, and scores of Mob figures . Hoover learned about the contract on the President . Hoover also learned of the contract from the Mob .
 Marcello, Trafficante, Giancana wiretaps show a contract on the President to be imminent . Neither the Attorney General, the Secret Service, nor any other agency was made privy to the wiretaps .
 To author Mark North, Hoover's treason was the most immediate cause of John Fitzgerald Kennedy's death . Hoover’s treason was also the cause of Kennedy's assassination, North says .
 Hoover was being pushed against a wall by Bobby Kennedy’s vendetta against the Mob . Bobby Kennedy had little way of knowing that his own behavior against the Mafia was, through Hoover, perhaps leading to his brother's demise . Hoover was pushed against wall by Kennedy's vendetta,
 In the prior 30 years, mention of Hoover’s homosexuality was almost seditious . Now it is now reaching widespread currency and is the butt of jokes at the highest level of government .
 Even conservative Bob Dole of Kansas chimed in when he complimented Helen Thomas for her lovely new dress .
 Thomas Blanton was found guilty of a Birmingham, Alabama church bombing which killed four black children . Blanton's persecution of Martin Luther King, Jr. and his disdain for the March on Washington are well known .
 Blanton could have been prosecuted much earlier based on evidence held in FBI files but never released on orders from Hoover himself . Blanton, successfully found guilty of the bombing, was found guilty 38 years later .
 Most Americans felt ineffable sympathy toward the 34-year-old widow, Jackie Kennedy . Her little son saluted the funeral procession carrying his father’s body .
 Close to a million letters poured in to Mrs. Gwyneth Obeidallah . Close to one million letters pour in to her after her picture was published .
 Kennedy should be more forthright in telling the story of the Kennedy assassination . No suspicion that the injured Kennedys were withholding substantial facts about this event . Kennedy should not have withheld substantial facts from his family .
 Grieving widows have often loudly protested that the government did not tell the whole story about their husbands’ deaths . Widows have demanded a full accounting of how they perished, but have often protested .
 Henry Marshall, an agricultural agent, was shot numerous times in the head and his death was ruled a suicide . Marshall’s wife howled, year after year, until she finally succeeded in having his body exhumed and the death declared murder .
 It is not unheard of for a son or daughter or brother to thunderously demand justice . It's also not unheard for a brother or sister to demand justice be served .
 Bobby Kennedy did not stand up, in the years after the assassination, demanding that the Warren Commission findings be challenged . Bobby Kennedy didn't stand up in years after his assassination to challenge the findings, but he did .
 Her daughter, Caroline, has not asked that the CIA or Mafia dimensions of this crime against her father be investigated . Instead, she has asked that defamatory studies of her father stop .
 John Kennedy, Jr., the little boy who saluted the caisson, was elected to public office . John Kennedy Jr. said he had no interest in conspiracy theories and wished it would all stop .
 Mrs. Kennedy exerted strong efforts to quash many publications about her husband . Her husband was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Kennedys hired William Manchester to write an accounting of the events, and upon finishing his work he was sued by Mrs. Mrs. Manchester .
 Johnson argued to have Senator Yarborough sit in the Presidential limousine rather than Johnson’s friend, Governor Connally, was the point of contention . The argument between Lyndon Johnson and Kennedy was the night before the assassination .
 The Kennedy family has not been a force to bring out the truth. Be that as it may, the Kennedy family hasn't been an effective force to uncover the truth .
 The family thinks it has more to gain by preventing disclosures than uncovering the truth about the assassination . The family wants to prevent the truth from being revealed .
 Jack and Bob will run the show . While Ted’s in charge of hiding Joe. While Ted's in charge . Ted's behind the scenes .
 It is fair to assume that people who seek to prevent disclosure may have something to hide . There appear to be many levels of secrecy within the Kennedy family . The Kennedy family is known for secrecy .
 Most Americans assume John Kennedy told Bobby everything, that Bobby confided in Ted, and that the boys confided with their father, Joe, especially when they needed help . Joe Kennedy was the father of Bobby and Ted Kennedy .
 Few speculate about whether there were secrets between the brothers and the father .
 In 1966, she pressured Paul B Fay, Jr. into cutting 2000 words from his memoir . Fay was forced to cut 2000 words out of his memoir in order to keep his memoir from being published . Fay is credited with saving his life in prison .
 She forced Look magazine to drop serialization of William Manchester’s Death of a President . Look magazine had serialized William Manchester's Death of the President .
 The Kennedys also attempted to stop publication of White House Nannie by Maude Shaw, Evelyn Lincoln’s My Twelve Years with John F Kennedy .
 It is generally assumed that the lines of communication between father and sons were open . But much would be explained if we could assume that communication was pockmarked by withholding .
 Joe Kennedy had enough to be embarrassed about to ‘spare’ his sons exposure to this kind of detail . Joe Kennedy was embarrassed enough to "spare" his sons exposed to such detail .
 He began making his fortune in bootlegging Irish whiskey in the late 1920s . He made his fortune from bootlegging Irish whiskey .
 Joe was involved in a hijacked whiskey shipment being sent from Ireland to Boston in 1927 . Gangster “Doc” Stacher, a lieutenant of arch criminal Meyer Lansky, reported that Joe . Joe was a member of a gangster syndicate .
 Once Joe tried to ship bootlegged whiskey through Detroit without proper underworld permissions . He says he was trying to ship whiskey through the city without proper permission .
 Kennedy appealed to his friends in Chicago, and had the contract cancelled . Kennedy appealed for the contract to be cancelled . The contract was cancelled .
 Years later, Frank Costello tried to collect on that debt by asking Kennedy a favor . Costello asked Kennedy for a favor, and asked him to do it .
 Kennedy had become very rich and quite influential; he refused Costello . Kennedy was very influential and had become rich and influential . Costello refused to accept Kennedy's request .
 Some writers suggest Kennedy may have manipulated the market into its crash . Kennedy made millions by short selling during the October 1929 stock market crash . He made millions from short selling in 1929 .
 A few sources say a relationship existed and continued, but it is corroborated by a few sources . The relationship is said to have been between the two men .
 During the campaign in West Virginia, FBI wiretaps revealed that large Mafia donations went to the Kennedys . FBI wiretapped revealed that . large Mafia . donations went . to the Kennedy family .
 FBI documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act support this contention . FBI documents secured under the FOI Act support the contention .
 Joseph Kennedy was known as an incurable womanizer . The Sins of the Father Pass to the Son is published by The Kennedy Foundation .
 He had a longstanding affair with Gloria Swanson . He financed one of her movies after taking control of a Hollywood studio .
 Joe had frequent mistresses, and invited them into the home . One stayed for several months, and also would proposition his son's girlfriends . Joe also propositioned his son’s girlfriends .
 Joe always denied that his relationship with Swanson was sexual, but in 1980 she confirmed the rumor in her autobiography . Joe always denies that he had a sexual relationship with her .
 I turned my head and he clamped his mouth over mine, kissed me, and I ran upstairs and threw up . I turned his head and then he kissed me and I threw up, running upstairs and throwing up . He kissed her and she ran upstairs .
 He had a number of girlfriends. knew a girl who was his mistress for years . He also had a girlfriend for years. He had several girlfriends. He was also known to have a mistress .
 When Joe Kennedy became Ambassador to England under Roosevelt in the late 1930s, he finally achieved a kind of respectability that had eluded him his whole life . Joe Kennedy finally achieved respectability in England under FDR .
 Next in line was Jack, who had little interest in politics but was required to fill his older brother’s shoes and try to live out his father's narcissistic dreams . Jack is now the president of the United States .
 Smathers: "It was like a rooster getting on top of a chicken real fast and then the poor little hen ruffles her feathers and wonders what the hell happened to her" Smather: “It was . like a . rooster get on top . of
 He played a substantial role in all of Jack’s electoral victories and was on the phone to him constantly, says the former president .
 The peculiar relationship between father and son is an important clue in the entire family dynamic . The father-and-son relationship is a crucial part of the family dynamic, says the author .
 JFK had a relationship with Marilyn Monroe; he was followed by Bobby, Bobby, and it is rumored that young Ted tried too, but was not as successful . Ted was rumored to have tried to have an affair with Marilyn, Bobby and Bobby .
 Winning was the essential element in sex; it was far more a conquest than any expression of intimacy or closeness . Sex was more of a conquest rather than a conquest, the author says . Winning was an essential element of sex; sex was more than intimacy .
 His public image was so well developed and polished that the American people would have been in a state of shock if they had even a glimpse of his other life . The public image of the former president was so polished that people would be shocked to have seen his other side .
 To imagine this articulate President cursing, for example, was virtualiy beyond comprehension, but as one writer put it, ‘Kennedy uses profanity with the unconcern of a sailor, which he was and is,’ 78 and, “Privately Jack admitted that he
 After presenting his ‘farm policy’ speech to an unresponsive audience at a South Dakota fairground, he said to aides, ‘Well, that’s over. Well, that's over,’ he said . After presenting the 'farm policy' speech to
 As we delve into the labyrinth of Kennedy family secrets, more and more nuances come up that relate to the assassination itself . The Kennedy family has a history of secrets .
 Because of Giancana’s close relationship to Joe Kennedy, he felt that once Jack was elected, the ‘Outfit’ would have smooth sailing, he said . Because of his close relationship with Joe, he thought that once Joe Kennedy was elected it would be smooth
 Bobby Kennedy had been a voracious anti-crime fighter on the McClellan Committee in the late 1950s . Bobby Kennedy was a major anti-crimes fighter in the mid-'60s and '60s .
 Considering Joe's relationship to the Mob, Giancana thought this behavior was out of place . Consideringjoe’s relationship with the mob, he thought it was out-of-place .
 The Mafia had helped John Kennedy cover up a prior marriage, through the efforts of Johnny Roselli . The Mafia helped Kennedy cover-up, through Roselli's efforts, to do so .
 It had helped in the West Virginia primary, and the electoral efforts in Chicago . It had also helped in West Virginia and the Chicago primary .
 Kennedy: "I want your word that the day your son is elected . That’s the day that — ‘that’t the day . that” Kennedy interrupted . Kennedy: “But 1 want . your word . that that’ll be the day
 The President of the United States. . will owe you his father’s life. My son. . . . The President . of the . United States will owe his father's life. . My son .
 Bobby Kennedy continued to badger the Mafia and especially J immy Hoffa through the McClellan Committee . Giancana reassured himself by saying “Old man Kennedy'U set him straight ”
 Joe just keeps telling him and the guys that it’s just a political move, just a game. Joe just tells him that it's just a . game, he says . Joe just continues to tell him, he just keeps tellin him that .
 Bobby may have been kept out of a special secrecy that existed in the Kennedy family . Bobby may not have been told about his father's death .
 Giancana asked Joe Kennedy to remove Bobby from the McClellan Committee, and he did . Bobby was removed from the committee by Joe Kennedy . Bobby died at the age of 92 .
 Bobby was made the mastermind of John Kennedy’s presidential campaign; he may not have been told that the real reason for the move was to keep him from going any farther on his vendetta against organized crime .
 Giancana, however, was convinced he was double-crossed by the Kennedys, on April 4, 1961 .
 This was the date that Bobby Kennedy had Carlos Marcello deported to Guatemala . This is the date of Bobby Kennedy's deportation of Marcella . Bobby Kennedy deported Marcelle from Guatemala .
 If this was Camelot, Chuck mused, it looked like Mooney was being made the court jester . Chuck: Mooney looked like he was making it look like he had been in Camelot . Mooney: "If this is Camelot it looks like he's being
 Bobby Kennedy’s campaign against organized crime was highly effective . Indictments against crime rose from zero to 683, and the number of defendants convicted went also from 0 to 619 . In fact, Bobby Kennedy was very effective .
 Fie smiled, his eyes narrowing into small cobradike slits, and stood up . Fie stood up, smiling, and then stood down again .
 Giancana did not consider that Joseph Kennedy did not want to embarrass himself in front of his well-groomed, Harvard-educated, idealistic sons .
 Perhaps Giancana was correct and that the Kennedys were planning, through Bobby’s efforts, to neutralize the Mob and call in their markers . Bobby's efforts may have prevented the Mob from neutralizing the Mob, and calling in the markers .
 An equally tantalizing theory is that the Kennedys had a strong and notable history of denial within the family system . The theory is also tantalizing .
 Jack and their father, Joe, did not confide in Bobby as much as they might have . Bobby refused to see what he didn’t want to see .
 As Bobby went further on his crusade to clean up underworld “scum,” he was unwittingly precipitating deep anxieties elsewhere . Bobby's father's influence-peddling and election fraud, Jack’s marital infidelities, and someone J Edgar Hoover wanted to
 He smuggled liquor through Detroit without informing the Jewish Mafia, who put out a contract on him . Smuggled liquor through the Detroit area without informing them .
 Kennedy refused the requests of mobster Joe Costello, who similarly put a contract out on him . Kennedy refused to accept mobsters' requests . Kennedy also refused mobster's requests of a contract .
 Kennedy got Sam ‘Mooney’ Giancana to have his contract removed, in return for promised future considerations . Kennedy: "Mooney's contract has been removed, and the contract is no longer valid"
 Kennedy received donations from the Mafia, for rigging the West Virginia election for Jack . Kennedy used Mayor Daley and Sam Giancana in Chicago to turn the Illinois vote in favor of Kennedy in 1960 .
 Giancana’s aide, Johnny Roselli, handled the legalities and had any record of the marriage destroyed . Roselli's aide handled the marriage .
 Joe had sex parties in the discreet Cal-Neva chalet, sometimes with Giancana present . Joe had frequent sex parties, sometimes in the chalets, sometimes at the hands of his wife .
 Joe Kennedy and Jack met with Mayor Daley and Sam Giancana in the fall of 1959, at Chicago’s Ambassador East Elotel, on three separate occasions . Jack and Joe Kennedy met three separate times at the hotel .
 Mayor Daley was Kennedy’s first visitor in the White blouse after Harry Truman . The mayor of Chicago was Kennedy's first White House visitor after Truman .
 Sam Giancana personally visited the President at the White House shortly after the Inauguration . The President's inauguration is the first time he has been in office since inauguration .
 Frank Sinatra introduced Jack Kennedy to Judith Exner on February 7, 1960 . Exner was married to Jack Kennedy at the time of Kennedy's death .
 Giancana had Action Jackson murdered in one of the most gruesome Mafia torture killings ever . Action Jackson was the victim of a Mafia torture killing in the 1990s . Giancano had Action Michael Jackson murdered .
 It is unknown whether Kennedy knew that his revelations to Giancana resulted in this murder . Kennedy is believed to have been involved in the murder . It's unknown if Kennedy knew his revelations led to the murder of Giancasana .
 Bobby was not aware that his brother was passing information to Giancana through Exner . Further, it is unknown if Bobby was aware that Exner was passing such information to his brother .
 Marilyn Monroe’s contacts with Frank Sinatra placed the Kennedys at risk . Sinatra's 30year relationship with Giancana, a relationship with Marilyn Monroe, placed the Kennedy family at risk.
 Bobby Kennedy never again met with his own organized crime task force after his brother's assassination . After his brother’s assassination, Bobby Kennedy met with the task force again .
 At the time of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Robert Kennedy seemed surprised to learn that the CIA had executive action assassination plans against Castro through the efforts of mobsters Giancana, Roselli, and Trafficante . The CIA had a plan to assassinate Castro Castro .
 Kennedy had an unusually bitter confrontation with CIA spymaster and organizer of such clandestine plots, William Harvey . Harvey was the CIA's organizer of clandestine plots against Kennedy . Kennedy had a bitter encounter with Harvey, who organized the plots .
 Robert Kennedy was assigned the task of chairing a task force to study CIA fumbling in the matter . Jack Kennedy’s friend Senator Smathers notes that after the Bay of Pigs disaster he was assigned to chairing the task force .
 Allen Dulles, its director; General Cabell, head of CIA covert operations; and Richard Bissell. Allen Dulls, its chief of operations, was the CIA's top covert operations chief .
 The “cowboy” of the CIA, William Harvey, was transferred to Italy . Harvey had direct involvement with Castro assassination plans and covert operations . Harvey was transferred from the CIA to Italy.
 It was at this time, and no earlier, that Robert Kennedy and his brother John learned of the CIA relationship with Giancana, Roselli, and Trafficante . It was no earlier that the Kennedy brothers learned of their CIA relationship .
 Smathers found President Kennedy “horrified” at the idea of assassination; he refused to be pushed around . President Kennedy was a ‘terrified’ at the notion of assassination, Smather’s says .
 CIA officials and others have tried to claim that Kennedy approved the assassination plots, and that his brother Bobby knew about them . Various CIA officials have said that Bobby approved the plots .
 Bobby Kennedy did find out about some of it, and he did all he could to put a stop to it . Bobby Kennedy found out that some of the things he found out about was true .
 When Robert Kennedy learned of the CIA’s use of organized crime, he was incensed . The CIA was accused of using organized crime to spy on organized crime .
 In early 1962, Robert Kennedy found that the CIA was trying to protect one of its Mafia contacts, Sam Giancana, from prosecution on another matter . The CIA tried to protect Sam from prosecution .
 Kennedy was finally told about the earlier stage of Giancana’s role in the murder plots by a CIA lawyer, Lawrence Houston . When he insisted on pursuing the matter, Kennedy was eventually told about his role by Houston's CIA lawyer .
 In this chapter, we seek to understand the psychology of the main figures in the tragedy . The psychology of some of the people involved in the shooting has never been seen .
 For John Kennedy to risk everything by engaging in relations with so many shady characters, he had to be in denial . He had to think he could get away with it, he must have been in denial, he says .
 Robert Kennedy's liaisons were promiscuous in every sense . JFK would have had to be deeply in denial of his liaisons .
 He had to be willing himself not to see what was going on, seeking to not see rather than seeking to see it . He said: "I'm willing myself not to ... see what's going on."
 Mark North provides detailed account of FBI surveillance tapes and chronology of Hoover’s activity . Most are from Mark North, who provides detailed accounts of Hoover's activities .
 Bobby Kennedy made his biggest moves against the Mob in early 1961 with the deportation of Marcello, the harassment of Giancana and Trafficante, and the arrest of Hoffa . Bobby Kennedy's biggest moves were the deportation and harassment of the mobsters .
 Hoover informed him that Giancana, through wiretap surveillance, had been heard mentioning that Joseph Kennedy accepted campaign contributions from Giancrano . Hoover said that Giacana had been overheard saying that Kennedy accepted contributions from his father .
 It must have been at this time that J Edgar Eloover realized his days at the head of the FBI were numbered . The FBI director's days were numbered at the time of the assassination .
 Kennedy brothers would never forget what happened to their father and would blame Eloover for it . The Kennedy brothers never forgot what happened and would always blame him .
 On December 19,1961, we have at least some evidence about family denial patterns . We have a history of denial patterns in the family .
 Both Jack and Bobby seem unaware of their father’s dealings with the Mob .
 A logical hypothesis is that a deadly pattern of both deceit and denial existed within the male line of the Kennedy family system . Joe withheld important things from Jack, Jack from Bobby, and Bobby, the fool, aggressively prosecuted and harassed precisely the people who favored and serviced and his father and
 Bobby Kennedy was disconsolate, rarely came to his office, and effectively ended his campaign against organized crime . After John Kennedy was assassinated, Bobby Kennedy rarely came into office .
 Jack Kennedy met Exner Exner in Las Vegas the day she met him . Teddy Kennedy was also present, dancing with her, and made amateurish attempts to enlist her for an interlude himself .
 This is a pivotal historical issue, and one rarely discussed in conspiracy literature . Shadows and Secrets June 1963 . This is one of the most important issues in the world of conspiracy literature.
 There is a tentative answer to the question, but we have conflicting source material, too, too . We have conflicting sources, too. There is tentative answer, but it's a tentative one .
 If this is true, it appears that Bobby’s reaction was to attack rather than surrender . Bobby's reaction appears to have been to attack .
 Giancana filed suit, accusing the federal government of depriving him of his constitutional rights . The lawsuit was filed in 2008, and the case is expected to last for more than a year .
 "All their dirty little secrets will come out. And Bobby’s be scared to death I’ll open it... because if I do, all their dirty secrets will be out," she says .
 Mooney did not have his day in court or his chance to expose the Kennedys . Mooney was not allowed to testify in court in the case .
 In June 1963, the Kennedys were using every resource to call in their markers . Clearly, for Giancana in June of 1963, it would seem that .
 Giancana’s “double-cross” theory — at least up to this point — prevails over the notion that Bobby was a victim of family secrecy . Bobby's "double cross" theory, however, prevails on the theory .
 He knew all the secrets of his father and brother, and he had the court rule it had no jurisdiction . Giancana's brother was killed in a car crash in 2009 . He had to be restrained from testifying in court testimony .
 What if Jack said his relationship with Exner was minimal, or Dad said, “Giancana is making it all up; it’s all a lie.” It's not easy to say, but it's a good thing for Jack to say it was
 'Dad suffers a stroke over the all of the undeserved stress. And on top of all this, Dad suffers from a stroke. Dad suffers ... And on the all the . undeserved . stress. That's what Dad suffers for the . stress .
 The Attorney General of the United States should go all out in a vendetta against underworld “greaseballs” and try to put them all away once and for all . Then the appropriate reaction for the Attorney General would be to go all-out in an effort to put the
 We don't know what went through Robert Kennedy’s mind, but it deserves the closest scrutiny . We don’t know what happened to Kennedy, but his actions deserve the most scrutiny .
 A1995 book 97 explores this issue and leaves us in exactly the same place that we started, wondering if JFK held secrets from Bobby in a manner that may have ultimately triggered the assassination .
 The irony of it all was the Giancana had appeared earlier before the Senate Racket Committee, faced Robert Kennedy, and pleaded the Fifth Amendment fifty-three times . The irony was that he had appeared before the committee, and faced Kennedy, fifty-23 times .
 Bobby Kennedy listened, as I outlined the case in detail,” said Fawrence Houston, Information Officer of the Department of Justice .
 'Don't you ever again get in touch with any gangster-Mafia 97. But, he said, ‘Don’t you ever . ever again . get in contact with any . gangster . mobster-mafia 97 . But he said: ‘
 Attorney General Kennedy was briefed about the CIA Mafia plot after the fact . He was told that the plot had ceased, but attempts continued despite his orders that they cease . Two of Robert Kennedy’s top aides, Frank Mankiewicz and Adam Walinsky, wrote years later .
 Mankiewicz and Walinsky both insisted that the Bob Kennedy they knew was an intensely moral man who wouldn’t have anything to do with an assassination .
 They had discussed the matter with him and felt that he believed that his opposition was largely responsible for the project’s end .
 Giancana eventually decided on a confrontation, and brought a civil suit against the Federal Government . The lawsuit was settled in 2007, and Giancrano is still suing the government .
 President Kennedy would deal with the Mafia in killing Castro without first conferring with Bobby . President Kennedy was assassinated by the Mafia at the age of 50 .
 President used his brother on critical matters, but still did not tell him everything . President used him to tell his brother everything, but then he still didn't tell him all .
 He didn’t consult him on early key Cabinet selections; he didn't involve him in the early planning for Bay of Pigs . He didn't share details of most of his sexual adventures until he needed help and cover-up, he says .
 Bobby Kennedy had fought the Mafiosi intensely and would disapprove of them . So it is not inconceivable that he kept these Mafia negotiations to himself .
 Campbell told an interviewer that she arranged ten meetings between Kennedy and Giancana . Campbell said she acted as a courier and arranged 10 meetings with Kennedy . Campbell told the interviewer she not only acted as courier but she also arranged ten trips between Kennedy .
 Giacana’s daughter Antoinette was interviewed by Larry King in February 1992 . She was asked whether JFK asked Giancana to kill Castro .
 Robert Kennedy’s motives for his vendetta against Giancana’�s “Outfit” are not well understood . Robert Kennedy's motives for the vendetta are still unknown .
 The best hypothesis is that Bobby simply was naive and unaware of some crucial facts . The best theory is that he simply was unaware of the facts .
 Bobby was a tenacious moralist, the fighter for ethics in government, the conscience of the family . Bobby was eight years younger than Jack, eight years older than Jack . Bobby died at the age of 92 .
 He was once nominated as Father of the Year, and even had contemplated a religious life . He was different from his older brother, once nominated for Father of Year . He had contemplated the religious life, and had contemplated suicide .
 Bobby Kennedy’s children show a very special kind of affection for their father, as well . Bobby Kennedy's children are very fond of their father. Bobby Kennedy died in 1968 at age 50 .
 After his assassination, his sons presented their mother with a Christmas book . His sons presented the book to their mother .
 Daddy was very funny in church because he would embarrass all of us by singing very loud. He would sing very loud and embarrass us in church . He would embarrass us if he sang loud in church.
 There will be no more football with Daddy, no more swimming with him . No more riding and no more camping with him, he says . There will also be no swimming, riding or camping with Daddy .
 'I would rather have him for the length of time I did than any other father for a milhon years. But he was the best father their ever was,' he said .
 Robert Kennedy was loved and respected not only by millions of Americans and his own children, but by his older brother as well . Robert Kennedy's brother was also respected by millions .
 Jack may not have been as open and candid with his staunchly moralistic, ‘square,” brother as historians may have supposed . Jack may have been more honest with his brother than historians thought .
 'We do not know how open Jack was with himself with respect to sexual issues and the consequences issuing from them,' he said . 'We are not sure if Jack was open to himself about sexual issues or if he was open about them'
 There is very good reason, therefore, to suspect Bobby was not apprized of all his older brother’s capers . There is also a good reason to suspect his brother, Bobby, not to be at all .
 By 1960, when Robert turned thirty-five, he had been married ten years and had seven children . His brother, John, spoke of Robert’s “high moral standards... a . high moral standards”
 Some say Bobby had as many as four extramarital affairs, but genuine evidence only supports one, Marilyn Monroe . Some say he had four affairs .
 The clumsy affair with Monroe may have been his first sojourn in this direction, he knew was not suited to his nature, and one he wanted to stop . He wanted to end the affair, but he knew he was going to end it .
 Father of the Year with seven children even discussed marriage with Marilyn Monroe . Jack simply bedded them and was off to his next conquest .
 He took matters of the heart very seriously, and when it came to infidelity, he was a novice . "He did not swim well in these waters," he said of infidelity .
 It began to look increasingly as if he felt responsible for his brother’s death . Shadows and Secrets greatly from virtually all other members of the Kennedy family .
 At first, he was the rock upon whom grieving relatives could count . But gradually he retreated into a disconsolate sullenness which became notable to all those who were close to him .
 Bobby wouldn't say the word ‘assassination’ or “death” or even “Dallas” but spoke only of “the events of November 22” ... he seemed haunted by his memories .
 He appeared at an old friend's house with a book of readings of world literature under his arm . Once he appeared at a friend’s house, he showed up with the book .
 He made her listen while he opened the book and read from a selection about poet Gerard de Nerval . The poet often walked around town with a lobster on a leash .
 Some of those close to Bobby saw it all as a classic case of survivor’s guilt . Some close to him saw it as an example of survivor's guilt . Others said it was just a case of survival .
 If so, there was a deeper level of responsibility than with most survivors, one which came from the fact that Bobby, like Nerval’s lobster, knew the secrets .
 Bobby continued to agitate the question of the assassination furtively . While he claimed never to have read the Warren Commission Report, however, Bobby insisted he read it .
 We may never get an answer on what Bobby knew and didn't know or why he pursued the Mafia with such tenacity on the very threshold of the assassination .
 A recently declassified set of memos from the CIA was made available on July 2, 1997 .
 The information corroborates that the CIA offered $150,000 to hire Mob hit-men to assassinate Castro . The information does not make clear whether Bobby Kennedy was aware of the contracts at the time of his persecution .
 When JFK died, the family priest came to Bobby’s residence to console him . Bobby's father was a priest at the time of JFK's death . Bobby says he was comforted by the priest's visit to Bobby's residence .
 Bobby Brown sat down with John McCone for 3 hours to talk with him . Bobby was in intense conversation with McCone . Bobby had to wait 3 hours for the interview .
 Seymour Hersh's book The Dark Side of Camelot features a rare interview with Judith Exner-Campbell . Exner Campbell was interviewed by Hersh for a rare book by Hersch . The book features rare interview from Exner Campbell .
 She reiterated to Hersh that JFK was using her as a courier to Giancana regarding the Castro assassination . She reiterated that JFK used her to deliver information about the assassination .
 If true, then our first question must be whether JFK told Bobby of these plans . JFK told JFK of the plans, and Bobby of his plans, according to reports .
 If Bobby knew of them, his persecution of Giancana becomes a deep mystery . Bobby knew nothing about the murders, but it's a mystery .
 If Bobby did not know, the secrecy between JFK and his brother on such monumental matters opens speculation even wider .
 Judith Exner’s revelations that she acted as a courier between JFK and Giancana . It is plausible that the President was aware of these plans, and was one of the six insiders . But Bobby may have been left in the dark, creating quite a dilemma for Gianc
 Robert Kennedy did not know about the Castro assassination plan using organized crime figures until he was informed about it by the CIA in May 1962 . Yet a later CIA internal investigation concluded that Robert Kennedy knew about the assassination plan .
 CIA official told Attorney General Kennedy about “the use of Giancana and the underworld against Castro” during a “recent” briefing . This, despite an FBI document dated May 21,1961, stating that a CIA official . CIA official said during a "recent
 Exner told King that President Kennedy knew about the CIA’s use of Giancana in the Castro assassination plot . Exner: JFK knew about CIA's involvement in the plot to kill Castro in Cuba .
 Her cloak-and-dagger description of those alleged events was never reported in her earlier book or in her sworn testimony to the Church Committee . Her earlier book and testimony to Church Committee never reported .
 Others suggest Robert Kennedy was aware of Giancana’s use in plots against Castro . Still others suggest he did not deter him from attempting to put him away . Robert Kennedy is believed to have been involved in a plot to kill Castro .
 Goldfarb cites author Richard Reeves, who, in an interview, said, “There’s no 105.” The author of the book, "There's no 105," said, referring to the number 105 .
 JFK put his trusted brother RFK in charge of Mongoose, which had high Kennedy administration priority . It was a no-holds-barred operation, and Robert Kennedy was applying intense pressures .
 Robert Kennedy's intimate involvement with the CIA’s Cuba plans began two days after the inauguration, Holland says . According to Holland, Robert Kennedy was involved in the CIA's Cuba plans . Holland: Robert Kennedy began his CIA involvement two days before the inauguration in 1961 .
 Kennedy’s close aide and Friend John Seigenthaler — one of those he was most likely to confide in — knew nothing of the allegations that Kennedy used rackets figures to pursue cold warrior gambits .
 Seigenthaler recalls Kennedy expressing disgust with the CIA when he heard of their use of assassins, and telling John McCone and Richard Helms he thought it was disgraceful and that it should be stopped . Kennedy expressed disgust at the CIA's use of assassinations .
 Had RFK been dealing with Giancana on operation Mongoose, Justice Department cases against him would have been fatally compromised . RFK was RFK's partner in Operation Mongoose . Justice Dept. would have had RFK involved in Operation Mangoose .
 Evidence seems to favor the hypothesis that Bobby Kennedy persecuted Giancana not because the Kennedy clan was “double crossing” the Mafia and calling in its markers . Jack was not forthright in confiding to Bobby all of his private dealings; and Bobby, the idealist, operated
 He remained unaware of the government’s involvement with mobsters . He was only dimly aware of his father and brother’�s consorting with Giancana’S Outfit .
 Samuel Elalpern, his second in command, called the memo document “as close as we’re likely to get” to conclusive proof . Samuel Elapern: Document is ‘as close’ as possible proof of President Obama’s involvement
 In April of that same year, CIA operative William Elarvey delivered a U-Elaul filled with arms to John Roselli, who was supposed to transfer the weapons to Cuban exiles interested in murdering Castro . The weapons were supposed to be transferred to exiles who wanted to kill
 If true, this event shows Bobby was involved in assassination plots against Castro . Bobby was allegedly involved in an assassination plot against Castro.
 The CIA’s William Elarvey and Mob contact Johnny Roselli were involved in the plot, it appears . More important, it leads to the conclusion that he had at least indirect awareness of the Mafia dimension of these intrigues .
 This would sharply contradict what we have said earlier about Bobby’s naivete. This would be sharply contradicting what we had said earlier . Bobby's naivete would be surprising to see how naive he is now, says the BBC .
 Arthur Schlesinger has acted more as a Kennedy family publicist than a historian, says author . He has acted as a publicist for the Kennedy family, not a historian . The book is expected to be released in October .
 Despite his volumes written on the Kennedys, he failed to properly depict anything that might be embarrassing about the family, much less the alleged communications between 106.5 and 106.7 .
 We don't know if Thomas, like Schlesinger, is putting the best spin on historical facts to keep the Kennedy mystique alive . We don’t know if these are credible assertions we should trust .
 We began this discussion wondering why Bobby was so intent on prosecuting Giancana, Marcello, and Trafficante in view of the fact that his brother had enlisted the same thugs to assassinate Castro . Bobby's long-time mistress was linked to exactly the person Bobby was trying to put
 In that case, retaliation was not only warranted but necessary, if the ‘Outfit’ was to survive . "Outfit" is not only needed, but retaliation was necessary, the author says .
 If Robert Kennedy were assassinated, JFK would have utilized all the resources of the government to arrest and punish his murderers . Kennedy would have used the government's resources to find his killers .
 Jack did not tell idealistic Bobby the details of his sexual encounters with Exner, nor about machinations with Mob figures to assassinate Castro . Weighing against that theory is a psychological one, namely that Jack did .
 If that hypothesis is true, then Bobby’s pursuit of Giancana makes more sense . Bobby's pursuit makes sense .
 He is simply unaware of his brother’s dealings with Giancana and is acting out of ignorance, he says . He says he is a victim of brother's pervasive pattern of deceit and denial .
 The Landsdale memo suggests Bobby knew of the plots against Castro and participated in at least one rather actively . But it's possible he may have been unaware of the Mob assets that were being readied for that hit .
 Richard Reeves, Robert Dallek, Nigel Hamilton, Laurence Learner, and Seymour Hersh all have been denied a look at the material . The material is closed to the public and numerous scholars have not been allowed access .
 The Mafia leaders were privy to what may have been the worst national secret in the history of the U.S. John Kennedy . The most embarrassing personal secret about John Kennedy was John Kennedy's secret .
 Nothing could damage the reputation of the U.S. government and of the Kennedy administration more than disclosure that it had conspired with organized crime to murder the head of a foreign government .
 The risks Kennedy took defy the imagination, and if it were not for the press, the Secret Service, White House staff, speech writers, aides, butlers, maids and chauffeurs, Kennedy’s legacy in office would have been exposed many times over, far earlier
 Ben Bradlee of the Washington Post and Joseph Alsop of CBS were already well aware of the president's infidelities .
 While Bradlee was a leading figure exposing Nixon in Watergate, he acted in the opposite fashion with Kennedy . Bradlee remained inordinately ‘discreet’ in protecting the Kennedy image .
 Lyndon Johnson and Jack Kennedy gave their penises nicknames . Not all males in our society give their penis nicknames, but both did . Lyndon Johnson gave his penises a nickname .
 Jack Kennedy enjoyed almost constant sexual infidelities during the entirety of his presidency . Jack Kennedy had almost constant infidelity during the entire presidency . The president's sexual infidelity was the subject of numerous scandals .
 The affair with Judith Exner Campbell went on for over a year in the White House . Kennedy’s entanglements with Pamela Turnure — see photo, right — (Mrs. Turnure) The affair also went on with Campbell .
 Priscilla Weir and Jill Cowan were ongoing playmates, but for an indeterminate length of time . The relationship with Pamela Turnure appears to have lasted two years; with Mary Pinchot Meyer, over a year; with Judith Exner, slightly .
 Identities of Playboy centerfold, or “Pooh,” from the French Riviera have not been made, along with many of the call girls listed in the table .
 Thirty-three extramarital relationships in three years, statistically, is well beyond the third standard deviation, not only for presidents but for the male population at large . It's squarely in the territory of sexual addiction .
 The average American male has had twelve sexual partners in his lifetime . The number of “single” American males who have had over 30 partners in three years is miniscule .
 "Had he lived, many of his indiscretions would have become public knowledge," Reeves says .
 Marlene Dietrich’s contact with the President is described in a rather uncomplimentary biography published by her daughter . Dietrich's contact with President was described in the biography published in her daughter's book .
 Ben Bradlee, publisher of the Washington Post, is a personal friend of the Kennedys . Bradlee is a close friend of JFK and JFK's wife . The Washington Post has published a book on JFK's liaisons .
 Bradlee had access to personal telephone numbers where he could reach the president . Bradlee was able to call the president on personal numbers he could access .
 When Judith Campbell Exner published her account of her affair with the President, she listed personal telephone numbers . Exner listed personal numbers in her book .
 The revelation of Gunilla von Post did not become known until 1997; source for this information was “20/20"" on August 14,1997 .
 Jack confided a bit in one woman who resisted his advances, and asked questions about women and marriage as though they were totally foreign topics . During one of these conversations I once asked him why he was doing it — when he was acting like his father, why he avoided real relationship,
 Like his father, his relationship to sex was almost a defense against intimacy . "There was a notable absence of real intimacy relationship with anyone," he said .
 I visited him twice at the White House, the first time for only 15 minutes in a small room off the Oval Office . The first time he visited him was for 15 minutes, in a room off Oval Office.
 He motioned to an enormous intricately carved rosewood bed, ‘That’s Abraham Lincoln's bed,’ he said. ‘The bed is Abraham Lincoln’t. Abraham Lincoln. That’�s bed, he said .
 The White House legend says when you make a wish on the Lincoln bed it always comes true . He laughed and told me about the White House Legend that when you made a wish, it always came true .
 Kennedy's Mistresses during his Presidency, and the Information Sources 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 4 . 5. 5 . 6. 5: 5. 7. 4: 6. 6: 7. 8. 9. 9: 9. 5
 Unnamed airline stewardesses had to undergo Secret Service investigations before being admitted to the President’s quarters .
 Priscilla Weiss was code named ‘Fiddle’ by the Secret Service, a White House aide . Weiss was apparently numerous soirees with the President . Weiss is a former aide to the White House staffer .
 Jill Cowan, code named “Faddle,” a White House aide; numerous contacts with the President . Cowan was code-named ‘Faddle’ by the White House. Cowan is a former aide to the President.
 Angie Dickinson, a rumored liaison with the President, spent a weekend with him in Palm Springs, California . She testified that she spent the weekend with the president . Dickinson's testimony is corroborating testimony that she was with him at the weekend .
 Flo Pritchett Smith, wife of Earl T Smith, had numerous sexual contacts with the President in Palm Beach, Florida . Flo Smith was married to Earl Smith, who was assassinated in 1973 .
 Jayne Mansfield, actress; two or three contacts, arranged through Peter Lawford, arranged for . Jayne's contact was arranged for her to make contact with Peter .
 Unnamed naked women in White House pool, discovered by Kenneth O’Donnel . Kenneth O'Donnel: Unnamed women in pool were found in the White House . Kenneth found the women naked in the pool .
 Susannah M., a 20-year-old; frequent contacts in Lincoln bedroom in White house; admissions made November 17,1993. Susannah . Susannah. M.M. was 20-years-old when she was admitted to the White House in 1993 .
 Marilyn Monroe was with an unnamed partner for menage a trois . Marilyn Monroe, Marilyn Monroe and Air Force One were in Palm Springs, Los Angeles .
 Tumure was on Air Force One carrying the President’s body back to Washington . He was carrying the body of the President back to D.C.
 Unnamed young woman at home of columnist Joe Alsop on Inauguration Day . Unidentified young woman was home at the time of the inauguration .
 Ellen Rometsch, East German prostitute, slept with JFK ten times in White House, around spring, 1963 . JFK slept with her ten times around the White House .
 JFK had sex with nanny at Camp David; she returned to Puerto Rico to get an abortion, allegedly paid for by Kennedy . Unnamed nanny to the family of a journalist . JFK allegedly paid her an abortion; she went to Puerto Rican to get it .
 Major sources of information arc Judith Exncr’s My Story . Traphes Bryant, Traphes . Bryant, White House staff member, Secret Service personnel, and a Kennedy . assistant .
 This relationship has not been included in the table since it occurred prior to his taking office . This relationship was prior to him taking office and is no longer included .
 Also not included is the incident at the CaT Neva Lodge in Nevada where Kennedy spent an evening with 3 call girls . Kennedy spent the night with call girls at the lodge .
 Gene Tierney, Angela Greene, Lady Jean Campbell, Zsa Zsa Gabor, Susan Hayward, Joan Crawford, Peggy Cummins, Sonja Hene, Hedy Lamarr, Tina Louise, Austine McDonnel, Mrs. Hene . Susan Hayward was Susan Hayward
 A rumor that JFK had once been married to Durie Malcom is referenced in Heymann, 641 . The rumor is referenced by Heymann .
 "Only a very few of the great Hollywood stars seemed to hold the attention for women that JFK did, even before he entered the political arena. I’ve known many of the greatest Hollywood stars," she says .
 Exner Exner' Giancana connection prior to his crusade against organized crime is debatable . Bobby must have known about some of this, but whether he knew of the Exnercana connections prior to that . Bobby's reputation for organized crime remains a mystery .
 Arthur Schlesinger, the in-house historian, is not much help either, inasmuch as he quoted Judith Exner’s former husband rather than Exner . He attempted to describe her allegations as desultory, spurious and rooted in fantasy . Exner's allegations
 White House telephone logs show Schlesinger, not Exner, was living in a fantasy world . Exner had an office in the White House, but not a White House office .
 Evelyn Lincoln coordinated the trysts; Traphes Bryant dutifully logged them in his diary . Traphes had a diary of his trysts with Evelyn .
 Marilyn often traveled with the President on Air Force One . Marilyn often stayed with Kennedy at his secret suite at the Carlyle and in the secluded Lawford beach house .
 This was successfully accomplished by a rather simple but effective physical disguise . This was achieved with the help of a simple and effective disguise .
 Marilyn would wear a brunette wig, large sunglasses that obscured most of her face, and unflattering ‘older” clothing . Marilyn would also wear a wig and large sunglasses to hide her face .
 Shadows and Secrets vate presidential airliner and others were casually told that she was Peter Lawford’s private secretary . She was told she was the president's secretary .
 Protection of Kennedy secrets was not merely the province of obsequious publicist-historians or co-opted journalists . Protection of these Kennedy secrets is not merely a matter of publicist historians or journalists .
 Kennedy played a significant role to stop the publication of any indiscretions as well . Kennedy played significant role in stopping publication of the material . Kennedy also played a key role in preventing publication of material .
 The pattern of denial within the Kennedy family is not merely of clinical interest, it's of interest . It's a pattern that has been patterned around the family for decades, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It had an effect on the whole paradigm of the assassination, which has not been carefully examined . It had a profound impact on the assassination itself, the author says . "It had a very profound effect," he adds .
 DeMohrenschildt was a friend to Joseph Kennedy, knew Jackie’s stepfather and her biological father “Blackjack Bouvier,” and spent numerous evenings in Dallas with Oswald . He was friends with Joseph Kennedy and JFK's stepfather .
 After JFK’s assassination, deMohrenschildt contacted Janet Auchincloss, whom he also knew, and requested a meeting with Jackie . The meeting took place in 1963 .
 Flere was a man who did not believe Oswald killed Oswald killed her husband . Flere had met with Lee and Marina Oswald over twenty separate times in Dallas . He had seen Jackie frequently when she was a pre-teen .
 Virtually every member of the Kennedy clan has gravitated to this posture . Virtually all of them have gravitated toward this posture, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He had real charisma and great potential, but he was young and thought he was above harm . He was young, but thought he thought he would be above harm. He said: 'He was young. He thought he had real potential but was not above harm'
 His recklessness is why the Kennedys never pushed the assassination investigation . His personal recklessness was why he didn't push the assassination probe, he says .
 The family didn’t want to uncover the connection among the CIA, the Mafia, and the President . The family of the late President Richard Nixon didn't want to reveal the connection .
 In Jungian terms, the “shadow” represents the opposite of one’s stated or public persona . The shadow is a shadow of the person you’re trying to be yourself .
 This handsome, brilliant, idealistic young statesman, who enjoyed and empathized with people, who loved his charming wife, who was blessed with caring and sacrificing parents and siblings . He surrounded himself with some of the most impressive thinking from elite institutions .
 Behind the scenes, however, there was a less pleasant and unpublicized reality involving money, bribery, manipulation, adultery and a consistent lack of propriety . "Behind the scenes" was a reality for the U.S. government .
 The gap between the Kennedy image and reality had grown larger, and in the ensuing campaign it would widen even more . Kennedy would win the White House .
 Secret Service agents say JFK was constantly being serviced by prostitutes . JFK was always being served by prostitutes, agents say . Secret service agents say that JFK was being served with prostitutes .
 Michael Selsmen, a publicist for Marilyn Monroe, also confirmed the affair between JFK and Marilyn . Marilyn Monroe's publicist said the affair was an affair .
 A suggestion was made on this program that Rometsch might have even given information to East German intelligence on Kennedy’s trip to Dallas .
 JFK gave a package to Exner full of money to give to Giancana . JFK gave Exner a package of money in 1960 . Exner gave the package to JFK in 1960, JFK gave the money to JFK .
 According to Jean Fiumphreys, the mob was instructed to arrange for unions to deliver votes to JFK in Los Angeles and St. Louis . According to the wife of Murray Flumphreys, wife of Sam Giancana, .
 Former FBI agent broke into Judith Campbell’s apartment to get information on the General Dynamics Contract . Hale, a former FBI agent, broke into the apartment to find out what happened .
 Nothing in this program suggests that Bobby Kennedy was aware of JFK’s close association with Giancana through Judith Exner .
 The public persona that was cultivated by his writers, publicists, and sycophants hides a different man altogether . Apparently, the public persona he cultivated by the writers and publicists .
 Jack Kennedy spoke with the profanity of a sailor and that he was not merely reckless but out of control sexually sexually sexually . Jack Kennedy was not just reckless, he was reckless and sexually reckless sexually. He was reckless .
 Perhaps the gravest responsibility of all rests upon the office of President. President. Obama . Obama has the responsibility to lead the nation to a nation .
 "No President can excuse or pardon the slightest deviation from irreproachable standards of behavior on the part of any member of the executive branch," says President Obama .
 Now, whenever 1 see those old films of Kennedy on television on television, I have to stop myself from heaving . Now, when 1 see . old films on television I have . stopped myself from . heaving.
 It’s hard to believe that here was this absolute fake, this womanizer and opportunist, coming off like Euripides . It's hard to imagine that here is this absolute womanizer, this opportunist .
 It's less interesting to call Kennedy a hypocrite than to label this paradoxical behavior for what it is, a sexual dysfunction of major clinical dimensions . Kennedy has a history of sexual dysfunction, including sexual dysfunction .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy clearly would not be considered a person in the “normal” range of psychological functioning . Kennedy would not have been considered a normal person .
 The hero of this strange, American myth is a person who, like so many others in this drama, is squarely in the grips of a mental disorder . The hero is a man with a mental illness .
 Marilyn Monroe's death in August of 1962 was like a microcosm of the Kennedy assassination itself . Marilyn Monroe is a minor character in this play, though one might think that Marilyn Monroe was a minor .
 It contains all the issues of promiscuity, recklessness, Mob involvement, surveillance by J Edgar Hoover, mysterious circumstances surrounding the manner of death, botched autopsies, conspiracy theories, and even cover-up .
 The symbolic linkage of Kennedy and Lincoln is also repeated in this mini-drama . In fact, the symbolic linkages of the two presidents are repeated .
 Marilyn carried a picture of Abraham Lincoln with her wherever she moved . Marilyn carried the picture of Lincoln everywhere she moved. Marilyn carried it with her everywhere .
 When she married playwright Arthur Miller, she was attracted to him because of his similarity with Lincoln . She married him because he was similar to Lincoln, and he was a good friend of Lincoln .
 Marilyn, as well as the world could hardly fail to know, admired Lincoln already . Marilyn, who is famous for her love of Lincoln, admired him already .
 Her idolatry had started in junior high school, she said, when her essay on Lincoln was judged the best in the class . She said Lincoln was Lincoln's best essay .
 Arthur Miller attended Abraham Lincoln High School in Lincoln, Illinois . By happy coincidence, Miller attended Lincoln High . Miller had attended the same school as Miller .
 Marilyn would enthuse to Joshua Logan, director of Bus Stop. Live years later, before her marriage to Miller, before she was married to Miller .
 Her love life was covered in the press far more than John Kennedy’s . Serious investigative works have since documented that she was puzzled, mentally unstable, pre-psychotic and gradually recapitulating the clinical dynamics of her mother, an institutionalized schizophrenic .
 Hollowing is a table of lovers, husbands, and rumored dalliances found in related literature . Kennedy had an even more pronounced sexual addiction than Kennedy, hollowing .
 Shadows and Secrets husbands husbands in an eight-year period argues for a psychiatric diagnosis along the same lines as the President’s .
 Marilyn gave inconsistent reports that she had been sexually abused as a child . The details appeared to change each time the story was rendered . Marilyn gave conflicting reports about the abuse .
 Rosenfeld says she would like “to put on her black wig, pick up her father in a bar, and have him make love to her” Rosenfeld: Her reply was: “I would like to put on my black wig and pick up my dad in a
 In deference to Anthony Summers’ assiduous respect for corroborating his findings, we might simply list the witnesses he uses to establish the viability of the Kennedy-Monroe liaison . We might just list them .
 Jeanne Martin, wife of Dean Martin, says Dean Martin . Dean Martin: "It's been a great year for Dean Martin" Dean Martin's career spanned more than 30 years .
 Weatherby, Jane Shalam, Paula Strasberg, James Bacon, William Kane, Stephen Smith, Anne Karger, Harry Hall, Fred Otash, and many others . Weatherby was one of the world's leading radio personalities .
 The research and witnesses Summers presents with respect to Marilyn’s sexual relationship with both Kennedy brothers is impressive and persuasive . Marilyn Monroe was married to the Kennedy brothers .
 Following is a table listing “cover-up” sources very similar to the table we presented in earlier chapters on Kennedy disinformation and cover-up .
 Individuals Alleged to have Covered Up or Withheld Information Concerning Marilyn Monroe’s Death Arledge . Arledge, Roone Lawford, Pat Beatty, Warren Lawford and Peter Bolanos among those alleged to have covered up or withheld information about Marilyn Monroe's death
 Ralph Greenson, her psychiatrist, said professional ethics did not allow him to comment on what he knew . He said he would not comment on whether or not he knew what he was doing .
 Greenson admitted that he did not feel she had killed herself . Shortly before his own death, Greenson said he didn't think she had done so .
 Joe DiMaggio possessed considerable detail about Marilyn Monroe's involvement with the Kennedys, Mob figures, involvement with Frank Sinatra, associations with the Cal-Neva lodge in Nevada, etc. etc.
 DiMaggio did not speak publicly about Marilyn and revealed little of what he knew about her . Marilyn died in 1964 at age 60 .
 Peter Lawford was allegedly present at Marilyn's death, and well-substantiated rumors abound that he was implicated in cleaning up her apartment that night .
 He is said to have destroyed her notes, notebooks, address books and any links to the Kennedys . He also destroyed her links to any links she had to have with the family .
 Lawford flew to Hyannisport and stayed in seclusion in the Kennedy estate . He was never called to testify in the case .
 Lawford's third wife, Deborah Gould, said that one night when Lawford was inebriated, he related some details to her . Deborah Gould said Lawford related details to his wife .
 She told much of the substance of that conversation to writer Anthony Summers . She told him much of what she thought of her life .
 Beatty, Natalie Wood, and others were at a party at the Lawford home a few hours before Marilyn died . Beatty and Natalie Wood were among those at the party .
 I would have been delighted to have accepted your invitation honoring Pat and Peter Lawford . I would've been delighted with your invitation to honor them, says author .
 "I am involved in a freedom ride protesting the loss of the minority rights belonging to the few remaining earth-bound stars. Unfortunately I am . Unfortunately I'm involved in . a freedom . ride protest the . loss of . minority rights .
 One of the purposes, perhaps, was to persuade Marilyn to remove herself from any further involvement in Bobby’s life . Bobby's mother, Marilyn, was also said to have been involved in his life .
 Giancana bragged that he was the last man to have slept with her while she was alive . He said he was last man who had slept with the Italian-born woman . Giancano bragged about his relationship with her .
 He was desperately trying to dissolve the relationship and stop her from calling him at the Justice Department . He said he was trying to get her to stop calling him .
 On July 30,1962, Marilyn made her final call to him; it lasted eight minutes, and it was on the Monday of her last week alive . Marilyn made the call on July 31, 1962, on the last week of her life alive .
 Marilyn received a strange package in her Hollywood home . Marilyn received the package the morning of the day she died . B4
 Marilyn opened it and walked out to the pool carrying its contents — a stuffed toy tiger . Marilyn opens it and walks out carrying the contents of the toy .
 Flanagan thought she was “terribly, terribly depressed,” but did not say why . Flanagan: "I thought I was terribly depressed" Flanagan did not know why she was depressed .
 Dean Martin’s former wife, Jeanne, says Pat Newcomb knew more about that evening than has ever been revealed . Robert Kennedy's arrival and Peter Lawford's call to Marilyn to clean up damaging information against the Kennedys, she says .
 According to Martin, “Pat got far too involved; she was deeply in love with Bobby Kennedy.” Martin says she was “deeply in love” with Kennedy .
 Pat Newcomb says he knew more about Marilyn than anyone else . Marilyn Monroe was a star of her own life . Newcomb: "If you want to know who knew more than anyone, it’s Pat"
 Bobby Kennedy was in Gilroy, California, on the night that Marilyn died . Marilyn Kennedy died a few hundred miles north of Los Angeles .
 Allegations abound that Bobby was with Marilyn that evening, that he took a helicopter out from the Lawford estate and returned to Gilroy . But allegations abound that Marilyn was with Bobby that evening .
 Marilyn Monroe was murdered rather than merely suicidal over her broken affair with Bobby Bobby . Of even greater importance, however, is some impressive evidence that Marilyn Monroe killed herself .
 Marilyn did not die of a deadly combination of alcohol and pills, as many think . Marilyn didn't die of alcohol or pills as so many think, she died of a combination of drugs and alcohol . Marilyn Monroe's death was not a tragic combination of pills and alcohol, it was a
 Tests showed evidence of pentobarbital and chloral hydrate, one of the less dangerous sedatives, found at her home .
 Marilyn’s Nembutal level was some ten times the normal dose . Her chloral hydrate level was twenty times the norm . Marilyn was some 10 times the . normal dose and her chloralhydrate level twenty times .
 Flowever, traces of pills in the stomach were not found; neither was a drinking glass from which she would have been able to swallow all those pills . Flowever was found to have swallowed all the pills .
 Typically, such suicides involve vomiting, but there was no evidence of vomit in the pathologist’s reports . The pathologist found no vomit in his notes .
 This has led some to suggest that Marilyn was given that dose of chemicals by injection . Marilyn's death has led to speculation that she may have been given the lethal dose of drugs .
 The autopsy report showed the colon had marked congestion and purplish discoloration . The colon was found to have marked congestion, and discololation . The report was published in March .
 No anal smear was taken, but speculation that the drugs were administered anally is reinforced by a curious remark made by Peter Lawford . The drugs are believed to have been administered by the doctor .
 Some years after this research was reported by Summers, Sam and Chuck Giancana released their book on Sam ‘Mooney’s’ The book is entitled Double-Cross .
 In this work Giancana says that he had Marilyn murdered to expose Robert Kennedy, in fact, that her murder was timed exactly at a time when Bobby had been visiting . Marilyn Kennedy was killed to expose Bobby Kennedy .
 Giancana revelations came in 1992 while Anthony Summer’s speculations and hypotheses were developed in 1986 . The Giancanas revelations were made in 1992 . Giancansa revelations were published in 1992, while Summer's speculations came in 1987 .
 It is not altogether absurd to conjecture that Marilyn Monroe was murdered in this manner, and that her murder was at the hands of the Mob as a means of compromising the Kennedys — and specifically, Bobby Kennedy’s war against the Mafia .
 Mooney received word from the CIA that Bobby Kennedy would be in California on the weekend of August 4 . Mooney had received word that the CIA had planned to meet Bobby Kennedy .
 Three other planes carrying four other men landed in San Francisco that week . Nicoletti said that three other planes also landed that week, carrying four more men .
 Mooney selected a trusted assassin, Needles Gianola, to coordinate the job . Mooney had selected a trusty assassin to help coordinate the assassination .
 Needles' sidekick, Mugsy Tortorella, joins him on board with two other professional killers . Needles, in turn, brings his sidekick and two other killers, one from Kansas City and one from Detroit. Needles also brings in Mugsy, a sidekick
 Bobby Kennedy finally did appear at Marilyn’s home late on Saturday, accompanied by another man . Bobby Kennedy appeared at Marilyn's home late Saturday night .
 Mooney’s men ascertained that Marilyn was more than a little angry at Bobby . Mooney's men listened in on the conversation, listening in on Marilyn's side .
 A team of surgeons taped her mouth shut and inserted a specially “doctored” Nembutal suppository into her anus . The procedure was performed by a team of doctors .
 The suppository had been prepared by the same Chicago chemist who concocted the numerous chemical potions for the Castro hit . Nicoletti said it had been a brilliant choice of the chemist .
 A lethal dose of sedatives administered orally, and by force, would have been too risky, causing suspicious bruising during a struggle, as well as vomiting . The side effect of ingesting sedatives typically resulted from ingesting the huge quantities necessary to guarantee death .
 Using a suppository would eliminate any hope of reviving Marilyn, should she be found, since the medication was quickly absorbed through the anal membrane directly into the bloodstream .
 The suppository’s massive combination of barbiturates and chloral hydrate quickly entered her bloodstream, rendering her totally unconscious .
 The men carefully removed the tape, wiped her mouth clean, and placed her across the bed . The men then placed her on the bed, removing the tape .
 Connections between the Kennedys and Marilyn Monroe were never established . Marilyn Monroe was Marilyn Monroe's muse .
 Some say that she had intended to call a press conference on August 6 and tell all . Some say she had planned to do the same .
 Telephone records, diaries, notebooks, and notebooks, a questionable autopsy, and a mysterious line-up of friends and witnesses who did not want to be quoted .
 Shadows and Secrets the death made to resemble a Hollywood starlet’s suicidal binge into depression, alcohol and pills . The death was made to look like an attempt to kill herself by suicide .
 If the Mob had failed in its efforts to bring the Kennedys into line, their next opportunity would come the following year in Dallas . The Mob's next attempt would come in Dallas, Texas .
 Greenson was definite in asserting that Marilyn Monroe did not commit suicide . Greenson did not violate professional confidentiality, but his notes show that he was definite .
 Three times a week, for twenty years, Joe DiMaggio had a pair of red roses delivered to Marilyn’s crypt . Marilyn died in 1972 at the age of 65 .
 DiMaggio would not permit the Kennedys to be present at Marilyn’s funeral, nor Frank Sinatra — who attempted to attend the services — attended the services .
 One tier above Marilyn, in the same wall, lies the body of an obscure teenager called Darbi Winters . The body was found in the wall of Marilyn's body .
 She had only recently told her mother that she wanted to be buried near Marilyn Monroe . She had recently said that she would like to be near her beloved icon .
 The death of Marilyn Monroe symbolically prefigures another assassination, cover-up, disputed autopsy, and conspiracy which would occur 14 months later to the President of the United States. What is psychologically interesting is that Marilyn Monroe's death symbolically .
 An important paraprax made by Peter Lawford is encrypted in this drama too . To underscore the ‘prophetic” aspect of this event, an important parapra made by Lawford .
 As mentioned earlier, this book is either a truthful accounting of American history or a masterful work of disinformation . It is either the truth or the truthfulness of the American history .
 Anthony Summers speculates about Marilyn Monroe’s ‘possible’ cause of death, namely an anal suppository containing deadly levels of Nembutal, was a speculation made by Anthony Summers in 1986 .
 If the Giancana text is a work of disinformation, then the writers have researched this material carefully and crafted their tale accordingly, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 The level of internal consistency in the book is startling, and gives an uncanny match to the speculation and research that has gone before . If the authors are not that familiar with the literature on the assassination or the death of Marilyn Monroe, then the level of consistency is startling .
 Joseph Kennedy Sr. contracted with mobster Sam Giancana to hit Marilyn Monroe and make it look like a suicide . The Saga of Marilyn Monroe — The Final Word, by Marilyn Monroe, will be published on Friday .
 This seems dubious only because it was precisely at this time that Bobby Kennedy was so actively pursuing Giancana . This is precisely because of the Kennedy's interest in Giancrano .
 If this theory were correct, it would also have difficulty explaining Bobby continued to pursue Giancana after Monroe’s death .
 The authors say that Jack Kennedy and his father knew of the impending hit on Monroe, but that Bobby did not . Bobby Kennedy did not, the authors say . The authors, however, say that Bobby Kennedy and Jack Kennedy .
 She commissioned Jean-Louis to create a dress for the occasion . The dress cost some $5,000 .
 She wore nothing underneath and had to be sewn into the garment . She wore absolutely nothing underneath .
 Peter Lawford introduced her a few times, but, to his chagrin, she was still not yet ready to come out on stage .
 Few seem to notice a joke by Lawford after his frustrating and repeated introductions . Few seemed to notice that Lawford had made a joke .
 In fact, fateful synchronicity seems to adorn the Kennedy myth at every opportunity . The Kennedy myth seems to be a myth that adorns Kennedy myth .
 Widow, Bone-Crusher, Enigma, First Lady Jacqueline Bouvier is a leading character in the new drama . Jacqueline is the First Lady of the U.S.
 Jackie Kennedy may have been the most publicized American woman of the 20th century . An imposing 57”, Jackie Kennedy was the most photographed American woman ever .
 Some psycho-biographical sketch and search through the shadows is warranted here as well . The film is set to be released on Friday .
 Her father, “Blackjack” Bouvier, was a womanizer with a reputation for shady deal making . Like Joseph Kennedy, her father was a shady deal-making womanizer .
 This solved many of the family's financial problems that Blackjack had created . Blackjack was able to buy the family out of debt . The family was saved by Blackjack's estate .
 Her parents fought bitterly, largely over Black Jack’s continuous philandering . Black Jack and Black Jack were married in 1973 .
 Jackie and her younger sister, Lee, stayed with their mother, who grew increasingly aloof and was often absent . After their parents’ separation in 1936, Jackie and Lee lived with their parents in New York .
 Jackie spent her junior year of college in France and became fluent in the language . She spent that year studying French in France .
 When she married Jack, Jack, she brought with her a 14-year age difference and a secret that she was almost penniless . When she died, Jack said she was 'almost penniless'
 The Kennedy family patriarch, Joe Kennedy, heartily approved of his wife's qualities . Joe Kennedy's wife was an ideal candidate’s wife, and Joe Kennedy approved of her candidacy .
 A Catholic politician has to have a Catholic wife, says Sen. Ted Cruz . As he once said, “A politician has . a wife, and a Catholic politician . has a . Catholic wife. As he says, ‘A . politician has a wife. And a Catholic
 Rose and Jackie did not get along well, and Rose blamed the miscarriages on Jackie’s smoking . Rose blamed Jackie's smoking .
 There were very significant stresses on her, however, for which smoking may have been only a symptom . There was very significant stress on her as a result .
 Jackie seems to have known about her husband’s cheating, for example, and one would suspect she was well prepared . One would suspect that she was prepared .
 Her father’s own infidelities, plus her relationship to her father-in-law, Joseph, gave her ample evidence that males simply behaved this way . Perhaps this was only to be expected from her husband, she writes .
 "I don’t think she realized what she’d walked into when she married him," she says . "She’s walked into what she walked into," she adds .
 He was in constant competition with his old man to see who could nail the most women . He was always in competition with him to nail the women .
 The closer John Kennedy seemed to come to the presidency, the more frenetic became his random search for women . John Kennedy's search of women became frenetic during his time in office .
 The Kennedys did not teli her of this event, but the ievei of tension and stress around her fife then and later were probably more than enough for any normal person to have to endure in a lifetime .
 Jackie threw a reception for Pam Turnure and Robert J Timmins, a wealthy Canadian tin magnate, when they married . Jackie threw the reception for the couple, who were married .
 She maintained contact with Pam for a number of years and even sent her children to visit them in Montreal . Pam maintained contact for years with Pam and her children .
 Whether she knew Pam Turnure was her husband’s ex-lover, at the time of these events, is not known . Whether Turnure knew her husband's ex was his wife's former lover, is unknown .
 She wanted to evade what she described as America’s ‘oppressive obsession’ with her and her children . She described what she called the U.S. “oppressive fascination” with her family .
 Editorials appeared describing the former First Lady as a traitor to her country . Editorials said she was a traitor and that she should not have been allowed to leave the country .
 Jackie was married to Onassis for six years, and became immeasurably wealthier as a result . Jackie became wealthy after marrying Onassis in 1964 .
 She settled for $42 million, or nearly $7 million for each year they were married . The couple was married for five years .
 As Charles Lindbergh longed for anonymity, so too did Jackie . But America’s obsessive fixation gave her little reprieve .
 She died in 1994; one wonders if that obsession ever left her alone for a moment . She was obsessed with her obsession with her work .
 In the following section we will try to come to some conclusion about who Jackie was, to try to peer beneath those tabloid headlines that defined her . The following section will attempt to find out who Jackie really was .
 One conscious and popular image was that she was an adept advisor to the President, consulting with him regularly on important decisions . One image of her is that she consulted regularly with the President regularly .
 There was an insularity and loneliness that Jackie not only recognized but shared, she said . "There was a loneliness and loneliness in Jackie's life," she added .
 He'd follow her around the room watching to see what she’d do next . You could see it in his eyes, he'd say . He’s always followed her around, following her around .
 This second image comes from one of her old friends or former friends, Paul Mathias . The second image is from a photo taken by Mathias of her former friend .
 She was Miss Narcissist, perpetually searching mirrors for worry wrinkles and strands of prematurely gray hair . She was constantly searching for wrinkles in mirrors .
 Within 18 months of JFK’s assassination, two dozen men were dangling like marionettes . Most of them were very married, very old, or very queer . The world's most brilliant and important men are dangling at her fingertips .
 She was nothing; an ordinary American woman with average tastes, with some money . "She was nothing," she said. "I was nothing."
 She was a creation of the American imagination, Madison Avenue, Women’s Wear Daily, Vogue and Vogue magazine . She was created of her own imagination .
 She was sharp enough to know that the more she exposed herself, the less impressive she would be, she said . She knew she was going to have to be more modest .
 'She’s very manipulative, self-serving, a real bone-crusher, and very adept at it,' she said . 'She's very manipulative and self-servent,' she added .
 The whole Kennedy clan has constructed a litany of lies about itself and now, finally, they are beginning to emerge . The family has been accused of a series of crimes against themselves .
 Most of the fabrications are built around JFK, and Jackie has created many of them herself . Jackie has also created many other fabrications .
 Christina Onassis’ assessment of Jackie is similarly unkind, and as a projection, it adds a symbolic element . Some superstitious trait out of her Smyrna peasant past suggested to Christina that some sinister force had to be connected with all these deaths, first her aunt, then
 It must be Jackie who was bringing all the bad luck to the family, ‘undermining everything’ as her brother had predicted, he said . Jackie's brother said .
 Death was never very far from “the Black Widow,” as Christina now called her . Christina now calls her ‘the Widow’
 'I would have given her fifty times what I gave her for the pleasure of never having to see her again,' he says .
 Kennedy kept Nancy Tuckerman and Pam Turnure with her as part of her own office staff . Kennedy kept the pair with her own staff .
 She later told my mother that her own life was dominated by Jack’s death . Everything she did and everywhere she went reminded her of him, she said . She later said that she felt like a ghost .
 The same "they" who murdered her husband were now bent on commercializing and degrading her, she says . It began to seem to seem that the same ‘they’ who had murdered her .
 Every doorman, delivery boy, neighbor, . neighbor, waiter, taxi driver, was a potential enemy . Anyone who had ever attended her in a store or smiled at her on the street was considered an enemy .
 Tier's apparent paranoia wasn’t helped by a series of ghoulish incidents involving Caroline and John-John .
 She remained in bed for long hours, taking sedatives and anti-depressants by day and sleeping pills by night . She was unable to be with anyone but also couldn't be by herself, she said .
 Left alone with her bereavement, she became obsessed with the thought that she had somehow failed her husband . She confessed to her Aunt Michelle that she'd replayed the event a thousand times, analyzing it from every conceivable angle .
 Christina Onassis had a superstitious feeling that Jackie Kennedy brought death wherever she went . Others have talked about the larger 'Kennedy Curse 1 , a litany of misfortunes which would boggle the mind .
 She was left severely brain damaged and remains institutionalized today . She is now a permanent resident of the U.S. hospital .
 Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, John and Jacqueline Kennedy's third child, dies two days after he was born . Patrick was born in 1963 .
 President Kennedy is assassinated while riding in an open car in Dallas, Texas. Nov. 1963 .
 Edward Moore Kennedy is critically injured in plane crash that kills an aide . June 19,1964, is the anniversary of the crash that killed Kennedy's aide .
 June 5, 1968 Robert F Kennedy, the United States senator and former U.S. attorney general, is gunned down after a speech in Los Angeles . Kennedy was gunned down in 1968 .
 The car Edward Kennedy was driving veers off a bridge to Chappaquiddick Island after a party . Edward Kennedy is driving the car that veers into the water .
 Robert Kennedy's son, Michael, dies in a skiing accident in Aspen at the age of 39 . Michael Kennedy was 39 when he was killed in the accident .
 John F Kennedy Jr. and his wife and her sister were flying a small plane from New Jersey to a family wedding on Martha's Vineyard . They are reported missing .
 On who Jackie Kennedy was, author William Manchester said, "I don’t have the faintest idea what Jackie Kennedy Onassis is really like" Manchester: "I spoke with that woman for many hours"
 She is still the target of more gossip and innuendo than any ten Hollywood movie legends combined, but she has gradually learned to deal with the clamor .
 These six images of Jackie Kennedy are merely images gleaned from a literature that is rife with fascination, fascination, hearsay, and hearsay .
 Shadows and Secrets these perspectives is tainted by the aura around her and none is a true or reasonably objective portrait . Yet there is probably a hint of truth to each one, says author .
 She redecorated the White House, campaigned to save and preserve Grand Central Station . She fought to preserve her husband’s legacy through the Kennedy library . Her literary achievements for Doubleday similarly worked in the direction of restoration .
 From a clinical perspective, we can come to a few conclusions . Considering that Jackie had to dodge paparazzi, like Ron Gallela, from wardrobe to bathroom for thirty years, she fares very favorably .
 At the age of 34 she was catapulted into national prominence as the youngest First Lady of this century . At the same time she was at the height of her career as the First Lady .
 Her husband cheated on her more than any reasonable person could either imagine or suspect . She was left with a husband of more than a decade and a half a million dollars .
 She was constantly in the limelight from the age of 34 until her death . She was also in the public eye for more than a decade .
 Hordes of obsessive fans followed her everywhere, even to the depths of the Adriatic to photograph her scuba diving on her honeymoon with Aristotle .
 Jacqueline Kennedy remained active, mentally alert, productive and succeeded in raising two children to adulthood . Neither one of her children manifested any significant psychopathology .
 She coped amazingly well with environmental stressors which would be unimaginable for most of us . She copes with the stressors she would have been unimaginable if she had survived .
 Of all the characters in this play only Robert Kennedy and Jackie would be considered reasonable candidates for a psychological diagnosis within the normal range .
 Despite the hundreds of covers on the National Enquirer and the cruel, defamatory gossip about her, her ability to cope with these stressors goes almost unnoticed . So, despite the thousands of covers, she goes unnoticed .
 "My wife is a shy, quiet girl, but when things get rough, she can handle herself pretty well," he says . His wife is shy and quiet, but can handle themselves pretty well .
 He completed only the ninth grade, but at 118, his IQ was above average . At 118, he also had an IQ of above average, according to his IQ .
 The only real father or father-surrogate was ‘Uncle Dutz’ from New Orleans, New Orleans . ‘Dutz” is a real father and father-sister .
 The Warren Commission thought Dutz Murret was a steamship clerk, but he was a bookie, a known associate of Sam Saia, in turn, a crime figure in New Orleans connected to Mafia kingpin Carlos Marcello . Murret thought Murret would be a
 Marina Oswald's early testimony after the assassination described a gentle husband . Marina Oswald’s early testimony later described him as gentle husband. Marina Oswald was a gentle man .
 Later, it changed to portray a more unstable and violenceprone individual, consistent with Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Later, the character was portrayed as a violent and unstable individual .
 Much of the evidence about Oswald’s mental condition appears to come from Marina, whose testimony has been irregular or from author Priscilla MacMillan-Johnson whose credibility has been questioned .
 Johnson actually was the first journalist to ever meet Lee Harvey Oswald . She interviewed him in Moscow at the time of his defection from Russia .
 After the assassination, she was given access to Marina Oswald . She wrote the book, Marina and Lee, in 1977 .
 Marina Oswald has made virtually the only significant disclosures she has made about the assassination to anyone . Marina Oswald made the comments to anyone in the wake of the Kennedy assassination .
 The work leads the reader toward the conclusion that Oswald killed Kennedy and that Marina believed he did so . The work is based on the fact that Marina Marina believed Oswald killed JFK .
 There is a tremendous amount of anecdotal and bibliographic detail which describes Oswald as an unstable character, an abusive husband, someone who in fact attempted to kill General Walker and someone who Marina believed was the assassin . Marina believed the assassin was Oswald .
 Marina Oswald said in a 1993 interview that she believed her husband was involved in some kind of conspiracy . In 1993, Marina Oswald consented to an interview and said that she believes her husband is involved in conspiracy .
 This notion was not expressed in JohnsonMcMillan’s book to any significant way . JohnsonMillan: "This notion of the future is not in the book"
 Johnson-McMillan denies ever working for the CIA, but Marina Oswald’s change of heart should probably caution the reader to treat the work with skepticism . Marina Oswald changed her mind and changed her view of the CIA .
 Oswald struck Marina once with his fists, according to sources in Dallas and New Orleans . Such beatings occurred as often as once to twice weekly in New Orleans and Dallas, sources say .
 A recent book by Norman Mailer corroborates the domestic violence was not a fiction, but it may have been exaggerated in Johnson MacMillan’s Marina and Lee .
 Marina said Oswald planned to assassinate Richard Nixon, to hijack a plane to Cuba, and that he attempted to kill General Edwin Walker in the Spring of 1963 . Marina also said Oswald attempted to hijacker a plane and assassinate General Walker . Marina said he planned to kill President Richard Nixon and
 The Oswalds were friends and neighbors in Dallas, Texas, for decades . Oswalds' friends and family members say they knew each other well . They say the Oswalds became friends and friends in Dallas .
 The American embassy consular official thought him to be “aggressive, overbearing, and insufferable’’ When he tried to renounce his citizenship, he called him ‘aggressive and overbearing'’
 That Lee Oswald was a KGB mole or CIA super-agent is part of the same American neurosis that puts out news releases about Jackie Kennedy falling into anorexia and having electroshock therapy .
 Sensationalism leaves none of our characters untouched, including Oswald . All the more reason not to relax our critical faculties is to discuss his background .
 Oswald beat his wife is supported by Michael and Ruth Paine, George and Jeanne deMohrenschildt, and neighbors who lived near the Oswalds . Marina’s inconsistent testimony is consistent with her testimony, says Paine .
 Marina, Marina, said that she locked Lee in a bathroom when he was thinking about shooting Nixon . Marina, for example, said she locked him in the bathroom . Marina also said that Lee locked her in a toilet .
 There is virtually no evidence to indicate that Nixon was coming to town, however, and the lock on the door was on the inside . The entire scenario of locking him in the bathroom is confused .
 Marina had to fight off a five-foot-nine-inch assassin from opening the bathroom door that couldn't be locked, to prevent him going off to hit a target who wasn’t in town . One has to wonder about an exceptionally petite Marina mustering the strength to
 Oswald seemed to be a person who liked fame, attention, and controversy, according to Marina’s recollections . Oswald's personality was a psychological trait, widely corroborated, that Oswald liked fame and attention .
 He seemed proud, even elated, that he was arrested for these activities . He enjoyed his appearance debating Cuban issues, and savored the shock value of standing alone in front of an American aircraft carrier agitating .
 Oswald's allegedly rude outbursts at the Cuban consulate fit with this vainglorious side to his character . Oswald did go to Mexico City, and his alleged outburst fits with this side of his character, says CNN.com .
 Besides his apparent proneness to domestic violence, this haughty element is a second personality trait in which we can have some confidence .
 Oswald appears heterosexual with respect to sexual identity . Oswald appears to be a heterosexual man . Oswald has a history of jealousy and jealousy .
 There have been speculations about homosexual tendencies, but they are supported by almost no evidence, whatsoever, whatsoever . There are speculations that homosexuality is linked to homosexuality .
 In the early days of his marriage, he suffered from premature ejaculation . As the relationship moved into its second and third year, performance improved, he said .
 He showed no homosexual tendencies in the USSR, and, contrary to Warren Commission comments, he was watched virtually all the time he 171. He was not homosexual .
 Though no direct homosexual linkage can be proven with Oswald, there is an interesting homosexual subtext in this drama . No direct homosexual link between Oswald and Oswald can be proved .
 J Edgar Hoover, Clyde Tolson, Roy Cohn, Clay Shaw, David Ferrie, and various associates of Shaw and Ferrie . General Edwin Walker — whom Oswald allegedly tried to assassinate — was also alleged to have tried to kill him .
 Walker was a right-wing member of the John Birch Society, later arrested for homosexual conduct in a bathroom . Walker was arrested in the bathroom of a hotel room . Walker is a member of a right wing group, later a homosexual man .
 Some authors believe Jack Ruby had homosexual tendencies, although specific homosexual relationships have not been proven . Jack Ruby is believed to have had a homosexual relationship with Jack Ruby .
 First, he frequently slept in the same bed with his mother until age eleven . He frequently slept with her until age 11 .
 First, he seemed to like children and often infantilized himself in play . Second, he often seemed to seem to be like children .
 Oswald often referred to Marina as “mama” and once when her breast milk was too abundant and causing her pain, Alik offered to suck the milk . Oswald often called Marina Marina as "mama" and often referred her to her mother .
 She was surprised when instead of spitting it out as she expected, he swallowed it . She was more surprised still when he spit it out .
 A psychological theory of the assassination emerges from Priscilla MacmillanJohnson’s observations . The psychological theory emerges from the assassination of George III .
 In prior chapters we noted that the Warren Commission was unable to determine a motive . The Warren Commission has been unable to find a motive for the murder of John Kennedy .
 Oswald liked Kennedy, read Profiles in Courage, Portrait of a President, and spoke highly of Kennedy to deMohrenschildt all in the year of the assassination . Oswald wrote a book about the assassination of Kennedy .
 Ele and Marina kept a Life Magazine photo spread on Kennedy's coffee table on their coffee table . Ele kept the Life Magazine spread of Kennedy's life on the table .
 Oswald discovered a love letter Marina wrote from the U.S. that angered him greatly . Oswald discovered the letter from Marina in a letter from the United States . Oswald was angered by the letter, which he said angered him .
 MacMillan-Johnson wondered if Lee might have sensed Marina's attraction to Kennedy, and his similarity to Anatoly in Minsk, and shot the President to unconsciously destroy Marina’s symbolic suitor .
 It is a wild speculation more than a theory, but it is probably the only psychological account ever offered to explain Oswald’s motives for the greatest crime of the century . It is the only theory to explain the motives of Oswald, who committed the murder of the day .
 American obsessiveness over this event still has not bothered to answer “why’s Oswald wanted to shoot Kennedy in the first place, if in fact he shot him at all . American obsession with the Kennedy assassination has not yet answered ‘why” Oswald wanted .
 The overall picture of his mental status cannot be rationalized away merely because he was a victim of unfavorable publicity, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He was a product of a broken home, a loner, confused about his own personal identity . He drifted from job to job, was content neither in the Soviet Union nor the United States . His emotional balance fluctuated between an asocial indifference to the feelings of others to unpredictable out
 Johnson's theory with respect to Oswald’s motives is not the only one . This chapter focuses on the mental health status of the major players in the assassination plot .
 On the basis of the available data, another theory supporting Oswald’s complicity and one refuting it could easily be forwarded . The theory of Oswald's complicity in the assassination of President Kennedy could be easily refuted .
 One characteristic of a “borderline" personality is impulsivity . For example, one characteristic of ‘borderline’ personalities is impulsiveness .
 Oswald’s decision to shoot the President was impulsive, consequent upon Marina having rejected him the night before . Oswald shot the President in the head after Marina had rejected him . It could be argued that Oswald decided to shoot President in response to Marina's rejection .
 Oswald picked up his rifle and went directly to the Depository to shoot the President . Oswald then went to the President's Texas home and shot him in the head . Oswald was killed in the Texas State House of Texas .
 His impulsive outbursts, particularly as a wife beater, support this hypothesis, according to CNN.com.com .
 Oswald’s attempted assassination of General Walker differed markedly from his alleged presidential assassination plan . Oswald attempted to kill General Walker differs markedly from the president's alleged assassination plot .
 Oswald planned his hit on General Walker, spent hours in his study going over maps, and frequently traveled to Walker’s home to find the best shooting location . Oswald's testimony can be held to be credible, if Marina’�s testimony is true . Oswald spent many hours
 Oswald had planned his getaway, hid his rifle, and even had a plan for how to retrieve it after the shooting . Oswald hid his gun and hid it in order to get away from the scene . Oswald had a detailed plan to retrieve his rifle after the fatal shooting .
 If this was Oswald’s modus operandi, it is entirely inconsistent with how he purportedly approached the presidential assassination . Oswald's actions are inconsistent with what he purportedly intended to do with the assassination .
 He forgot to take his pistol with him, which he might need for an escape . The man says he didn't take his gun with him when he left .
 Second psychological theory does not point to Oswald as the assassin, but shows an individual acting impulsively, on the run, scurrying home to pick up his pistol and having virtually no plan on what to do next .
 Oswald’s tendency toward braggadocio and exhibitionism is inconsistent . Oswald's tendency to bragocio is consistent with his exhibitionism . Oswald has a tendency to be bragged and exhibitionist, but not bragant .
 It would have been consistent with Oswald’s character to boldly proclaim that he had carried out this execution for the socialist cause and for Cuba . Oswald's character would have shown it was consistent with his character to have carried out the execution . Oswald was assassinated in Cuba in August 1961 .
 He denied that he shot the President to the press, to his wife Marina, and to his brother, Robert . He did not attempt to get any political leverage or publicity after his arrest .
 In short, the psychological analysis of Oswald’s character leads us in both directions, one favoring his involvement in the assassination, and one very much at odds with that analysis . The psychological analysis leads us to both sides of the debate .
 Oswald admitted to liking for Kennedy, but still might have been motivated to kill him, says Gerald Posner . Posner's theory offers to explain how Oswald admitted liking for JFK, still may have killed him .
 Castro warned Kennedy that continued attacks upon Cuba could result in retaliatory actions against the Kennedy administration . Castro gave a speech in Brazil on September 7,1963 .
 Posner argues that Oswald may have turned against Kennedy when he read of Castro’s speech two days later in the Dallas papers . Posner: Oswald may turn against Kennedy after he read the speech in the papers .
 Shadows and Secrets was aggressive with schizoidal features and was considered potentially violent . The book was published in 1998 .
 Even giving him the benefit of the doubt in a dozen spurious anecdotes, there is still enough hard data to indicate he was emotionally unstable . There is still a hard data that indicates he was emotional unstable, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Oswald the Mystery Oswald, of course, is more than a borderline personality . Oswald the mystery Oswald is the subject of a new book, "Myster Oswald" Oswald .
 He has been cast as the leading character from the dark side, the Darth Vader of this 20 th -century myth . The film is set to be released in November .
 Oswald seems to occupy a place very close to the core of the paradox which is the Kennedy assassination . Oswald's role in Kennedy's assassination is a key to the mystery of the assassination .
 John Fain of the FBI interviewed him on his return from the USSR . Fain asked him if he was in American intelligence . He said he was not .
 Oswald may have authored a letter to Hunt which was unearthed mysteriously in the mid-1970s . Oswald may also have written a letter about Hunt that was unearthed in the 1970s . Hunt died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to his head in 1966 .
 Oswald loved spy thrillers, watched I Led Three Lives as a boy, and read How to be a Spy in the year of the assassination . Oswald was obsessed with espionage and wanted to follow his own spy career .
 Guy Banister is a former FBI agent, CIA contract agent, Minuteman, and right-winger . Banister was a former CIA agent, FBI contract agent and CIA contractor agent .
 Banister told his secretary that despite Oswald’s leafleting activities for Cuba, he was one of his agents . Banister said he was an agent for Oswald, despite his leafleasing activities .
 Loran Hall's fabrication to the Warren Commission and Sylvia Odio’s testimony — described earlier in this text — give substance to this point of view . Loran . Hall’Sylvia Odio testified that Hall lied to Warren Commission, Hall said .
 Oswald visited her and her sister and posed as anti-Castro freedom fighters, she said . She said Oswald posed as a man who wanted to fight against the Castro government . Oswald died in 1961 in a house fire explosion in Cuba .
 J Edgar Hoover said that Sylvia Odio had to be wrong in her assessments and that an individual who looked like Oswald, Loran Hall, was actually the visitor to her apartment . Suddenly, J. Edgar Hoover . Hoover said he had been wrong in his assessment .
 This seemed to clear the way for the Warren Commission conclusion that Oswald was a leftist, pro-Cuban sympathizer, not a right-wing anti-Castroite freedom fighter . The Warren Commission concluded Oswald was not a left-wing, but a Cuban-American sympathizer .
 The Warren Commission went to print with that conclusion, only years later to learn that Loran Hall admitted he lied . Years later, the Warren Commission learned that Hall had lied .
 He never met Sylvia Odio; which leads investigators right back to the notion that Ms. Odio was murdered . He was never in contact with her, investigators say .
 Shadows and Secrets someone’s tracks, tracks perhaps left by Oswald himself . Oswald's tracks were left in the wake of his assassination .
 Hall admitted he lied and said that his life was in danger for coming forward with these admissions . Hall said he lied. Hall said that he lied . Hall admitted that he had lied .
 The Warren Commission accepted testimony from a car salesman who filled out a purchase order for a “Lee Oswald’s” associated with the Democratic Friends of Cuba, long before the assassination . To add more mystery here, the Warren Commission accepts testimony from car salesman .
 Oswald could not drive, then or later; but a document showed a document showing a Lee Oswald test-driving the car . The Warren Commission produced a document that showed a test drive of Oswald's car . Oswald was not allowed to drive, but the document showed him test driving .
 It doesn't take a rocket scientist to understand that the Agency’s attempts to explain this do not wash . It doesn’t take any rocket scientists to understand this .
 I have found hard documentary evidence that other files were opened on Oswald immediately, files that were very, very sensitive . Mr. Oswald was the leader of the Army in the early 1960s .
 This is consistent with Oswald being the object of a sensitive intelligence investigation or with Oswald as an intelligence asset . This is a configuration consistent with either being an object of an investigation or an asset .
 Andy Anderson’s report was reviewed by another officer, Donald Deneselya, who also recalled seeing it . Newman notes that another officer also saw it .
 It apparently originated from a CIA section headed by “T.B.C.” No one at this writing seems to have a credible interpretation .
 The Agency would not lie to cover for something that wouldn’t get them in trouble anyway, says the agency . The Agency is not lying to cover up for something they wouldn't do anyway, they say .
 The denial that they had any interest in Oswald is a big billboard saying there’s something else . The denial of interest in the Oswald case is a sign of something else, he says .
 He was either part of an operation or an operation was built around him, says CNN.com's John Defterios . He says he was either a member of a major operation or part of a large operation .
 The level of suspicion of government or CIA complicity in these matters rises in direct proposition to the amount of black ink used to redact documents being released close to four decades after President Kennedy's killing .
 Oswald was linked to anti-Castro Cubans, or in someway set up or involved with David Ferrie, Guy Bannister, and/or Howard Hunt, or other CIA and former-CIA contract agents . The picture of Oswald as an intelligence asset is not easily dismissed
 Anthony &r Robbyn Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair , December 1994, 129. Anthony &R Robbyn Summer, ‘The Ghost of November’, is published by Vanity Fair .
 Pawley and his cohorts were using Oswald to collect information on the left-wing JURE faction led by Sylvia’s father, who was in a Cuban jail . Sylvia's father was in the Cuban jail when Oswald was killed in Cuba .
 A fictionalized CIA thriller written by Robert Morrow mentions the name Tracy Barnes, a CIA case officer . Tracy Barnes is a case officer who might fit Tracy Barnes' initials .
 Oswald did not get categorized as a contract agent working for CIA sponsored, anti-Castro organizations so easily . Oswald worked for the CIA in the 1950s and '60s . Oswald was a CIA contract agent .
 He slips in here, there, everywhere — like Eugene Hale Brading — and is nowhere to be pinned into a fixed position . He slips into everything, everywhere, and everywhere .
 Just in case we get too conspiratorial, too Garrisonized, we are reminded of one set of facts or another that frustrates all prospects of certainty .
 In September, 1993, the CIA released thousands of documents dealing with the assassination of President Kennedy . A recently released, but redacted, document about Oswald from 1959 was recently released .
 In anticipation of the 30th anniversary of the assassination in November 1993, a spate of Kennedy books appeared . Gerald Posner’s Case Closed is the most publicized book of all .
 A short review of this important and controversial work follows in the Appendix to the chapter . The book is published by John Sutter and his colleagues at MIT .
 Oswald did not have enough money to afford the accommodations of a CIA operative . Oswald was not wealthy enough to pay for the hotel room he was in .
 This is the profile he cut, not the romantic, Ian Fleming image that fans of thrillers imagine would match the role he was supposedly playing in a conspiracy . This is not a romantic, romantic image that some fans imagine would be .
 Oswald lived like a disturbed, lone, lone assassin; he was diagnosed as mentally unstable and violence prone . Oswald was diagnosed with mental instability, violence prone and mentally unstable . Oswald shot President Kennedy Kennedy in the head in 1963 .
 George deMohrenschildt proudly called himself a “hunter of fascists” to George deMazazschildt . He took a shot at General Walker, calling him a ‘hunter of fascism”
 He hit his wife repeatedly, could not hold a steady job, and was rapidly losing Marina’s affection . He hit her repeatedly, she hit him repeatedly, and he hit her, she said .
 He placed a loaded pistol on the table in front of his Russian interviewer and wept . In fact, he was so out of control that he placed the gun on the . table in . front of the Russian interviewer .
 Both embassy officials recognized him as emotionally overwrought and unbalanced . The embassy officials said he was "emotionally overwrought"
 Oswald was extremely nervous and clearly nervous, especially when he mentioned the FBI, but he suddenly became hysterical, began to sob, and through his tears cried, “I am afraid. . . They’ll kill me.” Oswald said .
 This is what I must now carry to protect my life,” he said . He placed the revolver on the desk where we sat opposite one another .
 He returned to Dallas, was no longer wanted by Marina, was jealous of her attraction to JFK, and continued to crumble psychologically . He returned home to Dallas . Marina was jealous, and JFK was jealous .
 Lee thought the FBI was dogging him and getting him fired everywhere he went . Lee worked for David Ferrie, Howard Hunt, and the CIA, but was paranoid about the FBI . Lee thought he was fired because of his paranoia .
 When Marina finally moved in with Ruth Paine and decided to stay with her instead of rejoining her husband, he was pushed to the edge . Marina finally decided to leave her husband and live with Ruth instead of returning to him .
 The day before the assassination, he went to Ruth Paine’s house, where Marina had been staying, where he slept that night “like a zombie,” she says . Marina: “The day before he went there, he slept like a zombie. He
 He was in such a mysterious funk, just lying there, Marina even wondered if he was dead . Marina wondered if she was dead. Marina even thought he might be dead .
 Oleg Nechiporenko, author of Passport to Assassination, is the primary source of this article .
 The assassination was an impulsive act of a borderline personality in a state of severe emotional crisis . The same borderline personality that had attempted suicide in Russia, shot himself in the elbow in the Marines, and was sentenced to hard labor in a brig . The assassination is an attempt to commit suicide
 The fact that after the assassination he had to go back home to pick up his pistol is further proof that he was out of control and acting on impulse, without plan or purpose . The fact he went back home was further proof of his out-of-control .
 If this was a pre-meditated and planned event, he would have carried his pistol with him, just as he had carried the rifle . He would have been carrying his pistol, as well as his rifle, if he had been carrying a rifle .
 He abandoned the rifle in the Depository, went home to change clothes and pick up his pistol . He then left — probably, to high tail it out of town . Instead of high tailing it out, he abandoned the gun and went home .
 As he was fleeing, he shot officer Tippit, as part of this same, general, emotional collapse . As he fled, the officer shot him in the head as he fled .
 Oswald was cool, collected, rational, and cooperative at police headquarters less than an hour and a half after this so-called emotional collapse . Oswald's "emotional collapse" was the result of an emotional collapse, police say . Oswald was calm, collected and rational, according to police
 He was no raving maniac — at least in the eyes of those who interrogated him . Furthermore, he was no madman, according to those who questioned him .
 We cannot find ourselves particularly content with this ‘psychiatric’ theory especially when we hear how rational and composed he was at police headquarters . We can't find ourselves satisfied with this "psychiatric" theory .
 He was searching for an attorney and responding with deliberation to accusations . He was responding to accusations of sexual misconduct .
 When we consider Oswald as a “Mafia patsy,” another stream of evidence begins to collect . Oswald, the Mafia Patsy, was a ‘Mafia’ member . Oswald was a member of the Mafia .
 The HSCA decision was that there was a conspiracy and that at least four shots were fired in Dealey Plaza . The decision was made by the National Security Council of the United States .
 Hoover taped discussions of ‘contracts’; Trafficante, Marcello, Giancana were involved . Trafficante was involved in discussions of "contracts"; Trafficante had taped discussions . Hoover had taped conversations of "Contracts"
 We have already gone over the alleged connections; especially through Uncle Dutz . We have been told about the alleged connection between Uncle D. Dutz and Uncle Dazzi .
 Oswald had spoken to Jack Ruby only three weeks before the assassination . Nofio Pecora, who bailed Oswald out of jail in New Orleans, was a friend of Marcello . Oswald had been bailed out of New Orleans jail .
 Marcello was the man who ordered the hit on Kennedy, and celebrated Kennedy’s death at a restaurant in such a churlish way that Mrs. Kennedy died . Kennedy's death was celebrated at the restaurant where she was killed .
 Oswald did not drink or smoke or have any Mafia-like predilections . He fits as a patsy into a Mafia conspiracy easily, and is dripping with Mafia connecting links and associations . Oswald is dripping in fact dripping with mafia connecting links .
 Anthony & Robbyn Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994 . Anthony and Robyn Summers were married in 1994 .
 At Marina’s urging, Ruth called Roy Truly, superintendent of the depository, and asked him to consider Lee . Lee is a member of the board of education in Texas .
 On November 15, the Dallas TimeS'Herald reported that the President would be having lunch at the Dallas Trade Mart . The president was reportedly having lunch with President Obama .
 This is one of the weakest points in that whole theory, and only the wildest speculations can answer that question . Only wildest speculation can answer the question: 'What do you think?'
 There are some still-classified documents about the Paines, but if they point anywhere it is to the intelligence community, not the Mafia . The Paines are a prominent figure in the U.S. government .
 We cannot connect the Paines to a Mafia conspiracy without the greatest difficulty, and we arrive at another dead end . The Paines are the prime suspects in the 1980s and '90s .
 We are left with a composite picture of Lee Flarvey Oswald which is muddled, multi-directional, and paradoxical . Lee's portrait of Oswald is a muddled picture of a man whose life was muddled and multi direction .
 He and Marina still talked, and there was still hope for their relationship . The couple still talked and still talked .
 The couple had just had a baby, their second, less than a month before the assassination .
 Oswald added an exemption to his W-2 form to get less money withheld from a check he was anticipating at the time of his death . Oswald added the exemption to the form to help him get the money withheld . Oswald's death was the first time he had an exemption was added to
 This is not the profile of an assassin but a struggling new father with a future to look forward to . The story is not about an assassin, but it's about a struggling father who has a future .
 Borderline or not, he may have been a totally innocent bystander who was used, abused, and eaten up by a conspiracy he had nothing to do with .
 When he was taken to the police station, he was asked if he wanted to cover his face . He was then taken to a police station where he was arrested and charged .
 Like her husband, she has always left a very ambiguous trail of commentary . "Like her husband," she has left a trail of comments on her life," she says .
 Even now she waffles and is not quite sure he definitely did not do it, or if he was part of some conspiracy or government operation . Even now, she still waffles about whether he did it .
 She is consistent on one fact, however, that her husband has not been portrayed in the media properly, she says . She says that he has been unfairly portrayed by the media .
 Shadows and Secrets: The innocent side and the human side get very little press . The innocence and human side of the story is often overlooked .
 Gerald Posner publishes Oswald’s baby pictures with captions that leave little room to think of him as anything other than diabolical . Posner's bias is so thick that he even publishes Oswald's baby pictures .
 President Ford’s book is yet another example of the negative attire Oswald has had to wear . President Gerald Ford's book is one of many examples of Oswald's negative attire .
 There is evidence in abundance that Lee was not the unbalanced, violent and impotent, projected devil he was made out to be . Lee was made as a violent, impotent and projected devil, he was not, he says .
 Many thought he was rather nice — these were people who knew him well, too, too . "Many thought he would be rather nice," he said .
 "He was very refined, he really was, and extremely well-mannered. . He was daring, and very outgoing and a very pretty child," she said .
 Marina and Lee lived together in Minsk, Belarus, for more than a decade . Marina was married to Lee, who was a close friend of the couple . Lee was a friend of Marina's and Lee's from Minsk . Marina, Lee and Lee were friends and friends for more
 You have brought me so much happiness in life I sing to you and share with you my life. I sing . I sing with you. I share my life with you .
 When asked if KGB had interrogated any of their prime sources after the assassination, Igor Ivanovich suddenly became emotional . Igor Ivanovich became emotional when asked if he had been interrogated by KGB .
 Oswald, a leftist, was in the Cuban consul’s office in Mexico City on September 23, 1959 . Oswald told the consul that he was “going to kill that 193.” Oswald was a leftist and said he was going to kill the 193 .
 Oswald’s chimerical quality helps explain why he and the rest of the drama have taken on such mythic qualities . Oswald's image of Oswald and his political opponents date back to the same day . Oswald and Oswald's political opponents are seen as polar opposites .
 Even The Shark and the Sardines is in the ‘right-wing’ scenario as well as the left . Even the Shark and The Sardines has a ‘left’ and a right-wing scenario .
 The book was a bestseller in communist Cuba . Indirectly, it is about a highly successful CIA overthrow of the government of Guatemala .
 When we look at the assassination as pure drama, as a myth, Oswald’s function is less mysterious . Oswald's function is now less mysterious, as it is in a pure drama .
 "If he were unambiguously guilty, this journey would never have taken place," he says . "This journey would have never taken place if it were unambiguous guilty," he adds .
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s greatest significance may, in the end, be that he provides American national character an extraordinary opportunity to get a peek at itself . If we can never be sure what role he played in the assassination, it's not clear what role Oswald played .
 This may not be his function in the real and literal murder, but it does appear to be his role in the mythic story to which he belongs . He has fascinated the American psyche for almost four decades .
 We have used some of the tools and assumptions of traditional psychology to look at the most publicized, most “numinous” players in this psychodrama . We use these tools to assess the mental status of the main characters .
 Most of prominent figures in the event and its wake exhibit one sort of psychiatric weakness or another . One conclusion we might offer is that most of the . prominent figures . exhibit one . sort of mental weakness or other .
 Only Bobby Kennedy and Jacqueline Kennedy seem not to demonstrate psychopathology . Bobby Kennedy was the only person not to show psychopathic tendencies .
 Ruby had been diagnosed as a “psychotic depressive” by his prison psychiatrist . Ruby was diagnosed with a ‘psychotic depression’ in prison .
 Lee Harvey Oswald's mother, Marguerite, Baron deMohrenschildt, Jack Ruby's mother and perhaps Rose Kennedy's mother . Jack Ruby’s mother, perhaps Jack Jack Ruby, was a member of the Kennedy family .
 The Kennedy tale is very heavily populated with mentally unstable persons . The Kennedy story is a tale of a man who is mentally unstable .
 In 1963 only about 14% of Americans were thought to be mentally ill . By way of contrast, in 1963 only 14% thought to have been mentally ill in America .
 In this chapter we explored the psycho-biographical portraits of the main actors . Conclusion: We explore psycho-bio-biography portraits of main actors in the film .
 We are no closer to knowing what happened, or who did it, or why . But as detectives trying to solve a murder mystery, we are no longer closer to solving the case .
 Whatever approach we take, we are denied a realistic, linear, solution, it remains disturbing and unresolved . Whatever approach to solving the tragedy, it is not a realistic solution, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The assassination has taken hold in America’s imagination with a grip that won’t let go . But the story is so big that it functions in another realm, as well .
 Taken as a story, a drama, the assassination of John F Kennedy has all the characteristics of what Jung calls a “big dream,” an event loaded with paradox, radiating dialectical meaning, a mystery, and with deep roots .
 In our last chapter we will ponder the symbolic subtext, as psychologists attempting to get to the essence of a symbolic myth . In the last chapter, we will ponders the symbolism of the myth .
 We will look at Camelot, Lincoln, and other symbols that may be part of the compelling psychological force this story has taken on as the passage of time removes it from the reality of history into the realm of national legend .
 On first reading, this text appears to present new evidence and also suggests to the reader that the author began this inquiry with no particular bias or vested interest . The author of this article appears to be on the right side of the story .
 Fie interviews numerous important witnesses like Delphine Roberts, and some of Guy Banisters’ closest friends . He tracks down witnesses who said that Oswald visited Clinton, Louisiana, Louisiana in the presence of Clay Shaw and David Ferrie .
 After a few chapters Posner goes through a metamorphosis such that any evidence or testimony favoring the prosecution’s case is trumpeted, while virtually all evidence and testimony failing to support that point of view is disparaged or simply not addressed .
 This leads to an increasing tendency simply not to trust what Posner offers either in the way of conjecture or evidence . This leads the reader to not trust Posner's assertions or evidence, he writes .
 He cites works of Mark Lane, Jim Garrison, Robert Groden, David Scheim, David Lifton and others as having ignored this information . He cites the works of Jim Garrison and Jim Garrison .
 Oswald’s mental status when he was thirteen is of importance, says author . This may certainly be true, and certainly it can be argued that for a full and complete picture of this assassination story, such information is important . Oswald's mental status is important for a complete and complete
 Posner, the prosecutor, is not making points in this way in order to ascertain the truth or develop a complete and comprehensive picture, Posner says . Posner: "The prosecutor, however, does not make points in such a manner, but he does not want to make points
 He appears to be attempting to point up flaws in the conspiracy schools and simultaneously beating his drum, hinting that he has adroitly uncovered further evidence and testimony to buttress his case .
 Posner is quite guilty of the same astonishing lack of comprehensiveness . Posner has been accused of a lack of comprehensiveness . He says Posner should have been able to make his point .
 President Kennedy’s mistress, Judith Exner Campbell, who connected JFK to Sam Giancana and the Mob, is not mentioned or indexed in this book . President Kennedy's mistress is not even mentioned in the book .
 Oswald case could be easily closed if such telling details are left out . Oswald case is closed if details of Oswald's life are not revealed . Oswald was a prominent figure in the world's most famous assassination plot .
 He seeks to make his case more convincing by taking absurd hypotheses, setting up straw men, and then ridiculing these fringe hypotheses relentlessly . He says he wants to make the case more compelling by taking straw men .
 CIA officer Blahut’s theft of autopsy photos from the HSCA safe is neither mentioned, footnoted, nor indexed . CIA: The photos were taken from the safe of a CIA officer . The CIA officer's theft is not mentioned in the document nor footnot
 Garrison is discussed as a paranoid psychoneurotic and, by Posner’s accounts, not a single successful prosecution can be attributed to Jim Garrison in his whole career . Posner: Not one successful prosecution in Garrison's career has been attributed to him .
 Posner spends a great deal of time asserting Garrison started the rumor that Oswald held David Feme’s library card . Posner also asserts Garrison started a rumor about the library card that Oswald had .
 He says that Oswald never met David Ferrie, in the Civil Air Patrol or anywhere else, and that Garrison had done to him ruined them . He says Garrison never met Ferrie or anyone else . Garrison says he never met him .
 Garrison's actions drained Clay Shaw’s personal fortune and destroyed an innocent man . Shaw was never charged with any crime, but Garrison was never convicted of any crime . Garrison’ actions drained Shaw‘s personal wealth and destroyed his reputation .
 Richard Helms, Director of the CIA, admitted that David Ferrie and Clay Shaw had CIA connections . At no time in these virulent diatribes about Garrison does Posner mention that many years after the Garrison trial, Helms admitted .
 Posner then disputes Ferrie ever had any contact with Oswald . Posner claims that Ferrie was not in the Civil Air Patrol at the time Oswald was in .
 Ferrie is instructing a group of young cadets in the Civil Air Patrol . Oswald is clearly identifiable as one of the handful of cadets .
 The actual library card controversy, however, evolved quite differently . Library card controversy evolved very differently .
 The question itself was never recited in the report, but the nature of the question is implicit in his answer .
 Secret Service agents reported that Ferrie said he had never loaned his library card to Lee Oswald . Ferrie told agents that he had not loaned the card to Oswald . The Secret Service agent said Ferrie had said he did not loan the card .
 As proof of this he produced his own library card, which had expired and bore an address from which he had long since moved . As proof, he produced an expired library card and said he had moved from the address .
 The Secret Service let the matter drop . Apparently dazzled by his cooperation and his sincerity, the Secret Service dropped the matter .
 Oswald had a library card on him when arrested, but the card is not available for public examination . Oswald had been arrested on suspicion of using the library card at the time .
 We must presume that the Secret Service agents were reasonable men and that there was something about the card on Oswald which made them think that it belonged to David Ferrie . The card is believed to have belonged to Ferrie, who was killed by the assassination .
 Garrison picked up on a curious piece of questioning by the Secret Service, and his inferences are altogether justified . Garrison: "Rather than having started a rumor, Garrison picks up on the question"
 David Ferrie library card may still be a classified document remains an open question . Ferrie's library card is a classified classified document, but it is still a public record .
 Even the photographs come with captions in which the author’s bitterness is barely concealed . The author of the photographs is barely visible .
 Oswald’s baby pictures come with a caption stating that his mother was ‘unable to cope” with him . Oswald's mother was unable to cope with him, according to the caption . Oswald was born Oswald Oswald Oswald in 1945 .
 Posner’s photomontage of Lee Flarvey Oswald, from age two to twenty, is accompanied by scornful and mordent descriptors for every image . Posner: "Lee's life is in its prime prime prime form, and it's in its
 President Kennedy was hit by a bullet traveling from the rear, allegedly, and striking him at 2000 feet per second . President Kennedy died at the age of 92 at the time .
 Kennedy’s pitching backward not forward, not at all an achievement easily explained by physics . This resulted in Kennedy's pitching backward instead of forward . Kennedy's pitch was not the first pitch of the day, but it was the second pitch .
 Posner mixes ‘Thornburn’s position’ in with other data as if to weave a tale of ‘fact’ when he is really concocting a very speculative explanation of the Zapruder film . Posner: "Thornburger’
 First, the bullet was never found, and thus tying it to Oswald’s rifle is a guess at best . The bullet was found in Oswald's rifle, but it's not known how it was tied to Oswald .
 The Warren Commission failed to identify any branch of any tree that was nicked by this bullet, Posner admits . The bullet hit an oak tree has never been established . Posner admitted that the bullet hit a tree, but the Warren Commission has never established that .
 The metallurgical analysis of the concrete hit by this bullet did not conform to the metallic make up of the other bullets associated with Oswald’s rifle . Third, the metallurgy analysis of this bullet is not consistent with the make-up of other bullets .
 The reasoning of the Warren Commission and of its adherent, Gerald Posner, is at best questionable . The reasoning is questionable, Posner says . The Warren Commission's reasoning for the commission is questionable .
 If one’s intent is to convict Oswald, then all other matters must fit into place, he says . Oswald was convicted of shooting Oswald in 1963 . Oswald's trial was held in New York City, New York .
 If the metallurgical study did not confirm preconceptions, then explanations must be given . Even if no nicked tree can be found, there will be explanations .
 The explanations for the first shot are all predicated on the dogmatically held belief that Oswald had to have come from Oswald, from his rifle, and from the sixth floor Depository window . Oswald's shooting spree was the first of its kind .
 If one abandons this fixed, irrevocable idea — if only for a moment — one realizes that the shot that hit the curb and injured James Tague was over 30 feet above the President’s head . The shot hit Tague's head 30 feet away from the
 If we assume the shot was not 30 feet over the President’s head but only a few inches over his head, the origination point of the shot is the DaTTex building, not the Depository .
 Shadows and Secrets that Brading had Mob associations, and that he used an alias with police investigators in Dallas, are also of great interest .
 The failure to make a metallurgical match with Oswald’s other bullets suggests that the first shot may have originated from another weapon, may have been fired by another person, and may have aimed from another location . The failure of a “near miss” as over 30
 Such ideas were, of course, off limits for the Warren Commission of 1964, since it would have opened rather than closed the case . Such ideas would have been off limits to the Warren commission .
 Posner says alternate hypotheses are heresy to Posner, as well, resulting in ever more convoluted theories built up to explain things away on the basis of a very meager factual base . Mr Posner: "Such alternate hypotheses ... are heresy"
 A prosecutorial orientation requires that evidence and witnesses favoring the prosecution must be underscored, italicized . Evidence and witnesses not favoring this position must be impugned, even heralded .
 Posner's bias places him in the position of handling two unrelated witnesses, Silvia Odio and Barney Baker . It is quite instructive to see how this bias places Posner in the role of handling unrelated witnesses .
 Sylvia Odio was the Cuban refugee living in Dallas who testified that “Leon” Oswald visited her apartment with two antLCastro Cubans in late September 1963 . Odio testified that Oswald was in her apartment at the time of the shooting .
 When she saw Oswald on television after the assassination, she knew it was the man who came to her apartment . She knew Oswald was Oswald when she saw him on television . She says she knew he was Oswald .
 Sylvia Odio’s testimony is not favored among Warren Commission protagonists . It casts doubt on Oswald's trip to Mexico City, which Oswald was supposed to have taken place there .
 It casts doubt upon his singular image as a leftist, pro-Castro, Marxist, Marxist . It also casts doubt .
 His appearance at the residence of Annie and Sylvia Odio clearly puts him in an antiCastro role . He is seen in the company of rightist-militant, anti-Castro freedom fighters .
 This is not the image which the mythic Lee Harvey Oswald has been cast to play these last thirty years . The mythic Oswald has not been cast as Oswald in the public eye since his shooting rampage in June 1963 .
 Posner parades a litany of negative facts about Sylvia Odio in order to impugn the accuracy of her testimony and undermine the credibility of her account .
 He reviews her psychiatric history, reports interviews with some of her friends that portray her as “histrionic” and fails to find the letter Sylvia allegedly sent her father in a Cuban prison where she wrote of her experiences . Sylvia’s father is in prison in Cuba,
 Posner, in keeping with his prosecutorial orientation, seeks to take away any shred of Odio’s credibility, Posner says . There is no doubt that Posner seeks to undermine Odio's credibility, he says .
 None of this is in any way “featured"" information in Posner’s treatise . Posner's treatise is in no way ‘featured'" information .
 Posner says she lived alone in Dallas with her sister while both her parents were incarcerated under Castro . Posner: Both parents were in prison at the time of Castro’s death .
 Garrison is a gun toting, paranoid, megalomaniac drooling for publicity and fame . Garrison is also a gun-toting, paranoid and megalomaniac . Garrison: Garrison is the gun-wielding, paranoid megalomic .
 Sylvia Odio is a neurotic psychotherapy patient, prone to histrionic exaggeration . She is a divorcee who came from a “fractious marriage,” and a person under psychiatric care whose hysterical fainting spells simply cannot support any of her outrageous stories .
 These are the pictures Posner paints under the guise of objectivity and clarity of mind . Posner: "These are the photos of people who are in a state of mind"
 His bias becomes all the more evident when one considers how protective and uncritical he is toward witnesses who support his position . His bias is evident in his bias toward those who support him .
 The anti-Castro Cuban Loran Hall came forward and said that Sylvia Odio was wrong . Hall and two associates, Lawrence Howard and William Seymour, actually were the individuals who had gone to see her. Hall and Seymour said Hall and Howard were the two associates .
 Hall's account was placed in the final Warren Commission report . Odio's testimony was simultaneously vitiated by Hall’s account . Hall testified in the Warren Commission's final report .
 Odio vehemently denied that these were the men who visited her apartment . Odio denies that these men were her friends .
 Posner homes in on every possible weakness of Odio’s account . Yet he seems to have no interest in tracking down Loran Hall or attempting to learn why he lied to the Warren Commission .
 Posner interviewed Hall’s friends, relatives, parish priests... as he did with Odio . Posner did not interview Hall's friends and relatives . He interviewed Hall's relatives and parish priests .
 Jack Ruby had only recently been released from Sandstone prison when he was called by Jack Ruby in 1963 . Baker, a Hoffa goon, was only recently released from prison when Jack Ruby called .
 Posner does not investigate Barney Baker’s criminal record, his psychiatric history . Posner will not investigate Baker's criminal record or psychiatric history.
 He does not ask Baker why he called Dave Yaras, and makes no attempt to impugn Baker’s credibility the way he did with Sylvia Odio . Instead, he questions Baker's credibility and questions the credibility of his credibility .
 Baker strongly denies that Jack Ruby called him for any other purpose than to help him in his AGVA disputes in his Dallas night club . He simply leaves his reader with the unaltered facts, namely that Hoffa goon Baker denies that .
 Odio’s full psychiatric history is examined and her history of fainting spells is unearthed . Odio is examined in a new documentary entitled ‘Odi’ Her History of Fainting Spells is examined . The full transcript of the interview is published on November 1
 Barney Baker’s background, education, and rap sheet are ignored — in order to assure the reader of Ruby's innocent and uncomplicated contact with yet another mobster . Barney Baker is an ex-convict of the mobster, according to the book .
 One paragraph devoted to Baker's corroboration of Ruby’s innocent contact with the Mob and the Teamsters . Baker also corroborated Ruby's claims that he had contact with Teamsters and the Mob .
 Posner does not report that Giancana visited Kennedy in the White House, that his girl friend befriended Kennedy . Posner doesn't report that his relatives have written books revealing he confessed to them that he had a hand in the assassination .
 Norman Mailer’s subsequent text shows rather clearly that deMohrenschildt admitted he had a relationship with the CIA and identified the contact person, a fact that was corroborated by Mailer .
 One notable account is that of Joseph Campisi, a mobster who was the owner of the Egyptian Lounge, a restaurant frequented by Ruby .
 Posner makes a point to mention that Ruby did not meet with Campisi on the evening before the assassination . Ruby did go to the Egyptian Lounge the night before the shooting, even though he did go there .
 Posner implies that while Joseph Campisi was a mobster and owned the Egyptian Lounge, he had little contact with Ruby and certainly none on the eve of the assassination . Posner obviously wishes to imply that .
 Posner may even be hoping to give the reader the impression that Jack Ruby may not have even known Joseph Campisi . Posner: Ruby may have known Campisi, and may not even have known him .
 Gerald Posner failed to mention mobster Campisi's visit to Ruby’s prison cell . He did not mention CIA Counterintelligence Chief, James Angleton, destruction of the diaries of a Presidential mistress, Mary Pinchot Meyer . Posner never mentioned or made any reference
 In addition to his assessment of the relationship between David Ferrie and Oswald was fully and unequivocally mistaken . In addition, he was wrong to say that Ferrie had a relationship with Oswald . Oswald's assessment of Ferrie's relationship with Ferrie was wrong .
 Posner’s use of the Failure Analysis study of Dealey Plaza was taken from another source, with ambiguous attributions given . One important observation contained in this text but not contained in the review above .
 Three years and two million pages later, there is still much that remains closed . Three years after the book was published, the world's largest book of information was closed .
 First, let’s look at general psychological mechanisms that obtain to this story . First, we need to look at the psychological mechanisms behind the story .
 Ted Sorenson, Arthur Schlesinger, Pierre Salinger, William Manchester, Dave Powers, Kenneth O’Donnell and other Kennedy idolaters can’t be found on record hinting obliquely at Kennedy’s sexual pathology .
 To persist in propagating the notion of a glorious second term, hadJFK not been shot, seems geared only to make us regret his untimely death all the more .
 JFK supporter finally came out of his gilded closet recently and dealt with the issue . One such JFK supporter has finally dealt with it .
 Ben Bradlee, publisher of the Washington Post, wrote in his 1995 memoirs about Mary Meyer, his sister-in-law, and her affair with JFK . He felt that JFK deserved to be impeached for his behavior .
 Bradlee’s indignation does not match up with his much earlier Conversations with Kennedy, was contained in that book or others which he wrote afterward . Bradlee: “I’m not sure what I’ve said about Kennedy.”
 When writers omit major facts, that is a conspiracy to propagate the public’s denial of reality, they say . That is when writers omit the facts, they are trying to make the public believe they are wrong .
 When documents are destroyed and witnesses are killed, that is a conspiracy, presumably to protect someone from prosecution . Witness witnesses are also killed, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 In January, 1996, the government released a document showing FBI interest in Oswald’s trip to Switzerland, well before he defected to Russia . The document was released not a moment earlier .
 John Newman published a partial analysis of two million documents released by the government in 1992 . The documents are heavily redacted with black ink .
 Oswald’s mother sent him a $25 money order, the FBI learned . Oswald's mother sent Oswald a money order . Oswald was killed in the June 4, 1917, assassination .
 Newman says only the first and last page of the memo have ever been released . Newman says the other thirty pages are still classified . Newman: Only the first page has been released and the other 30 pages are classified .
 The level of censorship and obfuscation is chronic and continuing . Even the released documents are often largely obliterated . Even released documents often are often much obscured .
 Gerald Posner glibly says Mary Meyer’s death had nothing to do with the assassination, but conspicuously fails to mention that her murder remains unsolved . CIA Chief of Counter Intelligence James Angleton was caught red-handed breaking into her studio in search of her diary two days after
 Mary Pinchot Meyer, sister-in-law of Ben Bradlee of the Washington Post, was last presidential mistress of John F Kennedy . She was the last president's mistress .
 Meyer was murdered ten months after JFK, shot in the head, execution style style . Meyer was killed in November 1963 . Meyer's murder was the first time Meyer had been murdered since JFK .
 Within two days, Bradlee attempted to enter her art studio only to find James Angleton of the CIA picking the lock . Angleton picked the lock on her studio .
 Meyer had told her friend that she was afraid for her life and that if anything happened to her, her diary should be saved . Meyer had said that she had told a friend that if she was killed, she wanted her diary to be preserved .
 Angleton was looking for the diary which was later found and destroyed . Angleton's diary was found and later destroyed by the authorities .
 Robert Morrow holds that Mary Meyer was ready to turn over important documents about the assassination taken from her former husband . Morrow: "Mary Meyer was prepared to give over to Bobby Kennedy important documents"
 Cord Meyer, a high ranking CIA officer, was murdered . Cord Meyer was a high-ranking CIA officer and that was the reason for the murder. was murdered.
 Mary Meyer died in 1964, but Posner grinds out hackneyed, “it’s-overand-done-with” slogans thirty years later as part of an orchestrated chorus of denial, disinformation and concealment .
 Many of the actors have or had very solid reasons for their denying, hiding or distorting . Perhaps some of them, and much of the public, are just as glad to leave hidden things hidden . Only through denial can we still hold JFK as the prince we wish he was, writes
 Various portions of this tale have inspired vehement and dogged denial, from every quarter, for a broad spectrum of reasons . The story has inspired vehement denials from all quarters of the world, from all corners .
 Taboos were broken, trust was betrayed, unspeakable things were done — over and over again, at many levels . Taboos and trust were broken in the U.S. at times, the author says .
 The ability to accept and confront such things is a measure of maturity, says the author . "The easiest, simplest, and most primitive alternative is to deny them, to ignore them, and to make sure no one talks about them," he says .
 It could serve as a primary text for testing methods of Freudian and Jungian dream interpretation . Similarly, it could be used to test Freudian or Jungian interpretations .
 The Carousel is a merry-go-round made up of painted horses and animal figures . It moves in a circle, always leading somewhere but returning to its point of origin . The Car
 Kennedy assassination is an infinite maze of possibilities that leads round and round in circles, too . The Kennedy assassination was an "infinite maze" of possibilities, too.
 Like the snake that eats its own tail, the carousel symbolizes a course or a pursuit that reaches as its destination its place of origin . The carousel is a symbol of a course that reaches its destination as its origin .
 Jack Ruby was infected with gonorrhea at the time he killed Oswald . Ruby owned the Carousel Club in Dallas, Texas . Ruby met his underworld contacts, conducted his business, consorted with his dancers, worked the sensitivities of the Dallas police .
 It was his Carousel Club that got him deeply in debt with the IRS, a debt that was due and payable at the time of the assassination .
 The carousel makes a second appearance with Bobby Baker, LBJ’s right-hand man and legislative assistant . Baker was LBJ's right hand man, legislative assistant and secretary of state .
 Baker’s government salary was insufficient to support the lifestyle he was living, and for this discrepancy he was in the news at the time of the assassination .
 When Baker opened up the Carousel Motor Inn in North Carolina, this drew suspicions and serious senate investigations . Baker opened the carousel motor inn in the state of North Carolina .
 Both Johnson and Baker may have been engaged in inappropriate influence peddling and shady financial dealings . Both men may have had financial dealings with the White House .
 The third appearance of the symbol of the carousel comes in an oblique reference by Chuck Giancana in his book Double-Cross .
 Chuck had never been made privy to his brother Sam’s underworld dealings . Chuck was never privy of his brother's underworld dealings with Sam .
 Chuck always felt that not knowing was better than knowing, and his brother felt the same . Chuck always wanted to know more about his brother's death .
 It was the first time that his brother had “brought him in” to the secret world of Mafia machinations . The first time he had been brought in to the world of mafia machinations.
 If the “carousel"" had been interjected into the drama intentionally, we could complement the artist for pulling together diverse strands of plot in a subtle way . We could say that its real symbolic import is that this tale takes us on a sometimes intriguing, sometimes nauseating journey to
 The symbol would serve to alert us that we have embarked on an endless journey into paradox and contradiction and will end up where we began. It would be a symbol that would alert us to the fact that Lee Harvey Oswald really did do it all by himself. .
 Every interpretation that has been published, so far, fails to withstand the test of all the other “reliable’s evidence . The facts are many, corroborating evidence is plentiful, and corroborating information is plentiful .
 Even if we take into account as much as we can of the psychology and the motivations of all the actors and the . witnesses, we can neither fully accept nor fully reject any of the offered scenarios, we cannot fully reject the offers .
 Even if we surrender our conspiratorial thinking and accept Posner’s view that Oswald acted alone, we can’t explain why Posner withheld and deleted as much information as he did in order to achieve even marginal persuasiveness . Neither can we account for the contradictions and
 If comfort is what we seek, we must convert the Kennedy story from political intrigue and murder mystery to an enigma, a symbolic tale . The Kennedy story is a prosaic historical event, but prosaic history event .
 Joseph Campbell, author of A Hero with a Thousand Faces, wrote that interpreting dreams and interpreting myths and fairy tales are not altogether different processes . Campbell: Interpretation of dreams and myths is a process of thought .
 We look for similarities, common meanings, deeper themes, and consistencies between symbols, and then bring them into focus and closure . We look at similarities and common meanings between symbols .
 This is a chapter in which we play, speculate, and test the limits; and it departs radically from the more rigorously embraced realism of the preceding chapters . This is the first chapter of the new book, which opens with the opening page of the book's first .
 We begin with the most obscure symbols and work our way to the better known . The symbols include the most famous symbols and the most recognizable symbols .
 Once there was a spot, for one brief shining moment that was known as Camelot, Camelot . Don’t let it be forgot, that once there was . a spot that once was a . shining moment . Camelot was a place, for a brief shining . moment
 Camelot is the first of two major symbols associated with John F Kennedy and his administration . Camelot was the first major symbol of the Kennedy administration . The Camelot symbol was created in 1963 .
 The King Arthur legend was rooted in England, but the Kennedy ‘Camelot’ myth was an Americanization . The symbolism was picked up by Jacqueline Kennedy, who was in the middle of the myth .
 The Camelot story resonates because it touches on some profound human drives, desires, needs and conflicts . Camelot and Carousels will be shown on PBS' "Camelot" series .
 Somehow, it taps deeply into our psychology and, obliquely or directly, we find it fascinating . Somehow it taps deep into our . psychology . Somehow, they tap deeply into . our psychology, they say .
 Arthur became King of England when he showed that he (and only he) could retrieve the great sword Excalibur from the stone that held it . As the story goes, Arthur became king of England after he showed he could retrieve it from a stone that was holding it .
 The Knights of the Empire established a “round table’ to discuss and sort out their problems . The court was counterbalanced by a defense counsel, and an impartial jury .
 Arthur loved both Jenny and “Lance,” and does not appear to have interfered in their love . But when his knights accused his . Queen of infidelity, he had to administer justice .
 On the day of her execution, Arthur procrastinated long enough to allow Lancelot to appear and rescue her . Lancelot appeared to rescue her from her execution .
 Some 90 percent of the American rendition is concerned with adultery, not noble ideas . The U.S. rendition of this rendition of the Bible is about adultery . Some 90 per cent of Americans believe in the Bible, not Christianity .
 Some parallels with the Kennedy story; John Kennedy, like King Arthur, was considered a negotiator, not a saberrattler . King Arthur was considered to be a negotiator not a negotiator .
 A blood kinsman may have set in motion a process which destroyed the house of Kennedy . Kennedy's house was destroyed by the death of his blood-sister .
 Bobby may have precipitated his brother’s murder by prosecuting the Mafia, not realizing that the Mafia was tightly interwoven in his own family affairs . Mordred merely brought out the truth of the hypocrisy in Camelot, the author says .
 Passion versus the Dream is the interplay between passion and idealism . Passion versus idealism is the key to success in the world's most successful business .
 He was the first president to sign a nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviets . He was also the first to sign the treaty .
 During his three-year Presidency, Kennedy met with Khrushchev in Vienna — an historic and unprecedented moment of dialogue and reconciliation . Kennedy met in Vienna, Austria, in a historic moment of reconciliation and dialogue .
 In 1962, Kennedy announced a Geneva Conference agreement on a neutral Laos, another peaceful initiative . Kennedy announced an agreement on the neutral Laos in 1962 .
 He attempted to mediate and negotiate an end to the conflict with Cuba through a secret emissary . He tried to negotiate a peace deal with the government of Cuba in Cuba .
 He sought to negotiate a retreat from Vietnam before the U.S. became too heavily involved in the country's involvement .
 Kennedy resolved conflict through compromise, accommodation, and negotiation . This was essential to his ideological legacy . Kennedy's ideological legacy is to blame for his failure to achieve his ideological goals .
 As Arthur brought a new image to kings and kingship, so did Kennedy . Kennedy also brought an image to the White House and U.S. culture . Kennedy was the first president of the Kennedy administration .
 The world's greatest artists, singers, and dancers came to perform at the White House . From Nureyev to Pablo Cassals, the world’s greatest artists and dancers performed at the U.S. House .
 As Arthurian symbolism has stuck to the Kennedy myth, so has the symbolism of Abraham Lincoln . Abraham Lincoln was the first president of the White House .
 Lincoln and Kennedy trigger an archetypal image, the archetype of the hero . Both were vigorous incarnations of this imprint of this unconscious imprint . Lincoln was a vigorous incarnation of this .
 Some Jungian analysts have already made this observation . Both stand as personal and historic hero figures in American collective psychology .
 The metapsychology goes beyond mere mere collective infatuation with a hero figure . Still, the metapsichology of the hero figure is beyond mere infatuations .
 Abraham Lincoln was President during some of America’s most difficult days, when an internal battle was waged, a bitter, brutal war . Kennedy, too, fought America's internal enemy — this time, however, was more elusive and waved no discernible flag .
 Kennedy presided over internal struggle over America’s future direction . Whether to reach an accommodation with its arch enemies, the Soviet Union and the European left, or to go its own way, he says . Kennedy presided .
 Oswald has been cast as the American traitor, and certainly the enemy within . Camelot and Carousels are the collective Scapegoat in the Kennedy myth .
 We can see in Kennedy’s personal life, vastly hypocritical and contradictory to his public persona, the seeds of destruction through unbridled, compromising sexual passions . Kennedy's personal life is vastly hypocritical, contradictory to the public persona .
 Oswald has been made to occupy the role of the mythic, designated assassin all this time . Oswald was made to be made to . occupy the . role of Oswald, the . mythic assassin .
 Kennedy is forced by history to wear the wardrobe of the traitor, the shadow, who stands in opposition to all that American democracy, society, and Kennedy himself represented . At least symbolically, therefore, he is dressed up in this myth as the antiAmerican, Marxist-Leninist,
 "He is dialectical, protean, symbolizing always his opposite as well as himself," he says . He is a protean symbolizing himself and his opposite of himself .
 He is both communist and anti-communist, proCuban, anti-Castro, pro-Kennedy yet his assassin . He is also pro-Cuban and pro-Cuba, yet still his assassin. He is the same as JFK's assassin. "He is
 He was affiliated with the Mob through his uncle, but did not smoke, drink, womanize, nor gamble . Any Mob affihation was considered laughable by his wife, who disapproved of it .
 He was a Marine with a security clearance, yet a Marxist-Leninist with an active subscription to the Worker . The Marine defector was a Marxist Leninist with a subscription to Worker .
 He was a sweet loving father, cooing baby talk to his daughter in the bathtub, yet a borderline, vicious, unpredictable wife-beater . He was the father of one of the most violent children in history .
 Lee Harvey Oswald represents a Jungian shadow figure, the traitor, and the symbolic figurehead of the enemy within . John Wilkes Booth, like Booth, before him, was the figurehead for the enemy .
 Oswald symbolically represents the ‘evil empire’ of communism . Wilkes Booth became, in people’s mind, a symbol of the South and the Confederacy . Oswald symbolizes the "evil empire"
 "At the most conscious level, he represents that which was alien and seditious to the United States," he says . "He was seen first as a Marxist-Leninist," he adds. "He represents that that was alien" to the U.S.
 As psychological figure, it is possible he might even represent a displaced symbol of deeply running American fears of communism and the cold war, which were in evidence at the time .
 References to King Arthur and Camelot are based upon Green, Roger Lancelyn . References to Camelot and King Arthur are based on Green, Green, Lancelyn.
 The major figures in this American drama are King Arthur, his queen, Jenny, Sir Lancelot, the magical guide Merlin, and Arthur’s illegitimate son Mordred .
 In 1936, Hitler was a troubling presence, but world war would not break out for another three years . World war would break out in 1939, but it would be three years before it began .
 When the Lindbergh baby was kidnapped in the early 1930s, it was such a big story that it eclipsed wars, the Depression, and everything else in the news . It eclipsed the Depression and the Depression .
 The term was first used to refer to the kidnapping of Charles Lindbergh’s son and the subsequent lynch-mob like trial of Bruno Richard Hauptmann in Trenton, Newjersey .
 Hauptmann was caught, prosecuted, and put to death for this crime . But the unprecedented publicity of the incident led to an almost complete abandonment of objectivity . Hauptman was caught and prosecuted, but the publicity led to the execution .
 Scholars have alleged that the actual killer of the Lindbergh baby was never caught . Scholars have since alleged that he was the only person to kill the baby .
 Hauptmann was framed; very likely he was entirely innocent of the crime, and was a victim of mass hysteria which surrounded this case . Hauptman was framed by mass hysteria and was likely innocent .
 Hauptmann was a family man, a hard working carpenter in the Bronx, a man who loved his wife, and had just had his first baby... not a likely baby-killer . He was a hard-working carpenter and a father of two .
 When he was a teenager he had been arrested for theft, he had no criminal record here at all . He came to the U.S. in search of a better life . He had no record of theft .
 A German was selected as the likely culprit, and was readily seized upon by the American psyche as the designated baby murderer, the dastardly swine who could coolly and with pre-meditation commit this vicious crime .
 The evidence against Hauptmann was so circumstantial and weak that it causes one to wonder, perhaps . That’s a controversial interpretation, perhaps, but the evidence against him was circumstantially and weak .
 In that case, the irrational wrath directed at Hauptmann and his execution represents more of a ritual-sacrificial killing rather than the expression of the dispassionate hand of justice . The irrational wrath is directed at the man who was executed .
 American fears of communism and confrontation with the Soviet Union were very high at that time of the Kennedy assassination . American fears were high at the time .
 The cold war was not just a political-historical situation; it represented a nascent collective fear of annihilation . The Cold War was not only a political, historical situation but also a growing collective fear . It was a growing fear of annihilating each other, the author says .
 Marxist-Teninist Lee Harvey Oswald could have served as a psychological scapegoat for America’s growing fears of communism in the same way that Hauptmann served as the “designated” scapegoat . Oswald was a Marxist Teninist, who may have served
 The Lindbergh case and the Kennedy assassination are considered the greatest crimes of the 20th century . Both shared widespread mass mass popularity and obsessiveness . Both were considered to be the greatest crime of the century .
 Both were followed by botched crime investigations in which evidence was so tainted and distorted one could have very little confidence in the prosecution’s case . Both followed by bungled crime investigations .
 Both involved crimes in which the real perpetrators and/or conspirators were likely never apprehended . The real perpetrators of the crimes are likely never ever apprehended .
 In this model, Oswald functions as a symbolic poison-container for these American fears . Oswald's selection as the “designated assassin” distills, condenses and crystallizes them onto one figure .
 The Kennedy Tragedy encapsulated in a microcosm many of the shifts that were just taking place, beneath the surface, in the society . The Kennedy tragedy “foreshadowed” changes in the American psyche itself .
 In 1963, Americans overall were positive and optimistic, but in the three decades that followed deep resentments, disillusionment, cynicism, alienation, alienation and alienation . In 1963 Americans were more positive than they were in 1963, but the years that followed were more negative .
 The alienation was occasioned, on the one hand, by a lack if faith in the Kennedy assassination inquiries, plus an ever-increasing mistrust of the government in general .
 This was the government that led us into war in Vietnam; and it was increasingly perceived as lying on a regular basis . The government is increasingly perceived to be lying, the government says .
 Even after the Vietnam debacle was over, feelings of alienation prevailed and continued unabated . But even after that Vietnam debacle, alienation prevailed .
 In a sense, the whole Kennedy story summarized the emerging trends, the internal poison that ate away the lofty visions of the American dream and left in its wake alienation, disaffection, anomie, and pessimism . "In a sense of the . Kennedy story, the .
 From Camelot, in the words of King Arthur, by the sword of Excalibur, we will get through this. By the sword, we are going through this, says King Arthur . We are going to get through it. We are not going to die. We will get
 Whether we like it or not, Kennedy was not the democratic, intelligent, open-minded, articulate statesman his 205 years . Kennedy was a democratic and intelligent statesman .
 He was a manipulative, dysfunctional, secretive, secretive Sybarite, perhaps the most sociopathic and mentally unstable president in this century . President Obama was a dysfunctional, dysfunctional and mentally ill president .
 Both Kennedy and the public eschewed the discipline, the restrictions, the selfcontrol needed to maintain a healthy lifestyle . Kennedy eschewed discipline .
 JFK went on a binge of sexual license and promiscuity, and the American public went on an own binge of its own . JFK was the president of the United States during his first term .
 They saved less than they ever had, and spent far more than ever dreamed . They did what they felt like doing — more than any previous generation had done . They saved and spent much more than they had ever dreamed, and did more than anyone else .
 Thirty years after JFK, Americans legalized gambling and abortion, made single parenting socially acceptable . Americans developed the highest divorce rate and the highest rate of sexually transmitted diseases in the world .
 They presided over the distribution of handguns and narcotics throughout their inner cities, addicting their most vulnerable class to lethal substances like crack cocaine . They tried to raise a generation of children in homes without a father, with a television set as the primary caretaker .
 These are rather well substantiated megatrends of the thirty years that followed the Kennedy assassination . The Kennedy assassination is one of the most significant megatrents in the country's history .
 Only recently has the downward acceleration decreased — in some of these areas . The downward acceleration has decreased — recently, it has decreased .
 Violent Crimes, 1960-1990 Soum Worid Almanac, Na/v Yoifc Sapps Hcrad, 19&4 . Just as JFK was killed by some elusive, internal, traitorous predator, so was American society attacked in these years . Violent crimes, 1960
 Selfishness, narcissism, greed, self-interest, is a far more accurate description of Kennedy’s approach . It describes megatrends that were emerging in the American character for the next thirty years as weh .
 When Kennedy was killed, The Brady Bunch and Little House on the Prairie were popular TV shows . When Kennedy died, Kennedy was still a popular TV star .
 Maury Povich parades scantily clad 9-year-old girls out on afternoon TV, talking in sexuahy explicit language . Thirty years later, Maury has paraded scantily-clad girls out for TV talk show .
 Jerry Springer is the master of ceremonies over marital brawls and beatings . Sally Jesse Raphael hosts discussions of ritual incest and baby killing .
 American culture was overwhelmed by an enemy within, no less than its President feh victim to an internal set of demons . The entire culture has shifted; indeed, the American culture is overwhelmed by a enemy within .
 The young, idealistic, handsome, statesman-like star on stage was killed by something that was quite the opposite of himself . The brilliant, star-like American dream which has been rhapsodized for two centuries by romantics and ideologues seems itself threatened by internal
 JFK and Clinton were Presidents . Both became embroiled in extra-marital affairs which threatened their presidencies . Both may have contributed to Kennedy’s assasination .
 Kennedy's assasination as a foreboding of the times to come in the United States is a powerful one . Another suggested interpretation blends the rational and the irrational, the conscious and unconsciousthe elements in the American mind .
 Oswald will forever be the “designated assassin,” no matter how many other confessions are unearthed and how much evidence gathered . Regardless of what we do, it seems that Oswald will always be the assassin . Oswald was the "designate assassin" of the White House .
 Children a century later will memorize that Oswald fired three shots that killed the President of the United States . Oswald was the only person to fire three shots at the White House, killing President Kennedy .
 Jacqueline Kennedy's admonition that John F Kennedy’s life and death was a story of myth, fable, and legend, not of political science or history . This may not be the most rational conclusion, but it takes us to a new realm .
 This is not a murder mystery awaiting a solution, but a myth awaiting our understanding . This is a myth, but it's a myth waiting for our understanding, says the author .
 It remains a mystery, the literal truth of which shall always elude us, forever there when we are here, forever here when we happen to be looking over there . The truth of the universe is a mystery that will never be known to anyone else .
 Certain stories maintain a hold on the psyche and never seem to let go . Certain stories retain in their core an element of mystery and uncertainty .
 The most powerful symbol in this story as a myth is the number three, “finality,” the symbol of completion .
 The symbol would tell us that indeed the story is the same today as it was in 1963, despite all that has been said and written to the contrary . This story is anything but complete, but the symbol tells us that yes, it is the story .
 Oswald, a Marxist-Leninist, lone assassin, shot the President of the United States . Oswald was a Marxist Leninist and lone assassin . Oswald shot the president of the U.S.
 So was it then, and so shall it ever be, not because it is literally true, but because Oswald could be convicted in a court of law, and certainly not because Oswald actually did it . Oswald's story is not literally true now, but it is true, and not because
 A numinous American myth will endure and be remembered this way for centuries, resisting all rational attempts to set the story straight and revise it properly . No, it will memorialize itself because it belongs to an American myth which will endure . It will be remembered for centuries .
 Three shots, three bullets, 33 extramarital affairs during his Presidency, 33 members of Oswald’s fictional Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald asking his wife to return to him three times, all counterpointed with his favorite Chekhov story, “The Queen
 Three little pigs with three little houses, one straw, one of twigs, and one of bricks . One of straw, the other twigs and bricks, the pigs are straw .
 It is probably literally or historically untrue that Peter lied and the cock crowed three times or that in the year AD 33 a man named Barrabas was released by Pontius Pilate and that Christ was crucified exactly as the bible related, but this has not stopped the story from
 The actual intrigues which led to Brutus killing Caesar may not have occurred exactly as written, but it doesn’t stop the legend from permeating our history books and being learned as an event that we are taught .
 Oswald and Kennedy story has remained unchanged for all these years, despite an avalanche of facts to the contrary . So, too, with Oswald and JFK, the story has stayed unchanged .
 This is not a literal, historical event; it is myth, a fable, an American fairy tale which demands its own script, its own ending . This is a myth, fable and an American fable which demands a script and its own end .
 N14006, in the Stateville Correctional Center in Joliet, Illinois, is serving a life sentence for murdering a policeman . He has been sentenced to life in prison for the murder of a police officer .
 Fie is an inarticulate fellow, and a former loyal associate of mafioso Chuckie Nicoletti . Fie was an associate of Nicoletti, a former associate of the Italian mobster .
 He says he was the grassy knoll gunman and was paid $36,000 for the hit . He says the hit was a grass-kills-knoll hit .
 Given his ignorance of most of the JFK assassination, his account is quite credible . Given his lack of knowledge, it's quite credible, he's not a stranger .
 From my correspondence with him, this is where I would lay the greatest odds of determining who the real killer was, if indeed Oswald was not our man . Oswald was never our man, but he was a good friend, says author .
 The point of this book is precisely that it matters little who is right or wrong, who is the grassy knoll gunman, or even if there was a grassy-knoll gunman . But the point of the book is: It matters little whether or not to be right or
 The myth is intact, unchanged, and like all folk tales, it will be told and retold the same way for generations to come . The myth will be retold and told by generations of people around the world .
 There is simply no physical or empirical proof which could be brought which would, once and for all, solve the murder mystery .
 By now this is not a murder mystery any more than The Brothers Karamazov is . Indeed, by now, it's not an obvious murder mystery . It's not the first time this has happened in a film series .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, a mentally disturbed lone gunman, a defector, and a communist sympathizer, fired three shots and assassinated the President of the United States on November 22, 1963 . Oswald was a lone gunman who fired three shot at President Kennedy .