 At age 86, Fidel Castro has largely disappeared, unseen in public for months . Castro has been seen in Cuba for months, but has largely been silent since .
 His place in control of Cuba’s destiny has been assumed by his brother Raul Castro, age 81 . Castro was also a high-level participant in October 1962 .
 Raul visited Moscow in July 1962 to discuss Soviet military shipments, including nuclear missiles, and whose military oversaw the deployment of missiles in Cuba . As defense minister, Raul oversaw Soviet military deployments of missiles to Cuba .
 Fidel Castro sought to drive the United States and the Soviet Union to the point of no return . Castro was an avid recipient of Soviet nuclear weapons, staunch anti-imperialist, and darling of the revolutionary movements .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War . Castro saw it, a conventional war was likely to escalate quickly into a nuclear exchange . Castro and other Cuban leaders understood very well that ‘we would have been annihilated’
 On October 26, 1962, Fidel fired off a letter to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in Moscow . Fidel sent the letter to the Soviet Premier in Moscow on that day .
 In other words, the Castros were ready to risk it all in what appeared to be a terrible game of nuclear chicken . The Castros are ready to take on the challenge, but it's not easy .
 The toxic mix of nuclear weapons, rage against the U.S., and a readiness to embrace martyrdom for a cause—either sacred or secular—represents a danger in the world of October 2012 just as it did in October 1962 .
 Relations between the U.S. and Cuba will likely never achieve normality until the men who were prepared to launch nuclear war to defend their anti-American revolution depart the scene . The men whose dictatorial regime has run unchallenged .
 Ray Walser, a veteran Foreign Service officer, is a Senior Policy Analyst specializing in Latin America at The Heritage Foundation . He is a senior policy analyst at the Heritage Foundation.