 The concession did not have to be made because Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to an American ultimatum and removed the missiles without an explicit link to the Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The Jupiter missiles were obsolete anyway, Rusk said .
 The Cuban missile crisis is considered one of the most tense moments in U.S.-Soviet relations . It was a tense period of tension between the United States and Russia .
 Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine and threatened to attack Soviet territory if any missiles were fired from the island . Kennedy publicly criticized the buildup on Oct. 1962, ordered a navy quarantine .
 On Oct. 1962, the U.S. delivered an ultimatum to the Soviets, demanding withdrawal of the missiles, pledging no United States invasion of Cuba . Washington would withdraw the obsolete Jupiters as previously planned and not as part of any deal with Moscow .
 Kennedy developed the fallback position amid concern Moscow might reject the U.S. ultimatum, Rusk says . Rusk: Kennedy developed it amid concern it might push the two nations toward nuclear war . He says Kennedy developed a fallback plan amid concern Russia might reject U.
 The next day, however, the Soviets began dismantling their Cuban missiles, easing the crisis . The day after the crisis, the Soviet Union began dismantling its missiles .
 Washington considered Jupiter missiles to have limited military value . Rusk letter: Washington considered the Jupiter missiles had limited military use .
 Any trade-off would have involved Turkey, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, and was seen by senior Kennedy advisers as a threat to the alliance . Nevertheless, any public trade-offs would have included Turkey, an ally of the U.S.
 The incident might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war is disclosed in a book released last week . The incident was disclosed in the book released by the author .
 They managed to pass unnoticed through U.S. and NATO cordons in the northern Atlantic . But they were spotted by the Navy as they approached Cuba .
 Valentin Savitsky's B-59 submarine was quickly spotted by Navy patrol aircraft when it appeared on the surface . Navy patrol planes spotted the submarine on the Russian coast of Crimea .
 Submarine commanders could use conventional torpedoes only on orders from the navy chief . Nuclear torpedoes could be authorized only by direct order from the defense minister, the book says .
 Close surveillance by the U.S. Navy made it difficult for submarines to resurface for scheduled communications sessions . However, the close surveillance by . the United States Navy made the close . surveillance difficult .
 Savitsky eventually controlled his anger and ordered the submarine to the surface . Savitski was angry at the incident and ordered it to be brought back to surface .
 It was dark, but the area was brightly lighted by searchlights from United States ships and a United States helicopter buzzing overhead . Searchlights from U.S. ships and United States helicopters illuminated the area .
 Savitsky is not quoted in the book; he had died by the time Mozgovoi began work on it . Savitski died in 1953 .
 The previously unknown incident might have pushed the superpowers closer to nuclear war . The incident is disclosed in a book released this week .
 They managed to pass unnoticed through U.S. and NATO cordons in the northern Atlantic . But they were sighted by the Navy as they approached Cuba .
 Valentin Savitsky's B-59 submarine was quickly sighted by Navy patrol aircraft when it appeared on the surface . Navy patrol planes were able to spot the submarine on the Russian coast .
 The use of nuclear torpedoes could only be authorized by direct order from the defense minister, the book says . Submarine commanders could use conventional torpedoes only on orders from the navy chief .
 Kubinskaya Samba Kvarteta Fokstrotov translates to Cuban Samba of the Foxtrot Quartet .
 Mozgovoi says Savitsky was the only one of four submarine commanders to consider unauthorized use of a weapon . Mozgovo says it's hard to blame him, but that it's not clear why he did it .
 The crisis ended with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's agreement to withdraw missiles in exchange for President John F Kennedy's no-invasion pledge .
 The previously unknown incident might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war . The incident is disclosed in a book released this week .
 The bombardment went on for several hours and some sailors lost consciousness . Some sailors were hit by the bombardment .
 After an especially strong explosion shook the submarine, Savitsky got furious and ordered an officer in charge of a nuclear-tipped torpedo to arm the weapon . Orlov wrote in a new book .
 After an especially strong explosion shook the submarine, Savitsky got furious and ordered an officer in charge of a nuclear-tipped torpedo to arm the weapon . Orlov said in the book, "Savitsky became furious" after the explosion .
 In today's list of quotes from the late '60s to '90s, you'll hear about the Apollo 11 launch, the Challenger explosion, Hurricane Andrew and more . Today's list includes some of the most memorable quotes of the day .
 Readers: This is part three of a 1999 piece on Florida through its voices . This is the third time this piece has been published .
 Apollo 11 launch commentator Jack King recalls July 16, 1969 . "There was a majestic Saturn V launch vehicle sitting on Pad A with three calm and cool astronauts on board''
 They were the scum then like we are now, but in a decade, you'll see. In the next decade, they'll see, but they were scum when they were, like we were, now. But in the next 10 years, they will see. They were
 Many bright minds crossed the Florida Straits seeking exile.'' -Manuel Collado, part of the 1980 Mariel boatlift . Collado was part of a boatlift that took place in 1980 .
 Many Marielitos were blue-collar and some were criminals released from jails . While many of the 1960s refugees were among Cuba's elite, many were blue collar and some criminals . Some of the refugees were criminals .
 The dramatic influx of 125,000 people in just four months overwhelmed South Florida . The influx helped make Miami the capital of Latin America .
 The fire of Liberty City and the water of Mariel have left Miami faltering, uncertain and divided, at the most crucial point in its history.'' -Nov., 1980, Miami Herald editorial .
 In May 1980, four white former Metro-Dade officers were acquitted in the beating death of black motorcyclist Arthur McDuffie . The riots erupted in Miami's Liberty City after the acquittal of four white officers .
 Big Pine Key firefighter Joe Crehan recalls the chaos that followed Hurricane Andrew in 1992 . "Oranges!''
 It was, at least at the time, the most devastating hurricane in U.S. history . Hurricane Katrina was the most deadly hurricane in the United States history .
 Her family once owned each side of a road in Boca Raton and grew beans in the 1950s before South Florida exploded in an orgy of growth . Her family now owns two sides of each of the roads in South Florida .
 Submit your questions, comments or memories to FloridaTime@Gatehousemedia.com. Share your memories with us on Facebook and Twitter @FloridaTime .
 After exchanging notes, they realized the brush was even closer than they had thought . The brush is even closer to the brush than they'd thought .
 Russian general in charge of operations in Cuba revealed that tactical nukes were on the island and ready to be used . In addition to Soviet missiles that triggered The Crisis, the Soviet missiles were also included in The Crisis .
 The leaked memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev already have shown that Fidel Castro was eager to have the Soviets employ nuclear weapons . Fidel Castro wanted to use nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 There seems to be some confusion about whether he wanted them used in response to an American invasion of the island or even before .
 The Russians were under the impression that their Cuban caudillo was calling for a First Strike, and prudently declined the honor and risk . The Russians declined to strike .
 If those Soviet nukes had been used against American troops, there's little doubt that the American commander-in-chief, John F Kennedy, would have retaliated .
 There is much to learn from such retrospective discussions, mainly about human folly . There are many lessons to be learned from such discussions, such as human folly.
 He had a way of being present at the creation of one disaster after another, including the Vietnam War . He had been there at the time of the disaster, including Vietnam War.
 By OK'ing an operation that could not succeed on its own, then abandoning the freedom fighters on the beaches, the Kennedy administration succeeded only in tightening Fidel Castro's grip on Cuba and his tail-that-wags-the-dog relationship with the Soviets . The Kennedy administration failed
 If the Churl of the Antilles had been overthrown in 1961, he would not have been in any position to provoke a nuclear crisis or inspire three wasted decades of insurrectionary violence .
 If communism had not been allowed to sink its hooks into Cuba earlier, the world would have been spared a missile crisis later . Communism had not sunk its hooks in Cuba earlier .
 Robert S McNamara was the secretary of defense associated with so many American reverses . But somehow I can't imagine McNamara leaning across the table and telling Cuba's bloody dictator as much .
 It was like having Stalin at an exchange of historical reminiscences about the Katyn Forest massacre . It was a bit like having him at a meeting about the massacre .
 Robert Strange McNamara's string of failures in foreign policy led him to ever loftier heights in the American establishment, still giving advice . It is ironic enough enough to have him still advising the U.S. establishment .
 President Obama says this is the time just when Fidel Castro's regime is shakier than ever to relax the pressure and resume normal relations with Communist Cuba .
 McNamara offered the same kind of defensive praise for the brutal regime in Cuba that one used to hear about the Soviet Union and Communist China before the truth became undeniable . McNamara expressed some pro-forma concern about the complete absence of freedom under Cuba's Maximum Leader .
 Even if Cuba had been left to the Batistas, health and education would probably have advanced in step with its economic progress over the past 30 years . Health and education have advanced with Cuba's economic progress, experts say .
 Same old voices argue for an accommodation with the last remaining Communist tyrants even as they are toppled . Yet the same old voices keep arguing for accommodation with last remaining Communists . Yet old voices still argue for accommodation .
 There is something about having helped engineer a great series of failures in the long-ago that gives their present pronouncements an oracular aura . And there is something there that gives them an aura .
 The true Communist faith is now represented only by a couple of isolated outposts Cuba and North Korea . In reality, that terra incognita to the McNamaras of the world is only China . The last great redoubt on the Chinese mainland is North Korea and Cuba .
 One just hopes Cuba's Maximum Leader will live long enough to see it all come crashing down around him . Cuba's maximum leader is Cuba's longest-ever leader .
 The story can't miss, but Donaldson is hard-pressed to maintain the intensity during the film's entire running time . The film can't be missed, but it's a must-see .
 The film covers everything that happens between the discovery of Soviet missile bases in Cuba and the final accord reached between the Soviet Union and the U.S. The film was released in October 2013 .
 Donaldson and screenwriter David Self are required to maintain tension -in a story whose ending is a foregone conclusion . Donaldson's film is set to be released in October .
 Costner, also one of the film's producers, plays White House advisor Kenny O'Donnell in the film . Costner is also a producer for the film, which is based on the book, "Kenny"
 O'Donnell is privy to the most intense and intimate conversations between his old college chums, John and Robert Kennedy, who are now the president and the attorney general of the United States . The film is based on the conversations between the Kennedy brothers .
 Myriad military and political advisers are also on hand to weigh in on the crisis . hawks far outnumber the doves, with hawks outnumber doves .
 The president's reluctance to launch a full-scale offensive is a position supported by the likes of Dean Acheson and Gen. Gen. David Cameron .
 Curtis LeMay -is seen by some as indecisiveness and by others as outright cowardice, if not treason - is seen as cowardice or treason . LeMay's actions have been criticized as a sign of cowardice and treason .
 History has judged Kennedy's actions favorably, and Thirteen Days is in no way of a revision or rethinking of that history . History has been judged favorably by Kennedy, and that history is not changing .
 Greenwood's triumphant personification of JFK is one of the best portrayals of Kennedy to date . The sweep of the story occasionally obscures the individual personalities of some of the pivotal characters involved .
 Culp's portrayal of Robert Kennedy is not quite as successful but still praiseworthy . Culp: "It's a good story. It's a story of a great human tragedy"
 Ed Lauter and James Karen don't seem to have any dialogue at all - although both hover on the sidelines throughout . Frank Wood, Dylan Baker, Madison Mason and Madison Mason make strong impressions in the film's smaller roles .
 Michael Fairman's performance as Adlai Stevenson is a surprise standout . Fairman has been in the role for more than a decade .
 Costner, sporting an overripe New England accent that makes it sound as if he's doing a Kennedy impression, is coolly appealing as O'Donnell . Costner's performance is particularly coolly in the film, particularly when he's operating within the ensemble nature .
 When it comes time, late in the film, for Costner to extol the Meaning of It All, Thirteen Days comes dangerously close to pretentiousness . The film, which stars Kevin Costner, is about to be released on May 1 .
 Also attending the conference will be Arthur Schlesinger Jr., former special aide to President John F Kennedy . The conference will focus on Cuba's role in the crisis .
 The conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis . The crisis peaked when the U.S. learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba, just 90 miles away .
 Nikita Khruschev withdrew the weapons without consulting with Havana . The move enraged Fidel Castro's government . After several tense days of negotiations with Washington, the weapons withdrawal was canceled .
 Former presidential speech writers Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen will also take part . Former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni will also be taking part, Fernandez says .
 Also taking part in the Oct.-13 event will be a number of Soviet military officials .
 There will be two days of seminars and a day of visits to sites related to the crisis . There will also be visits to a former missile silo in the western state of Pinar del Rio .
 The international affairs research institute maintains an extensive archive on declassified U.S. government documents .
 Fernandez said the Cuban government will release a number of formerly classified documents on the crisis in conjunction with the conference . Fernandez: The Cuban government plans to release the documents . Fernandez says the government will also release documents related to the crisis .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for U.S. guarantees that Cuba would not be invaded . The missile exchange ended in a deal that allowed the removal of missiles .
 Ten were declassified in 1973 by the State Department, and the 11th was released in '79, she said . Ten were released in 1973, and 11th in 1979 .
 The remaining letters, written by both men, have remained sealed at the Boston library .
 World leaders may be reluctant to have frank correspondence if they fear the documents might be released later . Blight said the reason may be that world leaders may have been reluctant .
 St. Cit Cit Cit at ion CHRISTOPHER CALLAHAN, ' United States won't release 11 letters on missile crisis', St. cit at ion . U.S. won't be releasing 11 letters, he says .
 It did so despite a breakdown in communication between Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, his defence minister and senior military commanders, says the author . The author, retired Cmdr. Michael O'Neill, says it was the result of a breakdown of communication between the PM and
 He also suggests that nuclear weapons were deployed in Canada at the time . The Canadian Forces was prepared for nuclear war, he says .
 Canadian Involvement Reconsidered, will be published next month by the Toronto-based Canadian Institute of Strategic Studies .
 He credits defence minister Douglas Harkness and Rear Admiral Kenneth Dyer with making decisions which allowed the forces to defend .
 On Oct. 1962, the United States obtained irrefutable evidence that the Soviet Union had installed medium-range missiles in Cuba which were nearly operational . The U.S. obtained the evidence in October 1962 .
 President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of the island . U.S. military stepped up patrols against Soviet submarines which had entered the Atlantic .
 Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Krushchev conducted 10 days of tense negotiations . The negotiations took place in the days leading up to the brink of war .
 The U.S. and Canadian military continued their patrols to flush Soviet subs out of North American waters . Soviet subs, many armed with nuclear weapons, were still at the top of the list .
 The United States needed Canadian help to protect the continent, Haydon writes . The North American Aerospace Defence agreement provided for such co-operation, he says .
 The prime minister was upset with Kennedy for what he saw as a lack of consultation with Canada over the crisis . Kennedy was also upset with Canada for not consulting with the government .
 Diefenbaker delayed ordering the forces to a higher state of alert . As a result of those and other factors, the forces were delayed ordering a higher alert .
 Harkness, realizing the seriousness of the crisis, eventually took it upon himself to tell senior commanders to do what was necessary .
 With the United States navy calling for assistance, Dyer ordered much of the fleet to sea .
 The navy and air force played key roles in finding and tracking Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic and close to the coastline .
 BOMARC surface-to-air missiles were designed to destroy Soviet nuclear bombers north of populated centres . Haydon marshals an array of evidence to suggest the missiles were armed and ready at North Bay .
 CF-101 Voodoo fighters may also have been armed with nuclear weapons, Haydon says . Haydon: "CF-101 fighters may have been able to carry nuclear weapons"
 The Diefenbaker government, fearing a nuclear weapons debate, sidestepped the question during the crisis . The government avoided the issue during the nuclear crisis .
 A supposed 'missile gap' helped John F Kennedy defeat Richard M Nixon for the presidency in 1960 . A supposed "Missile gap" or fear that the Soviets had more and bigger missiles than did we .
 "We had the decisive edge in missilery after all but the anxiety remained. Turned out that the ""gap"" faced the other way we had the crucial edge in Missilery .
 Kennedy permitted Cuban exiles secretly training in Central America to attempt to recapture their country from Fidel Castro and communism . Then, two months into his administration, Kennedy permitted exiles to secretly train in Central .
 Castro crushed the invasion at the Bay of Pigs and further consolidated his power by constantly warning countrymen of a perpetually imminent second invasion . Castro continued to warn people of a second invasion in the country .
 The Soviets, led by Nikita Khrushchev, began constructing missile launch sites in Cuba to reassure Castro . The Soviets began building missile sites to reassure the Castro Castro of his Cuban government .
 When aerial photography confirmed the construction, Kennedy summoned senior advisers for an intense week of secret meetings . Public officials attempted to maintain normal schedules .
 Hardliners among them advocated ""pre-emptive" strikes to take out the launch sites before they were operational . The hardliners are believed to be hardliners in the U.S.
 President Kennedy told the nation of the construction of the sites and of a ""quarantine"" of Cuba to prevent the delivery of missiles for the sites to launch . And so, on Oct. 1962, President Kennedy said .
 In the end, Khrushchev and Kennedy ""kept their cool,"" as slangsters of the day would have said . In the aftermath of the war, Kennedy and Nixon "kept cool" in the end of the conflict .
 The first Soviet vessel that approached the quarantine line was allowed to pass, judging it had no missiles aboard anyway, and the others turned around . We permitted the first Soviet ship to pass .
 25 years later, at a conference in Moscow, we learned that some of those missile sites had been completed, were operational and that area commanders had the authority to launch, if we had taken a shot at them .
 Cuba erects a deactivated Soviet medium-range missile on the Havana coast as a monument to the Cuban missile crisis .
 The 80-foot missile, similar to the more than 40 Soviet R-12 missiles deployed in 1962, was positioned pointing straight up, not north toward the U.S. The missile was deployed in the Soviet Union .
 In October, 1962, the United States pressured the Soviet Union to remove the missiles . The U.S. pressured the Soviets to remove missiles from the USSR in October .
 The missile is a monument to "the Cubans' refusal to be bowed," Cuban military officials say . Cuban military: Missile is a "monument to the Cubans" refusal to bow .
 Radem Cruz Soto joined neighbors streaming out of their oneand two-story concrete homes in this farming community to throng the main road for a closer look .
 The transports carried no insignias; the pink-faced young men wore ordinary clothes . The transports were accompanied by pink-face young men wearing ordinary clothes.
 The 19-year-old economics student swelled with pride -and a feeling of relief . He said he was proud to be able to walk free from the streets .
 A force of exiles organized, armed and trained by the U.S. had landed at Playa Giron, a stretch of beach at the mouth of the Bay of Pigs, in an attempt to wrest the Caribbean nation from the socialist revolution of Fidel Castro . Eighteen months earlier
 The attack was a disaster, but U.S.-backed insurgents continued to hold the Sierra del Escambray mountains around the southern port city of Trinidad in Sancti Spiritus province . The attack is a disaster but insurgents continue to hold on .
 Havana officials saw the work of the CIA in warehouse fires, factory explosions and plots on Castro's life . Officials in Havana saw the CIA's work in the warehouse fires and factory explosions .
 Cubans braced for a larger invasion, this time by United States troops . The U.S. troops are expected to arrive in Cuba this week .
 The unannounced delivery of the Soviet R-12 and R-14 medium-range ballistic missiles seemed to be a relief . Cruz Soto: "Long-awaited help finally had arrived"
 Cuba now has nuclear weapons capable of striking most cities in the continental United States, he said . Cuba now had the deterrent it needed to pursue its new brand of socialism free of interference .
 Spy plane photos of Soviet base construction 40 years ago this coming Monday would trigger the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War . Spy plane photographs of Soviet military base construction at the foot of the Cordillera de Guaniguanico mountains would trigger a confrontation .
 Americans remember the Cuban missile crisis as a moment when the world seemed to teeter on the edge of nuclear armageddon . But to Cubans it was a time of courage and defiance, a brief instance when the little country had the strength to stand up .
 Cubans say it wasn't until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to take the missiles back that they felt vulnerable . Castro learned about the deal through news reports .
 Rudolf Anderson during the crisis, and the Soviet missile launcher used to shoot it down . Anderson was shot down by the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 President John F Kennedy ordered anti-aircraft artillery artillery artillery to be used in Cuba's Malecades . State-run museum displays map of the naval blockade ordered by President Kennedy .
 Cubans call ""la Crisis de Octubre"" as part of a larger narrative, one also represented by newspaper headlines describing United States sanctions against Cuba and the tank commanded by Castro to defend the Bay of Pigs .
 Cubans say it was the failed April 1961 landing at Playa Giron that led Castro to seek Soviet protection . Castro sought protection from the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 He outlines what his commanders believed would be the United States battle plan . Running his fingers over a map, he outlines what he believed was the U.S. battle plan. He outlines it in detail .
 Operation Mongoose was authorized by Kennedy in November 1961 . It combined diplomatic pressure, economic sanctions and military threats with industrial sabotage and support for insurgents .
 When Castro asked for conventional missiles to defend Cuba, Khrushchev saw an opportunity . Khruschev saw the opportunity to attack Cuba with conventional missiles .
 In the years since World War II, the U.S. had surrounded the Soviet Union with hundreds of nuclear warheads . The United States had hundreds of warheads in its arsenal .
 The Soviets, meanwhile, had no more than 50 weapons capable of striking the U.S. The Soviets had only 50 weapons that could strike the United States . The Soviets' weapons were limited to about 50,000 .
 The Soviet soldiers, their sunburned faces glistening in the tropical heat, smiled and waved to their Cuban companions .
 After years of tension with the stronger United States, the missiles brought Cubans a sense of relief . The missiles were launched by Cuban rebels in 2009 . The U.S. missile strike was the first to hit Cuba .
 From the beginning, Cuba and the Soviet Union differed over whether to publicize the acquisition . The Soviet Union and Cuba did not want to release the information . Cuba and Russia did not agree to sell the land .
 Castro favored announcing a mutual defense pact; Khrushchev told him they should wait until arms were assembled and present their presence to Kennedy as a fait accompli . Kennedy was the president of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet troops setting up bases all over the island, even in civilian clothes, proved difficult to hide . Soviet troops set up bases around the island in civilian clothing .
 CIA analysts examining photographs taken the day before by U-2 pilot Maj. Maj. John Sutter . Maj. Sutter was the pilot of the U.S. U.2 .
 Rafael Saumell Muoz remembers images of Castro and Kennedy flickering across the family television screen . Muoz was 11 years old at the time, at the height of the Castro-Kennedy era .
 He recalls shortages of milk, butter, rice and beans during the crisis . He recalls seeing U.S. planes flying low over the island .
 Looking out over the Malec from his father's high-rise apartment in Havana, he says, he could see the line of U.S. ships stretching across the horizon . Looking out from his dad's apartment, he said, "The line of United States ships stretched across the
 Castro deployed all of Cuba's military to defend the island against Soviet ships approaching the Soviet blockade . Kennedy was preparing for action, but not everyone was calm . Castro's Cuban government was prepared to fight the blockade .
 Kennedy's pledge not to invade the island would provide little comfort . Kennedy: "I'm not going to invade it. I'm not sure what I'm doing"
 Khrushchev's agreement to remove the missiles would strain relations between Havana and Moscow for years . The agreement would have strained relations between the two countries for years.
 Cuba felt ignored, betrayed and abandoned by the West . While the rest of the world gasped its relief, Cuba felt abandoned and abandoned . Cuba felt betrayed, betrayed, abandoned and ignored .
 Pena Martinez still sees injustice in the U.S. focus on Cuba . Forty years after the crisis, Martinez still feels injustice in Cuba .
 In South Florida, people are wondering how much longer the tension could last before the crisis erupted into war . People were wondering how long the crisis could last .
 FBI agents observed that the staff at the Soviet embassy was burning large quantities of documents -generally the last act of an embassy before its country goes to war . FBI agents said that in Washington D.C. staff was burning documents .
 Air attacks would be fairly quick and low-risk -at least compared to an invasion which, the military estimated, would result in 18,484 casualties . The military estimated that an invasion of the U.S. would have resulted in an estimated 18,500 casualties .
 In Havana, Fidel Castro thought the low-level flights were a prelude to a U.S. attack . Fidel Castro believed the flights were an attack on a United States attack .
 The Cuban leader also sent an astonishingly bellicose message to Khrushchev in which he estimated that the U.S. was planning to invade Cuba within the next three days .
 He suggested that if the United States invaded Cuba, the Soviets should try to pre-empt U.S. plans by unleashing a nuclear attack on American targets . The Soviets should attack American targets, he said .
 The Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 when the crisis was resolved . A United States official, asking not to be identified, said the Kennedy letters could contain clarifications . A U.S. official said some of the letters may
 The crisis grew out of the Soviet decision to station offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba . No other conflict during the post-World War II era brought the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than the crisis .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles in return for a promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba . A week of unprecedented international tension ended in a week after the crisis ended .
 Official: Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 . Official: Letters may contain clarification of agreements reached in October 1962 when crisis was resolved .
 Officials say the government's decision to release the letters is linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis . Officials said the Cuban government is holding a conference on missile crisis in Havana . The conference is scheduled to take place in Cuba .
 U.S., Cuban and former Soviet officials who participated in the crisis are scheduled to attend . Former Soviet officials are also expected to attend the event .
 Castro was outraged by Khrushchev's decision to withdraw missiles without consulting him first . During the crisis, Castro was angered by the decision to pull missiles .
 At least one of the letters has not been released because no copies were placed in State Department files . A United States official said at least one letter was not released because it was not placed in files .
 The president's daughter showed Khrushchev a signed copy of the 1963 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . Her mother, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, kept the treaty as a memento .
 The treaty had its beginnings in the 13-day standoff over Soviet nuclear missiles being placed in Cuba, just 90 miles from the U.S. The treaty was formed in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Khrushchev, Kennedy advisers Theodore Sorensen and Schlesinger on panel discussion . Former Cuban diplomat Josefina Vidal also taking part in panel discussion.
 All were opposed to a pre-emptive strike against Iraq to remove weapons of mass destruction . They said the Bush administration had not learned the lessons of the missile crisis .
 Schlesinger said advisers then urged Kennedy to carry out a military strike against Cuba to remove missiles .
 The telegram, sent at the height of the crisis, fifty years ago this month, was disclosed yesterday among 2,700 pages of previously unreleased files from the personal papers of Robert F Kennedy .
 Documents shed light on how the Kennedys and their closest advisers averted catastrophe in 1962 . U.S. spy planes discovered the USSR had secretly deployed nuclear missiles to Cuba, its ally .
 One memo by Dean Rusk, Mr Kennedy's defence secretary, details plans for a strike by the U.S. air force on the Cuban missile sites .
 The archives contain exhaustive minutes, transcripts and handwritten notes from meetings at the White House during the notorious ""13 Days"" described in Robert Kennedy's memoir of the same name .
 U.S. ambassadors around the world sent memos to Washington on how the crisis was playing out on their patches . But they also contain dozens of memos sent to Washington from America's ambassadors .
 Mr Bruce served as ambassador to the Court of St James's between 1961 and 1969 . He took the temperature in Westminster during his time as ambassador .
 Kennedys were anxious about the Labour opposition, led by Hugh Gaitskell, which had many proud Socialist MPs . While they could depend on the Atlanticism of Harold Macmillan's Conservative government, they were anxious .
 Most Britons were sympathetic to the CND, according to the historian . While most were sympathetic, most Britons were violent, he said .
 Mr Bruce was secretly briefed on internal party wranglings by George Brown, Labour's deputy leader and head of its Right wing . Mr Brown was head of the party's Right wing, George Brown .
 Lord Lambton, a Tory MP, told Mr Schlesinger to report back to Kennedy that he should have sent in the marines . On the other hand, Lord Lambon, a Conservative MP and ""advocate of fighting everywhere"
 The archives publish in full the letters between President Kennedy and Nikita Krushchev, the Soviet premier, which in the end led to the aversion of hostilities . In the end of the war, the letters led to an end to hostilities .
 Kennedy received a rambling letter from Krushchev on Oct 26 promising the missile sites would be removed if the United States pledged not to invade Cuba . Kennedy received the letter .
 The terms were for the U.S. to dismantle its own missiles in Turkey . Before he could reply, he received another on Oct 27 stating that the terms had been reached .
 The president famously chose to ignore the second letter and respond to the first, accepting the deal . The president's decision to accept the deal was made public in 2008 .
 Even the president's brother, Robert F Kennedy, then attorney general, argued in favor of air strikes or an invasion of the island nation to remove Soviet nuclear ballistic missiles .
 Only the president favored Khrushchev's offer to remove the missiles if the U.S. would scrap its Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Documents will be made public this week by the John F Kennedy Library .
 The library's officials could not be reached for comment . The Globe report was based on transcripts of meetings held by the National Security Council .
 On the same day Kennedy revealed the missile crisis, a Soviet officer spying for the West falsely reported that the Soviet Union was about to launch a nuclear attack on the United States, Newsweek magazine reported . Newsweek magazine: A Soviet officer falsely reported the attack .
 State Department adviser during the Kennedy administration says CIA officers disregarded the warning . CIA officers did not tell Kennedy or his top aides . State Department advisers say CIA officers correctly disregarded warning .
 Kennedy added to the proposal that the U.S. would dismantle its weapons in Turkey five months later . Kennedy added that he would not appear to have backed down, according to the Globe . He added that the United States would dismantle the weapons in five months .
 The administration had decided prior to the crisis to eliminate the missiles in Turkey, but they had not carried out the plan . The administration did not carry out that plan .
 Robert Kennedy disagreed with the compromise and later urged ""that we buy time now in order to launch an air attack Monday or Tuesday,"" Oct. or 30. Nevertheless, Robert Kennedy later urged "buy time now" for an attack .
 Khrushchev announced the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba Sunday morning . The move came after a night meeting between Robert Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin .
 Garthoff: CIA official told him of the false alarm shortly after it happened . GarThoff said his report was based on information from a CIA official, who told him about it .
 Oleg Penkovsky wanted to provoke the superpowers because he had been spying for the West for a year and a half . He was about to be arrested, Garthoff said . Penkovsksky was a senior Soviet military intelligence officer, he said .