 In October 1962 President Kennedy was informed of a U-2 spy-plane’s discovery of Soviet nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba .
 He and his Soviet counterpart Nikita Khrushchev confronted each other “eyeball to eyeball,” each with the power of mutual destruction . Over an intense 13 days, he and his . fellow Soviet leader Nikita .
 A spy photo of a medium-range ballistic missile base in San Cristobal, Cuba, with labels detailing various parts of the base, displayed in October of 1962 . The spy photo was taken in 1962 .
 President Kennedy and the group of advisors he had assembled evaluated a number of options . President Kennedy was at the nuclear precipice at the time of his decision .
 President Obama imposed a naval blockade on further shipments of armaments to Cuba . After a week of secret deliberations, he announced the discovery to the world .
 Kennedy rejected the option of attacking or accepting Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . Kennedy rejected both options .
 The crisis was resolved at the last minute when Khrushchev accepted the U.S. offer . Crisis was resolved by the United States' intervention .
 Evidence presented by the U.S. Department of Defense, of Soviet missiles in Cuba, was presented in Cuba .
 Low-level photo made October 23, 1962, of the missile site under construction at Cuba’s San Cristobal area .
 Added since October 14, the site was earlier photographed, are fuel trailers, a missile shelter tent, and equipment . Added since Oct. 14, there were fuel trailers and a shelter tent among the equipment .
 Evident are extensive vehicle tracks and the construction of cable lines to control areas . Evident also are extensive . vehicle tracks, construction of . cable lines and construction of vehicle tracks .
 Curtis LeMay talks about U-2 spy plane flights over Cuba . U.2 spy planes have been flying over Cuba in the past . LeMay and LeMay met with President Obama at the White House to discuss the matter .
 Map of Cuba annotated by former U.S. President John F Kennedy, displayed for the first time in Boston, Massachusetts, on July 13, 2005 .
 U.S. President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis, on October 24, 1962 .
 President Kennedy tells the American people that the United States is setting up a naval blockade against Cuba, during a television and radio address, on October 22, 1962, from the White House .
 Cuba’s Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui; and United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson. Soviet foreign deputy minister Valerian A Zorin . Soviet foreign . deputy minister . Soviet . deputy . minister was Soviet foreign minister Val
 Cuban President Fidel Castro replies to President Kennedy’s naval blockade via Cuban radio and television, on October 23, 1962 . President Kennedy's naval blockade was a response to Cuban President Castro's request to President Castro . President Castro responded to the blockade via radio and TV .
 President John F Kennedy signed a proclamation enacting the United States arms quarantine against Cuba, on October 23, 1962 . President Kennedy signed the proclamation on the same day .
 Two soldiers sit in a sandy dugout beside a machine gun hold position on a beach on Key West, Florida, on October 27, 1962 . Two soldiers were killed in the attack .
 The first Soviet F-class submarine to surface near the Cuban quarantine line on October 25, 1962 . U.S. Navy surveillance of the first Soviet submarine .
 Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament march during a protest against the U.S. action over the Cuban missile crisis .
 U.S. Army anti-aircraft rockets pointed out over Florida Straits in Key West, Florida .
 A low-level photograph taken November 1, 1962, of a Medium Range Ballistic Missile Site at Sagua La Grande, Cuba .
 President Kennedy reports personally to the nation on the status of the Cuban crisis, telling the American people that Soviet missile bases in Cuba are “being destroyed”, on November 2, 1962 . The American people were told that the missile bases were being destroyed .
 U.S. air surveillance will continue until the effective international inspection is arranged, he said . He said United States will continue air surveillance until an international inspection has been arranged .
 Soviet personnel and six missile transporters loaded onto a Soviet ship in Cuba’s Casilda port, on November 6, 1962 . Soviet personnel . loaded onto the ship in Casilda, Cuba .
 Note shadow at the lower right of the RF-101 reconnaissance jet taking the photograph . The photograph was taken by a reconnaissance jet in the area .
 A P2V Neptune United States patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 .
 The Soviet ship Kasimov removes 15 Soviet I1-28 aircraft from Cuba after the United States asked for their withdrawal . The U.S. requested their withdrawal from Cuba .
 Soviet submarine near the Cuban coast controlling the operations of withdrawal of the Russian Missiles from Cuba in accordance with the US-Soviet agreement, on November 10, 1962 .
 U.S. warships watched over Soviet freighters carrying missiles back to the Soviet Union . American planes and helicopters flew at a low level to keep close check on the dismantling and loading operations .
 U.S. Army hospital tents and ambulances set up at the Opa Locka airport, formerly a marine air station in Miami, Florida in November 1962 .
 Buildup of troops and military equipment, rushed to south Florida to launch an invasion of Cuba if ordered, remained on the keys, between Miami and Key West .
 This unit, showing no sign of dismantling, was manned and ready with its anti-aircraft missiles in Key West on November 21, 1962 .
 Photographs capture the moments in time when the USSR had placed nuclear missiles withing launch range of the United States . These photographs capture the moment when the U.S. launched nuclear missiles .
 I was 6-7 years old at the time and I can still remember these events unfolding. I was just a child when I saw these events unfold. I can't believe it was anything more than an assassination attempt .
 The cold war was a long drawn out event which had started just after the close of WWII, when Russia had been an ally to the United States against Germany .
 General George Patton never trusted the Russian Communists . He made that point publicly known . General Patton said he did not trust the Communists .
 Kennedy opted for a Naval blockade of Cuba, and presented the aggression before the UN security counsel . With every U.S. military impulse set to destroy the USSR military weapons, Kennedy opted to .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles if the U.S. would promise not to invade Cuba . The United States removed its missiles from Turkey and the United. States removed the missiles from Cuba and Turkey .
 Khrushchev would have a large complement of his navy spread across the Atlantic . U.S. would have soviet attack submarines within a few miles of its naval bases .
 Juan Farrias December 30, 2020 i was 19 years old and lots of people were building undergrond shelters . There was no question kennedy ment what he said .
 After 37 years in the Navy, this is so great to see, learn about what he and his shipmen went through . He has just recently passed, but after 37 years, he has just passed, he says .
 In the middle of the night we made a hard turn to Port, went to flank speed. Wes left Newport, RI 10/15, bound for Scotland . In the morning, he was on his way to Scotland .
 We stayed at General Quarters, on her aft starboard for the next fourteen days until relieved by a sister ship . The ship was relieved by the sister ship, which was too small .