 A lawyer by training, Castro led the Cuban Revolution and transformed the island into the first communist state in the Western Hemisphere . Castro was born in 1961 and became the first Cuban state to become communist . He is now the leader of the Cuban state of Cuba .
 Fidel Castro Ruz was born on August 13, 1926, on his family's successful sugar plantation near Birán, Oriente Province, Cuba . He was born in 1926 on a sugar plantation .
 Castro's parents had not planned to send their young son to school, but he talked them into letting him go when he was only six or seven years old . Castro was so set on getting an education that he convinced his parents to let him go to school .
 He was a motivated student who did well in agriculture, history, and Spanish . He was also an exceptional athlete .
 Castro soon joined the activists and associated with one of the gangs, the Unión Insurrereccional Revolucionaria . Castro soon became a member of the gang . He has been in prison since his release from prison .
 Police suspected him of the murder of a rival student leader and other violent actions, but nothing was proven .
 Castro developed a reputation for his personal ambition and public speaking ability, yet he never became a well-known student leader . Castro was known for his ambition, but he was never a well known student leader.
 Castro jumped into the shark-infested waters and swam to shore carrying a gun over his head . Castro swam ashore with a gun in his hand . Castro was bitten by a shark in the shark .
 U.S. streets, distributing anti-United States material and stirring a revolt . Streets of streets of streets were filled with anti-U.S.-Arabians .
 Cuban students sought asylum, or protection, in the Cuban embassy in Colombia . Pursued by Colombian authorities, Cuban students seek asylum in Cuban embassy .
 The ideas of fascism (a strong central government headed by one absolute ruler) and communism (where goods and services are owned by the government and distributed among the people) were widely discussed in the 1930s .
 Castro soon found a calling with Cuba's Ortodoxo party, which stressed economic independence, political liberty, social justice, and an end to corruption . Castro found his calling with the party's Ordojo party .
 Castro became a devoted follower of the party's charismatic leader, Eduardo Chibás . Castro also became devoted followers of the charismatic leader of the Communist Party .
 Castro had no income with which to support his family, the marriage eventually ended . Castro's marriage to Castro ended because of his lack of income . Castro was forced to live with Castro's family .
 Early in 1952 Castro began campaigning for a seat in congress as a replacement for Chibás . Castro campaigned for a place in congress in 1952 . Castro was elected to congress in 1953 .
 On March 10 General Batista and his army overthrew the regime of Cuban president Carlos Prío Socarrás . Batista overthrew President Socarras in Cuba in March 1959 .
 For Castro, violence seemed to be the only way to oppose the military takeover . Castro's violence seemed the only option for opposition to the takeover .
 He organized a group of followers and on July 26, 1953, attacked the Moncada military barracks in Oriente Province . The attack was the first of its kind in the country .
 Castro was released by an amnesty in 1955, and sent to Mexico City, Mexico . Castro was freed by the amnesty in 1953, and is now living in Mexico City .
 There he began organizing an expedition against Batista called the 26th of July Movement . There he organized a revolt against the Batista government .
 On December 2, 1956, Castro and eighty other men landed in Oriente Province, Cuba . Castro and the others landed on the island of Cuba in 1956 . Castro was the first to arrive in Cuba .
 Castro fled to the Sierra Maestra after encounters with the army . All but twelve of his men were killed or captured by the army, Castro fled .
 Castro designed a guerrilla operation, where a small band of revolutionaries would attempt to remove Batista . Castro designed the operation in the mountains, where he would try to take over Batista from Cuba .
 Castro emerged as the undisputed leader of the anti-Batista movement . His guerrillas increased their control over rural areas in rural areas .
 It was called off after Batista ordered strikers to be shot on sight, causing massive shootings . Batista's government was overthrown in 1953 after he ordered strikes on sight .
 On January 1, 1959, Castro and his July 26th Movement assumed power and began public trials and executions of ""criminals" of the Batista government . Castro and July 26 Movement took control of Cuba in 1959 .
 Castro replaced José Miró Cardona as prime minister on February 15 . He appointed his own brother, Raul, as commander of the armed forces . Raul is Castro's own brother .
 Castro began exercising an almost mystical hold over the Cuban masses . Castro was a powerful speaker and a charismatic leader . He was a charismatic speaker and charismatic leader.
 As previous revolutionaries had done, he lectured the Cubans on morality and public virtue . He lectured them on morality, public virtue, as well as morality .
 He also emphasized his commitment to democracy and social reform, and promised to hold free elections . But he denied that he was a communist .
 Castro greatly reduced rents, and passed a law that confiscated inherited property . Castro's moves hinting at communist leanings . Castro was a leader of the Castro regime .
 Many military leaders left and were replaced by communist radicals . By the end of 1959 many military leaders had been replaced by communists .
 This internal trend toward a communist agenda appeared in foreign policy too . The Communist Party's foreign policy also appeared to be on the rise in Russia .
 Castro accuses the U.S. of taking actions against his revolution . Castro accused the United States of taking action against him . Castro: "I'm not going to give up on my revolution. I'm going to do it"
 Cuba established relations with other communist countries, mainly the very powerful Soviet Union . Cuba established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 President Dwight Eisenhower broke relations with Cuba on January 3, 1961 . Eisenhower broke diplomatic ties with Cuba in 1961 . The U.S. broke diplomatic relations with the island nation .
 In April 1961 anti-Castro exiles, supported by the United States under the leadership of its newly elected president, John F Kennedy, attempted an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . In April 1962, the Cuban government declared a socialist state of Cuba .
 In December 1961 Castro merged all groups that had fought against Batista into the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations . Castro merged the Revolutionary Organizations into a group that fought against the Batista .
 President Kennedy avoided confrontation with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . Castro felt humiliated when he negotiated removal of missiles from Soviet Union . Castro was humiliated when President Kennedy negotiated the removal of the missiles .
 Castro's determination to take his revolution into other countries was a source of conflict in Cuban-Soviet relations . Castro was one of the leaders of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 After the 1964 Havana Conference, the Soviet Union was able to slow down Castro's support for armed struggle in Latin America . The Soviet Union had been able to stop the Cuban government's support of armed struggle .
 Castro founded the Asia-Africa-Latin America People's Solidarity Organization in 1966 . The organization was formed to promote revolution on three continents . Castro was the leader of the Communist Party in Cuba in 1959 .
 Castro formed the Latin American Solidarity Organization in July 1967 . The organization was designed to spark violence in Latin America . Castro was the leader of the organization in the early 1960s .
 Castro's efforts, however, were mostly unsuccessful, as evidenced by the failure of former Cuban revolutionist Che Guevara's guerrilla campaign in Bolivia .
 Castro's efforts in this regard continued through the 1970s . Nevertheless, Castro's attempts to improve the situation in Cuba continued .
 Castro was constantly criticized for human rights abuses in Cuba . Repression culminated in the boat lift .
 Political prisoners crowded Cuban jails, while homosexuals, intellectuals, and others were constant victims of government-sponsored violence . Homosexuals, intellectuals and others died in Cuban jails .
 One of Castro's goals was to remove opposition to his rule, which he accomplished not only with executions and imprisonments, but also through forcing people to leave the country . Castro's goal was to keep people out of the country, and to remove people from Cuba .
 The largest of these, the Mariel Boat Lift, occurred in response to a riot in Havana . Cuba's Mariel boat lift was the largest response to the riots .
 In mid-April of 1980 Castro opened the port of Mariel to outsiders, particularly exiled Cubans living in Miami, Florida, who sailed into port to claim relatives .
 He loaded boats with prison inmates, long-term psychiatric patients, and other people whose presence in Cuba was not welcomed . The boats were loaded with people who were not welcome to the island .
 With the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, Castro's revolution began to lose momentum . Communism loses steam with the fall of Communism .
 Unemployment and inflation both grew in Cuba . Without support from its Soviet allies, unemployment and inflation grew . The Cuban government was forced to rely heavily on the Soviet Union .
 Castro began pressing the U.S. to lift the trade embargo it had imposed upon Cuba since the revolution . Castro was pressing the United States to lift it's imposed on Cuba . Castro is now pushing for a lifting of the embargo .
 The United States refused to negotiate with Cuba on trade matters until Castro ended his form of government . The U.S. government remained firm, however, refusing to negotiate until Castro's end of his government .
 U.S.-Cuban relations had begun to show signs of warming by the latter part of the 1990s .
 Castro visited the United States in 1996, inviting Cuban exiles to return to their homeland and start businesses . Castro visited Cuba in 1996 and invited exiles then living in the U.S. to start businesses in Cuba .
 In the summer of 2000 a Cuban mother and her son escaped Cuba on a makeshift boat . The mother and son were able to make it to the U.S. via a makeshift raft in Cuba .
 The mother died during the trip, but the son, Elian Gonzalez, was rescued and brought to America . The mother, who died, was taken to the U.S. by the rescue team .
 Castro was heavily involved in the dispute over custody between Elian's relatives in the U.S. and his father in Cuba . Castro was involved in a dispute between his father and his mother in the United States . Elian is now in the care of his father, Elian,
 On July 26, 2000, Castro led what may have been the largest government-organized march in Cuban history to protest the U.S. embargo of Cuba . Castro led the march in which he led the Cuban government to demonstrate against the embargo .
 The march also celebrated the forty-seventh anniversary of the Cuban Revolution . The march was held in honor of the revolutionary movement .
 The leader of Cuba is said to be showing his age, but he still manages to speak for hours on end . He sleeps only a few hours every night and speaks for hours a night .
 War is not fighting, though fighting's what we see, nor it's death, nor is death, for death is but it's end . War's not war, but war is not war. Death is but the end. War is the end of the war.
 It is the rancor of disunited hearts, the death of love, the end of hope, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The rancor is "the death of hope," he says .