 Cold War pitted east against west, pushing the world to the brink of nuclear war . The Cold War was the Cold War of the Cold Cold War .
 CNN International is again airing its 24-part series, The Cold War, which first aired in 1998 . Now, as we approach the 25th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall, the Cold War is back on the air .
 The Cold War is a look at the events that defined an era and shaped the world of today . Viewers will see how the events of yesterday have shaped today's world .
 Award-winning television director Jeremy Isaacs was the executive producer of the series . The series is based on the work of Emmy-winning director and producer Jeremy Isaac .
 The series is narrated by Oscar-nominated actor Sir Kenneth Branagh .
 The programs will air on CNN International every two weeks starting on January 4 . CNN International will air two weeks a week .
 Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisis . People gather in an electronics store to watch American President John F Kennedy deliver a nationally televised address .
 Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisis . Onlookers gather on George Smathers Beach in Key West, Florida, to see the United States Army's Hawk anti-aircraft missiles .
 President John F Kennedy signs the order of naval blockade of Cuba on October 24, 1962 . The crisis was the first Cuban missile crisis since 1962 .
 American tanks are on alert in the Berlin Grunewald, West Germany, on October 25, 1962, as the crisis over the Cuban blockade looms .
 U.S. destroyer USS Vesole escorts freighter Polzunov into international waters in October 1962 . The incident brought an end to the Cuban missile crisis .
 The secret techniques of Stasi agents . Disguises as tourists were often used to help agents appear 'inconspicuous' in places frequented by Westerners. Disguised as tourists as tourists .
 The secret techniques of Stasi agents were used to train prospective agents in how to keep suspects under watch . Pictures from a staged surveillance scene helped to train future agents .
 All parcels mailed to the GDR from West Germany were opened by the Stasi . The secret techniques of Stasi agents were used to open the mail . The lives of Stasian agents were revealed to the public .
 The secret techniques of Stasi agents – The United States Embassy in East Berlin was constantly photographed and filmed . The U.S. Embassy in Berlin was . constantly photographed .
 The lives of Stasi agents – An arrest is staged and documented for training purposes . An arrest of an arrested person is staged to be used as a training exercise . The secret techniques were used by the Stasi police in the 1960s .
 The secret techniques of Stasi agents are detailed in Simon Menner's book . Many of the disguises used by the Stasi were detailed in the book . Menner: The Stasi Agents' disguises include masks and disguises .
 The lives of Stasi agents – So versatile: So versatile, a Stasi agent blends in with the crowd . The secret techniques of St.asi agents are revealed .
 Thousands line up December 19, 1963, to apply for passage into East Berlin . Thousands of people line up in line to see into the East Berlin area .
 When the Berlin Wall first opened – Cars pass into East Berlin on Christmas Day in 1963 . Cars pass through the wall on the first Christmas Day of 1963 .
 When the Berlin Wall first opened – The opening brought joyous reunions for separated families . The opening of the Wall in Berlin was the first time families had been reunited .
 More than 500,000 people were said to have entered East Berlin by midnight December 31 .
 When the Berlin Wall first opened – A West Berlin policeman stops traffic at an crossing point on January 5, 1964 . West Berlin police stopped traffic at crossing point .
 Diplomatic and trade relations between the two countries resumed when President Franklin Roosevelt took office in 1933 .
 The relationship was strained again after the USSR annexed the Baltic States and signed a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany . The relationship continued to be strained after the annexation of the Baltic states .
 Despite their differences the Soviet Union and the United States found themselves allied after the German invasion of Russia in June 1941 .
 As the war in Europe began to wind down and victory was in sight, the two countries had very different views on what post-war world would look like .
 Stalin wanted to put Eastern Europe under the Soviet sphere of influence, setting the conditions for the Cold War to commence . At the Potsdam Conference, just before the atom bomb was dropped on Japan, it became clear that Stalin wanted Eastern Europe to be under Soviet influence .
 Episode 1 includes interviews from George F Kennan, Zoya Zarubina, Hugh Lunghi and George Elsey . Episode 1 also includes interviews with George F. Kennan and Zoya Zoya .
 In the Soviet Union, Stalin has resumed his feared purges and the country is gripped by famine . The country has been gripped by a wave of famine in recent years .
 Germany is forced to cede some of its eastern territory to Poland, and the Germans living in that area are expelled from their homes . Germany's eastern part of the country is now Poland .
 Stalin begins to increase his hold on Eastern Europe, installing communist regimes, but decides to stay out of the Greek Civil War . Stalin decides not to participate in the war, but stays out .
 The United Kingdom, exhausted from the war, sees its once-powerful empire go into decline . The U.S. is exhausted from war and exhausted from its once powerful empire .
 A more assertive U.S. begins to challenge the USSR's influence in Turkey and Iran . Food shortages begin to threaten the stability of Europe .
 Episode 2 includes interviews from Lord Annan, Sir Frank Roberts and Paul Nitze . Episode 2 also includes interviews with Sir Frank and Sir Frank Nitze.
 Stalin prevents countries in the Soviet sphere from taking part in the plan . Suspicious of U.S. intentions, Stalin prevents nations in the USSR from participating .
 As a counter to the United States plan, Stalin established the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance . Stalin established it as a counter against the plan .
 Yugoslav leader Marshal Tito was originally allied with the Soviet Union . He accepted aid from the Marshall Plan . Tito accepted help from the plan .
 After the 1948 Italian elections, the CIA and Catholic Church conspire to push the communist party there from power . The CIA, Catholic Church and the Catholic Church try to oust the party from power in Italy .
 The Marshall Plan successfully modernizes Western Europe and strengthens its ties to the U.S. It was created to modernize Western Europe, modernize the United States .
 With the introduction of the Deutsche Mark, the Soviets react by tightening checkpoints leading into the French, British, and American sectors of Berlin, ultimately leading to a ground blockade of the city . The move ultimately led to the closure of Berlin .
 The Berlin Airlift was launched in order to keep the city from starvation . Western allies began ferrying in supplies by plane to the city .
 German Communists in Berlin successfully take over the city's municipal government, causing the city and country to be divided between east and west . The city and the country were divided between East and West .
 The Soviets install Kim Il-sung as the leader of the north, while the Americans place Syngman Rhee at the head of the south .
 North Korea invades South Korea, pushing U.S. and South Korean forces to a city at the southern tip of the Korean peninsula, called Pusan . In 1950, with the help of the Soviets, North Korea invaded South Korea . North Korea pushed the United States and South
 In response to the invasion, a United Nations force, led by the United States, regains the advantage, driving the communist forces towards the Chinese border . The U.N. force is led by U.S. and drives communist forces to the border .
 Mao Zedong attacked Stalin at Stalin's behest . Mao's attack was at the behest of Stalin . Mao attacked Stalin in response to the threat .
 The House Committee on Un-American Activities in the United States begins investigating alleged communist infiltration in the entertainment industry and diplomatic corps . The House committee will investigate alleged communist infiltrations .
 In the USSR, an increasing cult of personality is being built up around Stalin and a more repressive police state is taking hold . In the Soviet Union, Stalin's personality has been built up .
 Soviet Union pushes a series of purges in Prague as a warning to other satellite countries that may stray from Soviet policy . In response to Yugoslavia's independent foreign policy, the Soviet Union pushed the purges . The purges were carried out in Prague, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia .
 Fear and repression in the USSR hits its zenith right before Stalin's sudden death in 1953 . Stalin's death was Stalin's last gasp of freedom .
 Khrushchev also reestablishes relations with Yugoslavia . In a secret speech given to the Soviet leadership he denounces Stalin's harsh policies .
 West Germany begins to rearm, leading the USSR to establish the Warsaw Pact in response . The Warsaw Pact was established in response to West Germany's rearmament .
 Khrushchev sends troops into East Germany, Poland, and Hungary to put down revolts . Trying to maintain Soviet influence in Eastern Europe, he sends troops in East Germany .
 With the successful Soviet launch of Sputnik, America responds by increasing its development of nuclear armed missiles . America responds to the success of the Soviet launch with increasing production of nuclear weapons . The U.S. responded by increasing the development of its own nuclear missiles .
 A fear takes hold in the U.S. that the nation is falling behind the Soviets in terms of technology . The fear is that the United States is losing ground in technology .
 The Soviets seem to have a commanding head start in the space race in 1960 . John F Kennedy is elected President of the United States in 1960.
 Khrushchev demands that the British, French, and Americans leave West Berlin . The opportunity for a peaceful resolution is dashed when the Soviets walk out on the Paris Summit of 1960 because of the U-2 incident .
 On August 12, 1962, East German security forces begin to build the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was built in the East German capital on the night of August 12 .
 In response, United States and Soviet forces engage in tense standoff . U.S. forces clash with Soviet forces in Moscow, Russia in 1980s .
 In 1963, President Kennedy delivers his famous ""I am a Berliner"" speech . President Kennedy delivered the speech in Berlin .
 He begins to nationalize American assets in Cuba, which leads to an economic boycott of the island nation . The U.S. introduces an economic boycotts of Cuba, leading to a nationalization of assets .
 The United States sponsors a failed counter revolution on the island with the Bay of Pigs Invasion . The U.S. sponsored the failed invasion of Cuba in 1961 . The invasion was the first of its kind .
 The crisis leads to a United States blockade of Cuba, and a near war with the Soviet Union . The crisis led to a U.S. blockade of Cuban territory .
 The crisis ends after secret negotiations between the United States and USSR lead to a deal to remove American missiles from Turkey and Soviet missiles from Cuba . U.S. and USSR agreed to remove the missiles and remove them from Turkey .
 Refugees began to flood into South Vietnam from the north, after communists there began a strict land reform program . Refugees flooded into the country after the communist government began a land reform .
 The Viet Cong, with Soviet help, tries to reunify the country through force . The Vietnamese government was overthrown by the Soviet Union .
 America, supporting South Vietnam, becomes more involved after the Gulf of Tonkin incident . America supported South Vietnam after the incident .
 As American casualties continue to grow, so does the unpopularity of a war that seems unlikely to be won . As U.S. casualties grow, the unpopularities of the war seem to grow . The war is likely to be unpopular with the public, especially among Americans .
 After the Tet Offensive, President Lyndon Johnson's clout was severely damaged . President Johnson's power was damaged by the Tet offensive .
 A policy of bombing North Vietnam, while also seeking to negotiate a peace, does not work, says U.S. President Barack Obama . A bombing of North Vietnam while trying to negotiate peace, says Obama .
 A new deterrent policy was thought up by U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, called MAD, or Mutually Assured Destruction . The new policy was created by McNamara in 1968 .
 Both U.S. and Soviets begin testing and building more nuclear weapons . Submarine submarines are able to strike if one side destroys the other .
 Adopting a defensive strategy, the Soviets create an anti-ballistic missile . The Soviets create a missile that could be used to launch a missile .
 The United States develops multiple independent warheads to counter this . The U.S. develops multiple warheads to combat this .
 Both sides sign the SALT Treaty . There is some hope of de-escalation after the treaty is signed .