 'The Four Seasons', 'Big Girls Don't Cry', and Ray Charles' 'Can't Stop Loving You' also gave us the best pop culture history . TV shows like 'The Dick Van Dyke Show', 'The Danny Thomas Show', and 'The Andy Griffith Show' also
 Marilyn Monroe's death was assumed to have overdosed . Marilyn Monroe died at the age of 60 . Marilyn's death is believed to have been an overdose .
 Marilyn Monroe was a famous and scandalous actress and fashion icon of the '50s . Marilyn Monroe died at age 50 at the age of 50 . She was the subject of a series of scandals and scandals .
 Amidst all the good things, we even had the ongoing Cold War between the USA and the Soviet Union .
 Post Second World War, everyone sensed that the world was divided into two ideologies; capitalism and communism, led by the USA and the Soviet Union, respectively . The U.S. and the USSR were the two ideologies of the world .
 "There was a growing geopolitical tension and competition being sensed by everyone," says President Obama . "There were growing geopolitical tensions and competition," says Obama .
 Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet Premier, saw an imminent threat after the United States could overthrow Fidel Castro, the Cuban Prime Minister, anytime, and capture the small Soviet ally country, Cuba .
 Cuba was a Soviet country located near the US, naturally posing the threat of being captured by them . Cuba was located in Cuba, and posed a threat to the US .
 Khrushchev wanted to bring West Berlin under the umbrella of the Soviet government . He also wanted to make West Berlin a part of West Berlin .
 By strategically placing missiles, he planned to try to negotiate with Western powers to take over Berlin . So, by strategically placing the missiles he planned on trying to . He planned to . try to . negotiate with . Western powers, he said .
 Soviet missiles were a result of the arms race that both the U.S. and Soviet governments were taking part in, after the end of the World War . Both the United States and the Soviet government were actively taking part .
 President John F Kennedy, on the realization of the nuclear war threat, sent out a public warning against the introduction of nuclear weapons in Cuba . President Kennedy also warned against introducing nuclear weapons to Cuba .
 Despite warnings, a U.S. U-2 aircraft clicked images of ballistic weapons in Cuba . Despite warnings the aircraft was able to fly over Cuba . The images were taken by the U.N. military in Cuba, Cuba .
 President Kennedy sent out another notice publicly to take any such weapon away from Cuba . President Kennedy also sent out a notice to take such a weapon from Cuba.
 President Kennedy was stern in his voice and made clear that anything against the warning might lead to issues that are uncalled for . President Kennedy made the comments in a stern voice .
 Nikita Khrushchev replied to Kennedy that all Soviet missiles will surely be removed from Cuba upon an agreement of some kind that will promise that there will no longer be any threats upon Cuba in the future .
 Nikita Khrushchev in his second letter suggested that any proposed deal must include the agreement of the United States to remove their missiles from Turkey . Nikita also suggested that the U.S. must also remove the missiles from the country .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy then met with the Soviet Ambassador to the USA and showed the indication that the U.S. was anyway planning to remove the missiles from Turkey .
 On October 28, Khrushchev issued a public announcement that the Cuban missiles will be dismantled and removed . Following that, on Oct. 28, on that day, the Soviet Union announced that the missiles had been removed .
 Even though the missiles were removed, the naval quarantine was still not lifted . However, even though the missile has been removed, it has not been lifted .
 President Kennedy conveyed that the quarantine will not be removed unless the Soviet Union removed their IL-28 bombers from Cuba . President Kennedy said the quarantine was not to be removed until the Soviets removed the bombers .
 Spacewar!' is a space combat video game that was developed in 1962 . It was developed by Steve Russell in collaboration with Bob Saunders, Steve Piner, Wayne WIitanen, Martin Graetz, and a few others .
 It was written at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the newly installed DEC PDP-1 minicomputer . It was the first computer video game ever .
 PDP-1 was priced at $120,000, weighing 1.609.37 lb and with a memory of just 4,000 words . They were PDP1 which was . priced at . $12,000 .
 Imagine a board of advertising team thinking of a marketing strategy to get people to use this machine . The machine weighed twice the refrigerator . It was designed to make people feel comfortable in using it .
 The developers borrowed the orbital mechanic from Marvin Minsky's Minskytron which was a non-interactive demo for geometric interactions . The orbital mechanic was borrowed from the game's creator Marvin Minkink's Minsktron . The developers of the game borrowed the . orbital mechanic
 They borrowed the star background from Samson's 'Expensive Planetarium' software . The star background was also borrowed from the system used by Samson .
 The real challenge was the system to respond to the players because of the limited processor power . Everything was ready to go into the game but what was the real challenge is the response system .
 MIT team made photon torpedoes that were unaffected by gravity . First version of the game allowed just two players and the lowest graphics possible .
 By mid-1962, Samson came out with a second version of the game that had explosion graphics and scoring . The game was released by Samson in 1962 .
 Back then most of the players only included programmers, they quickly got the hang of it and started working on newer versions . Since back then most . players only . included programmers .
 The fashion statement of the decade started out with the domination of high fashion with a gradual transformation into hippie fashion by the end of the century . The hippie style of the 1960s was a major fashion statement .
 The period of 1962 to the '70s was considered crucial with the entry of street style fashion . Street style fashion challenged the high-end and well-dressed fashion style .
 Fashion icons like Audrey Hepburn, Twiggy, and the winners of the Miss USA beauty pageant played a great role in this transformation . Miss USA was crowned Miss USA in 1964 .
 Audrey Hepburn was a leading lady in the film industry and proved that she can flawlessly pull off any outfit or style . Hepburn starred in the classic classic film The Breakfast Show .
 During the early years of the '60s, Hepburn's style was extremely feminine and lady-like . Hepburn was known for her style of clothing and acting .
 Givenchy is a close friend of Audrey Hepburn and designer Givenchy . Givenchy was close friend to Hepburn . Hepburn wore Givenchy's Givenchy dress in 1964 .
 Givenchy and Hepburn have worked on many trends together to bring out the most trendy styles that could be copied by every woman for everyday life . This change was not limited to just women's wear, unlike previous decades . Hepburn and Givenchy were the most influential style icons of the
 Men's fashion had striking transformations as well, especially due to the fact that menswear hasn't changed much for the past few years . Menswear continues to be a fashion staple for men .
 Men were leaning towards a more casual look as well and suddenly men were seen in colorful and vibrant suits . Men were also leaning towards more casual looks as well .
 Menswear gradually started incorporating colors and patterns with wider ties as the decade kept progressing . Menswear began incorporating colors, patterns and wider ties in the 1980s .
 The Beatles, Mick Jagger, and Jimi Hendrix started influencing bold and daring colors and patterns . The style icons like the members of The Beatles and the Rolling Stones also started changing their styles .
 During the mid-60s, men's fashion trends were inspired by military elements .
 Rock culture was one of the main fashion influences that introduced most of the new trends in the world of men's fashion . Rock culture has been a major influence in the fashion industry for decades .
 The '60s were also known for those good ol' days that were not hit by inflation . Famous styles like tie-dye and loose-fitting shirts were introduced towards the end of the decade .
 With legendary music, art, and pop culture, the '60s really hit hard on the emotional and nostalgic side . The 60s is a classic form of art and music .
 All you would have to pay is a buck and enjoy yourself a great double-decker burger meal . But now imagine if you were in the '60s, all you would need to pay was a buck .
 In many restaurants, you could also score a dessert along with the entire meal and all you will still be spending is just a dollar . In some restaurants, the dessert is also included .
 You could also fancy yourself with a full chicken or shrimp dinner along with sides . And if you care to spend a few more cents, you could also enjoy a full dinner .
 A pie would cost you around 35 cents a slice, the same price as that of an issue of Life Magazine . A pie could be savored on an ice-cream sundae for just 40 cents .
 The fight was among the superpowers, but the one that went through the most was poor Cuba . Cuba went through a tough year of austerity . The Cuban government has been criticized for its harsh austerity measures .
 Cuba found itself in the midst of a situation where all it could do was value the superpower's support . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. has been strained in recent years .
 Khrushchev's insistence on their secret installation alarmed the Cubans . The Cubans were happily ready to allow the installation of nuclear weapons in Cuba, but were alarmed .
 Khrushchev thought of it differently and wanted to be on the safe side by keeping it a secret . They believed such arrangements should always be brought under public knowledge .
 Khrushchev said it was an attempt to save Cuba from any future U.S. attacks . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Khrushchev's lie was finally detected, through a United States spy aircraft, against the clear warnings against it by President Kennedy . An almost month-long conflict followed by letters back-and-forth followed and finally convinced him to withdraw weapons .
 Cuba was left feeling helpless, powerless and deceived and decided to never again trust the Soviet leader . The presence of these weapons turned out to pose more threat on Cuba, when removed, Cuba felt helpless and deceived .
 The Cubans did win a small battle and benefited in a sense through the formation of an agreement where all the threats that it was previously worried about from the US, were no longer an issue . On the bright side, however, the Cubans won't have to worry about the US
 1962 was also the birth year of many legendary stars like Tom Cruise, Ralph Fiennes, Jim Carrey, Demi Moore, and many more . The famous book by Rachel Carson titled ""Silent Spring" released in 1962 .
 The year 1962 also witnessed John Glenn taking a trip to space . Even to this day, ""Silent Spring" remains relevant in the context of how humans affect the environment .
 John Glenn was the first American who successfully orbited Earth, circling it three times . The Commonwealth Immigrants Act was passed in the UK in 1962 .
 The Kidadl Team is made up of people from different walks of life, from different families and backgrounds . If you liked our suggestions for 1962 facts then why not take a look at 1978 facts, or 1972 facts .
 From lino cutting to surfing to children's mental health, their hobbies and interests range far and wide . From surfing to surfing, the children's interests range from surfing to mental health .
 When you purchase through links to our site, we may earn an affiliate commission . We are happy to feature some of the best photos of the day .
 This year also gave us the first-ever video game and cassettes . The Cold War between the USA and the Soviet Union continued .
 Soviet missiles were a result of the arms race that both the U.S. and Soviet governments were taking part in, after the end of the World War . President Kennedy warned against the introduction of nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev in his second letter suggested that any proposed deal must include the agreement of the United States to remove their missiles from Turkey . Robert Kennedy then met with the Soviet Ambassador to the USA and showed the indication that the U.S. was anyway planning to remove the missiles
 1962 also gifted us the first-ever video game called 'Spacewar!' Due to this incident, the two nations decided to put a stop to their arms race .
 It was written at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the newly installed DEC PDP-1 minicomputer . It was the first computer video game ever .
 MIT team decided to make photon torpedoes that were unaffected by gravity . First version of the game allowed just two players and the lowest graphics possible .
 The period of 1962 to the '70s was considered crucial with the entry of street style fashion that challenged the high-end and well-dressed fashion style . The fashion statement of the decade started with the domination of high fashion .
 Givenchy and Hepburn have worked on many trends together to bring out the most trendy styles that could be copied by every woman for everyday life . In 1962, she even rocked the green Givenchy suit that she wore in the movie 'Paris When It Sizzles'
 Menswear gradually started incorporating colors and patterns with wider ties as the decade kept progressing . Style icons like the members of The Beatles, Mick Jagger, and Jimi Hendrix started influencing bold and daring colors .
 Khrushchev thought of it differently and wanted to be on the safe side by keeping it secret .
 When Khrushchev's lie was finally detected, through a U.S. spy aircraft, against the clear warnings against it by President Kennedy, President Kennedy . Cuba was left feeling helpless, powerless and deceived and decided to never again trust the Soviet leader .
 Cubans did win a small battle and benefited in a sense through the formation of an agreement where all the threats that it was previously worried about from the US, were no longer an issue .
 1962 was also the birth year of many legendary stars like Tom Cruise, Ralph Fiennes, Jim Carrey, Demi Moore, and many more . The famous book by Rachel Carson titled "Silent Spring" was released in 1962 .
 The year 1962 also witnessed John Glenn taking a trip to space . Even to this day, the book remains relevant in the context of how humans affect the environment .
 John Glenn was the first American who successfully orbited Earth, circling it three times . The United Kingdom passed the Commonwealth Immigrants Act in 1962 . John Glenn circled the Earth three times in space .
 We will always aim to give you accurate information at the date of publication . However, information does change, so it’s important you do your own research, double-check and make the decision .
 We recognise that not all activities and ideas are appropriate and suitable for all children and families . Not all activities are appropriate or suitable to all children or for all circumstances .
 Kidadl cannot accept liability for the execution of these ideas . Parental supervision is advised at all times, as safety is paramount .
 The Home Of Family Edutainment . Kidadl is committed to bringing authoritative, actionable content that families will love .
 We run adverts on the site and other Kidadl-related properties . We are happy to let users use our adverts to advertise our products .
 We ensure that adverts never compromise our editorial guidelines . We are happy to make clear that we do not tolerate adverts that compromise our values .
 We reserve the right to remove adverts that we deem not appropriate . We care about the content that appears on Kidadl.
 We endeavour to remove these adverts within 24 hours. We apologise for any errors made in this article .
 Editorial integrity is in our DNA and paramount to Kidadl . We will always maintain a distinct separation between advertisements and editorial content .
 If you see a product advertised on Kidadl it does not mean that KidAdl has endorsed it . If you want to buy a product that is not endorsed by the company, it doesn't mean it is endorsed by KidadL .
 The Kidadl editorial team may rate or rank products or services . Ads are screened in accordance with the policy above .
 These articles are determined by the editorial team without regard to any financial relationship with the companies that provide the product or services . The editorial team is happy to provide an accurate and accurate depiction of events in this article .
 All ads on Kidadl properties are clearly and unambiguously identified as such as such . The ads will be clearly and clearly identify as such. All ads are clearly identified as .
 Clicking on an ad will take the user to an advertiser’s site . Clicking a clicker will take you to a different site .
 Kidadl is a safe place for parents and children . The site is free and as such as adverts are supported by adverts . We will not accept any ad that is factually inaccurate or in poor taste .
 We will not permit the promotion of, or advertising of, illegal, misleading or objectionable products or services .
 Any advert that could be confused as Kidadl’s content will be clearly labeled as an advertisement .
 Sponsored content passes our editorial policy and passes the Kidadl Parent Promise . As with all ads, sponsored content is screened to ensure it passes our parenting policy .
 Kidadl has sole editorial control . No advertiser has any input into the content beyond the broad topic area .
 It will adhere to Kidadl’s editorial guidelines and may include products, promotions or links .
 A portion of the content will be created, or directed by an advertiser . Use this content to help with your daily Newsquiz . In the U.S. this week, please share your comments .
 These pages are hosted as a viewer resource, and are not meant to imply recommendations or endorsements . The content is not intended to imply endorsement of endorsements .
 These ads can be identified with “#sponsored’s” The ads can also be identified as #sponsored .
 Kidadl team may sometimes include links to products and services from our affiliate partners that we consider will be useful to parents . Affiliate policy and programs include affiliate partners .
 Kidadl's suggestions are selected independently . Unless we have been paid by a brand to promote their content, our suggestions are not sponsored by KidAdl .