 I am also grateful to Jonathan Brown, Thomas C Field Jr., Jonathan Hunt, Aragorn Storm Miller, David Scott Palmer, Claudia Rueda, Cameron Strang, and Jeffrey Taffet for their comments .
 There were, in fact, many reactions across the hemisphere, multilateralism in order to justify a blockade or “quarantine” that was, arguably, against the tenets of international law . The blockade or quarantine was arguably against international law, according to the author .
 The few histories that examine the crisis in the wider Latin American context focus on the OAS resolution and depict the hemispheric response as unanimous . History of Latin American response to the crisis focuses on the resolution of the resolution .
 Latin American politicians, military officers, and citizens did not sit idly by and watch the drama play out on their doorstep . Faced with the threat of nuclear war, Latin American leaders and military officers refused to sit back .
 The global scope of the missile crisis offers a unique opportunity to construct an international and transnational history of one moment across two continents, allowing us to compare the ways that internal and external dynamics combined .
 A closer examination of the hemispheric responses to the missile crisis reveals that Latin American governments and citizens tried to take advantage of this rare moment of United States vulnerability to change U.S. relations with Latin America . The missile crisis was a rare opportunity to change relations between Latin America and
 Two noteworthy exceptions to this trend are the Wilson Center’s Cold War International History Project 50th anniversary Bulletin and the two-part article by James G Hershberg on Brazil‘s covert role in the missile crisis .
 In the “first wave,” historians told the story of the crisis predominantly through the lens of the United States perspectives and sources . In the first wave, historians used the U.S. perspectives of this crisis to tell the story .
 A “second wave” began in 1987, when Soviet and Cuban sources started to reshape the conversation . A ‘Second wave’ of the conversation began with Soviet and Cuba in 1987 .
 At the same time, sentiments of both nationalism and pan-Latin Americanism inspired thousands of Latin American citizens across the hemisphere to seize upon the missile crisis to protest U.S. economic imperialism .
 They argued that Castro had every right to defend his country . They directed their anger against political and economic symbols of the U.S. presence in their countries .
 Latin American responses to the missile crisis also depended on domestic and “intermestic” politics . While concerns about the U.S. were paramount, concerns about Latin America were paramount .
 Latin American governments and citizens viewed the Cold War through the lenses of their own local conflicts . As they did with so many of the other Cold War battles, Latin American citizens saw the international confrontation through the lens of their local conflicts.
 Nicaraguan and Venezuelan leaders treated the crisis as an opportunity to eliminate Cuban support for domestic opposition . The crisis was also seen as a chance to eliminate support for the opposition .
 In Mexico, Bolivia, and Brazil, countries with strong leftist movements and revolutionary traditions, leaders had to take a more ambiguous approach to avoid alienating significant sectors of the population . In Mexico and Bolivia, leaders have to take more ambiguous approaches .
 The missile crisis widened the political divisions within many countries as deadly riots and street fighting broke out between supporters and opponents of Castro . The crisis also widened political divisions in many countries across the world .
 I use the term “Pan-Latin Americanism” to distinguish the anti-U.S. sentiment of regional solidarity from the program of Pan Americanism that the United States has promoted since the nineteenth century . The term is used to distinguish between the two programs .
 This combustible combination of threat and possibility manifested in various ways and with a wide range of consequences throughout the hemisphere . This is the result of the conflict in the Middle East, the U.S. has been described as a 'potential threat and opportunity'
 Many Latin American leaders enthusiastically supported the U.S. quarantine of Cuba . Some even tried to push Kennedy to take a more aggressive approach .
 Other Latin American leaders joined the effort to remove the missile bases . They saw it as an opportunity to gain United States support to shift local balances of power .
 National leaders in Central America, the Caribbean, and northern South America pledge military and strategic assistance to the U.S. National leaders pledge support for the United States position .
 The Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Colombia, Venezuela, Panama, Honduras, Haiti, Costa Rica, and El Salvador all expressed their readiness to provide marine, naval, and air force units to maintain the quarantine .
 Their enthusiasm stemmed from animosity toward Castro, who had been supporting revolutionary efforts to overthrow many of these governments . Castro had been trying to overthrow these governments, but his efforts were met with hostility .
 Nicaraguan dictator Luis Somoza Debayle, who considered Castro a personal enemy, adopted an especially belligerent stance .
 A member of one of Latin America’s longest-lasting familial dynasties, the Nicaraguan president had maneuvered himself into power after the assassination of his father, Anastasio Somoza Garcıza .
 Somoza used his position as director of the National Guard to assassinate the guerrilla leader Augusto César Sandino in 1934 . Two years later, he staged a coup and seized power . The family's hold over Nicaraguan politics dates back to 1934 .
 Somoza quickly consolidated his control, placing loyal somocistas in key positions in government and National Guard . He acquired wealth through investments, concessions to U.S. companies, theft, and graft, he says .
 The Somozas were the largest landowners in Nicaragua . They were infamous for their corrupt rule and repression of dissent . They are infamous for corruption and repression .
 Fidel Castro turned his gaze upon Nicaragua soon after overthrowing Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista . These qualities attracted the ire of Fidel Castro, who turned his attention to Nicaragua .
 In the years leading up to the missile crisis, Castro’s diplomatic officials in Mexico spent much of their time supporting revolutionary efforts by Nicaragua political exiles .
 When Somoza learned of the missiles in Cuba, he saw the crisis as a chance to eliminate a dangerous enemy and called for an invasion of the island . The crisis was the result of a Soviet invasion of Cuba .
 El Gral. Manuel Rangel Escamilla, “Actividades de asilados polı́ticos nicaraguenses residentes residentes in nuestro paí́s” “en forma constante tratan de efectu
 He argued that Latin Americans should not allow the U.S. to determine their defense against the threats of Castro and communism . He said Latin America should no longer allow the United States to determine its defense .
 Not all Nicaraguans supported Somoza’s belligerent response to the missile crisis . Many of those who opposed their country's dictator also challenged his foreign policy .
 The university was a long-standing center of political opposition . As early as 1939, students there had begun organizing protests and burning portraits of Somoza . The university had been a center of opposition .
 Tomás Borge Martı́nez was one of the founders of the Sandinista Front of National Liberation in 1961 . He participated in an anti-Somocista student movement in León .
 Latin American leaders tried to convince the U.S. to take a stronger stance against Castro . Other Latin American countries also tried to persuade the United States to act .
 Betancourt had also been a friend to Castro until 1959, when disagreement over the issues of communism and cooperation with the United States .
 Betancourt seized upon the missile crisis as an opportunity to crack down on both Castro and the domestic Venezuelan opposition that was receiving Cuban support .
 Betancourt says he is calling up the armed forces for the first time since World War II . He says the government will comply with each and every one of Venezuela's international compromises .
 Small groups armed with machine guns also attacked a Goodyear Tires warehouse and burned stacks of tires . Small groups of machine guns attacked the warehouse and destroyed tires .
 Miller, “Precarious Paths to Freedom,” 191; Richard Gott, Guerrilla Movements in Latin America, 112 . Miller, Gott, Miller, Miller: Guerrilla movements in Latin American .
 “No tengo por que que negar que es dificil y riesgosa la situación de hoy,” El Nacional, October 28, 1962, .
 President Betancourt had spoken at length about the threat posed to Venezuela’s oil industry . Hours later, “communist terrorists” set off explosives in four electric power stations around Lake Maracaibo .
 According to CIA estimates, the explosions temporarily reduced the country’s total oil output by one-sixth . The explosions were a significant blow considering that those exports provided approximately ninety percent of Venezuela's foreign exchange earnings at the time .
 Venezuela’s representative in the OAS blamed Cuba, claiming authorities intercepted a cable from Havana urging Venezuelan communist groups to attack the U.S. government and industrial installations . The cable was intercepted during the missile crisis .
 Raúl Lugo Rojas was a representative of the MIR who had been arrested the previous June in connection with a failed military revolt against the Betancourt government . Rojas questioned the right of the United States to establish quarantines in 32 countries .
 The missile crisis contributed to domestic unrest within Venezuela and cost its government significant oil revenues, but it also gave Betancourt an excuse to strike against the local opposition and their Cuban supporters . It also gave the government an excuse for its use of the missile crisis against the opposition .
 The attacks against the power stations and the oil and gas pipelines provided muchneeded evidence for Castro's efforts to convince domestic and international audiences that Venezuela was Castro’s “number one target” in the hemisphere .
 The U.S. continued pouring money and military equipment into Venezuela . Betancourt managed to keep both the leftist opposition and the military in check long enough for the presidential elections of December 1963 .
 Argentina’s government and military forces were the earliest and most enthusiastic partners in U.S. efforts to remove the missiles . Argentina's government was among the most enthusiastic in removing the missiles from Argentina .
 Interim president José Marı́a Guido was the first Latin American leader to promise military support . Two destroyers, Espora and Rosales, joined the United States fleet in the Caribbean .
 An editorial titled “Liberty Is Non-Negotiable” in the newspaper La Prensa rejected the possibility of a negotiated removal of the missiles .
 Lugo was released after the revolt as he still retained parliamentary immunity from prosecution . Lugo still retained his parliamentary immunity as he retained his immunity . He was released as he was still under parliamentary immunity . Lugos was released in 2010 after the uprising .
 Venezuela also deployed two destroyers to support the U.S. Navy’s blockade . Two destroyers were deployed by the government of Venezuela, according to Stephen Rabe .
 The Dominican Council of State sent two frigates to join the quarantine as well, but they soon had to detour to Puerto Rico for costly repairs . Two frigates were also sent to the quarantine, but had to take a detour .
 Frondizi had roused the ire of the armed forces by increasing trade with the Soviet Union . Mere days after the Peronists won a convincing victory at the polls, the military annulled the results and arrested the president .
 The Argentine response to the missile crisis had less to do with Castro’s revolutionary meddling . The crisis was more likely to have stemmed from internecine power struggles in the country .
 Argentina's armed forces were practically at war with each other over the role that the military should play in promoting modernization and democracy . In 1962, Argentina’s armed forces fought communism and Peronism . The armed forces are still at war over what they should do to promote modernization and
 The virulently anti-Peronist “colorados’ were campaigning for military rule, while the legalist ‘azules’ sought to preserve civilian rule under constitutional norms . The “azules,’ss,” were seeking to preserve
 In 1962, an azul-led tank column descended upon colorado troops assembled in downtown Buenos Aires . On multiple occasions, the two groups demonstrated their willingness to come to blows .
 In September, a week-long armed confrontation broke out between the coalitions . Later that year, in September, an armed confrontation also broke out .
 José Marı́a Guido, interim president at the time of the missile crisis, had been elevated from his post in the Senate by the azules following the March 1962 military coup against Frondizi .
 After Guido deployed the navy destroyers, leaders of the other branches clamored to become involved as well . Guido deploys the destroyers in a bid to get the attention of other branches .
 Brigadier General Cayo Alsina of the colorados offered Air Force support to his U.S. counterpart .
 M Robben, Political Violence and Trauma in Argentina in Argentina (Philadelphia, PA, 2011), 34. Robben . Robben: Argentina's political violence and trauma in the country has been a source of violence in recent years .
 Like the Venezuelans, the Argentines paid a price for their enthusiastic support of the U.S. quarantine . The Argentines are paying a price to support the United States .
 In mid-November, nine Argentine Air Force pilots died in Panama in a flight connected with the hemispheric operation to force the removal of the missiles . The operation was part of an effort to remove the missiles from Argentina .
 Argentina supported the U.S. during the missile crisis . Some very vocal members of the nation’s public sympathized with Castro .
 Saboteurs threw Molotov cocktails at a U.S.-sponsored “Allied for Progress” exhibit in Buenos Aires on October 24 . Violence escalated the next day into an attack on the home of the cultural attaché of the United States embassy .
 The violence lasted for days, as three people were wounded in a shootout between police and a group of protesters carrying Argentine and Cuban flags, and saboteurs launched tar bombs at a branch of a United States bank .
 Protestors used the international confrontation as an opportunity to demonstrate their dissatisfaction with the Alliance for Progress and with U.S. economic penetration of their country .
 In 1962, Argentina’s economy was in a depression and its citizens were suffering from inflation, stagnation, and shortages . Argentina's economy was experiencing inflation and stagnation . The country was suffering from shortages, inflation and shortages in 1962 .
 Controversial austerity measures imposed by the International Monetary Fund’s stabilization plan fueled anticorporate populism and nationalist sentiment . The IMF's stabilization plan has fueled anti-establishment sentiment .
 The destruction of U.S. property during the missile crisis starkly illustrated the rising tide of economic nationalism, forcing Argentina’s leaders to take note .
 President Arturo Illia caved to public pressures and delivered on his campaign promise to cancel private contracts held by transnational oil companies . Illia: "Almost exactly a year after the missile crisis,   caved" to public pressure and delivered .
 McClintock and other U.S. officials responded to Illia’s economic nationalism by decreasing assistance and foreign aid to the civilian government and increasing their support for military leaders . Illia's economic nationalism led to the death of many Argentinian citizens .
 Beginning in 1963, U.S. military aid and sales of material to Argentina rose dramatically . Argentina was one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 In 1966, the armed forces ousted Illia in a coup and installed Onganı́a in his place, ushering in a four-year military dictatorship . Illia was ousted in 1966, and Onganîa was replaced by a military dictator .
 “Violenta acción popular, tiroteos y manifestaciones en Argentina,” Revolucio’s, November 1, 1962 .
 Representatives from Mexico, Bolivia, and Brazil abstained on the clause that authorized the use of armed force to prevent the missiles from threatening the peace of the hemisphere . In the section-by-section vote on the final resolution, the representatives from Mexico abstained .
 Leaders of three countries sought to find a middle ground where they could support the U.S. without directly opposing the Soviets or Castro . Motivated largely by domestic concerns, these three countries tried to find the middle ground .
 Mexico's semi-authoritarian government had been one of Fidel Castro’s greatest public advocates in the region . Prior to the missile crisis, Mexico was one of the country's most popular statesmen .
 Mexico was the first country in the Americas to officially recognize Castro’s new regime in January 1959 . President Adolfo López Mateos repeatedly defended the Cuban government during a tour of South America the following year .
 When Kennedy revealed the presence of Soviet missiles in the Caribbean, Mexico's president tried to use his country’s special relationship with Cuba to find a peaceful resolution . Mexico's President tried to find peace with Cuba in the 1960s .
 López Mateos was out of the country at the time of Kennedy’s announcement, finishing a tour of Asia .
 He cut his trip short, and on board his trans-Pacific flight home sent urgent messages to Kennedy and Dorticós. He sent them on board .
 In both, he made a plea in favor of peace, and in the note to the latter he “expressed his fervent desire that the missiles not be used in any form and that they be removed 62.
 Intelligence agents and army officials closely monitored the actions of any group suspected of harboring sympathies for Cuba .
 Unlike in Argentina, different branches of the security forces cooperated and shared information . The ministry of national defense sent a report to the interior warning of leftist plans for informal, “lightning,” protest meetings .
 Riot police arrived two hours before a coalition of leftist groups planned to hold a meeting criticizing the U.S. quarantine of Cuba . Riot police arrive two hours after the meeting .
 The police tore down signs and banners and ordered the organizers to vacate the premises . Police tear down signs, banners and order organizers to leave the premises.
 The Mexican government also adopted military measures to minimize repercussions within and surrounding the country . Mexico's military has also taken steps to minimize any repercussions .
 The Argentine newspaper La Prensa quoted unofficial sources in the state of Veracruz that claimed that the Mexican navy had deployed at least ten ships to patrol the channel between the Yucatán peninsula and Cuba .
 Venezuela sent army troops to guard petroleum installations from sabotage . The government also deployed troops to prevent the sort of damages that the Venezuelans suffered .
 This firm governmental response combined with a relative lack of popular activism to keep violence from breaking out within Mexico . This is despite a lack of public support for violence in Mexico .
 One of Mexico’s leading leftist journalists, Manuel Marcué Pardiñas, bemoaned the lack of activism in his country .
 Secretarı́a de Relaciones Exteriores, “Declaración mexicana sobre Cuba y las armas atómicas,” Polı tica, November 1, 1962, .
 The government’s ambiguous policy toward Cuba had successfully co-opted a cause, defense of the Cuban Revolution, around which various leftist groups could otherwise have united and mobilized . The Cuban Revolution is a cause for leftist groups to unite around .
 The swift and coordinated response on the part of the intelligence services and the armed forces further discouraged pro-Castro activism . At the same time, the swift and . coordinated response .
 López Mateos’s “carrot and stick” approach to governing served him well during the missile crisis . Mateos: “Carrots and sticks” is a good strategy .
 There was at least as much popular approval of the blockade among the Mexican public as there was opposition . Furthermore, there was also as much support for the blockade as opposition .
 The United States consulates in Mérida, Tampico, Tijuana, Matamoros, and Monterrey reported widespread support for the United States during the missile crisis . The U.S. consulates reported widespread backing for the U.K. during the
 Mexican support for the United States during the missile crisis led to a subtle but important shift in the relationship between the two countries . Mexico's support for U.S. during missile crisis was a key moment in history .
 The U.S. tried to use diplomatic and economic pressure to compel Mexican leaders to break relations with Castro’s government . Before October 1962, United States worried that their southern neighbors were not taking the communist threat seriously .
 When Kennedy presented the world with indisputable proof of nuclear warheads in the Caribbean, the Mexican government had to choose a side .
 By supporting the United States in that crucial moment, López Mateos demonstrated where his true loyalties lay and gained U.S. acceptance .
 Manuel Marcué Pardiniñas, “La polı́tica internacional del gobierno del presidente Adolfo López Mateos,” Polıîtica, December 1, 1962 .
 The missile crisis caused significantly greater problems in Bolivia, where another conservative, semi-authoritarian government with revolutionary roots was trying to hold on to power . Bolivia's government is trying to keep control of the world's most populous country .
 Bolivian government took great care to avoid provoking an antirevolutionary backlash from the United States by compensating the owners of the tin mines, leaving other mines owned by U.S. companies intact . At the same time, the government maintained legal protections for foreign investment .
 Bolivia became the largest recipient of foreign aid in the Americas . U.S. funds provided one-third of Bolivia’s national budget by 1958 .
 In the year leading up to the missile crisis, the Alliance for Progress had continued these trends, as Kennedy tried to use economic assistance to temper revolutionary tendencies and encourage political stability . Kennedy's government had used economic assistance as a way of tempering revolutionary tendencies .
 Paz had been able to secure such largesse by arguing that his regime needed the support to keep its moderate revolution from falling into radical communist hands . Paz's regime needed to keep the support of the moderate revolution, he said .
 President Obama played the "Soviet card" to gain more attention from the U.S. from the Soviet Union . He played it to gain greater attention and aid from the United States .
 In June 1961, a series of strikes and demonstrations in mines, factories, and universities over a controversial plan of foreign aid convulsed the country and resulted in the deaths of five protestors . Four months later, as many as twenty students were killed when security forces repressed riots sparked by
 The U.S. Treasury Department’s decision to sell off thousands of tons of tin from the strategic stockpile in mid-1962 had also sent Bolivia into a tailspin . Bolivian legislators demanded renewed negotiations with the Soviets .
 Paz Estenssoro pulled Bolivia out of the OAS in September 1962 . Paz declared the country in a state of siege, and increasingly relied on the armed forces .
 Bolivia's leader was desperately trying to tame the revolution that he had unleashed to avoid the dual threats of civil war and U.S. intervention . Bolivia’s leader was desperate to tame his revolution to avoid a civil war .
 U.S. and Bolivian officials jumped into action in an effort to minimize the local effects of the crisis . Bolivians and the United States were quick to respond to the threat .
 The United States ambassador, Ben S Stephansky, cabled Washington on October 23 to report that the Bolivian minister of government had warned him that leftists in the national congress were planning to make pro-Cuban speeches calling for demonstrations . The U.S. ambassador reported that the
 Bolivian government minister had asked for the names and addresses of United States citizens in La Paz to provide adequate 84.2 million people in the country's capital, Bolivia . Bolivians have asked for names of U.S. citizens in the city to be provided with adequate
 The Bolivian foreign minister had already called the Cuban chargé d’affaires and asked him to publicly express his opposition to any possible demonstrations, threatening that even tacit Cuban support for demonstrations would be seen as an unfriendly act .
 Bolivian leaders’s efforts to contain the damage from the missile crisis proved insufficient . Bolivians’ efforts to deal with the problem proved insufficient, the country's leaders said .
 A storm of protests broke out on October 26, a few days later than Stephansky had predicted . Protests broke out in the U.S. on Oct. 26, 2011 .
 The disorder reportedly began when police used tear gas to disperse anti-Castro students who were stoning a pro-Cuban radio station . Police reportedly used tear-gassing to disperse protesters who were attacking pro-Cuba radio station in Cuba .
 The students regrouped and began attacking a communist-friendly bookstore, shattering its windows and burning its wares . The bookstore was attacked by students, shattering windows and shattering its doors .
 Three thousand labor union members responded with a pro-Castro demonstration near the U.S. embassy . Opponents intercepted the demonstration, which was intercepted by demonstrators .
 The crowd erupted into street fighting and rioting, mobs burned both Soviet and U.S. flags . Five people lay dead and dozens more were injured in the chaos .
 United States officials blamed the deaths on communist and communist-front organizations . U.S. officials, eager to turn the tragedy to their advantage, blamed communist organizations .
 The embassy in La Paz sent the State Department a list of names of twenty-eight people believed to be responsible for the violence . The State Department said they had been seen distributing weapons to students and union members . The embassy said they were distributing weapons .
 Two of the people on the list had traveled to Moscow, and eight others had gone to Cuba . Two of those traveled to Russia, eight others to Cuba, two to Moscow .
 Some of the suspected instigators were members of the Revolutionary Nationalist Movement, others were union leaders . Another was a former non-commissioned officer in the Bolivian army .
 The last person on the list had been recently employed as assistant to the minister of education . Paz Estenssoro tried to turn the tense situation into an opportunity to repair his partnership with the United States .
 Bolivian president expresses "sincere happiness" that his country’s stance had been appreciated by the 91st . Bolivians have signed a letter to the United States expressing their support for the country .
 The missile crisis thrust Brazil’s leaders into a similarly difficult position . The crisis thrusts them into a similar position .
 Leftist president João Goulart had been in power for little over a year and was struggling to establish legitimacy in the position that his predecessor, Jânio Quadros, had suddenly and unexpectedly abandoned in August 1961 .
 Goulart had been forced to agree to rule under a parliamentary system with reduced presidential powers .
 Goulart began maneuvering to abandon the parliamentary system at the same time as he was trying to strengthen Brazil’s shaky economy and keep the restive military in check . Dissatisfied with this arrangement, Goulhart immediately began .
 The fact that Goulart had established relations with the Soviet Union and refused to cut diplomatic ties with Castro added further tension to his relationship with the military and the U.S. The fact he had established ties with the Soviets added to tension with the United States .
 He appeared ‘visibly shocked’ when the U.S. ambassador summarized the evidence of the nuclear buildup in Cuba . The Cuban president appeared “visibly surprised” when he heard the evidence .
 Goulart expressed particular interest in seeing evidence of the missiles, which he claimed would be critical to publicly justify strong support for the U.S. He said he wants to see evidence of missiles .
 The Brazilian president described the Soviet action as a “grave diplomatic error,” arguing that the U.S. had made a mistake . The United States 94.9 percent of the world’s population was under pressure from the Soviet Union in 1994 .
 President Goulart’s disagreement with the U.S. response to the missile crisis continued, but his arguments and goals changed . After he had time to reflect and consult his advisors, he changed his view of U.K.
 He also voiced fears about the future of the OAS and contended that the organization had been losing authority as a result of hasty decision-making that departed from the proper application of its own statutory norms .
 Brazilian Premier and Foreign Minister Hermes Lima declared that, as a pacifist nation, his country opposed intervention . He defended Cuba’s right to self-determination .
 As in Bolivia, tensions escalated during the course of the missile crisis . Bolivian President Vladimir Putin is expected to make a visit to the region .
 On October 25, some seven thousand pro-Castro demonstrators, the majority students, marched on the U.S. Embassy in Rio . The majority students were students .
 Riot police in steel helmets intercept protesters with tear gas, clubs, and jets of water . They came within blocks before truckloads of riot police intercepted them . Riot police used tear gas and water to repel the protesters .
 Police officers fire submachine guns over the heads of the marchers, who fled . The demonstrators responded by throwing rocks, prompting several police officers to shoot them . The protesters threw rocks at police officers, who then fled .
 In Recife, military police used batons and tear gas to disperse a pro-Cuba demonstration, beating protestors who had sought sanctuary in a nearby church . Military police also used tear gas and batons to disperse protesters who sought sanctuary .
 The stevedores’ union threatened to stage a boycott of U.S. ships in Brazilian ports if the quarantine continued .
 Violéncias da polı́cia contra manisfestantes pró-Cuba,” Última Hora, October 25, 1962 .
 The Brazilians helped maintain the air quarantine, just as the Argentines were publicly helping to maintain the naval quarantine . In a quieter manner, the Brazilians thus helped maintain their air quarantine .
 Some Brazilians on the conservative side of the national political divide wanted their government to cooperate even more enthusiastically with the U.S. Some say they want to cooperate more with the United States .
 A group of two hundred women bearing signs that read “Cuba yes, Russia no” held a demonstration at the Foreign Ministry . The women accused Hermes Lima of cowering in fear of the Soviet Union .
 Other conservative newspapers accuse the president of succumbing to radical leftist advisers . Other conservative papers accuse the White House of being too liberal .
 He told legislators from forty-seven countries gathered for an interparliamentary meeting in Brasilia that coexistence was the key . On October 24, he said coexistence is the key to coexistence in Brazil .
 One of President Goulart’s closest political advisors, former foreign minister Francisco San Tiago Dantas, presciently proposed one way in which the crisis could be resolved in a peaceful manner . Former foreign minister . Francisco San Tantas is leader of Brazil’
 Cuba should yield its nuclear weapons in exchange for a pledge from the U.S. not to invade, Dantas says . In an interview with reporters, he said Cuba should give up nuclear weapons to the United States .
 In September 1962, Brazil’s representative in the U.N. had submitted a draft resolution calling for the creation of a denuclearized zone throughout Latin America . Brazil had submitted the draft resolution in September 1962 .
 Brazilians began pushing again for the proposal that they had tabled the month before . Once the crisis developed in October, Brazilians started pushing again . The proposal was tabled in October .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff opposed the idea of using the Brazilian initiative to resolve the crisis . They said it would not guarantee the prompt removal of the missiles and would degrade the U.S. military flexibility .
 Evidence has recently come to light that Kennedy and other U.S. leaders initiated yet another Brazilian effort to find a negotiated solution to the crisis . United States officials eventually reached a compromise and instructed UN representative Adlai Stevenson to give a cautiously positive response to the denuclearization proposal .
 As historian James Hershberg has discovered, Brazil played a key role in a covert U.S. effort to convince Castro, not Khrushchev, to relinquish the missiles .
 On October 25, Kennedy’s Executive Committee discussed a proposal to make an approach to Castro “through a Latin American representative in Cuba, probably the Brazilian Ambassador,” the committee said . Any of the possible paths by which the Cuban crisis can be expected to develop will result
 If the missiles are not removed, “further steps will have to be taken against Cuba and very soon,” it warned . The U.S. says it will take further steps to remove the missiles .
 Goulart chose as his messenger the new chief of the cabinet’s military department, whom U.S. observers regarded as pro-Communist and anti-American . Instead of entrusting the message to the Brazilian ambassador to Cuba, he chose a pro-communist
 Goulart’s response to the missile crisis backfired by engendering resentment rather than gratitude among U.S. officials . Ultimately, the Brazilians’ not-so-secret attempt to convince Castro to relinquish the missiles failed .
 The rifts in Brazil’s political scene had become so wide that increasing numbers of people on both sides of the spectrum refused to compromise and began urging antidemocratic solutions to the deadlock .
 The missile crisis was one of many controversial events and issues that exacerbated polarization . Goulart’s attempts to play multiple angles left him exposed to attacks from the left, right, and swiftly shrinking center .
 Political factions within Brazil used the missile crisis as an opportunity to criticize and undermine Goulart’s leadership . Political factions in Brazil have used the crisis as a way to criticize the president .
 In the spring of 1964, the military staged a coup with U.S. approval and Goulart fled to Uruguay . He was left with no political base in Uruguay . In 1964, he was forced to flee with the military .
 Local political conditions combined with international alignments produce reactions ranging from war mongering to attempted mediation . The situation in the region has been described as the worst in the world for years .
 In the nations of Central America and the Caribbean, dictators tried to amplify the crisis to clamp down on domestic opposition and rid the region of Castro’s revolutionary intrigues . Dictators in the region also tried to clamp down on internal opposition .
 The Mexican government managed to turn the crisis to its advantage by gaining the gratitude of U.S. leaders . The government kept a tight lid on its domestic situation .
 Some South American governments enthusiastically joined the quarantine while struggling to quell local protests . Others endeavored to play a mediating role between Washington and Havana .
 The U.S. used the missile crisis as an opportunity to alter its relationship with its neighbors, experts say . The missile crisis was the first time the United States faced a crisis in decades .
 Lincoln Gordon, “Brazilian Financial Situation and Political Orientation,” November 20, 1962, ibid. Lincoln Gordon: Brazil’s financial situation and political orientation .
 Somoza and Betancourt were unable to goad the United States into pursuing a more belligerent policy toward Castro . As part of the resolution of the missile crisis Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba .
 There was a unanimous Latin American response to the missile crisis that eventually had a successful outcome . There was, however, one unanimous Latin America response that had a positive outcome .
 The events of October 1962 drove home the danger of nuclear war for people across the Americas . The events prompted a truly hemispheric reaction .
 In April 1963, the presidents of five Latin American countries announced that they were prepared to sign a multilateral agreement that would make Latin America a nuclear weapon-free zone . The agreement was the initiative of President López Mateos of Mexico .
 Leaders of 14 countries signed the Treaty of Tlatelolco on February 14, 1967 . Treaty banned nuclear weapons in their territories . Treaty was signed in Mexico City, Mexico, four years later .
 The nuclear weapons-free zone came into effect in 1969 when the requisite number of countries ratified the treaty . The treaty was ratified by the required number of nations .