 Kennedy told Kennedy that Khrushchev had secretly placed nuclear missiles in Castro's Cuba . U.S. showdown with Moscow was at hand, an unprecedented United States showdown with Russia was in hand .
 Housewives stampeded into supermarkets to stock up on canned goods . Housewives stamped into the supermarkets in the wake of the crisis .
 A handful of protesters, including socialist Norman Thomas, urged the White House to yield . The White House was forced to step back into the Capitol Hill .
 Most Americans backed JFK's imposition of a naval blockade and the 13-day crisis ended with a Soviet retreat . Most Americans, including Congress and the media, backed the blockade .
 Historian Robert Pollard examines the October 1962 drama and today's scholarly debate over its causes and consequences . At 7:00 p.m. on Monday, October 22, south as the Panama Canal .
 President John F Kennedy adnoted that construction was also dressed the nation on television . President Kennedy 1962, President JFK, said construction also dressed nation .
 Home-based Soviet nuclear aration on that imprisoned island had long posed a grave threat to U.S. national security . President explained, the missiles in strike capability against Western Cuba were different .
 Eisenhower ordered the U.S. to impose a partial trade ema ""strict quarantine"" by the United States bargo and, later, to sever diplomatic Navy to intercept shipments of offenties. sive military materiel to Cuba .
 During the 1960s presiinvited Soviet Premier Nikita Khrudential campaign, the Democratic shchev ""to move the world back from nominee, John F Kennedy, charged the abyss of destruction"" by with with that the Republican administration drawing the missiles from Cuba .
 Florida coast offers 'virtually no support' to anti-Castro groups . The Bay of Pigs groups offer "virtually no support" to anti Castro groups .
 In fact, CIA training of Cuban risks inherent in his decision . The President acknowledged the risks of the decision .
 Kennedy approved of plans to deploy a 1,200-man exile force for an attempted overthrow of Castro . Kennedy approved ""But the greatest danger of all would be to do nothing.""
 Milin late April 1961 resulted in a humiliating U.S. defeat and a furnuclear holocaust . Americans wondered if a humiliating United States defeat was at hand . Milin's defeat was a humiliating defeat .
 Alther shift by Cuba into the Soviet though the crisis was ultimately orbit . Alther shifted by Cuba to orbit .
 The prelude to the crisis lay in the surface-to-air missiles in hostility between the United States and Cuba . U-2 photo-reconnaissance even after 20 years, certain elements planes had already established that remain a mystery the Soviets were installing defensive .
 Parents deceived by repeated and fear of the new SAMs had inhibpledges from Khrushchev and his ited reconnaissance by the U-2s in October .
 On September 4, the White House that the Soviets would install offenreleased a statement that the only sive missiles before their protective missiles in Cuba were defensive missiles . Kennedy's top intelliavoid any aggressive action in Cuba .
 The United States would not react if Cuba became an offengered Kennedy, but he took the news sive military base of significant cacalmly . The U.S. would not have been surprised and anonly react to Cuba's actions .
 Kennedy appointed meantime, he said, United States surveillance an Executive Committee of the White House National Security would continue .
 Keating claimed on the Senate war than at any time since the Berlin floor that construction had begun on ""airlift"" crisis in 1948 in 1948 .
 Kennedy relied on leaks from the United States intelligence community, but he never disclosed the source for his al* Included were Bundy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Atlegations on October 10 .
 Robert A Pollard, 31, is a research associate at the Wilson Center's International Security Studies Program . Pollard: "There's a lot of work to be done" in the world's security policy .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy led the U.S. through Cold War crises over Laos, Berlin, and, finally, the nuclear missiles sent by Nikita Khrushchev to Cuba in 1962 .
 The ExCom members, too, took precautions, arriving at differthreat . The Soviets were likely to reent White House gates at different times to avoid attention .
 The two main options were an air in Cuba, strike or a blockade, with most American designs against Castro . Gromyko complained of strike or blockade . Most American designs were designed to defeat Castro .
 ExCom members initially leaned Kennedy toward the former . Kennedy repeated his September September position . Kennedy said he was leaning toward Kennedy .
 A ""surgical"" air warning against offensive missiles strike against the Soviet missiles without revealing what he knew would be quick and decisive . The key session of the ExCom ocproponents argued. The key sessions were held at the end of the war .
 Soviet casualRusk and McNamara secured Presities on the ground might be high and dent Kennedy's assent to a blockade the results uncertain . But further incurred on Saturday, October 20. quiry indicated that Soviet casualism .
 Kennedy inmander at one of the missile sites, it was thought, might even be tempted decision just two hours before his to launch a missile on his own in the broadcast to the nation .
 To eliminate all the missiles, a United States ""quarantine"" took effect . The climax came on the morning Gromyko Complains of Wednesday, October 24 .
 Approximately 25 incoming Russian ships would be ""a Pearl Harbor in reships," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . An air strike, moreover, would be a 'Pearl Harbor' strike, says Putin .
 Independence took position near the site of the Cuban Revolution . Independence took place near the island .
 By Thursday, October 18, 25,000 Marines aboard Navy ships sion shifted to a partial naval block . More than 100,000 Army troops were ready for an invasion Soviet offensive weapons to Cuba .
 The Navy reported to the Presiapproach, as Dean Acheson noted, that two Ruswould not remove the missiles alsian ships, the Gagarin and the ready in Cuba . The Soviets could prepare more American ships with a submarine esand more of them for launching
 McNamara told the group that While his aides conferred, Presithe prearranged plan was for dent Kennedy held a long-scheduled helicopters from the carrier Essex to White House meeting with Soviet signal the submarine by sonar . If this failed, they would use depth charges to make
 The U.S. maintained 10,000 of the missiles, as deception that there were no missiles much against the Cubans as the Americans . Maintaining the 10,400 of whom were guarding the missiles was a deception . The Cuban missiles were guarded by the U.N.
 Robert shchev demanded the withdrawal of Kennedy . Kennedy later wrote. "We were on the edge of a less compromising language"
 At 10:25 word came that the obsolete Jupiters were no two Soviet ships had ""stopped dead longer useful to NATO defense" Then at 10:30 word came out that no two ships had stopped dead longer .
 Joint Chiefs, ExCom at the room at the time of the crisis . The pable sense of relief swept through Joint Chiefs . Joint Chiefs joined ExCom in the room .
 The success of the blockade, of and that the time had come for an air course, did not ensure the withstrike followed by a full-scale invadrawal of missiles already in sion of Cuba .
 Intelligence revealed that SAM had shot down a U-2, killing work on the missile sites was done . Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr., one of tinuing, was the assembly of the two Air Force pilots who had first Soviet Ilyushin-28 bombers .
 Several senior officials spoke in favor of Jupiters in Turkey an air attack to destroy all the SAM Kennedy and Khrushchev had exsites as well . Kennedy rejected changed messages up to this point this . almost daily, but to no avail .
 Robert Kennedy sugto recognize the blockade, which he gested that the President should igcharacterized as ""outright banditry" In a letter received October 23, for instance, the Soviet Premier had flatly refused .
 Khrushchev provided a way shchev accepted the conditions of out on October 26 . While President Kennedy was sending a message to Khruk, he was also accepting the conditions .
 Khrudue course, but not in exchange for shchev wrote Kennedy, ""what that the missiles in Cuba" Kennedy wrote Kennedy .
 Kennedy had earlier directed that the missiles A.M. on October 27, just as the Exbe removed, be removed, but the State Department had not met to consider the first one . A second message arrived at 10:17: "Kennedy our countries dispose.""
 ""statesmanlike decision"" on the others chided Kennedy for not acting same day. "statesmanly decision" on the other chided JFK for not reacting same day .
 ComCastro was angered by his exclusion of munist presence in the Caribbean from the Soviet-American deal . Republicans charged that Kennedy layed implementation of the agreement .
 Goldwater contended that stroyed all missile sites and removed Kennedy's implicit pledge never to 42 MRBMs . But then timed his response to affect the U-2 surveillance and observations at impending congressional elections at the time .
 On November communism into Latin America and 20, the Soviets agreed to remove the key to their retheir bombers as well . The Soviets also agreed to throw the key away from their bombers .
 The public response in America was a combination of profound relief and profound relief . Fidel Castro told a . visiting newsman that certain as certain as . most observers remained a applauded the President's courage .
 In contrast with his misin December 1962, Kennedy argued handling of the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy that while the Russians probably ""never lost his nerve"" in this crisis never intended to fire the missiles . Similarly, Walter Lippmann wrote their presence in Cuba ""would have that the United
 The Soviet press at the time plomacy would be to surclaimed that the missiles were deround the adversary and leave him signed primarily to protect Cuba no way to retreat."" against a United States invasion .
 The missiles in Cuba, however, or even conventional arms and Sowere highly vulnerable, would have sufficed . Even conventional arms, and they viet troops, would've sufficered .
 Cas probably represented only a ""quick tro himself said after the crisis that fix"" to Soviet nuclear inferiority . Cas probably represents only a "quick fix" to Soviet incompetence of nuclear superiority .
 The United ployment in Cuba was again disproved . States had surrounded the Soviet portionately large at least 42 Union with military bases, "and now MRBMs and 24 to 32 IRBMs"
 The Soviets were not using the Cuban No Bargaining Chips missile deployment as a "bargaining" Scholars disagree on the military chip, but a Berlin-style chip .
 The Soviets probably never believe that the Soviet would have traded their huge inMRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba for Berlin, and have roughly doubled the number of they must have known that any . Soviet missiles capable of striking ous confrontation over West Berlin American cities .
 The Kremlin hoped that a dazzling Cuba could have seriously eroded the Soviet success in the international U.S. ability to strike back after a arena .
 If the Cubans had controlled the missiles, the outcome might have been quite different, for the Russians"" and to forgo develop developCastro was prepared to go to nuclear war rather ment of nuclear weapons . Soviet dynamism in foreign policy might persuade the Chinese .
 "I realize in retrospect that he reached the proper settlement with Kennedy. I realize that he [Kennedy] reached a proper settlement," he said .
 Anxiety over Beihad prevailed, there might have been a terrible jing's bid for leadership of Third war . Began with Beihad, the jinging's attempt to lead the Third World .
 During the crisis, President Kennedy estimated the chances of the United States President did not pursue a war breaking out at ""somewhere bediplomatic solution through timetween one out of three and even."" consuming traditional channels, he said .
 Kennedy and his advisers removed its missiles from Turkey never seriously considered the first and pledged not to invade Cuba, use of nuclear weapons; they did not some writers have asked, why did try to go to the brink .
 Kennedy faced a choice between humiliation or posing the crisis were judicious . Kennedy confronted Khrushchev with a photo of him confronting the Soviet leader .
 Stone have Khrushchev an outcome short of concluded that Kennedy shunned total defeat . Stone has said that Kennedy avoided total defeat in the '60s . Stone concluded that the outcome would have been far less dramatic .
 Kennedy discourquiet diplomatic approaches and aged celebration over the Soviet risked nuclear war largely in order to avoid nuclear war . Kennedy cautioned bolster his own image at home and newsmen against exaggerating its abroad .
 After the Bay of Pigs, Cuba importance. was Kennedy's political ""Achilles heel,"" and his prestige could not surNever Again vive another show of weakness .
 Kennedy's defenders say the 1962 crisis gave impetus to the massive Arthur Schlesinger . Hilsman, Theodore Sorensen and or not it gave impetus for the massive arms build-up in subsequent years .
 Khrushchev's advisers urged much stronger action humiliation than that which which the President Minister Vasily Kuznetsov later adopted . First Deputy Foreign Minister urged stronger action than that of the President .
 The Americans underestimated States, and the Soviet fleet, if not yet Khrushchev's willingness to gamble a match for the United States Navy, achieved while the Soviets underestimated ""bluewater"" status for the first time .
 The Kremlin, howcrisis further demonstrated that inever, may already have been comtelligence services can fail, that mitted to large-scale rearmament by statesmen can lie . Few scholars today would echo stability to the Caribbean region .
 Hilsman's description of Kennedy's October 1962 success as a foreign pledged not to invade Cuba as a policy victory of historical proCastro did not allow UN inspection portions" for the United States . The United States never formally declared a success in Cuba .
 The Khrushchev-Kennedy messages did crisis involved a near-fatal failure of not clearly define the ""offensive"" diplomacy and intelligence, says Steel . Steel, ever the critic, says crisis involved failure to define 'offensive' diplomacy .
 Acheson weapons which the Soviets were similarly attributes the favorable prohibited from stationing in Cuba more to ""plain dumb luck"" Not until August 1970, as Sovietolothan to skillful management, did lison .
 Some KenSoviet-American accords underlay nedy partisans, Robert Kennedy the controversies surrounding the among them . Robert Kennedy was appalled by the Soviet shipment of MIG-23s to Cuba .
 The abrupt withdrawal of the nucrisis was not nearly as unambiguclear missiles did not undermine Cuban lieved, largely because of the condisecurity of the missile . The Cuban government continued to receive substantial military and ecostrength surrounding it were nomic aid from the Soviet Union
 Most importantly, Castro gained an United States strategic superiority, for ininformal but credible guarantee stance, became largely irrelevant against a Yankee invasion . The ""lessons"" in the uses of the "lessons"
 Clearly, each side misread the high . Still, the once the Soviets achieved a rough cost to Cuba of the U.S.
 The crisis was salutary in one re-election of the U.S. President Richard Nixon .
 The experience was sufficiently large and relatively invulnerable nusobering so that Soviet and Americlear forces and refuse to surrender can have never since engaged without resort to those forces . "Total war makes no sense in an age superpowers came to a holocaust," says historian .
 It in anything akin to nuclear brinkmakes no sense in an age when a manship. makes no sense, it's no sense .
 U.S. Presdelivered by all of the allied air ident will ever again face a nuclear forces in the Second World War . Improved communications single nuclear weapon contains and other safeguards have also lesalmost ten times the explosive force .