 As the decade of the 1960s opened, much of Latin America seemed ripe for revolution . Much of the Latin American nation was ripe for revolt .
 Fulgencio Batista was driven from power by Fidel Castro, who promised social justice and political freedom . Already, in Cuba, Batista had been driven out of power by Castro .
 Castro did promulgate social reforms, but then proceeded to turn Cuba into a communist state . Castro did promulgate social reforms but then turned Cuba into the communist state. Castro did not live up to expectations .
 In Latin America, the competition between communism and democracy had begun . The competition between Communism and democracy in Latin America began .
 The Castro challenge compelled a reappraisal of h emisphe ric defense policies . Castro challenged the Castro challenge . The 1960s, he anticipated, would be "the years of maximum progressmaximum effort"
 Joint Chiefs of Staff found serious flaws in several of these ideas . The Joint Chiefs found flaws in some of the ideas .
 Western Hemisphere has most capability to deal with the least likely threat, according to ISA . Western Hemisphere had the least capacity to cope with the most probable danger, insurgency, ISA says .
 General Lemnitzer: Latins resented U.S. efforts to tell them how large their military establishments ought to be . The Latins deeply resented, as gross interference in their internal affairs, he says . The U.N. should not tell the Latins how large
 First, include a strategic appraisal of Latin America's military importance . Second, include an assessment of Latin American military importance in the region .
 First, prepare guidance for each country on possible actions to prevent a communist takeover . Second, prepare advice on how to deal with the threat of communism .
 Third, defer establishment of an Inter-American Security Force until the concept could be tested in the Caribbean . Dictatorship should not be established until the idea is tested in Caribbean .
 U.S. influence could be exerted far more effectively through MAP than any controls resulting from regional or bilateral agreements . Fourth, speak of ""arms limitation"" rather than ""arms control" than "arms limitation"
 Take note that bilateral agreements permitting the provision of U.S. assistance against indirect aggression appeared to be militarily undesirable . Fifth, take note that .
 The United States would be obliged to keep current regimes in power . Latin countries involved in such agreements would be surrendering some of their sovereignty . There would be difficulties in determining whether opposition movements were communist .
 One state always had the right to assist another when so requested, they reminded Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara .
 Many of these matters were reargued when, in October 1961, the State Department circulated its cisms .
 Most countries could not absorb all the out-of-country training that had been offered . Indeed, most countries were not able to absorb the training offered .
 President prodded the Joint Chiefs of Staff again in October 1961 . They proposed greater use of in-country training and provision of additional materiel . (jtflfl)
 During an inspection of Special Forces at Fort Bragg, the Chief Executive asked General George H Decker what more the U.S. military could do with Latin counterparts .
 JCS reply, forwarded to President Kennedy on 30 Novembe r, offered numerous recommendations . The JCS replied to the President Kennedy's request for a change in policy .
 Memo, CNO to JCS, 16 May 61, to devote more effort toward internal • improvements; and increasing . United States military advisers and training teams, so as to accelerate civic action programs .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff sent Secretary McNamara a list of 46 such projects in January . Joint chiefs of Staff also sent Secretary of Staff a list in January of 46 projects .
 JCSM-M-832-61 to Pres, 30 Nov 61 (derived from JCS 1976/394); JMF 9122/9105 sec 2. 2. JCSS-8 32-61 was sent to Pres.
 At President Kennedy's urging, Congress changed MAP ' s primary purpose from hemispheric to internal defense . MAP 's primary purpose was to protect the nation's interests .
 After a review, the Joint Chiefs of Staff made several reservations known to McNamara .
 Civic' action, they argued, should be undertaken not only by MAP-supported units but also with a country's own resources . Civic action should also be undertaken with the help of MAP-backed units .
 Such an approach would be consistent with both the principles of self-help and the ceiling upon MAP funding . Such a change of funding would be a good thing for the state of Maine, the author says .
 MAPsupported units should perform only such civic action tasks as were ancillary to their military mission and lay within their organic capabilities . MAP supported units should only perform such civic tasks as an integral part of the military mission .
 The team found that there was still time to take corrective action, even in countries where the problems were most serious . The team finds that there is still time still time for corrective action .
 As a rule, indigenous internal security forces could maintain order and suppress outbreaks of urban violence . The violence is a major problem for indigenous security forces .
 The communists could neither overthrow any government nor sustain a large-scale struggle . The communists were not able to sustain any government or a large scale struggle . They could not be overthrown any government, they said .
 JCSM-107-62 to SecDef, 10 Feb 62 (derived from JCS 1735/636); same file . JCS1735/ 636; same file. JCS 107-62: "SecDef"
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff readily agreed with the team about the need for increased internal security assistance and more coordinated executive guidance . Joint chiefs of Staff said the need was urgent .
 They opposed any wholesale revision of the U.S. military program . But they oppose any wholesale change of the United States military program. The U.N. has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 A recent consolidation of Service Missions with MAAGs should alleviate some of the difficulties . Service Missions should be consolidated into one of the largest organizations in the world .
 As for bilateral agreements, they feared that the United States might lose more in renegotiation than it would gain . The U.S. might also lose more than it might gain in negotiations, they said .
 They criticized the team for failing to stress the importance of civic action programs and military participation . Lastly, they said the team failed to stress enough importance of military participation in civic action .
 ISA reviewed bilateral agreements and concluded that no revisions were needed . ISA review bilateral agreements was reviewed by ISA and concluded no revisions needed .
 ISA endorsed all the teams' s proposals, including the proposition that military 13 • v"") ""Mission to South America South American Assessment Team,"" 3 Jan 62, Att to JCS 1976/405, 6 Feb 62; JMF 9130 sec 2.
 Conclusions were summarized in Encl B to JCS 1976/419, 2 Mar 62, same file . Conclusions are summarized in the Encl. B to the JCS. B . Same file. Conclusions .
 SHE. participation in civic action received a lower priority . President Kennedy kept pressing for additional actions .
 Parker suggested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff tell CINCs and Missions to take the initiative in encouraging participation by the 14 . Parker, suggested that Joint Chiefs should tell Cincs to take "the initiative"
 JCSM-187-62 to SecDef, 14 Mar 62 (derived from JCS 1976/419); JMF 9130/3100 sec 3. 3. JCSSM- 187-62 was sent to the U.S. on 14 Mar 1962 .
 Johnson, 16 Mar 62, Att to N/H of JCS 1976/419, 23 Mar 62; same file, sec 2. Johnson . Johnson was a member of the Joint Council of Statesmen .
 In April 1962, General Lyman L Lemnitzer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, presented OSD with a Civic Action Plan for Ecuador costing about $1.1 million .
 Phase I involved primarily road building and water supply; Phase II emphasized school construction, water supply, and public health . Phase III stressed colonization, advanced agriculture, and education . Phase I focused on road construction and water supplies; Phase III emphasized colonization, agriculture, education .
 JCS 1976/420, 6 Mar 62; Msg , JS 3623 to CINCLANT and CINCARIB, 14 Mar 62 . (derived from JCS1976/420) ;JMF 9122/9105 sec 5.5 sec 5 . JCS
 In reply, CINCARIB described one possibly insuperable obstacle — namely, that the target was uneducated or illiterate conscripts, to whom written material would be incomprehensible .
 Ltr, CINCARIB to JCS, 18 Mar 62; JCS 1976/451, 28 May 62; same file, sec 6. Ltr. CinCARIB, CinCIB, JCS: "CinCib" Ltr to J
 CM-671-62 to SecDef, 28 Apr 62, Att to 1st N/H of JCS 1976/444, 8 May 62; JMP 9138.2/3700 sec 1.2 sec 1 . Memo, DepSecDef to CJCS,
 CINCARIB sent the JCS bi-monthly status reports on these projects . Subsequently, CINCIB sent JCS monthly status reports . The JCS sent the reports on the projects .
 In September 1962, Secretary McNamara flew to the Panama Canal Zone and conferred with CINCARIB . Ultimately, though, however, the Defense Department authorized and funded CCC projects in Bolivia and El Salvador .
 General O'Meara stressed that the chief problem was Congress' $57.6 million MAP ceiling . O’Mearas said the MAP ceiling is too high for the federal budget .
 U.S. was heavily involved in ASW programs; these would have to be augmented in order to receive a return on earlier investments . But the United States was heavily invested in the program .
 McNamara agreed to consider civic llT Tsl JCSM-652-62 to SecDef, 24 Aug 62 (derived from JCS 1976/467), JMP 9122/9105 sec 7 .
 1 action projects approximating $3 million for the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, El Salvador, Colombia, Bolivia, and Chile . DOD approval is mentioned in comments on comments on paragraphs 16 and 23 of Memo .
 The Chairman recommended, and the Secretary approved, projects requiring $3,417 million in DOD and $1.1. million in AID funds . The Chairman subsequently recommended and approved projects requiring DOD and AID funding .
 Action had begun on 39 of the 46 projects recomme nded by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in January . US-Latin commanders' conferences had become annual events . InterAmerican Defense College was about to open .
 Military services in all Latin countries were participating in civic action projects . State-DefenseAID message went to CINCARIB and the various Embassies explaining that internal security and civic action were now MAP's primary purposes .
 Ltr, CINCARIB to JCS, 26 Sep Sep 62, Att to J CS 1976/478 3 Oct 62; CM-12-62 to SecDef', 10 62 . Att to 1st N/H of JCS '76/478, 11 Oct 62
 The State Department drafted guidance to explain the program in May . The U.S. has been criticized for the lack of transparency .
 ISA wrote a revision intended to make clear that increased internal security would allow the Latin military to contribute more effectively to hemisphere defense . ISA thought that some of State's language might intensify Latin misgivings .
 In 1964 the Brazilian military ousted left-leaning President Joao Goulart and put General Castello Branco in his place . JCSM-601-63 to SecDef, 6 Aug 63 (derived from JCS 1976/521); JCS-734-63
 The State Department, the Special Group, and ISA all favored some prompt expression of U.S. support for the new regime . The State Dept., the . Special . Group, the. Special Group . and the ISA . all favored the . expression of United States support
 ISA wanted MAP raised from $9.9. to $12. million; the United States Ambassador advocated an increase to $20 million . ISA said MAP raised $9 million from $12 million; U.S. Ambassador advocated for an increase of $20million .
 ISA's proposal is too small to demonstrate U.S. support and likely to offend Brazilian sensibilities, critics say .
 Congress had set a $55 million ceiling on material aid for Latin American, there would have to be compensating cuts in other country programs . The process would disrupt orderly planning, deprive countries of critical assets, and shake confidence in U.S. reliability .
 U.S. efforts to discourage jet aircraft purchases proved to be an almost complete failure .
 CINCARIB had told Secretary McNamara that Communists occupied key positions in the Brazilian Army and government, and that the country might go Communist in three years . Early in 1962, CINCIB had said that Communists occupy key positions .
 Cunha, ""Report of Conference — Caribbean Command,"" 5 Feb 62; JMF 5410 . / early and strong effort"" be made either to remove the $55 million ceiling or raise it to $75 million . Cunhas: "Early and strong efforts"" be
 A $20 million Brazilian program should be approved for planning purposes . Once that's done, a $20 billion Brazilian program will be approved .
 Credit assistance and costsharing proposals also ought to be prepared at an .early date . Credit assistance, cost sharing proposals also should be prepared .
 Cuba would, of course, be rather like performing ""Hamlet"" without the Prince . Cuba would be like performing "Hamlet" without Prince .
 Secretary of the Army Cyrus Vance became Mr McNamara' s executive agent on all Cuban matters . General Earl G Wheeler, who had become Chief of Staff of the . Army in October 1963, acted as JCS representative .
 The policy statement should say that the Uni ted States would ""^" If the latter, it should speak simply of being ""prepared, as appropriate opportunities present themselves,"" to do these things . If the U.S. would "prepared" to act, the policy statement
 Joint Chiefs of Staff urged adoption of the former course of action . They recommended repeated lowlevel reconnnaissance flights over Cuba be included among the possible courses of action against Cuba . Low-level reconnaissance flights were also recommended .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff reaffirmed their preference for more drastic actions . Joint chiefs of Staff say they want to see more drastic action . Joint Chiefs say they are 'prepared for the worst'
 Defense Department, accordingly, adopted this position . One possibility involved Defense Department adopting this position.
 See, for example, JCSM-809-63 to SecDef, 21 Oct 63, Encl A to JCS 2304/205-1; JMF 9123/3100 sec 1 . See, see, see and follow the instructions in the comments .
 JCSM-458-63 to SecDef, 15 Jun 63, Encl A to JCS 2304/197; JMF 9123/3100 sec 4. 20 matters completely. JCSSM- 458-63 is JCS2304-197; J
 Mr Vance asked the Joint Chiefs of Staff to propose plans for air-sea surveillance . Mr Vance has been asked to propose a proposal for air surveillance .
 On 20 January, they and Secretary McNamara charged CINCLANT with monitoring all ship movements into Venezuela .
 CINCLANT concluded that, although surveillance could be accomplished, boarding and searching all ships would be such a daunting task that firm intelligence about subversion traffic was absolutely vital .
 On 17 February, CINCLANT outlined before Secretary McNamara and the Joint Chiefs of Staff a scheme for disrupting Cuban arms traffic . They promptly approved it, as the basis for a detailed plan .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff conferred with President Castro on 4 March 1964 . President asked them for a list of measures that might add to Castro's troubles . Joint chiefs of Staff gave list of possible measures to help Castro .
 General Curtis E LeMay, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, more explicitl y, insisted that the longer we refrain from positive 32.2 percent .
 He proposed saying The Joint Chief of Staff believe that the ultimate. ultimate. goal was to be the ultimate . Therefore, he proposed saying ‘The Joint Chief . Chief of . Staff’s ‘ultimate. objective’ was to ensure that the . ultimate.
 General Maxwell D Taylor circulated a draft that, with minor additions, won JCS approval . General Taylor, who had been Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff since October 1962, circulated the draft . The draft was approved by the JCS, and the draft won approval .
 The White House recommended a resumption of the program involving the employment of [covert assets] to conduct interdependent operations, including the covert collection of intelligence, propaganda actions, and economic denial actions .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff continue to believe that the ultimate U.S. objective toward Cuba must be to establish a government in Cuba that is acceptable to the United States. The Joint chiefs of Staff believe that that must be .
 Little remains which offer promise of real effectiveness in removing Castro short of a blockade or an ascending scale of military action up to or including invasion .
 They will keep this problem under continuing review and advise you should any new and promising courses of action be uncovered .
 For the remainder of the 1960s, something of a stalemate persisted . So, for the rest of that year, the two countries were at odds over the issue .
 Fidel Castro continued to control Cuba, but he made few converts in Latin America . Fidel Castro was still in control of Cuba . He made a few converts to Latin America, but made little converts in the region .
 Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara failed completely; in 1967, he was captured and killed . The gravest peril appeared in Boliva, where Castro's lieutenant failed completely . In Boliva he failed completely and was captured in 1967 .
 In the Western Hemisphere, counterinsurgency must be counted a success . Counterinsurgencies must be considered a success in the U.S.
 In November, the JCS sent Secretary McNamara a plan for attacking the sugar industry which, they thought, merited ""serious consideration"