 In October 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union came closer to war than ever would . The two superpowers came close to war in October 1962 . The U.S. and Russia were the closest to war ever before .
 John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev backed off, with both making substantial concessions . Both made substantial concessions to the Soviet Union in the wake of the war .
 At the beginning of 1959, Cuban guerillas led by Fidel Castro overthrew the pro-American dictator Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban rebels .
 By mid-1960 Castro had firmly oriented the new regime against the United States . Castro's government grew increasingly dependent on the Soviet Union for military and economic aid .
 Eisenhower administration approved plan for military invasion by Cuban exiles . Kennedy approved plan soon after his inauguration . Eisenhower administration plan for invasion was approved .
 The exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, were swiftly crushed by the Cuban military . The expected popular uprising failed to materialize and the expected uprising failed .
 Kennedy authorized the largest covert operation in CIA history, Operation Mongoose, to undermine the Castro regime and Cuban economy and perhaps assassinate Castro . The operation was intended to undermine Castro's regime and perhaps to assassinate him .
 He also ordered the Joint Chiefs of Staff to prepare plans for a future invasion of the island .
 In 1962 the administration succeeded in barring Cuba from the Organization of American States, putting in place a comprehensive economic embargo, and pressuring 15 Latin American nations to break off relations with Cuba . In 1962, Cuba was barred from the OAS, and the embargo was put in place .
 Khrushchev, too, saw the fate of his country and his leadership wrapped up in Cuba . The fate of the Cuban people was tied to his leadership in the country .
 The People's Republic of China was increasingly challenging the U.S.R.'s leadership of the Communist world . A failure to defend Cuba with sufficient vigor threatened to undercut the Soviet Union's standing .
 Khrushchev also thought he saw an opportunity for Communist gains, believing Kennedy was cautious, if not timid, and would not risk nuclear armageddon . In addition to these political and strategic incentives, he also believed Kennedy was not willing to risk nuclear war .
 Khrushchev offered to bring Cuba firmly within the Soviet Union's orbit and to deploy nuclear missiles under Soviet control . Castro, who with good reason feared for his life, accepted the proposition .
 During the summer of 1962, U.S. suspicion about Soviet activities in Cuba grew . Domestic political pressure on Kennedy became intense .
 In mid-September, the first Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles arrived in Cuba . In early October, nuclear warheads arrived in early October . The first Soviet missiles were sent to Cuba .
 U-2 spy plane turned up incontrovertible evidence of missile sites . U.S. intelligence reported missile sites appeared to be under construction in September .
 On October 22, Kennedy addressed the world demanding that the missiles be withdrawn . Kennedy announced the imposition of a naval “quarantine” on shipments of “offensive” weapons to Cuba .
 Kennedy ordered the military to prepare for air strikes or an invasion . At the same time, Kennedy ordered an invasion or air strikes .
 Soviet-bloc ships steaming toward Cuba decided at the last moment not to challenge the cordon . United States naval forces took up positions two days later .
 The next week was a harrowing one as the world teetered at the edge of nuclear war . It was the next week that the world was on the brink of a nuclear war.
 Soviet and U.S. decision makers weighed their options, and both Kennedy and Khrushchev deserve much credit for their caution .
 Kennedy resisted pressure to pursue more aggressive military action that would have raised the risk of unintended escalation . Kennedy in particular resisted recommendations and pressure from his closest civilian and military advisers .
 Khrushchev's letter offered to withdraw missiles in exchange for U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . The style and substance of the missive reflected the extreme stress under the Soviet leader was under pressure .
 The situation grew more tense when an American U-2 was downed during a Cuba overflight . Another U.S. spy plane drifted into Soviet airspace after it was downed .
 Kennedy agreed to terms of Khrushchev's second letter, but in a way that would permit the U.S. to save face . Kennedy was fearful that the accelerating cycle of violence would push the two powers over the precipice .
 In exchange for the withdrawal of the missiles, the U.S. offered a public commitment not to invade Cuba . The United States would quietly withdraw the Jupiters a few months after inspectors confirmed that Soviet missiles had been removed from Cuban territory .
 Khrushchev agreed to Kennedy's proposal, and on October 28, the crisis all but came to an end . The crisis was the first time the crisis was over .
 U.S. officials congratulated themselves for having stared down the Russian bear . But the better informed among them knew that both sides had gone far to allay the other's concerns .
 On November 21 Kennedy announced that the United States was satisfied that the missiles had been withdrawn . The United States relied on aerial photography instead—and that the quarantine had been lifted .
 Millions evacuated their homes, and all over the country shoppers raided supermarkets for emergency supplies . Millions of people are expected to be evacuated from their homes this week .
 Tourists and other foreign visitors desperately sought to flee to safer parts of the globe . Tourists were forced to flee the country to escape violence in the wake of the attacks .
 Americans faced the brutal fact that talk of civil defense in the preceding decade had been just that . Americans faced a brutal reality that the civil defense had never existed .
 When the crisis abated, the public was understandably relieved, but raised no clamor for an ambitious civil defense program to reduce the vulnerability to nuclear attack . No clamor was raised for such a program, but the public should be relieved .
 Some undoubtedly understood that the nuclear revolution meant that defense had become impossible . They embraced the logic of nuclear deterrence . Some undoubtedly believed that defense was impossible .
 Ronald Reagan's focus on the Strategic Defense Initiative and George W Bush's commitment to missile defense . Most avoided unpleasant realities, however, and others refused to abandon the elusive dream of foolproof defense .
 The emerging consensus appears to be that his primary goals were deterring an American invasion of the island, countering the overwhelming United States advantage in strategic nuclear weapons, and building the foundation for a triumph .
 Kennedy chose to proceed initially with quarantine rather than a number of other possible options . He believed only a strong display would persuade the Soviets of American resolve, while too strong a display could spark a full-fledged war .
 The most interesting question with regard to the U.S. is why the installation of the missiles was viewed as inherently threatening . The installation of missiles is not necessarily a threat to the United States, CNN says .
 The domestic politics of Cold War America played a role . Concerns were voiced about maintaining the U.S. reputation for resolve among its allies and adversaries .
 Many scholars interpret the crisis as a classic illustration of the impact of individual and organizational irrationality on foreign policy . That both superpowers ran such great risks for such apparently small rewards has led many scholars to interpret it as an example of individual irrationality .
 Soviet and American decision making was rife with misperceptions and miscalculations . Policy makers suffered from cognitive and motivated biases and were misled by bureaucracies committed to their interests .
 Organizations following standard operating procedures nearly led the U.S. and the Soviet Union over the nuclear cliff . The United States and Soviet Union nearly went nuclear .
 Soviet leaders wrongly saw a U.S. nuclear test in the Pacific as a clumsy effort at intimidation . The test was scheduled long before, and was seen as an attempt to intimidate the Soviet Union .
 U.S. decision makers incorrectly assumed that the order to shoot down the plane had come from Moscow . Decision makers perceived the downing of their spy plane over Cuba as escalatory saber rattling by the Kremlin .
 Many have traditionally attributed the resolution of the crisis to American strategic and tactical superiority, but this was well-known to the Soviets before they embarked on this venture . This was well known to the Soviet Union before it embarked on the venture .
 The side that cares most deeply is willing to climb higher up the escalatory ladder, and it can consequently issue more credible threats . Thus, its preferences will come to dominate .
 The proximity of Cuba to the United States mainland gave the U.S. an advantage in the competition for credibility, but the Soviets, too, had strong reasons not to back down . The proximity to Cuba gave the US an inherent advantage .
 When faced with mutual assured destruction, both countries grew cautious and carefully picked a path away from the brink . Both countries were forced to choose carefully carefully and carefully .
 But dumb luck and resolute leadership also played a large part in the success of the team .
 The Soviet Union and the U.S. might have laid waste to each other . Kennedy listened to many of his advisers and approved air strikes or an invasion .
 The two countries again came close to war in 1973, during the war between Israel and the surrounding Arab states . On several other occasions, nuclear command and control faltered, and accidents nearly grew into tragedies .
 Contemporary debates about the dangers of nuclear proliferation turn in part on such differing interpretations of the Soviet and American experience with nuclear weapons .
 The stability of deterrence during the Cold War may inspire confidence that future nuclear-armed states would show equal caution . The stability in Cold War could inspire confidence in future nuclear states .
 If the Cold War did not turn hot was less the product of reason than of luck and leadership, then any confidence that other nuclear rivals, India and Pakistan, for example, would be as fortunate might be misplaced . If the fact that Cold War didn't turn hot is less of reason
 Between the mid-1940s and the early 1960s, the U.S. and the Soviet Union engaged in a competition for global influence that knew no bounds . Between the 1940s and 1960s the United States and Soviet Union were engaged in an intense global competition .
 The crisis of October 1962 marked a critical turning point, as both superpowers identified a line that could not be crossed and negotiated ground rules . Both superpowers agreed ground rules that fundamentally altered the nature of their relationship .
 These explicit mechanisms of assuring stability in crisis were less important than the tacit agreements forged over Cuba and more generally over their respective spheres of influence .
 Covert activities to roll back Soviet control over Eastern Europe and American influence in Latin America were all but unheard-of in the 1950s after the crisis . Covert efforts to roll-back Soviet control in Eastern Europe, Latin America, were common in 1950s .
 After 1962, both superpowers accepted the status quo with regard to Germany . Both relinquished any hope of reuniting the country on their side of the Cold War divide . The Cold War ended in 1962 .
 By the mid-1960s, analysts spoke often of superpower relations after the Cold War . Not because they were optimistic about a future in which superpower conflict would be absent . Instead, they were looking for a future of superpower conflict .
 The world's only superpower superpower superpower has changed, not just a difference of degree . The U.S. President Barack Obama and other world leaders agreed that the U.N. had changed the course of action .
 Reagan's zealous pursuit of American invulnerability threatened to undermine the Soviet nuclear deterrent . Reagan's aggressive rhetoric regarding the “evil empire’s” came not from aggressive rhetoric, but from his pursuit of U.S. invulnerability .