 Batista's forces launch a last, unsuccessful push against a small guerrilla army led by Fidel castro and based in the mountains of the Sierra Maestra . Batista’s forces launched a last attempt to defeat the small army .
 Fidel Castro rallies Cubans to legitimize his policies, which many support . When the U.S. press calls the executions a ""blood bath," he rallies Cuba to support his policies .
 Members of Castro's 26th of July Movement underground and leaders of the anti-Batista political opposition form an interim government . Castro's government was overthrown by the Batista government in 1953 .
 Manuel Urrutia, a judge, becomes president of Spain . José Miró Cardona becomes prime minister . Manuel Uruutia is a judge .
 Rebel army commander Fidel Castro becomes prime minister of the revolutionary government . He replaces Miró Cardona, replacing him as the prime minister .
 Castro's government expropriates properties belonging to the International Telephone and Telegraph Company, and takes over its affiliate, the Cuban Telephone Company, lowering telephone rates . Castro expropriations are expropriated properties owned by the government .
 Castro visits the United States. He is greeted everywhere by cheering crowds . Castro is greeted with cheering crowds everywhere .
 The trip is overshadowed by suspicions that he might be a Communist . He publicly denies the Communist leanings of some in his inner circle, including his brother .
 The government expropriates farm lands over 1,000 acres and bans land ownership by foreigners . The government has expropriated farm lands and bans foreign land ownership .
 Castro calls for a rally in Havana on the anniversary of the storming of the Moncada Barracks . Castro called for the rally to mark the anniversary .
 In celebration of the Agrarian Reform Law, tens of thousands of peasants are brought to the city, welcomed and housed by middle and upper class families .
 At a mass rally of one million people, Castro reveals the class content of his revolution . Castro reveals his revolution's class content to one million protesters .
 Comandante Huber Matos resigns his post as military commander of Camagüey province . He is one of 14 officers who resigned along with 14 other officers . He was important figure in the revolution .
 He cites his concern with the growing influence of Communists in Cuba's revolutionary government . He cites growing influence in the Communist Party in Cuba .
 Pedro Luis Díaz Lanz, former chief of Castro's air force, flies a B-25 plane from Miami to Havana . He drops leaflets calling on Fidel Castro to eliminate Communists from his government .
 One of the most popular comandantes of the revolution, his death is to this day shrouded in mystery .
 Matos' conviction marks the end of the ""revolutionary coalition"" between moderates and radicals . Matos is a former member of the "revolutionary coalition between moderates and radicals"
 By the end of the first year, only nine of the original 21 ministers of the revolutionary government remain . Only nine of 21 ministers remain .
 Fidel Castro holds the reins of power firmly in hand . With his brother Raúl as minister of defense, Ché Guevara in charge of Cuba's Central Bank and himself as prime minister .
 Soviet Union agrees to buy five million tons of sugar over five years . The Soviet Union agreed to buy sugar from the Soviet Union over the next five years. The deal was part of a five-year deal .
 The United States will place embargos on sugar, oil and guns, and issue propaganda . The U.S. will also issue propaganda on sugar and guns .
 The plan calls for Cuban exiles to attack Cuba and attempt to overthrow Castro . In addition, the plan also calls for attacks on Cuba and overthrow Castro.
 Within the next month Texaco, Esso, and Shell oil refineries will be nationalized . The refineries are expected to be nationalised within a month .
 U.S. Congress eliminates Cuba's remaining sugar quota . Cuba's sugar quota is eliminated in response to these seizures .
 Fidel Castro addresses the U.N. General Assembly, lashing out at the United States and flaunting his new friendship with Soviet premier Nikita Krushchev . Castro also addresses the United Nations General Assembly in New York .
 Under the direction of the Ministry of the Interior, the C.D.R. serve as surveillance agents, ferreting out dissidents, counterrevolutionaries, homosexuals .
 They will carry out health and education campaigns and fuel revolutionary enthusiasm . They will also carry out an education and health campaigns .
 More than 50 percent of Cuba's doctors and teachers in the first two years of the revolution . Many are businessmen and professionals, including more than 50 per cent of Cuban doctors .
 President John Kennedy authorizes the CIA to proceed with Eisenhower's Cuban invasion plan . Eisenhower's plan to invade Cuba was approved by President Kennedy in 1961 .
 1,200 Cuban exiles to land in Cuba's southeast coast, take over the city of Trinidad . They call on Cubans to rise up against Castro and call for a revolution against him .
 Three other key opposition leaders are arrested at a meeting in Havana . Humberto Sorí Marín, the architect of the revolution's Agrarian Reform Law, is among them .
 Rolando Masferrer, a former Batista official, is indicted in Miami for an attack on Cuba violating the Neutrality Act . The aborted invasion of Cuba the previous October 4th .
 The United States distances itself from pro-Batista exiles while supporting other anti-Castro groups . The U.S. has been critical of the Castro government .
 A second bomb in several days destroys Cuba's finest department store, El Encanto . Second bomb in a series of days destroys the department store . Cuba's best department store destroyed by bomb .
 Eight B-26 bombers attack airfields at Ciudad Libertad in Havana, San Antonio de los Baños in Pinar del Río and Santiago de Cuba in an attempt to destroy Cuba's air force . Eight bombers attacked Havana airfields in a bid to destroy
 Second wave, designed to wipe out any surviving aircraft, is inexplicably cancelled . A second wave, which wiped out any remaining aircraft, was also cancelled .
 Castro regime places dynamite under the cells in prisons, as a warning to any prisoner who might try to help Bay of Pigs combatants . The Castro regime is known for placing dynamite in prison cells to deter prisoners from trying to help .
 Word spreads, so that no Cuban citizen with a family member in prison will aid the U.S. invasion . No Cuban citizen has family members in prison .
 The invasion will end three days later in the exiles' defeat by the Cuban army . The invasion ends in the end of the three days after the invasion .
 In Havana, former colleagues who have spoken out against him are executed for treason . Former colleagues including Humberto Sorí Marín, Manuel Puig, and Regelio Gonzalez Corso, are executed .
 President Kennedy approves Oeration Mongoose, a covert CIA plan to get rid of Castro . President Kennedy approved the plan in 1963 .
 Castro calls for all Latin American people to rise up against imperialists in his Second Declaration of Havana . Castro: All Latin Americans should rise up to fight against imperialistism .
 President Kennedy bans all trade with Cuba, except foods and medicines, except for medicines . President Kennedy banned all trade, except food and medicine .
 President Kennedy bans the import of all goods made from or containing Cuban materials . Kennedy bans all goods from or from Cuba . Kennedy also bans all imports of Cuban materials from the US .
 Biryuzov secretly arrives in Havana to discuss placing nuclear weapons in Cuba . The Soviet Union had a secret plan to place nuclear weapons on Cuba .
 Fidel's brother, Raúl Castro, Cuba's Minister of the Armed Forces, goes to Moscow . Fidel Castro's brother is the Cuban President of the Soviet Union . Castro is the son of Fidel Castro, a former President of Cuba .
 The two nations agree to deploy nuclear missiles under Soviet jurisdiction in Cuba . The two countries agreed to deploy the missiles under Cuban jurisdiction .
 A Soviet freighter arrives in Cuba with the first nuclear weapons shipment, a cargo of middle-range ballistic missiles . The shipment is the first of its kind to arrive in Cuba, Cuba's first ever .
 A second Soviet freighter delivers another shipment of middle-range ballistic missiles to Cuba . The missiles are part of a series of Soviet missile shipments to the island nation .
 U.S. U-2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba photographs Soviet construction of intermediate-range missile sites . After two weeks of being deterred by clouds, a U.2 reconnaissance mission over Cuba was successful .
 Kennedy announces a naval blockade of Cuba and declares that a Soviet nuclear attack launched from Cuba would require a response in kind . Kennedy declares a response to a nuclear attack from Cuba .
 Castro writes to Khrushchev urging him to use nuclear weapons and sacrifice Cuba if necessary . Castro writes a letter urging him not to use nukes in Cuba . Castro: "If necessary, we will sacrifice Cuba to survive"
 Khrushchev is ready to remove the missiles from Cuba . Radio Moscow announces a deal has been reached with the Soviet Union . The missiles were removed from Cuba in 1959 .
 Kennedy promises to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey and promise not to invade Cuba . In exchange, Kennedy promised to remove missiles and not invade Cuba, in exchange . Kennedy also promised not to attack Cuba .
 The United States sends Cuba medicine and food in exchange for exiles captured in the Bay of Pigs invasion . The U.S. sends Cuba medicines and food to the Cuban government . The Cuban government was overthrown in 1961 after the invasion .
 Kennedy administration bars Americans from any transactions with Cuba . Kennedy administration barred Americans from dealing with Cuba in the 1960s .
 Given a hero's welcome, the young revolutionary revives Soviet spirits and faith in the future . The film is set to be shown in cinemas in Moscow .
 After disastrous experiment with rapid industrialization, Cuba agrees to focus on producing sugar . Cuba has been forced to rely heavily on sugar production after years of economic turmoil .
 The Soviets agree to purchase sugar at inflated prices while selling Cuba oil at deflated prices . The Soviets also agree to sell sugar to Cuba at inflated rates . Cuba oil was sold to the Soviet Union in deflated amounts .
 Cuba will receive free of charge all military equipment it requests . Cuba will also receive free military equipment from the US government .
 President Kennedy sends a message to Castro that he is now ready to negotiate normal relations and drop the embargo . President Kennedy sent a message that he was ready to talk normal relations with Castro . Kennedy: "I'm ready for normal relations, and I'm ready to drop embargo"
 According to former Press Secretary Pierre Salinger, Kennedy would have negotiated the agreement if he had lived . Kennedy would've negotiated the deal if he'd lived, he says .
 Lyndon Johnson sworn in as the new president of the United States . Vice president Lyndon Johnson is sworn in at the inauguration of the president .
 Mexico is the only country to refuse to discontinue diplomatic and trade relations with Cuba . When the Organization of American States requires its members to stop trading with Cuba, Mexico refuses to comply .
 Fidel Castro reads a letter Guevara had written him the previous May . Fidel Castro read the letter in Havana, Cuba, the next day .
 In it Guevara resigned all his official posts and his Cuban citizenship before leaving to fight in other lands . In it he left Cuba and fought in other countries .
 Months later, defeated and humiliated, Ché Guevara will return secretly to Cuba . Months after the defeat, he will be humiliated and humiliated .
 Fidel Castro proclaims that ""revolutionaries in any corner of the world"" can count on the assistance of Cuban fighters . Fidel Castro: "revolutionary in any corresponders in any corner of the world.""
 Ché Guevara leaves for Bolivia to try to spark a continental revolution . After months recovering and training in the mountains of Cuba, he leaves Cuba for Bolivia . After spending months recovering, he heads to Bolivia .
 President Lyndon B Johnson grants the right to apply for permanent residency to any Cuban who arrived in the U.S. after January 1, 1959 . President Johnson granted the right in 1959 to Cuban immigrants .
 Fidel Castro makes wild promises about his cattle breeding program . Addressing the Federation of Cuban Women, Fidel Castro made wild promises . Fidel Castro was speaking to the federation of Cuban women .
 He predicts Cuba will produce enough milk to satisfy the demands of the entire population . Cuba's milk production is expected to be enough to satisfy all its needs .
 Aleksei Kosygin made surprise visit to Havana after meeting with President Johnson . The Soviet premier was the first Soviet premier to visit Cuba since 1959 .
 He advises the Cubans that the Soviets will not support wars of national liberation in Latin America . He advises that the Soviet Union won't support national liberation wars .
 Leonid Brezhnev warns Castro that the Soviets will not prevent a U.S. invasion if Castro continues fomenting revolution in Latin America . His visit is followed by a letter from the Soviet leader warning Castro of a possible invasion . Castro's visit was followed by the letter
 After capturing Guevara in Bolivia the day before, U.S.-trained rangers execute the Cuban revolutionary . The Cuban revolutionary was executed in Bolivia . After capturing him, rangers executed him .
 The Cuban government begins rationing petroleum in response to a reduction in supply from the Soviet Union . The government rationed petroleum in Cuba after a reduction of supply from Russia .
 Their 'microfactionalist' activities seen to compromise Cuba's sovereignty . Their activities are seen as a compromise to the country's sovereignty.
 Castro takes most of the remaining private Cuban businesses into state control . Castro also takes control of most of Cuba's remaining private businesses . Castro takes over most of Cuban businesses from state ownership .
 U.S. Senator Robert F Kennedy is fatally shot in Los Angeles, California . While campaigning for president, Senator Kennedy is assassinated . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Soviet tanks enter Czechoslovakia to suppress the reform efforts of president Dubcek and the resistance movement known as the Prague Spring . The Prague Spring was the country's first uprising since 1968 .
 People defined as anti-social -homosexuals, hippies, artists -are rounded up . Anti-social people rounded up. Homosexuals and hippies are rounded up in order to avoid offending people . Homophiles, homophiles and artists round up .
 The armed forces magazine Verde Olivo launches a campaign to ""cleanse" Cuba's arts and literature of all pernicious foreign influence .
 All of Cuba is mobilized to produce ten million tons of sugar in the next harvest . Cuba is mobilizing and resources diverted to a single goal of producing ten million tonnes of sugar .
 Volunteer workers from the United States arrive to work on the sugar harvest . Volunteers from the U.S. arrive in the country to help with the harvest .
 Other volunteers come from Korea, Vietnam, and the Eastern block countries . Volunteers come from Vietnam, Korea and Vietnam .
 Castro announces that the largest harvest of sugar in Cuban history has missed its goal by 15 percent . Cuba's economy is in a shambles as all resources -human and economic -consumed by the harvest .
 The arrest and detention of poet Herberto Padilla signals a dangerous crisis between the Cuban government and intellectuals . The poet was arrested for political differences with the government . He was detained by the government for political reasons .
 Cuba accepted as a member of the Non Aligned Movement, a ten-year-old conference of nations created in opposition to the U.S.-Soviet arms race and to Western colonialism . Cuba is accepted as part of the non-Aligned Movement .
 Castro is welcomed in Chile by President Salvador Allende, a Socialist who had been elected in September 1970 . Castro is on his first visit to a Latin American country since 1959 .
 Castro begins tour of Africa, Eastern Europe, and the Soviet Union . Castro begins a 63-day tour of Europe, Africa, Russia and Africa . Castro's first stop is in Africa .
 Cuba becomes a member of the Soviet Union's trade association, the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance . Cuba becomes the first country to join the council of mutual economic assistance .
 Cuban economic and political institutions are increasingly modeled on those of the Soviet Union . Cuba's political institutions have been modeled on Soviet-era Soviet architecture . Cuba has a long history of political and economic reforms since the Soviet era .
 Health indexes, which had dropped in the 1960s, begin to rise as a consequence of Cuba's large investments in a health care system . Cuba's health indexes rise in the 1970s as a result of its large investments .
 Cuba and U.S. begin negotiations over the problem of airline hijackings . Cuba and the United States are negotiating over the issue .
 Fidel Castro attends the Fourth Conference of the Non-aligned Nations in Algiers . Fidel attends the conference . Fidel Castro attended the conference in Algeria .
 He argues that a ""natural alliance exists between the Soviet Union and the Third World" He says that a 'natural alliance' exists between Russia and the world's Third World .
 In Chile, Salvador Allende's government is overthrown by a military coup d'etat . The Chilean president's government was overthrown in the coup . The coup was the first of its kind in Chile .
 In Miami, Florida, a group of seven anti-Castro militants forms Omega 7 . Omega 7 will target Cuban government representatives or Castro sympathizers in the U.S.
 Two United States senators visit Cuba, the first U.S. officials to visit since the break in relations relations . They are the first to visit Cuba since relations broke down between Cuba and the United States .
 The U.S. State Department conducts high-level secret talks with Cuban officials . The goal of re-establishing diplomatic relations with Cuba is to do so . The United States State Department is conducting secret talks .
 Henry Kissinger announces the United States is ready to normalize relations with Cuba . Kissinger: The U.S. is prepared to lift the 15-year-old trade embargo . Kissinger also announces the lifting of the embargo .
 The announcement indicates both nations are on the verge of a breakthrough . The announcement comes after months of secret negotiations .
 Organization of American States ends sanctions against Cuba, allowing member nations to determine their own relations with Cuba . OAS members will be able to decide their own relationship with Cuba after the end of sanctions .
 The United States allows foreign subsidiaries of United States companies to do business in Cuba . The U.S. drops penalties to other nations for trade with Cuba, dropping penalties .
 Top members of the Cuban general staff begin appearing in Angola, a mineral-rich Portuguese colony in South West Africa . Angola is a mineral rich Portuguese colony .
 Planeloads of Cuban special troops are sent to Angola, followed by two passenger ships . Cuban special forces are deployed to Angola . Cuban president: "It's not a military coup de facto"
 Angolan independence group M.P.L.A. proclaims independence from Portugal . With the military backing of Cubans, the group takes over the capital city of Luanda and proclaims Angola's independence . The military backs the group and declares independence .
 U.S. intelligence discloses more than eight failed attempts by the CIA to assassinate Fidel Castro between the years 1960 and 1965 . The CIA attempted to assassinate Castro between 1960 and 1964 .
 Gerald Ford announces that Cuban involvement in Angola will prevent the restoration of full U.S.-Cuban diplomatic relations for the near future . Gerald Ford: Cuba's involvement will prevent full diplomatic relations with the United States .
 Henry Kissinger: There is no possibility of normalized U.S.-Cuban relations while Cuba has troops in Africa . Kissinger: Cuba has forces in Africa, while the United States does not . Kissinger says there is no chance of normalized relations with Cuba .
 By now there are more than 15,000 Soviet-armed Cubans fighting in Angola . By now, there have been more than 150,000 Cubans in Angola fighting .
 Radio commentator Emilio Milán loses both his legs when a bomb explodes in his car . Milán was a radio commentator in Miami, Florida .
 He will assert he was attacked because of his public opposition to terrorism . He will later assert that he was . attacked because he . opposed to terrorism.
 A Cuban airliner crashes after an explosion near Barbados, killing 73 people . A Cuban plane crashes after a blast near the island nation . The Cuban plane was carrying passengers and crew members .
 Luis Posada Carrilles, an anti-Castro activist trained by the CIA, is charged with the bombing . He is accused of being a member of the CIA-trained group behind the attack .
 U.S. president Jimmy Carter, ignoring Cuba's continuing presence in Angola, initiates rapprochement . Carter: "I don't want to see Cuba in Angola again. I don't like it"
 President Obama allows U.S. citizens to travel to Cuba and spend $100 there . He allows United States citizens to go to Cuba for $100 . The Cuban government allows Americans to visit the country and spend money there .
 The United States and Cuba open interest sections in each other's capitals . Cuba and the U.S. have been at odds with each other for decades .
 Somalia expels all Soviet advisers and breaks diplomatic relations with Cuba . Somalia cites the presence of Cuban and Soviet advisers in Ethiopia . Somalia also breaks diplomatic ties with Cuba, citing presence of advisers .
 They will fight Somali forces with Soviet weapons and under Soviet command . The Somali forces will fight the Somali government with Soviet arms .
 Cuban troops helped block the Somali invasion of Ethiopia with the aid of East German and Soviet officers . The Somali invasion was the first of its kind in Somalia .
 U.S. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance declares that he does not immediately anticipate better relations with Cuba . Because of Cuban military activity in Africa, Vance says he doesn't expect better relations . The failed Kissinger initiative over Angola in 1975 was similar .
 Castro demands eviction of U.S. military bases from Guantanamo Bay . Castro demands the eviction of United States military bases . Castro says the bases should be removed from Guantanamo .
 Anti-Castro exiles begin bombing campaign against Soviet mission, Cuban U.N. mission, and Cuban interests section in U.S. The Cuban interest section in the United States .
 Those responsible for the July bombings will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law, U.S. officials say . The bombings occurred in July . The United States says those responsible will face prosecution to the full extent .
 U.S. officials believe that it could be used for military purposes . United States officials believe it could have been used for purposes of the military .
 Congressman Ted Weiss introduces an ambitious, yet unsuccessful, bill to re-establish diplomatic relations with Cuba . Weiss was unsuccessful in his bid to abolish the trade embargo .
 Since 1977, Cuba has supported the Sandinista insurgency against Anastasio Somoza's rule in Nicaragua . Cuba has been supporting the insurgency since 1977 .
 In July, the Sandinista Liberation Front takes power, resulting in a new western ally for Castro . The Sandinistas are a major ally for the Castro regime .
 Huber Matos is freed after 20 years in a Cuban prison, and transported to Nicaragua . He was sentenced to life in prison for 20 years . Matos was freed after his release from prison in Cuba .
 Cuba Independiente y Democrática will work to raise awareness of human rights violations in Cuba . The organization will raise awareness about human rights abuses in Cuba.
 Cuba supports the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, a non-aligned nation . Cuba has a history of supporting non-interventionists in Afghanistan .
 For the first time, Cuban farmers are allowed to sell the remaining produce above their state quotas in an unregulated market to private individuals . Private individuals will be able to sell remaining produce in the unregulated market .
 Ten thousand Cubans descend upon the Peruvian embassy seeking sanctuary after a shooting incident leaves the embassy unguarded . Cubans are seeking sanctuary at the embassy in Lima .
 125,000 refugees make their way to the U.S. during the Mariel boatlift . Twice as many are left behind to wait at the port of El Mariel .
 Cuban human rights activist Ricardo Bofill is arrested for disseminating ""enemy propaganda" and sentenced to another fourteen years in prison . He was sentenced to a further fourteen years behind bars . He has been sentenced to 15 years in jail .
 Most friends and university colleagues avoided contact with him . While he had succeeded in sending his reports on human rights abuses out of Cuba, most friends and colleagues were avoiding contact .
 Many political prisoners will ask to become members of the Cuban Committee for Human Rights . Bofill co-founded the group, which he founded, to compile accounts of prison atrocities .
 Anti-Castro terrorists assassinate a representative of the Cuban mission to the U.S. in Cuba . The Cuban government was attacked by the Cuban government in the 1970s and '80s .
 Ronald Reagan is committed to fighting Communism in the United States . Reagan is the first president to take office in the U.S. to combat Communism .
 President Bush establishes the most aggressive policy against Cuba since the Bay of Pigs invasion . He establishes a policy that would be aggressive against Cuba .
 Jorge Mas Canosa institutes an anti-Castro lobbying group in the U.S. The Cuban-American National Foundation quickly gains power . Canosa's group quickly gains control of the Cuban-Americans .
 For four weeks, the United States Navy carries out maneuvers in the Caribbean . The U.S. Navy has been taking part in maneuvers for four weeks .
 Pentagon officials state that the maneuvers were expected to send a message to Cuba . A week later Pentagon officials said they were sending a message . Pentagon officials later said the maneuver was intended to make a statement .
 Cuba anticipates a U.S. invasion and goes on full alert, preparing the country's entire military . Cuba is preparing for a possible invasion of the United States .
 Cuban vice president Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and U.S. Secretary of State Alexander Haig discuss the escalating situation in Mexico . They reach no compromise in secret meeting in Mexico, but find no compromise .
 Reagan administration reissues ban on U.S. citizens traveling to Cuba . Reagan administration issues ban on travel to Cuba in 1980s .
 Cuban vice president Rodriguez announces to the U.N. that Cuba's military power has nearly doubled since 1981 . The move comes in response to U.S.'s aggressive stance toward Cuba .
 Regis Debray, a socialist French writer who once fought in Havana with Castro's forces, travels to Cuba to escort him . He once fought with the Castro regime in Cuba .
 Valladares is received with great fanfare, and he founds Resistance International . He found the organization after his arrest in 2007 . He is the founder of Resistance International.
 The United States invades the small Caribbean island with 8,000 troops and establishes a provisional government . Suspicious of Cuban involvement in Grenada following a coup, the U.S. invades Grenada . Grenada was ruled out of Cuba by the United States .
 Cuba and Angola outline provisions for the removal of Cuban troops from Namibia . U.N. Security Council Resolution 435 calls for Namibian independence .
 The United States Department of Defense announces that it will spend $43 million restoring Guantanamo Naval Base . The U.S. government will spend the money to restore the base .
 The U.S. and Cuba reach an immigration agreement, beginning with the return of 2,746 Mariel refugees to Cuba . The United States and Cuba reached a deal to return 2,700 refugees to the U.K.
 A new housing law allows Cubans to purchase, and eventually sell, property they rent from the government . Cubans can now buy, sell, buy and sell property from their rental properties .
 Castro and other high Cuban officials meet with five U.S. Catholic Church leaders . Castro and others meet with church leaders in Washington, D.C.
 In early January, the Office of Religious Affairs opens its doors, signaling a deeper relationship between church and state . The office of religious affairs will open in early January .
 The station broadcasts news and information from the United States to Cuba . Backed by Reagan Republicans and Cuban hard-liners, it broadcasts news from the U.S. to Cuba.
 C.C.P.D.H. offers Bofill and his colleagues some protection - they become better known than ever, and much harder to silence .
 President Reagan's daughter gives a copy of the book to her father and introduces them . Reagan: "I'm sure you can't wait to see what's going on when I'm in the book"
 Reagan names Valladares as a delegate to the United Nations's Human Rights Committee . Valladare is a member of the U.N. Human Rights Council . He is also a representative of Colombia .
 Reagan prohibits Cuban government or Communist party officials to travel to the U.S. thus banning most artists, students, and scholars . Reagan also bans Cuban government officials from traveling to the United States .
 An international conference on the church in Cuba is sponsored and hosted by the Cuban Catholic Church .
 Farmers markets, which have been legal for six years, are banned in Cuba . Farmers markets are legal in Cuba, but they are banned by the Communist Party .
 A United States resolution criticizing Cuba for supposed human rights violations is voted down by the U.N. Human Rights Commission . The U.S. resolution was passed by the Commission of Human Rights Committees .
 Armando Valladares brings up the issue of Cuban human rights abuses at a U.N. meeting . The United States demands Cuba be inspected . The U.S. demands that the Cuban government inspect Cuba .
 Many Latin American countries doubt U.S. reports of the problems . Ultimately, the resolution will fail in a 19 to 18 vote because many Latin American nations doubt the reports .
 Armando Valladares once again asks the United Nations to look into Cuba's possible rights violations . Armando Vassadares asks the U.N. to look at possible human rights violations in Cuba . The Cuban government has been accused of human rights abuses .
 The Cuban government invites U.N.H.C.R. members from countries including Ireland, Columbia, Nigeria, the Philippines, and Bulgaria to visit Cuba and assess the situation .
 He firmly denies the existence of human rights organizations and calls any who might be involved liars and cheats . The president firmly denies there are any human rights groups involved in human rights .
 U.N. delegation visits Cuba to investigate human rights issues . The United Nations delegation visits the island nation to discuss human rights in Cuba .
 Because of an endorsement on Radio Martí, almost 4,500 people gather to testify on human rights violations . Because of the endorsement, 4,000 people gather on Human Rights Violations .
 Some of the abuses include torture, executions, disappearances, and inhumane medical experiments in the prisons of Cuba . Cuba has been accused of human rights abuses in the past .
 Castro tries to distract the committee by showing them flourishing hospitals and well treated prisoners in rehabilitation programs . Castro: "I'm not afraid to say yes. I'm going to tell them that I'm a prisoner"
 Back at the Hotel Commodoro, the group hears over 1,500 testimonies about rights violations . However, back at the hotel, they hear more than 1,000 of them .
 Cuban citizens are deprived of freedoms such as speech, movement and the right to assemble, according to the document . It details specifics including the names of people abused for political and social reasons .
 An anti-Castro station funded by U.S. tax dollars, TV Martí, is launched . The station was funded by the United States .
 Congress passes the Mack Amendment, prohibiting all trade with Cuba by subsidiaries of U.S. companies located outside the United States . It also proposes sanctions or cessation of aid to any country that buys sugar or other products from Cuba .
 U.S. Congressman Robert Torricelli introduces the Cuban Democracy Act . The act prevents foreign-based subsidiaries of United States businesses from trading with Cuba . It also prevents travel to Cuba by United States citizens .
 Over two-thirds of the trade between Cuba and the U.S. is in food and drugs . The Cuban-American trade is mostly in food, drugs .
 The law does permit private businesses to deliver food and medicine to Cuba . However, the law does allow them to deliver medicine and food to the island .
 The act is believed to violate an international law stating that food and drugs can not be used as weapons in international disputes . Because of this, the act is thought to violate international law .
 Castro ends ban on U.S. currency in Cuba as nation's economy declines without Soviet subsidies . Castro ends the ban on United States currency as the nation's economic decline continues . Castro ended the ban in Cuba in 1959 after the Soviet Union collapsed .
 Grupo Domos, a Mexican telecommunications company, signs a work agreement with the Cuban Ministry of Defense . The company is angling to update Cuba's telephone network . The agreement is part of an effort to update the Cuban phone network .
 Out of 66 passengers, 31 survivors get picked up by the Coast Guard and claim that two other boats tried to sink theirs, and did nothing to help save them . The Coast Guard picked up 31 survivors .
 More than 32,000 Cubans are picked up by the United States Coast Guard and taken to the U.S. naval base in Guantanamo Bay .
 The U.S. and Cuban governments decide on a cap of 20,000 Cuban immigrants annually . The United States and Cuba will decide on the cap .
 The United States and Cuba endorse their agreement that all rafters leaving Cuba will be returned . The U.S. and Cuba endorses their agreement to return rafters to Cuba .
 Five-point plan includes pardons for political captives, nonviolence, peaceful evolution toward democracy, a system that enforces human rights, and the right of Cubans everywhere to take part in that transition .
 Fliers urging citizens to revolt against the government are dropped over Havana by planes owned by a Miami-based group, Brothers to the Rescue . The group drops fliers over Havana urging people to revolt .
 The Cuban government asks the U.S. government to stop actions by exile groups . Consilio Cubano and Brothers to the Rescue are among the groups .
 Cuban government warns that it will shoot down exile planes in Cuban airspace . Cuban government says it has threatened to shoot down exiled planes in its airspace .
 Radio Martí challenges the Cuban military to follow up on their threat of shooting down rebel aircraft . Cuban military has threatened to shoot down rebels aircraft .
 Cuban military shoots down two Brothers to the Rescue airplanes over international waters . Four exiles were killed when the Cuban military shot down two planes .
 President Bill Clinton signs the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act . The Cuban Liberty Act was signed by Bill Clinton in 1993 .
 This law enforces penalties on foreign companies conducting business in Cuba . This law, also known as the Helms-Burton Act, enforces fines on foreign firms conducting business there .
 Terrorists bomb a dance club in the Melia Cohiba, Havana's premiere hotel . Terrorists also bomb a nightclub in the same hotel . The attack was the first in Havana's history of terrorism .
 A series of attacks on local nighttime attractions in Havana and Varadero follows . A series on Havana's nightlife attractions follows .
 A majority of young Cuban Americans wish to begin a dialogue with Cuba . Cuban-Americans over the age of 45 oppose such talks, according to Miami Herald .
 Cubans Vladimiro Roca, Félix Bonne, René Gómez and Marta Beatriz Roque are arrested . The authors of La Patria Es de Todos are arrested.
 Not until 2002 will the last to be released, Vladimiro Roca, leave the high security prison where he has been kept in isolation . The last person to leave the prison will be released in 2002 will be Vladimir Putin .
 Salvadoran Raúl Ernesto Cruz León is arrested for committing six of the attacks in Havana and Varadero . He is accused of attacking six people in Havana, one of the most violent attacks in Cuba .
 The FBI begins an investigation of seven Cuban exiles after the U.S. Coast Guard examines a boat in international waters requesting assistance . The FBI is investigating the seven exiles in Cuba .
 As a result of the investigation, the seven will be indicted in August 1998 . The seven are expected to be indicted by the end of 1998 .
 Jorge Mas Canosa, founder of C.A.N.F., dies in Miami, Florida . Canosa died in November at age 85 .
 The Pentagon decides that Cuba is no longer a significant threat to the U.S. and urges dialogue with Cuban officials . The Pentagon says Cuba is not a threat to America .
 European countries claim parts of the Helms-Burton Act violate international law . They call for an end to the Cuban embargo . European countries call for the end of the embargo .
 In Puerto Rico, seven Cuban exiles are convicted of plotting to assassinate Fidel Castro . Seven Cuban exile were convicted in Puerto Rico of plotting an assassination attempt .
 Senator John W Warner and over 20 other United States Senators recommend the formation of a bipartisan commission to review U.S. policies on Cuba . Warner: "The United States has been very supportive of the Cuban people in Cuba since 1961 .
 President Bill Clinton refuses to establish a commission to review Cuban policy . President Clinton refused to establish the commission . The Cuban government has been critical of the Cuban embargo .
 Cuba calls for a Salvadoran bomber to receive the death penalty . Raúl Ernesto Cruz León has been convicted of attacking Cuban businesses . He has been sentenced to death for attacking businesses in Cuba .
 The Coalition of Americans for Humanitarian Trade with Cuba unite with former members of the U.S. Congress . They ask the Clinton administration to end restrictions on food and medicine supplies to Cuba .
 They argue that it is unfair to supply it to other countries, such as Iraq, when Cuba's people are in desperate need . Cuba's government says it's unfair to send it to Iraq when it is in need .
 Cuban refugees are killed when their boat capsizes in the Caribbean Sea . Eleven Cuban refugees were killed in the boat capsizing in the sea .
 A five-year-old boy survives, but his mother is among those who die . Elián Gonzalez, 5, survives; his mother dies in the fire .
 Elián Gonzalez is sent home to his father in Cuba after seven months of legal and political battle . Gonzalez was sentenced to life in prison in Cuba . Gonzalez is the first person to be sent home from prison to Cuba .
 The Dallas Morning News and Chicago Tribune will join CNN and The Associated Press by opening branches in Cuba . The Cuban government announces that two American newspapers, the Chicago Tribune and the Dallas Morning and The Chicago Tribune, will open branches .
 At the 10th Ibero-American Summit, Posada Carriles and three other Cubans are arrested for plotting to assassinate Castro . At the same summit, three Cubans were arrested for planning to kill Castro .
 A bipartisan task force in the United States calls for end to the trade embargo . The U.S. trade embargo has been in place for more than a decade .
 Norwegian legislator Hallgeir Langeland nominates Fidel Castro to receive the Nobel Peace Prize for his help to other developing nations . Castro has been nominated for the prize for his work in developing countries .
 On October 12, former United States president Jimmy Carter receives the prize . Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter will receive the award .
 On the 40th anniversary of the Bay of Pigs invasion, a 3-day conference is held in Havana .
 Attendees include the CIA chief for the Miami base, five members of the Brigade 2506, two former Kennedy administration officials, and scholars . Attendees also include five former Kennedy officials, two ex-CIA officials .
 A C.P.F. poll determines that the majority of Americans think the U.S. should do business with Cuba and allow travel there . A majority of those polled think the United States should allow travel to Cuba and do business there .
 Elián González reunited with his father in Cuba was the appropriate decision . They also agree that reuniting Elián Gonzalez with his dad was the right decision .
 Former U.S. Surgeon General Jocelyn Elders tours Cuba's hospitals . Elders is a former surgeon general for the United States. Elders has been in Cuba for more than 20 years .
 Cuba is better than the U.S. at keeping people healthy and out of the hospital, but that America has a better health care system for those who are already sick, she says . She states that America's health system is better for those already sick .
 The United States Food and Drug Administration announces that Cuba has purchased 130,000 tons of grain from two American suppliers, Cargill, Inc. and Archer-Daniels-Midland . The U.S. Food and Drugs Administration announces the purchase .
 Cuban officials offer to compensate Cuban Americans for properties seized during the revolution 40 years ago . Cuban officials say they will compensate them for property seized during revolution .
 Cuban test scores and literacy levels top those of the rest of Latin America . U.N. Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization: Cuba's literacy levels are higher than Latin America's .
 U.S. Treasury Department grants licenses for Cuban travel . 2,000 Americans make the trip to Cuba .
 In Havana, six members of the U.S. Congress meet with Fidel Castro and members of two insurgent groups . Members of the United States Congress are in Cuba to meet with Castro .
 In the coming months, more U.S. elected officials will tour Cuba . The Cuban government is expected to tour the country .
 Undersecretary of State John R Bolton accuses Cuba of developing biological terrorism capabilities . Bolton says Cuba is developing capabilities to combat biological terrorism .
 In a three-minute address on Cuban television, he says he believes it is time to end the embargo . In the address, he said it was time for the embargo to be lifted .
 He also makes reference to the Varela Project, urging Cuban authorities to institute democratic reform .
 Firebombs are thrown at the buildings of the rebel groups C.A.N.F. and Alpha 66 . Firebomb attacks are carried out on buildings belonging to rebel groups .
 Cuba arrests 80 people for their political beliefs the day before the U.S. invasion of Iraq . Cuba arrested 80 people on the same day as the United States invaded Iraq in 2003 .
 The government also searches homes, seizing personal papers and electronic equipment . The government searches homes and seize personal papers .
 Of those detained in March, 75 are tried and convicted on treason charges . 75 of those detained were tried and sentenced in March . 75 were convicted of treason charges; 75 were later convicted .
 Denied lawyers before the start of the trial, the defendents are tried in coutrooms closed to all but immediate family members . The defence is denied access to lawyers before and during the trial .
 The sentences range from six to 28 years in prison, and average over 19 years . The sentences are between six and 28 years old .
 Human rights watchdogs denounce Cuba's re-election into the U.N. H.R.C. claims the country's presence in the organization is shameful . Watchdogs claim Cuba's presence is shameful and call for Cuba to be removed from the organization .
 President George W Bush restricts travel to Cuba from one visit per year to one visit in three years . Bush also reduces the amount of money that can be spent on Cuba .
 Cuba's central bank announces a ban on the use of U.S. dollars . Cuba's Central Bank announces ban on use of United States dollars . The ban was imposed by the Cuban government .
 Castro tells Cubans to ask their U.S. relatives to send other foreign currencies . Castro: Cubans should ask their United States relatives for other currencies . Cubans told to send money to relatives in the United States to send to Cubans .
 Filmmaker Adriana Bosch sought out thoughtful voices to tell the story of Fidel Castro . Bosch's film is based on an interview with the former Cuban leader of Cuba .