 The USA had been very hostile towards Cuba ever since the Communist revolution overthrew the US-backed dictator Batista to bring in the charismatic and fiery Fidel Castro .
 President Kennedy backed an attempt to overthrow Castro by supporting Castro’s enemies in an attempted invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . The United States President John F Kennedy even backed an overthrow attempt .
 On the following pages, there is a timeline of the events which followed . The following pages are a chronicle of events that followed .
 DEFCON 1 would be allout war with the USSR o President Kennedy went on national TV to tell the American public what was happening . In Moscow, Khrushchev became more and more convinced that the USA would invade Cuba . President Kennedy told the U.S. public what he
 Khrushchev condemned the U.S. blockade, calling it piracy . October 23rd o Khrushvic condemned the United States blockade .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships to stop heading for Cuba . Castro ordered Cuban forces to get ready for an American invasion . U.S. Armed Forces went to DEFCON2.
 U.S. warships stopped the first Soviet ship in the Cold War . This was the only time in the entire Cold War they went this close to war .
 Over 120,000 United States troops assembled near Florida coast . It was only carrying oil so they let it through October 26th o .
 Kennedy told ExComm that he favoured some sort of deal to end the crisis . United States invasion of Cuba looked likely o Kennedy . Kennedy said he favoured an end to crisis .
 The ExComm Hawks still wanted an invasion o Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev . Kennedy received the letter from the Soviet Union .
 The letter offered to remove the missiles if the USA promised not to invade Cuba . The letter was sent to the Cuban government in 1961 .
 Most of ExComm wanted to accept the offer October 27th o Probably the most tense day of the crisis . Most of the ExComm staff wanted to take the offer .
 Cuban forces shot down a U.S. spy plane o Khrushchev sent another letter to Kennedy . Kennedy sent a letter to the Soviet leader after the plane was shot down .
 Turkey insists U.S. missiles be removed from Turkey . It also insists that the United States remove missiles from Turkey from the country .
 Kennedy accepted Khrushchev’s offer . However, he admitted that 'Khrushchev has us in a pretty good spot here'
 In other cases, writers may focus on the technology or the politicians .
 Doomsday Clock is an estimate of how close the world is to destruction by nuclear weapons . Doomsday Clock estimates how close it is to the world being hit by nukes .
 The key figures on the BAS committee were not able to meet in October 1962 and therefore never set a time for the Cuban Crisis because it was over so quickly . The BAS committee never met again because the crisis was over quickly .
 Your task is to use all the resources provided to write a paragraph about the Cuban Crisis . Explain how many minutes to midnight the clock would have been set .