 RFE/RL correspondent Sophie Lambroschini reports on what ""lessons"" these men say they have for today's nuclear world . She asks: "Lessons" these men have for the future of nuclear weapons .
 Hollywood disaster movie provided occasion for serious and thought-provoking round-table discussion on nuclear risk .
 The standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union is widely considered the closest point of nuclear war . The standoff is considered one of the closest points to nuclear war ever seen .
 The roundtable, hosted by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, reunited key players in the nearly 40-year-old event . Kremlin and White House officials spent many sleepless nights determining whether it would be war or negotiation to end the crisis .
 The officials gathered for last night's discussion used their collective experience in the 13-day standoff to reflect on lessons for the world today .
 Carnegie Endowment President Jessica Matthews noted that despite the passing of time and changing ideologies, U.S. and Russian nuclear strategies seem "essentially indistinguishable" from their Cold War predecessors .
 She said they are equally ill-equipped to deal with today's nuclear risk . Because of this, she said, they were equally ill equipped to deal today's risk .
 Robert McNamara, the U.S. defense secretary at the time of the crisis, was among the round-table participants . McNamara was the United States defense secretary during the crisis .
 McNamara went on to point out that mistakes are a natural -and in the case of nuclear weapons, irreversible -part of war .
 The next missile crisis, he added, might not end so well . "The best managed foreign policy crisis of the past 50 years -in a sense I think it was," he said .
 McNamara recalled some of the errors of judgment made during the crisis by U.S. President John Kennedy, his brother Robert Kennedy -then United States attorney general -and the Russian leadership .
 McNamara said the Soviet Union made a mistake when it thought the U.S. would not react to the secret transfer of missiles to Cuba . The Bay of Pigs was just 90 miles southeast of the Florida coast . McNamara: The Soviet Union thought it was a mistake that the U
 U.S. spy planes discovered the missiles in the middle of October in 1962 . Most of Kennedy's advisers pressed him to launch an immediate bombing and invasion campaign to claim control of the island .
 Up until the last moment, this option was being seriously considered, he said . He said up until the end of the day it was being considered .
 While the invasion option was still pending, diplomatic efforts continued . Diplomatic efforts continued to try and find a solution to the crisis .
 Khrushchev defused the crisis by agreeing to dismantle the missiles in exchange for assurances that Cuba would not be invaded . U.S. missiles would be pulled out of Turkey and U.K. would pull out of Cuba .
 Khrushchev adviser Fyodor Burlatsky said he is still surprised that common sense prevailed in resolving the crisis .
 Khrushchev was ambling along the Black Sea shore in Bulgaria when aide pointed out that the United States held a missile base in Turkey . Burlatsky edited a letter from the Soviet leader to Castro that he sent to Castro . The letter was edited by a Soviet diplomat .
 Khrushchev then decided that the Soviets should have a base of their own -in Cuba - in Cuba . The Soviet Union had a base in Cuba, Cuba .
 Burlatsky recalls the idea was set into motion without any thought as to what would happen if the United States found out . Burlatky recalls he had no idea what the U.S. would find out if they found out about the plan .
 President George W Bush has argued that such a system is intended to protect the United States and its allies from rogue nations like Iran or North Korea that are suspected of developing their nuclear arsenal .
 The plan has spurred outrage in Russia, where many politicians say they believe NMD may be directed against their own country . Many politicians say the plan could violate the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty .
 All of the speakers at yesterday's roundtable said the defense shield would only increase the danger of nuclear confrontation . The defense shield is only a form of protection against nuclear weapons .
 Washington is repeating the original mistake of failing to see the other side's point of view . Georgi Kornienko, a Soviet embassy official who was involved in the settlement efforts in 1962, says that Washington is currently repeating the mistake .
 The United States has plans to deploy a National Missile Defense shield . The U.S. has plans for a missile defense shield .
 Sorensen also pointed out the increased risk of nuclear proliferation if NMD is deployed . Sorersen also said there is also a risk of increased nuclear proliferation .
 The Cold War mantra that no one would risk mutual destruction - worked for ""rational"" people like Khrushchev and Kennedy, but would have no effect on ""irrational"" leaders .
 McNamara suggested cutting U.S. and Russian offensive nuclear forces from 7,500 to 1,000 -levels even lower than preliminary START III targets . McNamara also suggested cutting United States and Russia's offensive nuclear force from 7500-1,000 levels .
 The risk of inadvertent or accidental launch could also be reduced by separating warheads and launch vehicles .
 East and West have sidelined disarmament issues on the basis of the unproven theory that ""democracies don't wage wars with one another."" An outside observer, Aleksei Arbatov, deputy head of the Duma Security Committee and one of Russia's most prominent security specialists
 Moscow and Washington are now being confronted by the issue again -and in an atmosphere of growing bilateral tension . Arbatov added that by forgetting about nuclear risks during the 1990s, Moscow and U.S. are now confronting it again .
 Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty © 2022 RFE/RL . Follow us on Facebook and Twitter .