 The Bay of Pigs invasion was unsuccessful . Led by anti-Castro supporters, the invasion failed . The invasion was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 Castro understood the invasion as an attempt to overthrow his government . Castro understood that the invasion was a plot to overthrow him .
 Two superpowers of the United States and the Soviet Union came close to a nuclear confrontation . After this unsuccessful event, the two superpowers came to an unsuccessful event .
 This book takes a closer look at this dramatic conflict and the tensions that emerged from the threat of nuclear power . This book is a look at the dramatic conflict between the U.S. and Japan .
 Our books are written to give essential information in a straight-to-the-point, easy to read format . Our books give information in an easy, straight to the point format .
 We cut out technical jargon, waffle, and unnecessary filler to ensure you get the essential information you need to achieve your goals with confidence . We have cut out all the unnecessary filler in this article .
 This book looks at a momentous event from the Cold War . Showing how one of the world's most charismatic leaders chose to follow a brave course of action .
 Personal narratives are also shared, allowing readers first-hand details that other books on this topic do not supply . Personal narratives also shared .
 Readers hear from a Soviet Naval Officer as he goes to battle, and a British Journalist who recalls the tense weeks of the crisis . Readers also hear from Soviet naval officer and British journalist .
 The moment is popularly remembered as the closest the world has ever come to full-scale nuclear war . Resolved through back-channel negotiations, the moment is still remembered as one of the closest moments to nuclear war ever seen .
 President Kennedy Fights the Cold War . Includes pictures . Includes photos of President Kennedy and his family .
 The issue of communist Cuba became central to John F Kennedy and his administration . Within just a month of becoming President, the issue of Cuban communism was central to the Kennedy administration .
 This notable book, packed with interesting sidebars and fascinating facts, transports readers back to a time of political intrigue . It is packed with sidebars, fascinating facts and fascinating sidebars .
 John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev managed to negotiate a peaceful resolution to what was nearly a global catastrophe . Over two tense weeks, the two world leaders negotiated a peaceful solution to the crisis .
 The United States and the Soviet Union squared off over the discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. and Russia were uneasy allies in World War II but Cold War rivals after the defeat of Germany .
 President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev prepared for the possibility of nuclear war . This launched 13 days of tense negotiations between the two nations, as both President Kennedy and . Soviet premier Nikita .
 This book frames answers to JFK, Robert Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev's roles . It uses recently declassified materials to frame answers to these questions .