 The major players in the conflict were the U.S. and Cuba, Cuba, and Russia, led by Premier Nikita Khrushchev .
 On 15 October, 1962, an American spy plane revealed missile installations in Cuba, raising concerns about Cuba's intentions . The U.S. spied on Cuba in October 1962 .
 President Kennedy authorized a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent military material from reaching the area . President Kennedy and his cabinet discussed a number of approaches .
 On 28 October, the United States agreed to refrain from invading Cuba and to the secret removal of American missiles from Turkey . The Soviet Union destroyed the missiles in Cuba, under the supervision of the United Nations . Ultimately, the U.S. and the Soviet Union agreed to the removal of
 The Cubans were angry by what they perceived as a betrayal on the part of the Soviet Union . Castro was not involved in the negotiations between the U.S. and Soviet Union, since he did not .
 Mary has a liberal arts degree from Goddard College . She spends her free time reading, cooking, and exploring the great outdoors .
 Mary McMahon began contributing to the HistoricalIndex several years ago . She has embraced the exciting challenge of being a researcher .
 I don't believe that the global nuclear threat will have been fully dealt with until we the world disarms as a whole . Discussion Comments .
 There will always be power struggles in future generations, and we must do our children and grandchildren a favor by uniting as one world and choosing to leave self-destruction behind us .
 The tactics of the Kennedy's were ingenious in this instance, but they did not affect change in terms of the Cold War, they simply stalled a potential nuclear fallout . The tactics were ingenious, but not as effective as they stalled a nuclear war .
 It was the brilliant tactics of diplomats under the Nixon presidency which brought the world past those times . Diplomats under Nixon were able to bring the world to the brink of war .
 I believe that the United States removal of their missiles from Turkey was the main goal of the Russians in this crisis . I don't find it unlikely that the superior U.S. intelligence would be able to recognize a nuclear threat that close to United States shores .
 The Russian missiles were stationed in such a way, that whey were easily discovered, this started all the circus. The missiles were located in such an easy way that they could be easily discovered .
 The Cuban Missle Crisis is generally considered the historical point at which the United States and U.S.R. came closest to nuclear war . The Cuban Missile Crisis is considered the point of the Cuban Crisis .
 Cuban President Castro consented to installing missiles and other military material . President Castro agreed to the move, deeming it a wise move .