 The history of Russian-US relations is rooted in the late XVII century, when independent American states did not exist . Russia and the U.S. have been at odds for decades .
 In 1698 Peter I met in London with William Penn, founder of the British colony, which later became Pennsylvania . Peter I and William Penn met in 1698 in London .
 In the first half of XVIII century begins active colonization of America . Russian merchants began to settle in America in Russia .
 Many Russian settlements were founded in the Aleutian Islands, mainland Alaska, in what is now the Canadian provinces of Yukon and British Columbia and the United States states of Washington and Oregon .
 The scattered Russian settlement colony were issued legally, over the territory occupied by Russian settlers proclaimed the sovereignty of the Russian Empire . Gradually the scattered Russian settlers were issued legal, over .
 In 1775 the 13 British colonies revolt against economic oppression by the British . The 13 colonies revolted against the British in revolt in 1775 .
 George III turned to the Russian Empress Catherine II with the request to assist British troops in suppressing the uprising . Catherine II refused to assist the British troops, to which was refused .
 July 4, 1776 in Philadelphia, was proclaimed the independence of the colonies . July 4 was proclaimed in 1776 .
 Formally, Russia has not recognized this act, however, but supports the desire of the colonies to independence . Russia does not recognize the act, but it supports the colonies' desire of independence .
 In 1780, at the height of the war for independence, Russia has announced an armed neutrality, is the actual support for the colonies . Russia has never supported the colonies in the past .
 Russia and the United States exchanged ambassadors in 1809 . In 1809, Russia and U.S. exchanged ambassadors, initiating diplomatic relations . The United States and Russia have diplomatic relations since then .
 The first United States ambassador to Russia, John Quincy Adams, became the first Russian ambassador to the United States Andrew Dashkov . Dashkov was the first U.S. ambassador to Moscow . Adams was the president of the Soviet Union in the early 1900s .
 In the XIX century, diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Russia were friendly . Russia and the United States had diplomatic relations .
 Civil War in the United States and the Polish uprising of 1863-1864 . Peak closer St. Petersburg and Washington were 1860s .
 Russia and the northern U.S. states had a common foe Britain, which supported both southerners and Polish rebels . Britain supported both sides of the divide, and supported southerner and Polish rebel groups .
 In 1867 all Russian possessions east of the Bering Strait had been sold for 7,2 million U.S. dollars . The sale of Russian possessions in 1867 was estimated to be worth $7 million dollars .
 Most of Alaska this includes the Aleutian archipelago and some islands in the Pacific Ocean . This includes most of Alaska and some of Alaska's Aleutians . Most of the Alaska region is Alaska .
 In the middle of the century, the government of Nicholas I drew American engineers in their projects of modernization of the empire . However, in the mid-century, American engineers were involved in the modernization projects .
 Experts from the United States played a crucial role in the construction of the railway between Moscow and St. Petersburg . For example, experts from the U.S. helped build the Moscow-St. Petersburg railway .
 The first telegraph lines and the rearmament of the army after the Crimean War were first laid out in Russia . The Crimean War saw the return of the Russian capital to St. Petersburg and the introduction of telegraphlegraph lines .
 Russia and the U.S. have been at odds for centuries . However, in the XIX century, they were at odds with each other . The two countries have a history of tension between them .
 Nota Monroe in 1823 was awarded the first Russian ambassador in protest against the possible intervention of the Holy Alliance in Latin America and the strengthening of the Russian settlements in California .
 Hungarian leader Layosch Kossuth visited the U.S. in the years 1849-1850 . He found a sympathetic response in the American West .
 Hale expressed his hope that the future historian will describe how the United States started"" the court is not over any a secondary power, whose trade is negligible and the sanctions which will cost a low price, but first and foremost on the Russian empire, announcing her verdict . Hale hopes that the
 I do not agree to judge Austria, until we are sentenced to some bigger criminals . Austria is not ready to judge until it is sentenced to bigger criminals, says Jurgen Schurrach .
 I do not want our actions to resemble fishing nets frequently to catch small fish, but miss a major . I do want us to be more careful not to catch a major fish .
 "When we do this, we show that by raising his angry voice against weaker powers, we do so not out of cowardice. When we raise our angry voice, we are not afraid," he says . "We do not fearlessly raise our anger," he adds .
 In 1880 Congress passed a series of decisions condemning the policy of Alexander III in the Jewish question . Alexander III died of a heart attack on Jews in 1881 .
 In 1886 at the initiative of President Grover Cleveland's Congress held hearings on the subject of future United States policy in the Pacific Ocean .
 At the hearing, it was decided that of all the Pacific countries, only the Russian Empire could potentially threaten U.S. interests . The hearing was held in Hawaii .
 The United States did not support the Russian-German-French ultimatum to Japan in 1895 . In this regard, the U.S. did not .
 In 1899 the United States declared policy of ""open door"", maintaining the territorial integrity of China . The policy was primarily due to containment of Russian advance into Manchuria and Korea .
 Since 1901 the administration of Theodore Roosevelt provided financial and military-technical assistance to Japan in the preparation of the Russian-Japanese war . The administration of the Roosevelt administration provided financial, military and technical assistance .
 Russia and the U.S. played a decisive role in suppressing the Boxer Rebellion in China . The Boxer rebellion was a major event in China's history .
 Russia and the United States entered the Allies in the First World War . Russia and U.S. entered the war together in 1918 .
 After the Revolution in Russia, the United States refused to recognize the Soviet government . The U.S. refused to accept the government of the Soviet Union after the Revolution .
 In 1918-1920 years, American troops took part in a foreign intervention, while supporting the White Army . American troops were involved in a war in Russia, Russia and Ukraine .
 United States has become one of the last states to recognize the Soviet Union . U.S. has been the last state to recognize Soviet Union since the fall of the Cold War .
 In 1919 the U.S. was deployed against communist and socialist movements banning the left-wing organization, according to authorities, a person said . In 1919, the United States was expelled from the country's dangerous .
 Diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and the United States have been set on Nov. 30, 1933 . Diplomatic ties between the U.S. and Soviet Union were set in 1933 .
 Americans participated in the rescue of "Chelyuskin" in 1934 . Valery Chkalov flight over the North Pole from Moscow to Vancouver in 1937 .
 During the Second World War, relations between the United States and the USSR were moderately good . Relations between the U.S. and USSR was moderately good during the war .
 The Soviet Union has caused among the American people a wave of respect and sympathy for the Soviet Union, almost single-handedly resisting fascist aggression . The German attack on June 22, 1941 .
 The USSR had circulated law the Lend-Lease Act, under which the Soviet Union were supplied United States military equipment, property and food prices . Roosevelt in November 1941 the USSR had passed the act .
 The union treaty between the USSR and the U.S. has been signed . But the union treaty has not yet been signed by the United States .
 USA and the USSR were allies on the basis of an international instrument the United Nations Declaration of January 1, 1942 . USA and Russia were allies in the U.N. Declaration .
 June 23, 1942 was signed by the Soviet-American agreement on deliveries of military technologies . The two countries signed an agreement on delivering military technology .
 U.S. refused to recognize the Baltics part of the Soviet Union . United States, referring to the text of the Atlantic Charter of 1941, refused recognition .
 The United States Congress also regularly raised the issue of religious freedoms in the Soviet Union . The U.S. Congress regularly raised religious freedom in Soviet Russia .
 Agreement between the members of the anti-Hitler coalition, made during and after the war, is to create a bipolar world . The union leadership in the West opposed the United States unit of the socialist countries rallied around the Soviet Union .
 At the end of World War II the USSR became a powerful superpower whose influence extended from Western Europe to the Pacific Ocean . The USSR became the world's most powerful superpower .
 American leaders sought to prevent the spread of Soviet influence and leftist ideas further west, in Latin America, Asia and Africa . U.S. leaders wanted to prevent spread of leftist ideas and Soviet influence further west .
 An important factor in the relations of the Soviet Union and the U.S. has become an arms race . The arms race has been a key factor in relations between the two countries .
 Both countries have invested huge funds in the defense industry . Total nuclear arsenal for decades has grown so much that it would be enough to destroy the entire population of the planet than a dozen times .
 John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev avoided military conflict in Vietnam in 1960s . Vietnam was the first time the U.S. was in contact with the Soviet Union in Vietnam .
 The increase in the armed forces threatened the economic collapse on both sides . Permanent forces are essentially meaningless, the increase in armed forces is essentially meaningless .
 In this situation, and signed several bilateral agreements that limit the accumulation of nuclear weapons . In this . situation, signed several . bilateral agreements .
 In the 1970's. conducted negotiations on limiting strategic arms, which resulted in the treaties were signed the SALT-I , which included the ABM Treaty and Salt-II to limit missile launchers . In the . 1970's conducted negotiations .
 June 1, 1990 an agreement was signed between the USSR and the USA on the maritime boundary under which the United States withdrew part of the exclusive economic zone of the USSR . The agreement was made under the terms of the agreement .
 Acute political, economic, ideological, ideological and ethnic crisis in the Soviet Union by the end of 1980 led to the collapse of the state .
 Many conservative American politicians are inclined to ascribe this regard; the United States win the Cold War . Many conservative U.S. politicians have this regard .
 The disintegration of the USSR is considered to be the end of the Cold War and the beginning of a new relationship between Russia and the U.S. Russia .