 Memories of a Young Reporter World . President Kennedy announces the Cuba blockade on Oct. 1962 .
 Fifty years ago, the Washington Post landed on my doorstep with big headlines about a crisis atmosphere in Washington, D.C., and pictures and stories describing late-burning lights in the White House .
 It would be hours more before we learned where the crisis was, what it was about and that it would push the planet as close as it has ever been to nuclear war .
 The bureau’s chief and owner was Les Carpenter, a Texan with close ties to Vice President Lyndon Johnson . The bureau was founded in 1964 and is now based in New York .
 Carpenter’s wife Liz, who started the bureau with him after World War II, had joined the vice president in the beginning of the Kennedy-Johnson administration . Carpenter's wife Liz had started with him in the early 1960s .
 The Post immediately answered one question, even if the stories themselves were barely pieces in a puzzle . "The Post" is a Pulitzer Prize-winning newspaper .
 The Saturday morning before, I had been working at the bureau when I received a call from Liz. Liz. She had been on the job at the Bureau of Investigation . Liz's death was the first time Liz had been in the news .
 President Kennedy cut short a campaign trip he was making on behalf of Senate candidates in Illinois and Wisconsin in mid-term elections . Kennedy was campaigning in Illinois, Wisconsin and Illinois . Kennedy had been campaigning for Senate candidates .
 The brief dispatches said the president had come down with a cold and was returning to Washington . The president is returning to D.C.
 Liz usually did not call our office for details of the president’s schedule, she says . Liz usually didn't call us for details, she adds .
 "I put it out of my mind and went back to writing my story about movie theater gross receipts for Variety," he says . Then he says he put it all out of his mind and goes back to write his story .
 The officials had been meeting in utter secrecy since the previous Tuesday, when the president had been informed that U2 spy planes had come back with photographic evidence that the Soviet Union was installing medium range missile sites in Cuba .
 The president and the others in the group had gone to great length amid ruses and decoys to keep their deliberations secret from the Soviets and the American press and public .
 White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger said the president would address the nation at 7m. But even as the hours wore on that Monday, there was no official word .
 Only 18 months before, the U.S. had tried and disastrously failed to invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro . The United States had failed to overthrow Castro .
 The Soviets were conducting a military buildup on the island, according to a U.S. official . The island was invaded by the Soviets in the 1980s .
 Berlin, divided for a year by a grotesque wall, had been a Cold War flashpoint for years . Berlin was divided by a wall, divided by years of war . Berlin has been a flashpoint of the Cold War for years.
 Nikita Khrushchev kept silent for once, often blustering leader of the Soviet Union . Khrushchchev was keeping silent at the time of the incident .
 Decades before cable news television, speculation was carried by radio, wire services and word of mouth . Decades later, speculation is carried out by radio and wire services .
 Newton Minow is the head of the Federal Communications Commission . Minow has been in charge of the FCC since 2009 .
 U.S. bolstering efforts to make sure president's speech could be heard in Cuba, Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The president described the missiles as capable of carrying nuclear warheads 1,000 miles . He said they could be used to target Washington, much of the southeastern United States and Latin America .
 He went on to build a case of the dangers of this first deployment of Soviet offensive weapons outside the USSR . The Russians had consistently lied about it, he said .
 In a room of about 20 normally talkative and garrulous fraternity men, the only sound was the occasional gasp . The only sound of the gasp was that of a gasp from a fraternity man .
 No one can foresee precisely what course it will take or what costs and casualties will be incurred . The U.S. government has no idea how long it will be .
 Of course, it was six days, not months, until the crisis began unwinding . Of course it was just six days before the crisis started unwinding, but six days later .
 No one knew so that night that night, wondering if Soviet ships would try to crack quarantine . If indeed the Soviets would adhere to the U.S. demand to dismantle and remove the missiles, the United States would launch a bombing strike or invasion .
 Nearly 20 moves in an adult lifetime are not conducive to keeping bits of paper . Alas, I am not a pack rat and nearly 20 moves is not conducive .
 About of dozen of us, and I was certainly the most junior by at least a decade, entered a conference room in the vice president’s office suite in the Executive Office Building .
 The War and State Departments were headquarters of both the first and second World Wars . The elaborate, high-ceiling room spoke of power and all the history .
 Johnson used to fill a room with his size, gestures and voice . He seemed especially subdued, talking in a low voice, his tone somber . Johnson's career has been on a downward spiral .
 The best news report I remember coming out of it was from Seth Kantor of Scripps-Howard . Seth was Seth's best news reporter .
 He pieced together from LBJ and other non-attributable sources just how dangerous a turn in the road the U.S. had reached, he says .
 As that week spun on, seemingly in increasing danger, there was some talk of some people here moving their families out of Washington .
 I knew no one who did, and the thought never crossed my mind, if only for the prosaic reasons that I had to go to work and school . "I never thought that I was going to die," she says. "But I'm going to live my dream. I
 Being a nuclear target was part of the subconscious price that we and our families paid to work and live in the nation’s capital . Ever since the Soviets exploded their first atomic bomb in 1949, being a target has been part of our history .
 President Kennedy secretly recorded Ex Comm meetings that he secretly recorded . Countless histories and memoirs and transcripts of the meetings have laid out the details of the crisis in the wake of a nuclear crisis .
 The key was a public deal for the Soviets to remove the missiles in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The deal was made public in the 1980s .
 Years later, we learned details of a secret side deal for the U.S. to withdraw some missiles from Turkey . The deal was part of a deal to pull missiles out of Turkey .
 Word of Khrushchev’s acceptance of the public deal was broadcast on a glorious autumn Sunday morning, the kind Washington often produces as an antidote to its hot and humid summers .
 Liz Carpenter called Liz Carpenter when she found out she was in danger in 1994 . Carpenter's story is told at a book signing event in 1994 in New York City .
 She died six years later, taking that and probably many other secrets to her grave .
 The missile crisis saga continues to be fodder for more books, and Washington being Washington, think tank conferences on crisis management .
 President estimated the odds of nuclear war between one-third and one-half of Americans could die . 20 million to 90 million Americans could be killed in nuclear war, he said .
 I thought for the first time in decades, those were not the greatest of odds for me to reach my 21st birthday . Hmm, I thought . The first time I thought I thought this was not the best of decades .
 President Kennedy's assassination was the greatest trauma of my adult journalistic life, covering the assassination of President Kennedy . But for me those memories were subsumed a mere 13 months later in a mere . months later .
 He writes dispatches on what scholars and wannabe secretaries of state have to think about for Europe, Asia and Latin America . From time to time, he writes on what those scholars have to say for Europe and Asia .
 Here's the Deal, our politics newsletter for analysis you won't find anywhere else . Learn more from CNN.com/Heroes .