 The discovery of these installations by U-2 photoreconnaissance missions led the U.S. government under the Kennedy Administration to impose a naval blockade on Cuba euphemistically called a “quarantine” to give it an appearance of international legality .
 The Cuban government requested the removal of missiles already in Cuba . The request was accompanied by an explicit threat of a “full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union” should any of those missiles be launched .
 Such policy was announced by President Kennedy in a TV address on 22 October 1962 . President Kennedy announced the policy in 1962 .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles, under two conditions . The missiles were removed on 28 October, after days of extreme international tension .
 The crisis was later defined by historian (and Kennedy’s aide) Arthur Schlesinger, Jr as “the most dangerous moment in human history” 4.5 million people died in the crisis in 1968 .
 Martin Luther King’s reaction to the Cuban crisis was initially dealt with in the context of an article by this author that first investigated the African Americans’ responses to said nuclear crisis .
 Reactions tend to combine support for the President in a time of national crisis with a strong desire for the preservation of peace . More specifically, said reactions tended to combine a widespread support for President in national crisis .
 At the time, while he had not yet been awarded a Nobel prize, he was already the best known activist and the most influential leader of the civil rights movement .
 The views he expressed, if more elaborated and nuanced, appear consistent with the reactions of approval recorded among the majority of the African American public . Fitting because the views of approval are consistent with those of the public, he said .
 The pastor from Georgia says the picture was already in the heart of the pastor . The pastor says it was a picture that lay already in his heart of Georgia .
 His statement was cautious but supportive, while unwilling to define his position on the specific measures taken .
 He declined an approach by an emissary of the local student movement for nuclear disarmament – the ‘Tocsin’ – to combine his rally with their own and address them jointly 9.9. He also declined an offer to combine their rally with a joint address .
 It is entirely plausible that the rationale for this refusal was to avoid to be dragged into a protest debate against White House foreign policy . It is also plausible that this refusal is to avoid being dragged into the debate .
 This however was not due to any tendency to court the administration, as confirmed by both his previous public condemnation of the Bay of Pigs invasion and his later protest of the Vietnam war in Vietnam .
 He was convinced that the government did not deserve to be criticized in this specific case . Apparently, he was simply convinced that he was not being criticized in the case .
 Everyone knows full well that we came dreadfully close to the precipice of nuclear war in 1962 . In 1962, the U.S. was on the brink of war with North Korea .
 We must not allow the delicate balance that has been established in matters of foreign policy to be destroyed by our arrogance . We need to not allow our arrogance to destroy our delicate balance, he says .
 We would hope that since near disaster has been avoided, America would in humility readily grasp the opportunity to make a determined bid for peaceful co-existence . Now is the time for us to concretely seek common agreement on nuclear testing and disarmament .
 The Soviets had ended up backing down unconditionally as soon as the U.S. had raised their tone, making clear they meant business. According to those opinions, the Soviets backed down .
 Détente was the course that Washington and Moscow chose in 1963 16. 16. The Soviets gained more from the agreement than was publicly known at the time, thus confuting the claims of a total United States triumph .
 These views may now be integrated with a previously unknown document that was recently unearthed . King expressed his views publicly on the missile crisis in a letter to the president .
 Clarence prepared for King a draft letter, here quoted in its essential parts . Clarence prepared the letter for King, here are the essential parts of it .
 As a spokesman for civil rights I have written you to press for programs we felt to be urgent . But as a private American citizen, my personal observations on other subjects, have necessarily been limited, he says .
 The resolution of the Cuba crisis with its immense implications is, however, so important, I am eager to express my personal reactions . The resolution is so important that I'm eager to talk about my personal reaction to the situation .
 At a time when so many are saying that the most impressive achievement is the result, I find myself as much impressed by the method . The method of winning the Nobel Peace Prize has been a huge success in the world .
 By method I do not mean ‘firmness’ or any of the other oversimplified descriptions which mislead rather than clarify. By method, I don't mean “firm’s” or ‘strength’, but ‘method’
 It was the larger scheme of your basic design which was singular in diplomatic art . Putting aside the issue of blockade, it was the largest scheme of the diplomatic art.
 The original quality of the original quality was in the opportunity it provided for choices to this adversary which could evoke constructive responses . "The original quality is in the chance it provided . It provided the opportunity to choose choices to engage in constructive responses"
 Khrushchev served to bring out a positive quality in the Soviet leader, writes David Frum . In precisely measuring consequences, the architecture of your initiative, by planning for a not dishonorable doorway, is the architect .
 In resisting any impulses to overestimate or overstate results, you gave your adversary an opportunity to count some gain, thereby obviating a psychology of desperation . Finally, in resisting any impulse to overstate or overstaggerate results, give your adversary a chance to count gain .
 Your fair and generous characterization of Mr Khrushchev’s responses as ‘statesmanlike’ created an example for him. Equally, your fair . and generous . characterization of him as a statesmanlike created . for him, writes David Cameron .
 In the combination of these approaches, I feel you have utilized some of the elements of non-violent creativity in international conflict, despite the presence of latent force . I feel this is a good example of the non-violence that can be used in international conflicts .
 Non-violent resistance has so much spiritual power because it unremittingly pursues its goal, yet it recognizes that every opponent somewhere has a receptive syndrome which may lead to reconciliation, even if it is limited in dimension . Non-violence is a form of non-violence that may lead
 Something vastly more important seems to have occurred than a bases-invasion quid pro quo . Something more important appears to have happened than a base invasion quid-proposal .
 A world armed and over-armed on both sides with ultimate weapons cannot find security or survival in multiplied power . You may well have reached into the deep recesses of a divided world and found a bridge of accommodation .
 Hope is only in the realization that there is a final point of restraint both sides must observe . Hope is in the hope that both sides will observe restraint in order to avoid violence .
 In this direction may be the greatest achievement of the twentieth century – the emergence of statesmen who are equal to the colossal risks a racing technology has imposed upon the world .
 Dora, Martin’s secretary, was to send me the reply at the time but it was sidetracked and I never saw it nor do I know the nature of his response”
 Clarence B Jones himself never expressed any contrary opinion, in our repeated email exchanges on the subject, though unwilling to provide further details26. Nor has Clarence B . Jones himself ever expressed any . contrary opinion in his email exchanges with us .
 Schlesinger, while receiving the letter, did not pursue its publication29 and the fact that, more recently, a footnote of Volume VII of Dr. Martin's book, was a footnote in Volume VII .
 Jones writes to King that his “suggested text incorporates thoughts you have expressed on this subject”32. Also writes that his suggested text incorporates his thoughts on the subject .
 This remark grants relevance to the document even should one suppose that it was not eventually sent or that it may have been sent in modified form, because it would still contribute to shedding more light on King’s views of the Cuban crisis .
 King’s description of Kennedy's policy as an example of “non-violent creativity in international conflict” is surely striking, considering that such actions no matter how politically comprehensible in light of the Soviet provocation and how less drastic than other alternatives considered in the Ex-Comm
 King’s use of “despite” and “put aside” to characterize the threatened use of force marks an implicit yet significant difference with the prevailing interpretation of Kennedy's handling of the Cuban crisis . “thanks to their combination with negotiation” marks a difference
 The general aim of the letter seemed to convey to the President a word of personal, even spiritual backing . The letter encourages him to pursue détente ‘despite contrary pressures” 37.
 Kennedy's final months of presidency would prove to be the path he took in the final months . Eventually this would prove, to the end of his presidency .
 Dr. King promoted non-violent methods not only in civil rights issues but also in the field of international relations .
 Groups pressing for desegregation at home were also campaigning for a stop to the arms race and for détente in foreign affairs, seeing the two issues as linked 46.
 In this regard the position assumed by King in this letter would appear emblematic . King's position on King's behalf is "emblematic"
 As King himself revealed in an article published in the midst of the nuclear crisis, 47 the two leaders discussed ‘issues ranging from the efficacy of non violence to the Cuban crisis’48 .
 The variety of reactions confirms the value of a study of the so far neglected sociocultural dimension of the crisis . The study was based on ways it was perceived and the reactions it produced . The researchers say the study should be used to understand how the crisis was perceived .
 The letter may also prove significant for what it tells us on the relations between King and Kennedy on two major points . King's relationship with Kennedy may also be significant for the future of King and JFK .
 King notices and praises this attitude by Kennedy perhaps even more because he knew how the political milieu at the White House and in foreign policy circles was centered on an ideology exalting toughness and masculinity . Even without knowing all of these details, King praises Kennedy's attitude .
 King convinced JFK’s quality as a leader was evolving, becoming bolder . King was convinced that JFK's quality was evolving and becoming bold . King: "I’m not sure what I’ve done, but I think it’ll be a great thing
 As he will explain after the President’s assassination, he believed he had known two different John Kennedys . He will explain in his book that he thought he knew two different presidents .
 President Kennedy’s efforts to avoid an escalation in the Cuban crisis played an important, early role in shaping this idea of an evolving Presidential leader in King's mind . And as one reads this letter of praise where King says to be ‘most impressed” by the President�
 Kennedy’s handling of the Cuban crisis is likely to have been one of the major steps that contributed to the late assessment of President Kennedy by Martin Luther King, of course .
 Levison’s words to Schlesinger also points in the same direction of an evolving relationship between the two leaders . Levison's words also point in the direction of a growing relationship with the two .
 It seems already useful to present this new document with all the elements currently available, considering its obvious relevance, for its content, the leaders involved, and because of its content .
 King’s reactions to the crisis and his relationship with President Kennedy . King's relationship with Kennedy remains a mystery . King will appear in a new documentary on the Kennedy era .
 They stand out for their initial laconic prudence and their absence of criticism of Kennedy during the crisis . King appears to see the President as someone to pray for, rather than someone to judge or debate upon . Later they warn against indulgence in national arrogance or self-complac
 I would like to thank Raffaella Baritono for kindly discussing with me a first draft of this article . I would also like to give a summary of the article .
 The Cuban missile crisis represented a turning point in the Cold war and in the nuclear age . The crisis occurred in the 1950s and '60s, and '80s .
 Alice George's book, "Awaiting Armageddon," is published by Alice George . Alice George is the author of the book, which chronicles the events surrounding nuclear war .
 The ratio was 22 in favour to 1 against . Also, among the several thousands messages that citizens sent to the White House, the ratio of 22 was 22 .
 Todd Gitlin was the organizer of the Tocsin rally, the future President of the Students for a Democratic Society . Gitlin is a member of the student body that organized the rally . He was the future president of the students for a democratic society .
 This comment was quoted later by the militant activist in exile Robert Williams in his newsletter from Cuba, with the word 'military' put in capital letters .
 John F Kennedy Institute for North American Studies, Berlin. M4389, Reel 11, Group 1, Series 7, is published by the Kennedy Institute.
 King also added his name to a petition condemning the attempted invasion . King has also signed a petition against the invasion of Iraq .
 The quotation marks here suggested some doubts on the suitability of a term that was recurrent in the international public debate of those weeks . The quotation mark suggests some doubts about the use of the term .
 Kennedy’s approval rates jumped from 66 to 77% after the Cuban crisis . Reeves mentions “The United States’ sense of triumph in Cuba”
 Before the Cuban crisis, it had been unfruitfully negotiated for years in Geneva . The Cuban crisis is the first time the U.S. government has been involved in negotiations with Cuba .
 Consensus among scholars on the impact of the Cuban crisis on 1963 détente and negotiations of the LTBT is wide .
 David Holloway, Fredrik Logevall, Campbell Craig and Fredrik . Fredrik. Logeevall . Campbell Craig. Fredrik: America’s Cold War, The politics of insecurity . The Cold War was the Cold War of Cold War .
 Clayborne Carson, Tenisha H Armstrong, eds. eds., The papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., Vol. Vol. 1, is published in The Papers of MLK .
 He was unable to provide details, despite repeated invitations and questions from the BBC . Ultimately, however, he said he would not comment on the matter .
 King’s frequent use of speechwriters and ghostwriters as a civil rights activist simply followed a common practice among public orators and prominent leaders in general . However this is not of direct relevance here .
 Schlesinger's choice not to publish letter may in theory be linked to doubts over its ‘delivered’ status . But there are no elements to support this case and it seems more plausible that his choice was based on different research priorities .
 Schlesinger has already written two big books on the Kennedy brothers and their times . Each contains chapters on civil rights and on their relations with King .
 The volumes of this broad project are published in chronological order, along several years, and the one covering the period of the Cuban crisis has not been released yet yet . The volumes cover several years of Cuban crisis .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council was the group of government officials and experts that President Kennedy gathered upon the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba to advise him .
 The papers of Martin Luther King, Jr. are published in The Papers of MLK, Vol. 1 .
 Rustin organized the largest peace rally of the week in the US, gathering between 8,000 and 10,000 people in front of the UN building, on October 28, 1962 . Rustin was born in New York City, New York, in 1961 .
 Lawrence Wittner, Resisting the Bomb, The struggle against the bomb – A history of the world nuclear disarmament movement, Vol. L Campus , Giorni, 179, 182, 183; . Lawrence Wittners, The Struggle against the Bomb – A History of the World Nuclear
 The two-fold struggle was for desegregation, not disintegration, as in the title of one of the most relevant chapters of V. Intondi’s book .
 Rustin’s 1959 mission to Ghana to try to stop French nuclear testing being conducted in the Sahara desert, or in the message of support sent by the NAACP to the delegates at the 1955 Asian-African Conference in Bandung, Indonesia .
 On the interconnection between civil rights and foreign affairs, segregation, and colonialism in that phase of the Cold war, see for example Brenda Gayle Plummer, In Search of Power .
 Bella left the U.S. en route to Cuba on the morning of October 16, precisely when the photo-evidence of the presence of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba was being secretly communicated to Kennedy himself .
 Bella and King could not have already been already aware of this new development when they met . The couple met at the end of their visit to the zoo .
 The attack on Adlai Stevenson for advising the President to advance specific negotiation proposals to Khrushchev seems to be symptomatic . In this regard, the attack is symptomatic.
 On the final legacy of the Kennedy administration on civil rights, historians disagree . Historians disagree on the legacy of civil rights .
 "What is important is that we preserve confidence in the good faith of each other," says President Obama . "We preserve confidence," he says .
 In theory this may have made civil rights activists slightly friendlier to Kennedy’s Cold War initiatives of the following weeks . Kennedy's Cold War initiative may have helped him further .
 There is currently no specific evidence of the episode having had any impact on Dr. Dr. John Sutter . However, there is no evidence of any impact from the episode .
 Jones’ forthcoming autobiography or the next volume of The papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., that, proceeding chronologically, should also cover the period of the Cuban crisis . Jones' autobiography or The Papers of MLK, Jr. should cover that period of crisis .
 Our search in the archives of the Kennedy Library and in the online document databases of the Howard Gotlieb Archival Research Center in Boston and of the King Center in Atlanta .
 Martin Luther King Jr. reacted to the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . King's reaction to the crisis is the subject of a new research article . This research article deals for the first time with the reaction of Martin Luther Luther King .
 The civil rights leader praised Kennedy’s management of that crucial nuclear confrontation between U.S. and USSR . King saw in it the potential for détente, King wrote .
 King's reassessment of Kennedy’s evolving qualities of leadership is a view that King will further develop over the course of 1963 . King will express his view after Dallas, Dallas .
 On this particular topic, he previously authored ‘Missiles have no colour.’ He previously wrote a book on the topic of 'Missiles'
 In 2012 he received a research grant from the JFK Institute for North American Studies of the Freie Universat, Berlin .
 L'Italia della Ricostruzione e del Miracolo attraverso il Festival di Sanremo' investigates Italy’s ‘boom’ years through the lens of popular songs of the time .
 Public historian works as a public historian for ‘Rai Storia’, History thematic channel of Italian State television .