 Ernest May investigates how Kennedy demonstrated his leadership skills during the crisis . Ernest May looks at Kennedy's leadership skills in the aftermath of the disaster .
 John F Kennedy's national security assistant, McGeorge Bundy, brought to the President's bedroom some high-altitude photographs taken from U-2 planes flying over Cuba . The ExComm and the secret tapes are the 'gravest issues'
 Nikita Khrushchev had promised not to send offensive weapons to Cuba . America's top intelligence analysts predicted that he would keep his word . Kennedy felt safe in voicing this warning .
 Eisenhower calculated in 1960 that if a crisis led either side to fire nuclear weapons, all humans in the northern hemisphere could perish . Kennedy's predecessor, Dwight Eisenhower, had calculated that, if a nuclear war broke out, all people in the north hemisphere could die .
 Kennedy assembled a small group that came to be called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or ExComm . The ExComm was formed to help him decide what to do about the Cuban situation, and how much risk to run of nuclear exchange .
 Kennedy had a tape recorder installed in an unused part of the White House basement, with wires running to concealed microphones in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room . We know today exactly what was said in the meetings of the ExComm, because .
 In the first day of the debates, everyone favoured bombing Cuba . Top Quarantine in Cuba .
 Chiefs of staff insist attack should also take out air defence sites and bombers . Aim is to limit losses of United States aircraft and prevent immediate air reprisal against U.S bases in Florida .
 President of Cuba ordered a blockade to prevent the introduction of further missiles, and demanded that the Soviets withdraw the missiles already there . To meet this concern, there developed the idea of the President's publicly announcing the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 To those of Kennedy's advisers who still favoured quick use of military force, this quarantine constituted an ultimatum .
 In the early phase of ExComm debate, Kennedy blamed himself for the crisis . 'Last month I should have said that we don't care' implying that if he had not given such a strong public warning, he could possibly have let Khrushchev get away with placing missiles .
 Kennedy interpreted the installation of missiles in Cuba as a move preparatory to a showdown on Berlin . Kennedy interpreted it as a plan to prepare for a showdown with Berlin .
 On Monday 22 October, Kennedy went on radio and television, describing the secret Soviet build-up in Cuba, proclaiming the quarantine and demanding that the Soviets remove the missiles .
 McNamara acknowledged that the submarine commander might think he was being attacked rather than being sent a signal and might fire at the destroyer . McNamara: "The submarine commander may think he is being attacked ... might fire"
 'I'd much rather have a merchant ship,' she said . 'One harrowing moment followed another. ... one harrowing moment after another. I'd rather have been on a ship'
 Khrushchev ordered all Soviet merchantmen bound for Cuba to turn back . Fortunately, before there was an encounter at sea, the incident was averted . The incident occurred in 1959 .
 Kennedy and his advisers faced the question of how to keep track of continuing missile construction in Cuba . Meanwhile, Kennedy faced the challenge of keeping track of continued missile construction .
 Robert Kennedy sent Robert Kennedy to see the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, to tell him that the missiles in Turkey were obsolete, and that the U.S. planned to pull them out within about six months .
 The Soviets dismantled their missiles and loaded the parts on ships for return to the Soviet Union . U.S. reconnaissance aircraft kept watch while the Soviets dismantled the missiles .
 The world escaped nuclear war in October 1962 largely because of the prudence of Kennedy and Khrushchev . Kennedy's prudence saved the world from a nuclear war . The U.S. and the world avoided nuclear war thanks to the actions of Kennedy .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev both recognised that, once blood had been spilled, it would be very hard to keep any crisis under control . Kennedy: 'Once blood has been spilled it will be very difficult to control'
 The Soviet bloc lived for the next 27 years with a wall around West Berlin that marked East Germany as a huge penitentiary . It eventually became possible for west and east to turn towards the stabilising compromises of the later period of détente .
 Earlier books have dealt with the making of the Monroe Doctrine, American expansion in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and World War I .
 This page is best viewed in an up-to-date web browser with style sheets enabled . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page .
 You will not be able to use the current browser to view the content of this page . The content of the page you use is your own browser . Use the mobile version of this article to help users with reading comprehension and vocabulary .