 He was the youngest president ever to be elected, the first Roman Catholic president, and the first president to be born in the 20th century . He was born in 1918 .
 President Obama was elected to a four-term term in 2008 . His legacy will be remembered for his impact on the world . He was assassinated in 1992 .
 John F Kennedy was born May 29th, 1917, child of Joseph P and Rose Kennedy . He was born in New York City, New York .
 John grew up in the nineteen twenties and thirties at his birth place of Brookline, Massachusetts . John was born in Brookline .
 John had once once stated, ""life is unfair,""1 yet for him, the statement was definitely not true . John had said, ""Life is unfair"
 Coming from a wealthy family let him have the freedom to do what most kids couldn’t, he says . He says he was able to do the most difficult things he could have done .
 He and his brothers and sisters all participated in things such as sailboat races, tennis matches, or even just a simple game of touch football .
 All family members were always encouraged to get involved with government issues . The family was proud of their involvement in the government .
 Joseph and Rose were trying to prepare their sons for public life and prepare their daughters for marriages to distinguished young men . Joseph was trying to protect his sons from going into public life .
 In 1937, the Kennedy family moved to Great Britain so that John’s father could become the American ambassador there for three years . The Kennedy family lived in Great Britain for the three years that John's father was ambassador .
 John was a very good student at Harvard, yet he didn’t make the high grades that his brother had had . John was very good at Harvard but didn't make the grades he did .
 John joined two clubs and spent most of his time working on a newspaper published at Harvard, ""Crimson""
 When he had finished his school term his father decided to let him tour Europe . When he finished his term he was allowed to tour Europe with his father .
 When he was there he started to become interested in wars and politics, after noticing Hitler’s actions . When he became interested in politics, he noticed Hitler's actions . He started to be interested in war and politics .
 John went back there the following summer and saw how Hitler never gave up and continued to strengthen his army . John went to see how Hitler continued to build up his army despite his defeat .
 The United States had sided with Great Britain, so he knew he would have to go into the war . The U.S. had sided against Britain, and he knew it would be necessary .
 He went to the Air Corps, but was turned away because of his back problems . So, he went to enter the Air Force . He went on to become an Air Force pilot .
 Instead he went for the position on naval officer and passes the health analysis . Instead of a naval officer, he chose the position of naval officer .
 He was assigned to the intelligence division, he thought it was very boring . He thought it would be very boring. He thought he was going to be boring.
 Shortly after Pearl Harbor, John was sent for motor torpedo training . He was sent to the U.S. Navy base in 1941 .
 In Tulagi, John was assigned to a dirty old looking boat that had already been through nine months of combat . John is assigned to the ship in Tulagi . John was deployed to a ship that had been fighting for nine months .
 John experienced his first real combat when his boat was attacked by a Japanese fighter plane . John's first real real combat was in a Japanese plane attack on his boat .
 Full size Japanese ship came full speed at Kennedy’s boat . They continued to stay there until one night when a full size ship came at Kennedy's boat . Kennedy says the incident happened in the early 1900s .
 The boat was demolished and the Japanese thought that all of the men had been killed . The men were killed in the attack on the boat .
 All of the men were forced to swim to Plum Pudding Island, three and one half miles away, with Kennedy leading them . The men had to swim three and a half miles .
 After his triumph he was promoted to Full Lieutenant and was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for saving his crew .
 He also received a Purple Heart for the severe back injury he suffered from the collision . He was also awarded the Medal of Honor .
 After that, he took command of another PT boat and took part in many more missions . After that he took control of a PT boat .
 For John one particularly bad thing happened to this war, his brother died . John's brother died in the war .
 Now that he was gone, John was now the eldest son and it was now his responsibility . John was John's eldest son . He was now John's responsibility .
 Though he was still weak from his war injuries, he campaigned aggressively. Though he still was weak, he won the election .
 He served three terms as a Democratic Congressman, from 1947 until 1953 . He was elected to Congress in 1953 .
 He won that election and less than a year later he enhanced his appeal to the people . He won the election and won the presidential election in 2010 .
 He had almost become Stevenson’s vice presidential running mate in 1956 . He almost became Stevenson's running mate .
 His speech on concession brought him into over 40 million homes in America . His speech was broadcast by 40 million Americans .
 He quickly became one of the most famous political figures in the country . He was a popular politician in the 1980s and 1990s .
 People were saying that no Roman Catholic man could ever become president . Now, people are saying that he could never be president .
 The press loved him, he and his wife appeared on magazine covers, photographers followed them everywhere . He and his family were followed by photographers everywhere .
 To transport him around the country, his father bought him a forty passenger Convair aircraft6.6. So, to transport him and his staff around the . country, he had to travel with his staff .
 Kennedy formally announced his presidential candidacy in January 1960 . In January 1960, he formally announced he was running for president .
 Senators Hubert H Humphrey of Minnesota and Lyndon B Johnson of Texas were Senators . Humphrey was a Democrat and Democrat .
 Kennedy knocked Humphrey out of the way and was still battling the rumors of a catholic president . Kennedy was still fighting rumors of being a Catholic president in the 1960s .
 He dealt with that by winning the primary in West Virginia, which is primarily Protestant . West Virginia is a state of origin, predominantly Protestant .
 He was nominated on the first ballot, and chose Johnson as his running mate . Johnson was the first choice to be nominated on first ballot .
 Congress passed his bill to create the Peace Corps . Congress passed a bill increasing minimum wage . Congress also passed the bill to increase minimum wage and create the peace corps .
 Which was an agency to perform social and humanitarian services overseas . Which was a social and . humanitarian services agency .
 Within two years the Peace Corps were working in Asia, Africa, and Latin America . The Peace Corps was working in Africa, Latin America and Asia .
 Kennedy ran into some problems after the conservative Republicans joined with the Southern Democrats to stop legislation they didn’t like . The conservative Republicans and Southern Democrats worked together to stop the legislation .
 A Medicare bill, a civil rights bill, and a bill to create a Cabinet-level Department of Urban Affairs were all defeated . Medicare bill was defeated . The bill was also defeated .
 Kennedy didn't lose all of his approval because he get some of his bills passed . Kennedy didn’t lose all the approval because of some of the bills passed.
 Congress passed a bill to lower tariffs, authorized a purchase of over $100 million in U.N. bonds . Congress appropriated more than $1 billion dollars to send a man to the moon . Congress also passed a measure to buy U.S. bonds and lower tariffs .
 Kennedy began to lose popularity after he started forcing universities in the south to accept black students . Kennedy lost popularity after forcing universities to accept blacks to study .
 He continued to speak out against segregation and lost even more populairty .
 Castro became very hostile towards the U.S. during the next two years . Castro was very hostile to the United States . Castro became hostile towards Castro during those years .
 Castro began to proclaim his belief in Communism . After some problems with $1 billion dollars in properties and companies owned by the U.S. After some . problems with some . properties, Castro began . to proclaim . Communism . Castro . Castro began proclaiming his belief .
 In April 1961, more then 1000 exiles landed in Cuba at a place called Bay of Pigs . More than 1000 ex-Cuban ex-cuba rebels landed at the site of the invasion of Cuba .
 Their plan was to move inland and join with anti-Castro forces to stage a revolt . They planned to join anti-Chro forces in a revolt against the government .
 Castro’s forces were there to meet the invaders, and the revolt didn’t happen . Castro's forces were in force to fight the invasion, but the revolt never happened .
 The prisoners were released in exchange for food and medical supplies valued at $53 million . The prisoners are released in a deal worth more than $50 million .
 In March 1961, Kennedy introduced the Alliance for Progress, which would strengthen democratic institution in the Latin American nation to prevent them from doing what Cuba did . Kennedy introduced it in March 1961 to prevent Cuba from taking over Cuba .
 There was a lot of hostility, considering that there was a shooting down of a U.S. spy plane in Soviet air space . The incident occurred in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Soviet premier made it clear that the policies toward the Untied States would be even more strict . The Soviet premier actually made it very clear that .
 In August 1961, the Communists ordered that there be a wall put up between East and West Berlin . The wall was put up in August 1961 .
 Those countries protested the wall, but since East Germany was Communist, it was done anyway . The wall was built in East Germany during the Cold War .
 Khrushchev decided to supply Cuba with nuclear missiles that would be in range of the Eastern U.S. The missiles would have been in range from the Eastern United States . The missiles were launched in Cuba in 1959 .
 In 1962, a U.S. spy plane photographed a construction site managed by the Soviets and then spotted a missile on October 14th . He denied it when asked if he was supplying Cuba with missiles .
 For seven days Kennedy met with advisors on how to handle and respond to this, while the administration carried on as if nothing was wrong . Kennedy met for seven days to discuss how to deal with the situation .
 On October 22, Kennedy told the nation about the missiles, demanded that the USSR remove the missiles and declared the water around Cuba a quarantine zone . The water was quarantined around Cuba .
 Kennedy warned the USSR that if Cuba attacked the U.S. it would be considered an attack on the United States by USSR itself . Kennedy: "If Cuba attacks the US. attacked the United. States, the attack would be an attack by the USSR itself"
 Troops were sent to Florida to prepare for invading Cuba and air units were alerted . Air units were also alerted . Troops sent to Cuba were alerted to the situation .
 American vessels blockaded any Soviet ships that looked suspicious and searched them . American ships blockaded Soviet ships looking suspicious . Soviet ships were searched by American vessels .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev discussed quarantine zone for several days . Soviet ships avoided quarantine zone during Kennedy-Khrrushchev talks .
 Before the U.S. could respond to that note, Krushchev sent another trying to negotiate other terms . Before the United States could respond, the Soviet Union sent another attempt to negotiate .
 The USSR removed and dismantled all of the mistled and offered the United States an on-site inspection . The USSR also offered the U.S. an inspection .
 Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and to remove missiles from Turkey . Kennedy promised to remove missile from Turkey and remove them from Cuba . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 U.S. spy planes revealed that missile bases were being dismantled . United States spy planes said they were dismantling missile bases . The bases were dismantled by the United States .
 They were trying to win support from the state that Kennedy had barely carried in 1960 . The state was Kennedy's last state in 1960; he barely carried it .
 Two shots fired in rapid succession as the motorcade approached an underpass . Two shots were fired in a rapid succession .
 One bullet passed through Kennedy’s neck and struck Governor Connally in the back . Connally was struck by Kennedy's bullet that struck his neck .
 Less than 2 hours after the shooting, Lyndon B Johnson was sworn in as the 36th president of the United States .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, who was employed in the warehouse, was arrested in a movie theatre and charged with murder . Oswald was arrested that afternoon . Oswald had been employed at the warehouse in New York City .
 Hundreds of thousands of people filed passed the coffin of the president . Hundreds of Thousands of people attended the funeral .