 The invasion plan called for the largest drop of paratroopers since the battle for Normandy in 1944 . The Pentagon estimated 18,500 Americans would be killed or wounded in the first 10 days of battle .
 One-eighth of the bombers were in the air at all times for 30 days . The bombers were prepared to drop nuclear weapons on targets in Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 More than 100,000 combat-ready army infantrymen were deployed to ports along the East Coast . The U.S. Army has deployed more than a quarter of the world's most active military personnel .
 A huge navy fleet, backed by 40,000 marines, was steaming through international waters in the Caribbean and the South Atlantic . The fleet was steamed moments away from battle stations .
 The new movie Thirteen Days recreates one of the most dramatic episodes of the Cold War . The movie is based on a Cold War Cold War battle between the U.S. and Russia .
 To his credit, Australian director Roger Donaldson's approach to his film is serious . The film is set to be released in cinemas in Australia and Australia this week .
 The film fails to cast a critical eye on the role of the Kennedys, the U.S. policy on Cuba, or Washington's foreign policy in general .
 The viewer ends up relieved that the world squeaked by, but not too disturbed about our future course . The viewer is relieved that it squeaks by .
 One hopes that some movie-goers will take it as a starting point to delve into the history and transcend in their understanding the one-sided picture of the crisis presented on-screen .
 The film begins with the nuclear mushroom clouds that might have been and nearly were . The film shows the fear that none of us who were alive at the time could ever forget .
 The film reenacts the 13-day crisis, mid-October 1962, when American policymakers debated how to handle the discovery of Soviet missiles being installed 90 miles from Florida . This atmosphere of chilling realism intensifies throughout the film .
 Thirteen Days contains all the defects that seem to be required by Hollywood, including gratuitous and overly sentimental moments . Technically, the film is playing to formula and including the requisite supply .
 Kevin Costner, the big-name attraction, unfortunately provides the least inspiring performance .
 The characterizations are based on the screenwriter's study of historical records and documents, White House tapes, memoirs and memoirs .
 It is fascinating to view the dramatization of the policy struggle between the White House and the military . It's fascinating to see the dramatship of the military and White House .
 Much of the dialogue is lifted directly from the transcripts of meetings of ExComm . Kennedy and his advisers assembled at the time .
 The movie refrains from demonizing either Castro or Khrushchev . One cannot leave the screening without shuddering at the thought of an unchecked military brass or a civilian regime .
 Air Force General Curtis LeMay is shown as the fascistic advocate of nuclear war that he was . LeMay was shown as an advocate for nuclear war by the U.S. Air Force .
 LeMay's contempt for Kennedy's reluctance to risk nuclear war is more graphic . In the actual transcript of the ExComm discussions, LeMay says he contempts Kennedy for not risking nuclear war .
 He declares at one point, “This blockade and political action I see leading into war.” He declares: “I see this blockade leading to war. I see war."
 Thirteen Days does depict LeMay in common company with Maxwell Taylor and the other military officials who are constantly bordering on insubordination in their demands for free rein against Cuba .
 "It's lucky for us that we have McNamara over there," says McNamara . McNamara's role in reining in the brass has been key to his success .
 The film's positive elements, however, are overshadowed by the fact that this is a political film with severe limitations . The film is about the White House crisis played out in the 1980s .
 In the end, one feels that Costner & Co. aim to contrast America's "great presidents" of yesterday with their lesser counterparts of today .
 We are shown a Camelot-like portrait of decisive and intelligent men, who despite massive pressure, stand firm and prevent a nuclear holocaust . Despite massive pressure—from the Joint Chiefs, Congress and senior statesmen—stand firm .
 To understand the Cuban missile crisis, one requires a correct perspective . To understand it, one needs to understand the crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The film's vantage point, portraying a dispute within the confines of the White House, cannot elucidate the interests of the working class, the film's director says .
 The men we watch in this film represent not the American people, but the American bourgeoisie . The men in the film represent the American bourgegeois people, the film says .
 Nuclear brinkmanship was a key component of U.S. foreign policy in 1962 . It was also a key part of the United States foreign policy .
 The film rather predictably portrays the Kennedys as the selfless advocates of reason, without a look back at the overall role they and the U.S. government played . Unfortunately, the film doesn't look back on the American government's role in the war .
 The actions with regard to Cuba of both the United States and USSR were criminally reckless and reactionary . The basic geopolitical facts and preponderance of power must be understood to assess responsibility for the events .
 The U.S. exercised unchallenged economic, political and military supremacy over two-thirds of the planet . In the aftermath of World War II, the United States exercised unchrenged economic and political supremacy over the world .
 The European states were bankrupted and compelled to liquidate their colonial empires . The colonial empires were liquidated by the end of their colonial powers .
 The United States took on the role of world policeman against the working class in the advanced countries as well as the semi-colonial masses . The U.S. became the world policeman in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The Cold War expressed the unrelenting military and economic pressure that the U.S. exerted against the Soviet Union in its drive to reconquer those territories that had been lost to capitalism .
 Kennedy administration sought to make hegemonic control of the U.S. more palatable, especially in light of the challenge from popular, radical regimes like that of Castro in Cuba . Kennedy sought to provide a measure of reform, not so much for its own sake, but to make
 The new administration's initiative, the Alliance for Progress, aims to create conditions for economic aid and political reform in Latin American countries . The initiative is aimed at creating conditions for political reform and economic aid .
 This can be described as a political cover-up, and it makes it impossible for the filmgoer to properly understand the events of October 1962 . This can rightfully be called 'a political cover up' by the film's critics .
 The American government's obsession with Castro began with the 1959 Cuban Revolution . The U.S. government has long been obsessed with Castro .
 Fidel Castro led the movement that overthrew the corrupt and autocratic Batista regime . Fidel Castro was one of the leaders of the revolution against the Batista government .
 Castro expropriated American sugar firms, nationalized all banks and industrial enterprises, including oil refineries, most of which were American-owned . In June 1960 Castro expowedowed the American sugar companies .
 Khrushchev agreed to purchase half of Cuba's sugar and provide $200 million in low-cost loans . The U.S. agreed to buy half of the sugar in return for $200million in loans to Cuba .
 Eisenhower administration developed plan for overthrow of Castro government . Plan was bequeathed to Kennedy when he assumed office in 1961 .
 The CIA assembled and trained a crew of Cuban refugees which it transported on April 17 to Cuba's Bay of Pigs, the site of the military fiasco . It transported the refugees to the site .
 In January 1962, Robert Kennedy established “Operation Mongoose,” a secret anti-Castro terrorist operation . Robert Kennedy set up “Mongoose’s” in January 1962 .
 Edward Lansdale, the infamous anti-hero of The Ugly American, was named to head the operation . Lansdale had overseen the crushing of the Filipino rebellion in the early '50s .
 The CIA quickly spent $100 million to create a base for clandestine operations out of Miami . The CIA spent the money to create the base . The base is now a base in Miami .
 Code-named JM/WAVE, the Miami station had hundreds of agents, exotic weaponry, and its own fleet of airplanes and speedboats . The Miami station also had exotic weaponry and exotic weaponry .
 During the same period, the U.S. government was devising various assassination plots against Castro . The plots were documented in 1975 by the congressional investigation led by Senator Frank Church .
 CIA official Richard Bissell subcontracted with the Mafia for Castro's murder . Bissell was a CIA official in charge of the murder of Castro Castro .
 Castro correctly, correctly, that he was facing a protracted and murderous assault from the US, and led him to ask Moscow for military protection . These were the conditions that convinced Castro .
 The U.S. tried to isolate Cuba by persuading other Western Hemisphere countries in the Organization of American States to cut off trade and diplomatic ties with the island nation . Officially, the United States tried to isolate Cuba .
 In April 1962, 40,000 men conducted amphibious landings at beaches in North Carolina and off Vieques Island, Puerto Rico . The exercise was a huge military exercise .
 Khrushchev, like Castro, came to believe that the U.S. was readying a second invasion . The two leaders believed that the United States was preparing for another invasion of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy was under pressure to have a showdown with the Russians over Cuba in 1962 . Kennedy was in the midst of the Cold War in 1962 when he made the decision . Kennedy's decision to make the decision was made in 1962 in a bid to avoid further escalation .
 The Kennedys were keenly aware that the face-off with the Russians came only weeks before congressional elections .
 Any perceived “softness” on Cuba in this deeply reactionary climate would mean political suicide for the Democrats . Any perceived "softness" on Cuba would be politically suicide for Democrats .
 U.S. policy under the Kennedy administration was militaristic, and, confident of its superiority, provocative . United States policy under Kennedy was provocative, says author .
 At this time nuclear capability was considered the main measure of national strength, and by any standard the United States predominated .
 Kennedy had announced that the United States would, by 1964, triple its ICBMs . Kennedy had said in 1964 that the U.S. would triple ICBM production .
 The intense series of negotiations between the Americans and Soviets over nuclear testing collapsed in April . Meanwhile, a series of intense talks between the U.S. and the Soviets broke down in April.
 The United States then proceeded with a new round of nuclear explosions in the Pacific . The U.S. then proceeded to demonstrate its military advantage .
 The deployment of Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Turkey began in November 1961, with completion set for March 1962 . In a further U.S. military provocation against the Soviets, the deployment of the Jupiter missiles began in Turkey .
 Berlin was a major flashpoint in the Cold War throughout the early 60s . This was a constant reference point in U.S. policy toward Cuba . The divided city of Berlin was the major reference point .
 Khrushchev had issued several ultimatums to the United States to remove Western troops from Berlin . The final one was at the Vienna summit of June 1961 at the end of the war .
 In mid-August the Berlin Wall was erected in Berlin . He gave the Allies six months to withdraw, and the Wall was put in place .
 Kennedy responded with a major military buildup, but the Allies were well aware that they could not win a battle in Germany with conventional weapons .
 The outlook of “containment,” begun under Truman, was taking on a new aggressiveness . The outlook for ‘containment’ began under Truman .
 This world political crisis was not simply a remote backdrop to the missile crisis, it was also a backdrop to Iran's nuclear crisis . This world's political crisis is not simply the backdrop to this year's crisis in Iran .
 The film Thirteen Days fails to convey the global context of the debate raging within ExComm . The film fails to in any way convey the real world context of events .
 JFK weighed the impact of any action in Cuba against its implications for world politics . The fact is that at every point, ExComm, and particularly JFK himself, weighed it up against the impact .
 Our war plan would have been to fire our nuclear weapons at them, says President Obama . "Our war plan is to use nuclear weapons against them," says Obama .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk: “If we strike these missiles, we would expect, I think, maximum Communist reaction in Latin America.” Rusk further points out, “I think I think I would expect ... maximum Communist reactions in Latin American. We would expect
 In the case of about six of those governments, the heads of government had some intimation requiring some preparatory steps from the security points of view, one or another could easily be overthrown . One or another of the governments could easily overthrow one of these governments .
 The U.S. bourgeoisie was increasingly aware that it was becoming vulnerable internationally . Along these same lines, the United States bourgeoisie was also aware of its vulnerability internationally .
 This became another factor driving the U.S. along the route of escalating militarism . This is another factor in escalating militarization of America .
 U.S. policymakers sensed a growing weakness in the face of a wave of decolonization sweeping Africa and Asia in the early 1960s . The United States was at its height at the height of its power in Africa, Asia .
 By 1960 the membership of the UN had doubled from its postwar size, including dozens of new African nations . For example, by 1960, the UN membership had doubled .
 Washington faced similar threats of independence from almost every corner of the so-called "developing" world . Washington had already resorted to the military overthrow of the reform government of Arbenz Guzman in Guatemala in 1954 .
 The Cuban Revolution was, therefore, considered a direct challenge to the world position of the United States . It became a symbolic issue for U.S. policymakers .
 The decision of Khrushchev to place missiles in Cuba was both reckless and provocative . The Stalinist mindset was the Soviet Union's decision to do so was reckless .
 It reflected a foreign policy that combined gross opportunism with adventurism . It reflected the foreign policy of the U.S. President Barack Obama, Obama said .
 It was a serious political miscalculation to underestimate the U.S. response to Soviet missiles on Cuban territory . Given the policies of the United States throughout its history, from the Monroe Doctrine on, this is a serious mistake . The United States has a history of underestimating its response
 He had no thought-out fallback position if missiles were discovered en route . But he had no fallback plan if the missiles were found en route, he said .
 Khrushchev was also under pressure from the emerging Sino-Soviet split, and was looking for safe avenues to appear militant and shore up the Warsaw Pact as well as the Third World and nonaligned bloc .
 Khrushchev was being challenged by the Chinese and by senior figures in his own government for reducing Soviet military preparedness and not taking a sufficiently “revolutionary’s” stance in foreign policy .
 Cuba's fate was becoming a test of Soviet power and global credibility . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Soviet Union in March 1968 .
 The Soviet ambassador to the US, Anatoly Dobrynin, and the Soviet representative to the UN, Valerian Zorin were not informed of the missile decision . The decision was made by the Soviet government .
 Dobrynin writes in his memoirs, “But he grossly misunderstood the psychology of his opponents.” He says he "grossly misunderstood" his political opponents .
 JFK announced the blockade of Cuba and warned the USSR that the U.S. would make a “full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union” to any attack . Khrushchev was apparently dumbstruck by the threat .
 Dobrynin writes, “Even then Moscow continued to tell our embassy nothing.” He says. ‘Even then . Russia continued to . tell us nothing,’ he writes . ‘Moscow continued to continue to tell [Russian] embassy nothing,' he writes.
 The Soviet bureaucracy conceived of the defense of the USSR in bourgeois and nationalist terms, as a matter of Great Power diplomacy . This rash gamble expressed the bankrupt and reactionary mentality of the Soviet bureaucracy, writes David Frum .
 To engage in the politics of brinkmanship and nuclear threats with the U.S. was an act of stupidity and political indifference, he says . To engage with the world's most ruthless imperialist power and a state that had proven its readiness to unleash thermonuclear destruction .
 Khrushchev attempted to expose the predatory aggression of the United States and rally workers and the oppressed masses against imperialism . Far from seeking to expose U.S. aggression, he attempted to reply in kind . The U.K. attempted to rally workers against imperialism, he said .
 The role of the bourgeois nationalist leader Fidel Castro was similarly reckless and hostile to the interests of the working class . Fidel Castro's role in Cuba was similarly similar to that of the Communist Party .
 Neither Khrushchev nor Castro sought to politically warn and mobilize the working class against U.S. provocations or the danger of a nuclear attack . Clearly, neither . nor . Castro . sought to . mobilize the . working class .
 Thirteen Days romanticizes the Kennedys once again . Romaticizing the Kenneseses is romanticizing them once again.
 It serves a contemporary political purpose to periodically update and revitalize the Kennedy legend . It forms a vital part of the myth of liberalism and the more general myths of the American bourgeoisie . The Kennedy myth is vital to modernizing and revitalizing .
 The Kennedy brothers were defending their class interests in a period of America's hegemony . As the leaders of the world's preeminent military power, the brothers defended their interests .
 They were more astute and measured in their approach than many of their contemporaries . They were astute, measured and more measured than many others . Their approach was more measured and measured than others'.
 It combined the Cold War with “human rights” with ‘Alliance for Progress’ and the Peace Corps, anticommunism with a measure of support for civil rights . CIA murders and CIA murders were the result of the “Alliance’s�
 In the early 1960s, America was only beginning to face the economic drain of Vietnam, mounting deficits and the dollar crisis . America was starting to face a serious economic drain .
 The Kennedys were able to shrewdly combine anticommunism, diplomatic flexibility, adventurism and restraint, thereby providing the bourgeoisie with political leadership . The Kennedy family was able to deftly combine anti-communism, diplomacy and restraint .
 The contradictions within Stalinism led to the self-dissolution of the USSR and the reestablishment of capitalist property relations within the former workers state . Subsequently, the contradictions within the Stalinist state led to a capitalist property reestablishment .
 American militarism remains as starkly dangerous to mankind and its future as it was revealed during those fateful 13 days in 1962 . While political forms have changed, the political forms of U.S. militarism have changed .