 Nuclear Science Week supports national and international interests relating to all aspects of nuclear science . Educate Yourself about Radiation Protection Regulations with Historical Research .
 These types of regulations may assist in developing clean energy, avoiding future radioactive accidents, and helping insure proper radioactive waste material disposal .
 The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission recently released these print historical volumes . The volumes cover major milestones within the United States nuclear power resources and regulatory environment .
 A Nuclear Crisis in Historical Perspective . Inside this book, you will find a bit of history about nuclear power that began in 1954 . Atomic Energy Act of 1954 became a law .
 This scholarly text explores the political, business, construction, and environmental elements surrounding nuclear power plant safety and regulation within the U.S. It also explores the politics and regulations surrounding the nuclear power plants .
 It also covers many insights into the reactor faults that led to Three Mile Island’s accident, evacuation of employees and political aftermath . The book also covers the evacuation of workers and the aftermath of the accident .
 Nuclear reactor engineers, operators, technicians, students as well as professionals and policy analysts may be interested in this work . Clean energy, clean energy, nuclear engineering and ionizing radiation may also be interested .
 A History of Radiation Protection in the Twentieth Century . Use this text to learn about the role of U.S. federal agencies in radiation safety .
 It traces how the principles and practices of radiation protection have changed over time in response to political and scientific developments . The book traces how these principles have evolved over the years .
 This book underscores efforts to provide adequate protection against the hazards of radiation to workers exposed in their jobs and to the general public . The book underscores historical efforts .
 Environmental science, pre-med, medical students and professionals may be interested in the 20th century history of radiation protection to compare it with modern-day regulations .
 Historian traces efforts of U.S. policy makers to find solutions to waste management issues . Commercial applications of nuclear energy have become a source of scientific and public inquiry .
 Walker examines the early history of radioactive waste disposal at government installations that produced materials for nuclear weapons . The book also examines the history of nuclear waste disposal .
 Find more resources relating to this topic in our Nuclear Power & Radiation collection . Nuclear Power and Radiation collection includes nuclear power and radiation resources .
 Find more than a million official Federal Government publications from all three branches at www.govinfo.gov.gov . Visit the website for more than 1 million publications .
 The goal behind the Counterterrorism Calendar is to educate and inform both first responders, military, intelligence, law enforcement and other counterterrorism personnel about the threats of international terrorism .
 This Revolutionary War recruiting poster urged brave and able-bodied young men to “take notice” and join forces with General Washington and the Continental Army .
 In World War 2, the Federal Government issued numerous similar domestic campaigns reminding citizens that it was their civic duty to “defend America” and inviting citizens to help support the war industry .
 The National Counterterrorism Center or NCTC serves as the primary organization in the United States government for integrating and analyzing all intelligence possessed or acquired by the U.S. government about international terrorism . The 2014 Counterterrorism Calendar is published by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence .
 Counterterrorism or CT Calendar from the NCTC is published annually . First published in a spiral-bound daily planner format in 2003, just two years after the World Trade Center .
 The right-hand page of the planner has the event planner dates along with key historical events of significance to terrorists that might be used to plan future terrorist activities . The planner also includes historical events that could be used in planning .
 On the left-hand pages are photos, maps and/or data on terrorists and terrorist organizations around the world . From Africa and the Middle East to Europe and the Americas, the pages include photos and maps of terrorism .
 Map denotes locations of major terrorist incidents likely committed by the Harakat Shabaab al-Mujahidin . Al-Shabaab is a “clan-based insurgent and terrorist group” operating in and around Somalia .
 NCTC 2014 Counterterrorism Calendar “Terrorism tutorial” information ranges from cultural—details about the Islamic Calendar; the spelling of Arabic names and terms; lists of Foreign Terrorist Organizations , and logos used— to technical – information about Chemical-Biological-Radiological-
 Full-page “Wanted” poster-style pages of an individual terrorist complete with photo, aliases, his terrorist activities, and how to report information about him .
 $25 million is offered for information leading to the capture of Ayman al-Zawahiri, also known as ‘The Teacher’ or “The Doctor” who is a physician and the founder of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad . One of the largest rewards, $
 Al-Zawahiri is believed to have served as an advisor and doctor to Usama Bin Ladin . He was believed to be a doctor and advisor to the late Usama bin Ladin.
 He has been indicted for his alleged role in the August 7, 1998, bombings of the U.S. embassies in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Nairobi, Kenya .
 Al-Qaida leader Ayman al-Zawahiri is the founder of Egyptian Islamic Jihad . He is the leader of Al-Qaeda's al-Qaeda branch in Egypt . He has been linked to al-Jihad in the past to the rise of the Islamic State of Iraq
 The NCTC carries on the civilian involvement tradition by including instructions for citizens of the U.S. and other countries on how they can help fight terrorism .
 The Rewards for Justice Program is described in detail . The Secretary of State may offer rewards for information that prevents or favorably resolves acts of international terrorism against United States persons or property .
 On the last page is a Bomb Threat Call Procedures form with valuable details of questions to ask and information to note about the caller, such as his or her voice .
 The National Counterterrorism Center’s annual Counterterrorism Calendar is simultaneously meant to alert and inform us . Like the tradition of the best Government civilian campaigns since the founding of the Nation, the annual calendar is meant to educate and alert us .
 With the 2013 bombings at the Boston Marathon, the importance of having an informed and involved citizenry has never been clearer . Citizens were instrumental in identifying and locating the terrorists responsible .
 Search for it in a nearby Federal depository library or download a PDF version of this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw in the news .
 Even the first floor of my house where I used to live in New Jersey on the Hudson River across from Manhattan was flooded . Even my New Jersey home was flooded. Even my home in New York City was flooded, says author .
 The heroes of Superstorm #Sandy are definitely the first responders from firemen, police, National Guard, and emergency medical personnel who rushed to deal with emergency situations during the storm .
 First responders have to rush into extremely hazardous conditions, often with live power lines, broken gas lines, or work around sewage, spilled chemicals, or other pollutants . All while trying to save lives, these first responders rush into dangerous conditions .
 Emergency Response Guidebook 2012 is the newly updated guide for use by transporters, firefighters, police, and other emergency services personnel . Transporters may be the first to arrive at the scene of a transportation incident involving a hazardous material or “Hazmat” as it
 Emergency Response Guidebook 2012 provides first responders with a go-to manual to help deal with hazmat accidents during the critical first 30 minutes . The ERG is known popularly to those who use it . ERG provides emergency responders with an emergency response manual .
 PHMSA’s goal is to place one of these ERGs into every emergency service vehicle nationwide . The ERGs are intended to be used in emergency service vehicles . The goal of the ERGs is to be placed in every emergency vehicle nationwide.
 The Guidebook is organized to provide first responders individual pages or guides on how to deal with each kind of hazardous material . First responders are able to use the guidebook to help them deal with hazardous materials .
 Identify the HAZARDOUS MATERIAL by finding either the Name of the Material or the Identification Number of the material from a placard or orange panel on the container or from the shipping paper or package .
 Identify 3-digit GUIDE NUMBER in this guidebook that corresponds to the material name or number . Identify the 3 digit GUIDE NINE in this book as a guidebook .
 Follow the GUIDE INSTRUCTIONS carefully on the corresponding orange-bordered numbered guide page . Use this guide to help you understand how to navigate the maze .
 First responders are trained to deal with hazardous materials first responders in a chemical spill drill . The drill was part of a training exercise for first responders .
 The 4-digit Hazardous Material Identification Number 2880 is clearly shown on a placard on the tanker . The number is clearly visible on the placard of the tanker.
 Cross-reference for hazardous material ID number to ERG Guide number . ERG guide number is required for hazardous materials .
 Water is to be used to deal with this particular material, not dry chemicals or foams such as from fire extinguishers . Water should be used only when dealing with the material, rather than dry chemicals .
 Each Guide page also discusses how to handle fires involving whole tanks for trailer loads, spills or leaks of this material . First aid for anyone injured by this substance .
 It also includes numbers for all provinces in Canada, including bilingual French-English phone numbers . The numbers also include hotline numbers for Mexico, Argentina, Brazil and Colombia .
 A terrific glossary of terms helps decipher some of the jargon . And finally, a terrific Glossary of Terms helps decipher the jargon.
 Firemen, bomb squads, CBRN teams, police, emergency medical personnel, military police and other first responders have a hard enough job to do without risking their lives dealing with broken pipelines, overturned tankers, bombs, spills and other hazardous materials .
 The Department of Transportation provides this excellent tool to help keep people and people safe .
 Find this and other books for Emergency Management and First Responders under the Security, Defense & Law Enforcement category on our new online bookstore .
 As of January 27, 2012, this poll is NOW CLOSED with the final results showing above . Feel free to click on the SHARE THIS link to pass on the results to others .
 Osama bin Laden was the mastermind behind the 9/11 attacks and many other Al Qaeda and insurgent terrorist attacks . Navy SEALS located and killed bin Laden this year, killing him this year .
 A Collection of Research Ideas, Thoughts, and Perspectives, V 1 analyzes causes and possible responses to terrorism as presented at the FBI Terrorism Research and Analysis Project Symposium .
 The recent death of North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong Il, marks an uncertain time for the Korean Peninsula and the entire region . The death of the North Korean leader marks a time for uncertainty .
 A Country Study looks at the dominant social, political, economic, and military aspects of contemporary North Korea before this .
 The Gulf Oil Disaster and the Future of Offshore Drilling, Report to the President, January 2011 . The Gulf oil disaster and the future of offshore drilling are discussed in the report .
 This best-selling publication offers the fullest account available of what happened in the Gulf of Mexico . It proposes actions, changes in company behavior, reform of government oversight, and investments in research and technology .
 There is an interesting White House timeline about the Iraq war at the end of which is a link to the Joining Forces initiative with which one can express one’s support .
 GPO’s bookstore has a number of books about Iraq, but two stand out as best-sellers . Two of the best-selling books are about Iraq in Iraq .
 Journal of a Company Commander gives a realistic account by Major Todd Brown of his experiences as a U.S. Army company commander in Iraq from April 2003 to March 2004 .
 The Iraq Reconstruction Experience examines the Iraq reconstruction experience . It provides 13 take-away lessons for future contingency relief and reconstruction operations .
 Natural disasters were big in the news this year, and the Federal Government was involved in responding to them . From the National Guard in the U.S. to foreign response teams overseas, the Government responded to disasters .
 The U.S. Agency for International Development deployed a Disaster Assistance Response Team in Japan . The team included disaster response experts, urban search and rescue teams, and nuclear experts .
 Field Operations Guide for Disaster Assessment and Response is used by USAID’s Office of United States Foreign Disaster Assistance for DART teams and other disaster assistance personnel .
 Last Space Shuttle flight 2011 marked the end of NASA’s three-decade long space shuttle program . Atlantis landed at its home port at Kennedy Space Center in Florida on July 21, 2011 .
 NASA has published a number of terrific books about the program which you can find in our NASA and Space Shuttle Publications . A new set of beautiful color bookmarks, one for each shuttle and the best-selling Wings in Orbitbook.
 U.S. economy, Federal Government budgets and deficits have been discussed in every newscast this year . United States economy and Federal budget have been a topic of discussion this year.
 GPO has assembled many collections of Federal publications on our year-round Gift Guide and in our Special Collections page on GPO’s online bookstore .
 Chemical-Biological-Radiological-Nuclear, chemical weapons, first responder, nuclear proliferation and nuclear proliferation .