 He was the first Roman Catholic president and the first president to be born in the 20th century . He was also the first Catholic president .
 Kennedy was assassinated before he completed his third year as president . He was assassinated in 1963 . Kennedy was the last president of the United States .
 He brought to the presidency an awareness of the cultural and historical traditions of the U.S. President. He brought an awareness .
 Because Kennedy expressed the values of 20th-century America, his presidency was important beyond its political achievements . Kennedy expressed his values beyond his political achievements, says historian John Avlon .
 By the time the Democratic National Convention opened in July, he had won seven primary victories . He had won 7 primary victories before the convention in July .
 His most important had been in West Virginia, where he proved that a Roman Catholic could win in a predominantly Protestant state .
 When the convention opened, it appeared that Kennedy’s only serious challenge would come from the Senate majority leader, Lyndon B Johnson of Texas .
 Kennedy won the nomination on the first ballot and then persuaded Johnson to become his running mate . Kennedy was the first to win the nomination in 1964 . Johnson was the second choice to be the vice president .
 Republicans nominated Vice President Richard Nixon for president and Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., for vice president . Kennedy had defeated Lodge for the Senate in 1952 . Nixon was nominated for president .
 Kennedy received the support of blacks in important Northern states, especially Illinois and Pennsylvania . Another important element of the campaign was the support Kennedy received from blacks .
 They supported him in part because he and Robert Kennedy had tried to get the release of the civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. They supported his efforts to release him .
 King had been jailed for taking part in a civil rights demonstration in Georgia . King was released soon afterward .
 The election drew a record 69 million voters to the polls, but Kennedy won by only 113,000 votes . Kennedy won the election by 113,00 votes .
 In his inaugural address he emphasized America’s revolutionary heritage . President Obama emphasized America's revolutionary heritage.
 Kennedy sought to attract brilliant young people to government service . Kennedy sought with considerable success to attract talented young people into government service. Kennedy sought success with young people in government .
 His hope was to bring new ideas and new methods into the executive branch . He said he hoped to bring ideas and methods into executive branch.
 Among them were McGeorge Bundy and Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., both graduates of Harvard . Bundy was a Harvard graduate . Bundy is the son of former President George W. Bush . Bundy and Bush were both graduates .
 Kennedy's most influential adviser was Theodore C Sorenson, a member of Kennedy’s staff since his days in the Senate . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 at the age of 25 .
 Sorenson wrote many of Kennedy's speeches and exerted a strong influence on Kennedy’s development as a political liberal . Kennedy is a person who believes that the government should directly help people to overcome poverty .
 Kennedy attempted to make the White House the cultural center of the nation . Kennedy's White House was the center of America's cultural center .
 Writers, artists, poets, scientists, and musicians were frequent dinner guests . Writers and artists were frequent guests at dinner .
 The Kennedy’s held a reception for all the American winners of the Nobel Prize, people who made outstanding contributions to their field during the past year .
 At the party the president suggested that more talent and genius was at the White House that night than there had been since Thomas Jefferson had last dined there alone . Thomas Jefferson was last seen dining alone with Thomas Jefferson in 18th century .
 Kennedy asked the name of a medal Khrushchev was wearing during a meeting with the leader of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . Kennedy asked him to name the medal he was wearing . Kennedy was the president of the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Kennedy’s first year in office brought him considerable success in enacting new legislation . Kennedy's first year was a year of success for the first time .
 Congress passed a major housing bill, a law increasing the minimum wage, and a bill granting federal aid to economically depressed areas of the U.S. Congress also passed a bill raising the national minimum wage .
 The most original piece of legislation Kennedy put through Congress was the bill creating the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps was the agency that trained American volunteers to perform social and humanitarian service overseas . Kennedy signed the bill through Congress .
 The program's goal was to promote world peace and friendship with developing nations . The program’s goal was promoting world peace .
 The idea of American volunteers helping people in foreign lands touched the idealism of many citizens . The idea was the idea of U.S. volunteers helping Americans in foreign countries .
 Peace Corps volunteers were working in Asia, Africa, and Latin America within two years . Volunteers were living with the people and working on education, public health, and agricultural projects . Volunteers are now living with people in Asia and Africa .
 Kennedy found it increasingly difficult to get his programs enacted into law . Kennedy found success with Congress, but struggled to get legislation passed .
 Southern Democrats joined with conservative Republicans to stop legislation they disliked . Southern Democrats held a majority in both houses of Congress . Democrats held both houses in both chambers .
 The Medicare bill, a bill to make medical care for the aged a national benefit, was defeated . The bill was defeated by the US House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 A civil rights bill and a bill to cut taxes were debated, and compromises were agreed to, but even the compromises were delayed . Even the compromise was delayed .
 A bill to create a Cabinet-level Department of Urban Affairs was soundly defeated . Kennedy wanted the economist Robert C Weaver, a black man, to be the new secretary . The bill was defeated partly because Kennedy wanted Weaver's appointment .
 Southern Congressmen united with representatives from mostly rural areas to defeat the bill . The bill was defeated by a vote of mostly rural members of Congress .
 Kennedy did win approval of a bill to lower tariffs and thus allow more competitive U.S. trade abroad . Kennedy won approval of the bill on Thursday .
 Congress also authorized the purchase of $100 million in U.N. bonds . The money enabled the international organization to survive a financial crisis .
 Congress appropriated more than $1 billion to finance sending a man to the moon by 1970 which was accomplished in 1969 . Further, Congress appropriated $1billion to finance the mission . The mission was completed in 1969 and the moon was completed by 1970 .
 The major legal and moral conflict during Kennedy’s three years in office was in the area of civil rights . The major American legal conflict in the civil rights era was in civil rights issues .
 Black agitation against discrimination had become widespread and well organized . Black agitation for discrimination against discrimination against black people was widespread .
 Kennedy was in no way responsible for the growth of the civil rights movement . He attempted to aid the black cause by enforcing existing laws . Kennedy was not responsible for growing the black movement .
 Kennedy wanted to end discrimination in federally financed projects or in companies that were doing business with the government . Kennedy particularly wanted to stop discrimination in federal projects or companies doing business .
 In September 1962 Governor Ross R Barnett of Mississippi ignored a court order and prevented James H Meredith, a black man, from enrolling at the state university . Meredith was the first black man to be allowed to enroll in Mississippi in 1962 .
 On September 29, the president went on national television to appeal to the people of Mississippi to obey the law . Rioting began on the night of September 29 even as the president appealed to the public .
 After 15 hours of rioting and two deaths, Kennedy sent in troops to restore order . Two deaths were caused by the riots .
 Meredith was admitted to the university, and troops and federal marshals remained on the campus to insure his safety . Meredith is admitted to campus .
 Kennedy again used the National Guard to prevent Wallace from interfering with integration in the public schools of Birmingham, Tuskegee, and Mobile . Three months later, Kennedy used the same National Guard .
 Kennedy also asked Congress to pass a civil rights bill that would guarantee blacks the right to vote, to attend public school, to have equal access to jobs, and to have access to public accommodations . Kennedy also called for a bill guaranteeing blacks the rights to vote .
 Public opinion polls showed that Kennedy was losing popularity because of his advocacy of civil rights . Kennedy lost popularity due to his civil rights advocacy, polls showed .
 Privately, he began to assume that the South would oppose him in the next election . He continued to speak out against segregation, the practice of separating people of different races .
 President Obama spoke to a group of students in Nashville, Tennessee . He said, “No one can deny the complexity of the problem involved in assuring all of our citizens their full rights as Americans .
 Fidel Castro overthrew the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar in 1959 . After several attempts, the Cuban revolution led by Fidel Castro finally overthrew him . Fidel Castro led the revolution against the dictator .
 Castro was to become increasingly hostile to the U.S. During the next two years, Castro became increasingly hostile toward the United States . Castro was assassinated in 1961 in Cuba .
 The new regime’s agricultural reform laws provoked U.S. companies that operated sugar plantations . New regime's agricultural reform law provoked United States companies .
 Companies that were not controlled by Cuban stockholders were not allowed to operate plantations . Sugar production was de-emphasized in favor of food crops in Cuba .
 In 1960 the Castro government nationalized, or took over ownership of, an estimated $1 billion in properties owned by U.S. companies and citizens . The Eisenhower administration imposed a trade embargo .
 When Castro began to proclaim his belief in Communism, Cuba became part of the Cold War, or struggle between the United States and its allies and the nations led by the USSR that involved intense economic and diplomatic battles but not direct military conflict .
 During the Eisenhower administration the Central Intelligence Agency had begun to train Cuban exiles secretly for an invasion of Cuba .
 In April 1961 more than 1000 Cuban exiles made an amphibious landing in Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . More than 1000 exiles landed in Cuba in April 1961 at the site of the invasion .
 Their plan was to join with anti-Castro forces to stage a revolt simultaneously, but instead Castro’s forces were there to meet the invaders . Castro's forces were met by the invaders, and the rebels were killed by Castro forces .
 The revolt in the interior did not happen, and air support, promised by the CIA, never came . Air support never came, and the revolt did not take place .
 On December 25, 1962, 1113 prisoners were released in exchange for food and medical supplies valued at a total of approximately $53 million . Prisoners were released for food, medical supplies worth $53million .
 Most other Latin American countries had the same bad social, economic, and political conditions that had led to Castro’s success in Cuba . Most of the Latin American nations have the same social and economic conditions that led to the success of Castro in Cuba.
 Many of these nations seemed ripe for a revolution that could easily be exploited by the Communists . Many of the nations were ripe for revolution, and could be exploited .
 President Kennedy looked for a program that would accelerate change in Latin America by strengthening democratic institutions . President Kennedy wanted to accelerate change by strengthening democracy in the region .
 In March 1961 he introduced the Alliance for Progress, and in August it was established by the charter of Punte del Este . In August 1961, he introduced it to the Alliance of Progress .
 The Alliance for Progress and President Kennedy’s particular concern for democratic institutions brought the U.S. renewed popularity in Latin America . Kennedy's concern for democracy brought the United States renewed popularity with Latin America.
 On June 3, 1961, in Vienna, Austria, Kennedy and Khrushchev met and reviewed relationships between the U.S. and the USSR . Kennedy and the Soviet Union's relations with the United States were reviewed in Vienna . Kennedy: "It was a very important meeting"
 The first was the shooting down of a U.S. spy plane in Soviet air space, and the second was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in early 1961 . The first shot down a United States spy plane, the second shot down of Soviet spy plane .
 The results of the conference made it clear that Khrushchev had construed Kennedy’s failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion as a sign of weakness . The results were made clear that . Khrushvic had construed the failure . of the . failure of . the Bay . of Pigs
 In fact, the Soviet premier made it clear that the Soviet Union intended to pursue an even more aggressive policy toward the U.S. The Soviet premier said he wanted to pursue a more aggressive foreign policy .
 He reported to the American people that the Soviet premier was a “tough-minded” leader who did not understand the intentions of the U.S. He said he reported that he did not think the Soviet leader understood the United States .
 In August 1961, to prevent East Germans from fleeing to the West, the Communists ordered a wall built on the border between East and West Berlin . The wall was built in August 1961 to prevent the East Germans fleeing the West .
 Kennedy had already asked for more military spending and called up reserve troops for duty in Europe . Kennedy had called up reservists for duty .
 When East German soldiers blocked the Allied route through East Germany into Berlin, Kennedy sent a force of 1500 soldiers marching along the route into West Berlin . Kennedy sent the force along the East Berlin route .
 Communist interference stopped, allowing Allied forces to travel to and from Berlin . Allied forces were able to travel from Berlin to Berlin . Communist interference prevented Allied forces from entering Berlin .
 Amongst other problems President Kennedy faced, none was more serious than this one . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 In 1960 Soviet Premier Khrushchev decided to supply Cuba with nuclear missiles that would put the eastern U.S. within range of nuclear missile attack . The eastern United States would be within range .
 Khrushchev denied that any missiles were being supplied to Cuba . In the summer of 1962 U.S. spy planes flying over Cuba photographed Soviet-managed construction work and spotted the first missile .
 For seven days President Kennedy consulted secretly with advisers, discussing the possible responses while in public his administration carried on as though nothing was wrong . Kennedy consulted with advisers for seven days before his assassination .
 On October 22, Kennedy told the nation about the discovery of the missiles, demanded that the Soviet Union remove the weapons, and declared the waters around Cuba a quarantine zone . The waters around the Cuban Islands were quarantined . The Soviet Union removed the weapons from Cuba .
 Kennedy called upon Khrushchev 12″to halt and eliminate this clandestine, reckless and provocative threat to world peace and to stable relations between our two nations” and warned that an attack from Cuba on any nation in the western hemisphere would be considered an attack by the USSR on the United
 At the same time, United States troops were sent to Florida to prepare for invading Cuba, and air units were alerted . At the time, the U.S. was preparing for invasion .
 American vessels blockaded Cuba with orders to search all suspicious-looking Soviet ships and turn back any that carried offensive weapons . U.S. ships were ordered to search suspicious looking Soviet ships . Cuban ships were turned back .
 For several tense days Soviet vessels en route to Cuba avoided the quarantine zone . Khrushchev and Kennedy discussed the issue through diplomatic channels .
 Khrushchev, realizing his weak military position, agreed to Kennedy’s demands to remove all missiles . Kennedy's demands were made on October 26 in which he agreed to remove missile removal .
 The following day, before the United States had responded to the first note, Khrushchev sent another, trying to negotiate other terms . The next day, the U.S. sent another attempt to negotiate terms . It was not the first time the Soviet Union had responded .