 Having an ally 90 miles off the coast of the Union States and in a position to influence the western Caribbean was a great advantage . For the Soviet government, having an ally with the U.S. government was a huge advantage .
 In 1962, Khrushchev and Castro negotiated the placement of Soviet nuclear missiles that could reach targets in the U.S. Almost as soon as their launch could be detected, the missiles could hit targets . The missiles were placed in the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 These missiles not only could have altered the Cold War balance of power, they also could have become a great propaganda coup . These missiles could have been a great publicity stunt for the Soviets .
 Historians still debate the exact motives for stationing the missiles on Cuba . Historians are still debating the exact motive for the decision .
 Khrushchev had not been impressed with Kennedy's statesmanship at their meeting in Vienna the previous year . What sort of United States reaction the Soviet government expected is unclear .
 The events of October 1962 brought the world as close to the brink of nuclear war as it has ever been . When the U.S. government discovered the missiles, the world was close to nuclear war .
 As these documents show, it was difficult for the Kennedy administration to determine a course of action that would neither show weakness nor lead to war . The Kennedy administration was trying to find a way to avoid war .
 First, the government had to assess the threat, and then the President had to inform the American people of that threat and of the U.S. response .
 The first document is a transcript of a meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The meeting was held in the early stages of the conflict in Iraq .
 The second is President Kennedy's address to the American people, broadcast live on television on October 22, 1962 . This is the first time President Kennedy has addressed the nation's citizens .
 "What I tried to do was develop a little package that meets the action requirement of the paragraph I read," he says .
 President Kennedy's Address to the American people, October 22, 1962 . Kennedy: "Good evening, fellow citizens. Good evening, my fellow citizens."
 The purposes of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere . The purposes are to provide nuclear strike capabilities against Western Hemisphere, the U.S. says .
 Government feels obliged to report this new crisis to you in fullest detail . And now having confirmed and completed our evaluation of the evidence and our decision on a course of action, we feel obliged to do so .
 Each missile is capable of striking Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city in the southeastern part of the United States, in Central America, or in the Caribbean area .
 This is an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas, the U.S. president says . The U.N. Security Council has passed a resolution condemning the Cuban regime's actions .
 U.S. President Barack Obama calls Russia's build-up of missiles a 'provocative and unjustifiable' move .