 Cold War tensions heightened to almost world war status as the United States confronted its nemesis the Soviet Union to negotiate the fate of Cuba . Cuba was now armed with missiles capable of delivering nuclear warheads to targets thousands of miles away .
 Fidel Castro's actions overshadowed by those of U.S. President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . Castro's intentions overshadowed those of those of the two world leaders .
 Kennedy mentions Castro's pilot in the first chapter of the book saying that the pilot’s “boastful and intoxicated way [of talking] about the nuclear missiles”2 led American intelligence operatives in Cuba to the discovery of the missiles .
 Kennedy mentions Castro directly twice in strategies discussed at President Kennedy’s specially formed Executive Committee meetings . Kennedy also mentions Castro three times in the meetings .
 Kennedy administration chose the former in that Soviet supplies to Cuba were stopped by a naval blockade, but never dealt with Cuba directly . The Kennedy administration never dealt directly with Cuba .
 Cuba and the Castro regime were never considered to be a major part of the crisis from the U.S. perspective . The Castro regime was never considered a major problem from the American perspective .
 Laffey and Weldes point to the ExComm transcripts for answers to this lack of a Cuban perspective . The transcripts show the Cuban perspective of the Cuban government .
 In their analysis they state that the U.S. government did not believe Cuba to be important to the crisis because they believed Cuba was a “Soviet-puppet state,”5 implying that the Castro regime was perfectly in line with the ideologies and aspirations of the Soviet Union
 The placement of missiles into Cuba was intended to be more like aid to a fellow communist nation than acts of a superior nation on its subordinate . Khrushchev states that the Soviet government had little influence in the outcome of the Cuban Revolution .
 Historians such as Tomas Acosta and Carlos Lechuga say Cuba turned to the Soviet Union for ‘mutual defense’ Cuba was betrayed by Soviet Union in negotiations . Historians say Cuba was betraying Soviet Union by turning to Soviet Union .
 I will cite Soviet material when it is necessary for understanding the ideological and tactical differences between Cuba and the Soviet Union . The Cuban government has been criticized by some of the world's most prominent figures .
 On January 1, 1959, Castro had sent Fulgencio Batista into exile . Castro had been able to bring the entire island of Cuba under his control . Castro was able to send the Batista to exile .
 A New History confirmed this theory by citing a passage from Khrushchev’s memoir . The book was published in 1964, and Khushchev's memoir is published in Moscow .
 Irving Louis Horowitz outlined five reasons why Castro did not openly embrace Marxist-Leninist ideology at the time of the Cuban revolution .
 The first point Horowitz made was that Soviet style communism would “elevate Havana to a supreme place in the bureaucratic hierarchy”16 and would thus take away some of Castro’s rural charisma, he said .
 The emphasis of Marxist doctrine on industry and the influence of Castro on the success of the Cuban Revolution . This point is well taken considering the emphasis on Marxist doctrine .
 Being forced to depend on a country literally on the other side of the world for political and material sustenance would place the success of the Revolution in jeopardy . The Revolution is not going to be able to rely on the support of the U.S. for political, material and political reasons
 The adoption of orthodox communism would cause Cuba to be politically and economically isolated from the rest of Latin America, Horowitz says .
 The final point Horowitz posed was that the adoption of orthodox communist doctrine would crush the “revolutionary will” of the Cuban people . The adoption of communist doctrine will crush the people, he said .
 This point is the strongest element of Horowitz’s argument of the historical context of the Cuban Revolution, he says .
 In order to fully understand the impact of this element in Horowitz’s theory, it is necessary to analyze the relationship between Cuba and the U.S. in the first half of the twentieth century .
 In 1895, the Cuban people revolted against Spain, their imperial homeland . The Cuban people revolt against Spain in 1895 . The revolution was the first of its kind .
 The United States intervened in Cuba’s defense and went to war against Spain in 1898 . The U.S. intervened in the defense of Cuba and went on to go to war with Spain against Spain .
 With Spain defeated, the U.S. occupied Cuba and assisted in its reconstruction as an independent nation . Cuba was declared an independent country in 1945 .
 Mary Speck analyzes the efficacy of two political stipulations placed on Cuba from the U.S. The Platt Amendment and the Reciprocity Treaty . Speck: The Politics of Cuban Trade, 1902-1933 .
 President William McKinley wanted to create “singular ties of intimacy” between the U.S. and Cuba . Speck explains the rationale for these two stipulations by quoting President McKinley and his desire for creating ‘singular relations”
 Reciprocity Act promised Cuba that the U.S. would maintain low tariff rates . The act also promised the United States that low tariffs would be maintained on Cuba . Cuba's trade embargo between Cuba and Cuba was lifted .
 Speck does indicate that in some instances the U.S. influence in Cuba did have positive effects on the Cuban infrastructure . Speck did indicate however that some of the positive effects were positive .
 Speck identifies the Cuban Portland Cement Corporation as a positive example of U.S.-Cuban cooperation by indicating that this company was capable of producing one thousand barrels of cement a day . Speck identified the company as an example of cooperation between the two countries .
 The effects of these two acts of legislation served to frustrate Cuba’s attempts at resisting U.S. incursion in their domestic affairs . They triggered economic and political failures in the country and made the nation ripe for the Cuban Revolution of 1959 .
 U.S. economic domination in Cuba intensified during the 1950s right before the Cuban Revolution . The Cuban Revolution was the result of the Cuban revolution .
 Philip W Bonsal analyzed the American influence on the industries in Cuba from the 1940s to the late 1950s . In his article entitled “Castro, Cuba, and the U.S. and the United States” Philip W
 This included the telephone, electric light and power companies as well as two of the three crude oil refineries . This included two refineries owned by an Anglo-Dutch conglomerate .
 The retail merchandising and tourist markets were also dominated by American capitalists . Bonsal adds that the American capitalists dominated the American tourist markets .
 Although Cuba was declared independent in the final years of the nineteenth century, Cuba was still dominated by the United States . These two analyses demonstrate that although Cuba was formally declared independent, this time, Cuba still dominated .
 The Cuban Revolution was meant to liberate the people from the economic dependence that the U.S. had imposed upon them . A half century later, the Cuban Revolution is meant to free the Cuban people from economic dependence .
 The notion that the Cuban people would eagerly accept a system in which they were wholly dependent, both ideologically and materially, on the USSR is contradictory to the Cuban spirit of liberty . The Cuban people are not willing to be dependent on the Soviet Union, the author says .
 Horowitz explained that Cuban-style communism formed naturally in a way that was contrary to Marxist-Leninist doctrine . In the same collection of articles, Horowitz also explained that the Cuban style of communism is contrary to traditional Marxist doctrine .
 Horowitz pointed out that at the time of the Cuban Revolution; there was no proletariat, no urban working class to unite together against the capitalist oppressors . Horowitz said that in Cuba, the working class did not unite together to unite against the capitalists .
 In Marxist-Leninist doctrine, the proletariat is vitally important to a successful communist revolution . The proletariat is important to the success of a communist revolution, Marxists say .
 Cuba could not survive on its own industrial strength and would require imported industrial goods for sustenance and therefore could not become self-sufficient . As a result of this, Cuba would not be able to survive without imports . Cuba would need to rely heavily on imports to survive .
 The guerrilla is the driving force of social revolution in lieu of the proletariat . Therefore in the doctrine of Cuban communism, the guerrilla is a driving force . The guerrilla drives the revolution in Cuba .
 We must come to the inevitable conclusion that the guerrilla fighter is a social reformer . He takes up arms responding to the angry protest of the people against their oppressors . The guerrilla fighter fights to change the social system that keeps all his unarmed brothers in ignominy .
 "He launches himself against the conditions of the reigning institutions at a particular moment," he said . "He launched himself against [the] conditions of these institutions," he added .
 Castro had vaguely defined himself as a ‘humanist’ early in his political career . After April 1959 he began to exhibit signs of moving rapidly to the left culminating in a speech given in December, 1961 in which he formally declared himself a communist . Castro declared himself communist in December
 Khrushchev indicated that this was due to the fact that on Castro’s visit to the U.S. he visited with Vice President Richard Nixon instead of President Dwight Eisenhower . The incident occurred during Castro's trip to the United States .
 The structure of Cuban issues to be resolved with the United States had the potential to produce antagonism between the two nations . While it is true that if Eisenhower had received Castro instead of Nixon, Castro may not have immediately become a communist .
 The “human will” of the Cuban Revolution was to rid itself of domination by the United States . Anti-U.S. sentiments already existed in Cuba without Castro’s communist transformation .
 CIA chief Allen Dulles wrote to Eisenhower that “Communists and other extreme radicals appear to have penetrated the Castro movement’s movement . Gott cites a memo written to Eisenhower by Dulles during the Cuban Revolution .
 Khrushchev’s speculation this mutual animosity and mistrust would prevent Cuba from becoming a “moderately friendly” nation to the U.S. Contrary to Sergei Khrushche”s speculation, Cuba has never been friendly to the United States .
 We began in the university to make the first contacts with the Communist Manifesto, with the works of Marx and Engels and Lenin . We began to make contact with Marx, Engels, Lenin and Lenin.
 'Many of the things that we have done in the revolution are not things we invented, not in the least,' he says . "I can say an honest confession, that many of the . things that I can say are not . things I have done, not the least," he
 When we left the university, in my particular case, I was really greatly influenced . Not that I will say I was in the least a Marxist-Leninist, he says .
 In declaring himself a Communist, Castro stated that he advocated the redistribution of wealth in his nation . Castro said he wanted to redistribute wealth in Cuba .
 These acts of legislation expropriated land and industries in Cuba placing them in the hands of the Castro regime . The acts of law expropriation of land and industry in Cuba placed them in Cuba's hands .
 Fidel Castro’s formal declaration as a Communist and a Marxist-Leninist resulted in the U.S. attempting to isolate the island economically and politically . American companies with economic interest in Cuba issued 8,816 certified claims against Cuba totaling to $1,799,548,
 Castro lived in fear of the United States believing that the U.S. would invade his island and crush his regime . Castro lived fear of invasion and invasion of Cuba .
 The presence of a Communist dictatorship in the western hemisphere alarmed the United States . Containment of Communist countries was a primary element of U.S. Cold War strategy .
 1,500 CIA-trained Cuban mercenaries attempted to invade the island in April of 1962 in an event known as the Bay of Pigs Invasion . The event was known to the Cuban people as Playa Giron invasion .
 He feared that the U.S. would mount another invasion and succeed in removing him from power . He also feared that he would be forced to step down as dictator .
 In order to fully dismantle Cuba’s communist regime, the U.S. would have to invade and occupy Cuba . The United States would need to invade Cuba to dismantle the communist regime .
 CIA authorized Operation Patty shortly after publication of “Cuba and Communism in the Hemisphere” Operation Patty . Operation Patty was the CIA's response to the publication of the book "Cuba"
 This was a multifaceted plot designed to kill both Castro and his brother Raul while creating a justification for U.S. military intervention in Cuba . The plot was intended to kill Castro and Raul and create justification for military intervention .
 This plan was scheduled to be executed July 26, 1961 during a nationwide celebration of the July 26th Movement . The plan was set to be carried out in honor of the movement . It was scheduled for execution on July 26 .
 At this celebration, Castro and his brother Raul would be targeted for assassination as they gave their speeches at functions in Havana and Santiago de Cuba respectively . Castro and Raul Castro would be assassinated at this celebration .
 The assassination of Raul Castro would take place from one of the houses close to the stadium where Raul was scheduled to give a speech . The assassination would be carried out from a house close to Raul's stadium where he gave a speech.
 A .30 caliber machine gun would be assembled in this house and would scope out Raul while he was giving his speech . A machine gun was assembled in the house to shoot Raul .
 Four men armed with grenades would enter the crowd and confirm the death of Raul . Shortly after the gunshot, four armed men entered the crowd with grenades .
 After the assassination of Raul Castro took place, mortar attacks were scheduled to go off at the Hermanos Diaz oil refinery and near the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo .
 The plan for assassinating Fidel Castro involved placing an 82 millimeter mortar shell in the Plaza of the Revolution in Havana near the stage where Castro was scheduled to give a speech .
 The size of the shell was intentionally designed to kill as many people as possible . It was intended to target specifically Castro and other subordinate members of the Cuban Revolutionary Government .
 After the assassination of Fidel Castro, assassins and saboteurs already positioned in the Cuban provinces of Camaguey and Las Villas would mortar buildings of communist party members and destroy bridges to impede Cuba’s ability to defend itself .
 Operation Patty was authorized in the final days of June in 1961 but not executed due to the fact that Cuban security forces who had apparently infiltrated the CIA intercepted information about the plan .
 The Cuban government allowed the plan to mature to the point where it knew that all parties were identified . It then canceled all events scheduled for July 26 and subsequently arrested all the operatives .
 The U.S. government continued to develop plots to assassinate Castro using various methods such as exploding and poisoned cigars . The Cuban government formally condemned the action on August 12, 1961 .
 The U.S. government planned to employ the Mafia as a delivery system for these devices . The Mafia had connections with the island due to their connections to the island .
 Richard Bissell, a high ranking operative in the CIA Cuba Project later stated, “I hoped the Mafia would achieve success.” Bissell said . Bissell was a high-ranking CIA operative in Cuba .
 The first stage of the operation was entitled ‘Action’ and was scheduled to go into effect in March 1962 . The operation was set to go ahead in March .
 The purpose of action was to “start moving in’ that is to say, infiltrate Cuba and prepare for the uprising. The purpose was to start moving in, ‘to prepare for an uprising.’ ‘I’m going to ‘move in�
 The second stage of the operation was entitled ‘Build-Up’ and was scheduled to take place in April-July 1962 . The second phase of the project was called “Build-up’
 The third stage of the operation was entitled “Readiness” and served as a deadline for strategy . The third round of the mission was entitled "Readiness" and served a deadline .
 Stage four, entitled “Resistance, involved placing the guerrilla fighters in position in Cuba . Stage four was placed in place in Cuba. Stage four is entitled ‘Resistance’ and ‘resistance”
 The fifth stage of Operation Mongoose was entitled “Revolt’s” and authorized the strategically placed guerrilla fighters to begin their disturbances against the communist regime . The fifth and sixth stage of the operation was entitled Revolt .
 CINCLANT60 memorandum dated 25 September 1962 outlined three different contingency plans for intervention in Cuba .
 Castro countered these acts of aggression by formulating his own military schemes . During the same time Castro was formulating military schemes to counter these attacks . Castro's military schemes were created by Castro himself .
 Castro created a covert military plan known as Operation Boomerang . The plan was part of the Castro administration's covert military operation . Castro created the plan as part of a plan to counterbalance the U.S. government .
 Under the conditions of Operation Boomerang, Castro would authorize sympathetic Cubans living in the United States to attack military and civilian targets in the most populous American cities if the U.S. ever invaded Cuba . The conditions of the operation would include attacks on military, civilian targets .
 Castro regime also sought military aid from the Soviet Union during this time . Castro regime sought military assistance from the Soviets during this period .
 Cuban government signed two military agreements with the Soviet government for aid and military supplies . In the latter half of 1961, Cuba signed two agreements with Russia for military aid .
 The first agreement, ratified on August 4, 1961, granted the Cuban government $48. million in military aid and equipment . The agreement was ratified in 1961 and signed in 1961 .
 The second agreement, ratified on September 30, 1961 promised Cuba $149.55 million in military aid and equipment . The agreement was ratified in 1961, and Cuba was promised $149 million .
 Cuba was obligated to repay only $67.55 million of this aid over a ten year period at two percent interest . Cuba was forced to repay the money over the next ten years at two per cent interest .
 The third military agreement signed in July of 1962 was Operation Anadyr66 in which nuclear missiles were transported from the Soviet Union to Cuba . The agreement was part of a larger military agreement between the U.S. and Cuba .
 From 1961-1962 the Soviet Union and other Communist bloc nations also sent economic aid to Cuba amounting to the sum of $570 million dollars . The Soviet Union sent $570million dollars to Cuba in the same period .
 Russia also placed a quota for 3 million tons of sugar to be imported from Cuba in 1962 . Khrushchev was also well aware of American aggression against Cuba that he had to protect his communist ally .
 He began to authorize plans to put missiles and nuclear weapons into Cuba in order to deter the U.S. Therefore he began to . Therefore, he began . Plans to . put missiles, nuclear weapons in Cuba in . order to . deter the United States . Therefore he . began to
 We wanted Cuba to remain revolutionary and socialist, and we knew Cuba needed help in order to do so . We had no other way of helping them meet the American threat except to install our missiles on the island, he says .
 Some historians have suggested that protecting Cuba from American aggression may not have been the only reason behind placing the missiles in Cuba .
 Other reasons included repairing the missile gap between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, bettering relations with Latin America, and regaining prestige in China .
 A Concise History that a schism occurred occurred between China and the Soviet Union in terms of Marxist doctrine . A concise History . that a . schism . occurred between the . Soviet Union and China in terms . of Marxist . doctrine . The Soviet Union was the only country to
 Munton and Welch indicated that Chinese communist leaders questioned Khrushchev’s orthodoxy in Marxist ideology and his resolve against the spread of capitalism .
 Munton and Welch theorized that a possible reason for Khrushchev putting the missiles in Cuba was to prove the resolve of the Soviet Union against capitalist aggression . The Chinese communists may have wanted to gain prestige in the eyes of the Chinese communists .
 If this was his intention it dramatically backfired at the end of the crisis, it would have backfired .
 Khrushchev authorized the sending of missiles to Cuba under the guise of protecting Cuba from another American invasion . Other possible ulterior motives aside, Khrushchev approved of the move .
 Khrushchev was correct in predicting this as stated by previous evidence . He was right in predicting it as stated previous evidence. Khrushche was correct .
 If what they really had was only fifty or sixty missiles, there is no doubt that the presence of those forty two missiles significantly improved the situation . "It almost doubled the effective delivery systems," says Peter Bergen .
 Hugh Thomas in his authoritative book, Cuba, indicated that although the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba shifted the balance of nuclear power to the Soviets’ favor, Soviet military strength still floundered compared to that of the United States . In the early 1960s, the Russian nuclear arsenal
 The United States still was superior to the Soviet Union and any nuclear exchange would annihilate Cuba . Russia sent very powerful elements of its nuclear arsenal to Cuba and such actions did shift the balance of nuclear power into their favor .
 On May 29, 1962 a group of Soviet nuclear scientists disguised as agricultural technicians arrived at Cuba with the preliminary plans for placing missile launchers in Cuba . The group arrived with preliminary plans to place missile launchers .
 In this preliminary stage of placing nuclear missiles into Cuba, Castro and his brother Raul met with these Soviet representatives in Havana . The Cuban government met with the Soviet Union in Havana, Cuba .
 After offering information I mentioned they asked what I thought should be done to avoid the attack . After offering the information, they asked for advice on how to deal with the situation .
 Khrushchev is reported to have responded, “Don’t worry, I’ll grab Kennedy by the balls and make him negotiate.” He reportedly said, ‘Don't worry,” “I’m grabbing Kennedy’s balls
 Acosta's account of Khrushchev’s actions debunked the theory that Premier Khrushchev was innocently pushed into placing the missiles into Cuba as a deterrent .
 In order to fully understand the differences of interpretations it is necessary to understand the life and career of Acosta . Acosta's career has been described as one of the world's most influential figures .
 The latter joined the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces in 1961 . He was mobilized in Cuba during the crisis as a political instructor of Military Unit 2562 .
 Acosta had access to materials from the Cuban perspective that point out the ‘other side’ of Sergei Khrushchev’s naïve account of his father’�s actions during the crisis . Acosta: "The other side of the story"
 Khrushchev sent Aleksandr Alekseev, the recently appointed Soviet Ambassador to Cuba, to Havana with a draft of the agreement that would place nuclear weapons on Cuban soil . In August 1962, the agreement was signed by the Soviet Union in Havana .
 Castro vehemently disagreed with the text of the agreement because he believed that this agreement should appear as a military agreement for mutual defense . Castro vehemently did not agree with the agreement . Castro said he believed this agreement would appear as military agreement .
 Castro sent Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones to Moscow carrying their revised version of the agreement as a counterproposal . Later on that month, Castro sent the rebels back to Moscow with their revised proposal . Castro sent a revised proposal to Moscow .
 Khrushchev agreed to the proposed revisions but insisted that the agreement not be published until after the missiles had been operational . The agreement was agreed to be published after the missile tests had been completed .
 This was the first of several important differences of opinion between the Soviets and the Cubans . The Soviets and Cubans were at odds with each other during the war .
 Khrushchev was confident that the missiles would be hidden from sight . Che and Aragones both believed that they would be discovered long before they were operational .
 After this meeting, the Soviet Union began to send an entire arsenal of nuclear weaponry to Cuba . The Soviet Union sent the entire arsenal to Cuba after this meeting .
 Thirty six R-12 MRBM missiles were sent in three regiments of twelve to the island . Thirty six of the missiles were deployed in three regiments of twelve .
 A single warhead possessed between fifteen to seventy times the destructive power as the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima . In simpler terms, a single nuclear bomb possessed between 15 to 70 times the power of the bomb dropped at Hiroshima .
 The warheads for the R-14 missiles were just as destructive as the warheads designed for R-12 . The warheads were designed to be more destructive than the ones for the 12 missiles .
 The actual missiles never reached Cuba, however, several of the warheads arrived at Cuba’s port of La Isabela on the Soviet ship Aleksandrovsk without American detection .
 Had the missiles were installed in Cuba, the targeting range would have been such that virtually any city in the continental U.S. would be a target . Most Canadian and Latin American cities would also have been a target as well .
 The Soviet Union also provided Cuba with an arsenal of conventional weapons . Cuba also received a range of weapons from the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 Four reinforced motorized rifle regiments amounting to 14,000 soldiers were deployed with a wide variety of equipment at their disposal including tanks and antiaircraft artillery . A total of 14,500 soldiers were involved in the operation .
 Six Luna missiles equipped with 2 megaton nuclear warheads were also sent to Cuba . Six Luna missile missiles were also equipped with two megaton warheads .
 Luna missile was a short range missile with only a range of forty miles . The Luna missile had a forty-mile range of range .
 Khrushchev authorized the Luna missiles to carry nuclear missiles in September 1962 . Every nuclear warhead required specific conditions for storage as General Beloborodov explained .
 "If it had only been a matter of our defense, we would not have accepted the missiles," says Putin . Putin: If it had been only matter of defense, Russia would not accept the missiles .
 The Cuban Revolution was very zealous about the image of the Revolution in the rest of Latin America . This in our opinion had a high political cost for our country’s image, he says .
 This statement contradicts statements he had made in 1962 which indicate possible hindsight and political flip-flopping to save face . This statement contradicted the statements he made in . 1962 .
 This is seen throughout interpretations of this event done by Cuban historians . Cuban historians have interpreted the events in Cuba .
 The storage of the missiles proved to be a tactical error in procedure . The storage for the missiles was a tactical mistake in procedure.
 We foresaw the possibility that U.S. intelligence might discover us, the author says . "We foresaw, naturally, that United States intelligence might find us," she says .
 On October 14 they photographed white slabs of concrete in New York City .
 Some of our comrades. . thought that the missiles could be placed in such a way that they could not be distinguished from palm trees, but that was a stupid conclusion . The missile sights had to be prepared, cables, hung, launching pads built, everything was complicated .
 If we had known what those missiles were like and if the question of camouflage had been posed to us, it would have been easy to decide what to do . In the country where there are so many construction projects, so many big chicken barns and all sorts of things, would have
 On October 22, 1962, a U-2 spy plane flying overhead photographed missile silos being erected in San Cristobal, Cuba . The crisis began when the U.2 plane flew overhead and photographed silos .
 The commander of the base at Guantanamo Bay has ordered all civilian residents to evacuate . This is evidenced by the order given by the commander . All civilian residents must now evacuate .
 President Kennedy arranged an Executive Committee on October 16, known as ExComm . ExComm consisted of 25 members including himself, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara .
 Members of ExComm developed a series of options or "tracks" to choose in order to resolve the crisis . ExComm members of the U.S. House of Representatives met in Washington, D.C. to discuss the situation .
 The Administration authorized a military blockade around Cuba consisting of sixteen destroyers, three cruisers, an anti-submarine aircraft carrier, and six utility ships . The blockade was eventually authorized by the Administration .
 These vessels were given orders to disable, instead of sink any hostile Russian vessel heading to Cuba . Russia was given instructions to disable the vessels, rather than sink them, in Cuba .
 Castro began reorganizing his political and military structure . Castro began to reorganize his political, military structure in the early 1950s . Castro was in charge of the Cuban government .
 Each of these divisions had their own military presence and political jurisdiction . Each division had its own political presence and jurisdiction .
 Castro appointed his brother Raul as commander of the Eastern province . Castro appointed Raul to head the province of Eastern Province .
 Commander Juan Almeida was named the leader of the central province . Che Guevara assumed command of the western province in Pinar del Rio . Commander Juan almeida became the leader in central province of central province, while Che Che took control of western province .
 Castro remained in Havana to maintain control of Cuba from its capital . Castro remained behind Cuba's capital in order to keep control of the Cuban government .
 At 5:40m. the Prime Minister, Commander in Chief of the armed forces, ordered the entire Revolutionary Armed Forces to be placed on combat alert status . This is only in cases of critical danger . The Prime Minister ordered the military to place the Revolutionary armed forces on alert .
 "This measure was taken in response to the reports coming from the United States, and to the mobilization of United States military forces against our country," says President Obama .
 The nation has awakened on a war footing, ready to repel any attack . Castro met with his chief of intelligence to calculate how many ships and soldiers the Americans would use in order to mount an invasion .
 Quinones also noted that if the 82nd Airborne Division were ever activated, the first stage of the invasion would take place five or six hours after . To combat the possibility of air raids, Castro placed reserve batteries of antiaircraft artillery on outskirts of Havana .
 The DP was assembled into various combat battalions and civil defense units including health and sanitation brigades, firefighters, and repair units in order to assist the war effort .
 "I consider aggression to be almost imminent" within the next twenty-four to seventy-two hours, he says . The situation is "almost imminent"
 The Soviet Union must never allow circumstances in which the imperialists might carry out a nuclear first strike against it . The dangers of this aggressive policy for humanity are so great that after such an event the Soviet Union should never allow such a strike .
 Tomas Diez Acosta said theories suggesting that Castro's letter pushed Khrushchev to independently broker for a solution to the conflict “lack any objective basis” and noted that the United States and the Soviet Union were already negotiating for peace before Castro’s letter of October
 The content of the letter and the reaction of Premier Khrushchev as told by his own son also emphasize the notion that it would not be prudent to include the Cuban people in the negotiations due to the ambitions of their leader . Although this is true, it is also true, the content
 Khrushchev may have let the Cuban people in on negotiations . Had this letter not been sent, or had it contained a different message, it may have been a positive signal .
 Historian Carlos Lechuga attempted to clarify Castro’s intentions in his book entitled In the Eye of the Storm . The Cuban historian has adopted a revisionist stance .
 Castro dictated his letter to Soviet First Secretary Monakhov who evidently did not speak Spanish well . Lechuga explained that Castro dictated the letter to Monakhova who did not understand Spanish .
 Lechuga’s revisionist theory indicates that the real nature of Castro's message was lost in translation . Lechug: Castro's real nature is that the message was not translated .
 If Castro’s message had been misunderstood, he would have sent a follow up message that clarified his intentions . Castro would have been more careful to clarify his intentions, he said .
 Castro doubted that Khrushchev fully understood the meaning of his message, but the content of those messages only serve to strengthen the meaning . Castro did send follow up messages to clarify his intentions, but those follow-up messages only strengthen the message .
 You based on the alarming news you say you have received from Cuba and, lastly, my cable of 27 October. You based this based on . You based it on the . alarming . news you . say you . have received . from Cuba . You say they say they have received
 I do not know what news you may have received; I am simply referring to the message I sent you the night of the 26 October, received by you on the 27th. I do know what . I am not sure what news I . might have received, I simply refer to
 "What we did in the face of events, Comrade Khrushchev, was prepare ourselves to fight," says Vladimir Putin . "We prepared ourselves for the fight, and we prepared ourselves," says Putin .
 The eyes of many men, Soviet and Cuban, who were willing to die with supreme dignity, wept as they learned of the decision to withdraw the weapons . "The eyes of [Cuban] men, [Cubans] wept," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Cuban people were prepared to fulfill their duty to the patria and humanity . This excerpt is taken directly from Castro’s most recent biography .
 Had Castro been misquoted he would have stated so either in the letter or in the interviews conducted for this biography . Castro would have said that in the letters or interviews he had been interviewed by the author .
 Khrushchev believed that they were more of a deterrent instead of weapons to be fired, as he would explain to his colleagues . The weapons were designed to be a deterrent, not weapons, according to the former Soviet leader . The first time the weapons were fired was in the 1960s
 On October 27, the Cuban military began to open fire on American planes, as per Castro’s order . The Cuban military has opened fire on U.S. planes since October 27 .
 In an act of solidarity, the Soviets began to fire their antiaircraft artillery as well . The Soviets began firing their anti-aircraft artillery as also . The incident occurred in the early hours of September 4 .
 Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 spy plane was shot down at 10:17 A.M. over Banes in Eastern Cuba . As a result of the shooting, Major Anderson's plane was downed .
 As per the agreement, President Kennedy publically proclaimed that the United States would never invade Cuba . President Kennedy made the announcement in 1961 . The agreement was made with the promise that the U.S. would never attack Cuba .
 Castro learned of the exchange through the international press instead of Khrushchev himself . In fact, according to his most recent biography, Castro learned about the exchange via the press rather than himself .
 "When the news reached us . . . It produced great indignation, because we had felt that we had become some kind of bargaining chip," she says .
 "Not only was this decision taken without consulting us, several steps were taken without informing us. Not only this was taken without consultation, but also several steps taken without telling us," said the mayor . "We are not happy with this decision," he said .
 The first point of Castro’s plan was that the economic embargo placed on Cuba by the United States in 1960 must be lifted . Castro's plan was to lift the U.S. economic embargo .
 The second point in Castro’s plan was that the United States must end all subversive activities designed to remove the communist regime from power . The U.S. must also end all activities that undermine the Castro regime, Castro said .
 Castro defined these activities as dropping explosives by air, sea and land vehicles, the organization of invasions by Cuban exiles or others, and acts of espionage and sabotage . Castro defined the activities as the dropping of explosives by . air and sea vehicles .
 The third point of Castro’s plan was that the acts of piracy undertaken by the U.S. and Puerto Rico were to cease . Puerto Rico and the United States were to stop piracy .
 Che Guevara was commander of the garrison at Pinar del Rio when he received the news . He was inspecting his military units when he was informed of the death .
 Cuban citizens began to write letters to the Soviet Embassy in disgust . Castro made a declaration to the Cuban people saying, “It is a shameful policy to hide the most serious issues from public opinion.”
 Throughout the month of November 1962, the Chinese Embassy in Havana organized large demonstrations in solidarity for the Cuban people . The Chinese Embassy organized demonstrations in support of Cuban people in November 1962 .
 Khrushchev believed the crisis was a victory for both the Soviet Union and Cuba . During this time Cubans began to align with the Chinese communists which took prestige away from the Soviet communists . In spite of all these events and sentiments,
 "We consider that we have achieved a victory for Cuba and for the Soviet Union," says President Vladimir Putin . "The objectives we had when we placed them there have been achieved," says Putin .
 Rodriguez replied, “That's just the problem, Nikita, he's not your son. He’s not a son.” Rodriguez replied to Nikita .
 Castro wanted Cuba to enter the Warsaw Pact and be militarily aligned with the Soviet Union . Castro wanted to join forces with the USSR . Castro was president of Cuba in the early 1960s .
 As a direct result of the crisis, Soviet influence in Latin America suffered dramatically, Che Guevara says . As a result of this, the Soviet influence suffered, he says . The crisis was a 'direct result' of the collapse of Soviet influence on Latin America .
 The Soviets’ prestige suffered and allowed China to move in and win the hearts and minds of Cuban citizens . China’s prestige suffered in Cuba, allowing it to win the minds of its citizens .
 Khrushchev succeeded in protecting Cuba from an American invasion . He did so in a way that indicated he thought things through or prepared backup plans for various contingencies .
 Cuban historians Gott, Thomas, Acosta and Lechuga demonstrate this very well in their interpretations of the event . The event took place in 1959 in Cuba .
 Castro's letter from Castro to Khrushchev dated October 26, 1959 . The letter prompted the acceleration of Soviet-U.S. negotiations after the letter .
 This is the strongest element of Sergei Khrushchev’s interpretation of this event . His weakest point is his overwhelming naivety concerning the relationship between the United States and Cuba, he writes .
 Soviet historians' strongest point is the Cuban historians' weakest point, says historian . "It has become my interpretation that the Soviet historians’ strongest point" is that of Soviet historians .
 Acosta and Lechuga attempt to clarify Castro’s meaning and intentions in his letter to Khrushchev of October 26 by revisionist means .
 Castro: These arguments are poorly crafted and do not reflect the views of the parties concerned, namely Castro . Castro: "These arguments, however, are well crafted and don't reflect the view of Castro"
 Castro viewed the missiles as a possible offensive weapon to rid Cuba of the looming U.S. presence that had threatened his government early in his regime . It is my interpretation that instead of viewing the missiles and warheads as a deterrent, in the way Khrushchev and other members of the
 Castro’s choice to view the missiles as an offensive weapon destroyed any possibility for Soviet military aid in the future as demonstrated by the repeated Soviet refusal to add Cuba to the Warsaw Pact . Castro chose to view missiles as a weapon that could be used against Soviet forces .
 The Soviet leadership was aware of the volatile tendencies that existed between the U.S. and Cuba . Adding Cuba as an integral part of its collective would only heighten Cold War tensions to an unnecessary level .
 The strain on Cuban-Soviet relations after the crisis only proved to widen the gap between Cuba and the Soviet Union . The strain was the result of the crisis in the Soviet-Cuba relations .
 Castro refused to sign the Arms Control Treaties of October-November 1963, acts of legislation that Khrushchev had brokered with Kennedy during the crisis . This is demonstrated by Castro’s refusal to sign those treaties .
 James G Blight and Phillip P Brenner argue that this statement was a declaration that Russia would never “Sovietize” Cuba . They argue that the statement was intended to protect the Cuban people from Sovietization .
 The lack of ideological and tactical unity on the side of the Soviets and the Cubans nearly caused a chain reaction that engulfed the entire world in nuclear war . The United States' vague assumptions made by the U.S. about Cuba about Cuba nearly caused the chain reaction .