 Deal involving the trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. Jupiter missiles was central to the diplomatic settlement . Soviet missiles were then deployed in Turkey and Italy .
 The Defense Department refuses to acknowledge that the U.S. had missiles at Turkish or Italian bases .
 The Defense Department released document 2 in September 2013 it withheld references to Turkey from the section concerning Nikita Khrushchev's public message to President Kennedy on 27 October 1962 suggesting a trade of United States missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Archive pointed out that Khrushchev message's was in the public record, but the Pentagon maintained the deletions . In 2009 appeal letter to the Defense Department the Archive said the message was public .
 What Khrushchev said was ""Turkey,"" but on national security grounds the Pentagon would not declassify that word in a statement that was made to the world . The Pentagon refused to declassify the word, saying it was a secret .
 Another unusual declassification decision involves a late October 1962 Joint Chiefs of Staff report on possible military and political operations against Cuba in the event that the negotiations with Moscow broke down . The report was declassified by the U.S. Department of Defense .
 A version in Air Force records was declassified in full in full raises questions about the standards used by the Pentagon to excise the other version . Very similar proposals have been declassified before and the fact that a version of the Air Force version in .
 The ""Turkey"" deletion and the excised JCS report also raise questions about the extent to which Pentagon guidance influences declassification review practices at the National Archives .
 Nearly forty percent of the millions of pages of documents reviewed, most of which are over forty years old, have been withheld on national security grounds . According to a recent NDC report, nearly 40 percent of those pages have been redacted .
 The Pentagon exempted pages may include items that the Pentagon regards as ""national security information" but which are no more sensitive than the Cuba ""secrets"" of 1962 .
 The Chiefs had been itching for an air attack and an invasion . They may have believed a diplomatic failure would give the Pentagon a chance to take action .
 They proposed indirect measures, such as pressures from the Organization of American States, and direct actions, ranging from an air blockade to covert operations to an all-out invasion .
 Chiefs suggested a series of ""provocative"" actions to induce Fidel Castro ""to make a mistake"" and give the U.S. an excuse to launch an attack . The Chiefs suggested series of 'provocative' actions .
 Among the provocations were harassments such as destroyer patrols around Cuba and inciting riots on the ""Cuban side of the Guantanamo fence" by using base workers as ""agents"" and providing military aid to them .
 Jupiter intermediate range-ballistic missiles deployed at Cigli Air Base, Turkey during 1962 and early 1963 . Jupiter missiles were deployed at the base .
 The ""skirt"" or ""flower petal shelter"" that enclosed the bottom of the missile enabled the crew to work on the missile during bad weather . The shelter was designed to protect the crew from bad weather while working on a missile .
 Inside the circular insignia is a mushroom cloud, not visible in this picture . The mushroom cloud is visible in the image of the insignia .
 Such proposals may not be too surprising to readers familiar with the history of the period . Such proposals could not be surprising to many readers of the history .
 An infamous JCS proposal from earlier in 1962, ""Operation Northwoods,"" suggested a variety of wild pretexts, disregarded by civilian policymakers, for a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Northwoods included proposals for phony ""Cuban"" terrorist attacks in U.S. cities and a ""Remember the Maine"" attack on a United States ship . Declassified by Kennedy Assassination Review Board .
 JCS proposals are less than revelatory than actual covert operations against Cuba, including Operation Mongoose and assassination plots against Fidel Castro and other foreign leaders during the early 1960s .
 The 28 October report was released in its entirety earlier this year, in a release of Air Force records on the crisis .
 A different copy of the same JCS report has gone through parallel declassification reviews . The story is more complicated, however, because the report is different from a different copy .
 Second copy is in a special collection of Secretary/Deputy Secretary of Defense ""sensitive records"" on Cuba during 1961-1964 . The second copy of the book is in the special collection .
 It was first released earlier in 2013 in a massively excised form, before the unredacted version in Air Force records had become available .
 The National Security Archive filed an appeal with the National Archives . Challenging the excisions, the National security Archive filed a petition . The appeal was filed in response to the decision .
 Many of the proposed ""provocative"" actions were excised along with the covert operations proposals, such as assassinations . Many of these proposals have been excised .
 The full release of the report is good news; something is working right in the declassification system . The report was released by the U.S. government .
 Significant deletions in the other copy, however, should be a red flag that something is very wrong, says CNN.com .
 Why the separate reviews produced such greatly divergent results is unclear . It's unclear why the different reviews produced different results .
 Different Defense Department reviewers assigned to NARA's National Declassification Center reached totally opposite conclusions . Plainly, different Defense Dept. reviewers .
 One reviewer regarded the information as old hat and properly declassified the report . One reviewer said the information was old hat .
 The other overreacted seeing the report as full of supposedly sensitive secrets and concluded inappropriately that complete declassification would harm U.S. defense and foreign policy interests . The other said declassification of the report would harm the United States defense .
 NARA staffers may well have objected but under existing rules Defense Department reviewers do not have to listen to them . NARA staff may have objected to the decision, but NARA doesn't need to listen .
 Reviewers redact 50-year-old documents when nothing about them is sensitive . Yet it is a waste of resources and a sign of a seriously defective declassification system, reviewer says .
 This is an exceptional case only because it is possible to make direct comparisons . This is the first time it's possible to compare the two sides of the line .
 The excisions about the Jupiter missiles in Turkey provide further evidence of a serious problem . The Jupiter missiles were launched in Turkey in 2010 .
 In 2009, the Archive filed an appeal on Department of Defense excisions in several documents held in a special collection on the missile crisis among records of Secretary of Defense .
 One of the documents was a compilation prepared by Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric's military assistant, Col. Col. Gen. Col.-Col. Roswell . The documents include a compilation of documents compiled by Roswell's military aide Col. Gilpatri .
 Defense Department's decision reaffirmed many of the excisions made in 2009 . Archive's appeal letter pointed out the contradictions in the decision .
 It would be interesting to know whether the Pentagon consulted the State Department when it made that decision .
 The Defense Department followed the same procedure with other documents released in the same appeal decision . The decision was made after the Defense Department appealed the decision .
 These are undeniable examples of over-classification which suggests that the Defense Department's security reviewers follow guidelines that are obsolete and overly stringent . Defense Department security review guidelines are outdated, overly stringent, say experts .
 Recently the Defense Department's Inspector General conducted a review of over-classification . The report focused on small-bore issues such as the use and misuse of classification markings .
 In light of the pattern of Defense Department practices discussed in this and previous Dubious Secrets postings over-classification remains a problem . Over-classified information is still a problem in the U.S.
 This problem raises questions about the procedures used for reviewing Defense Department documents at the National Archives' National Declassification Center . This problem also raises questionsÂ over the proceduresÂ used to review Defense Department records .
 A very high 39 percent has been withheld for purported security reasons . 39 percent is withheld from the public for purported reasons .
 Some pages probably include Restricted Data withheld under the Atomic Energy Act and intelligence sources and methods authorized by the 1949 CIA Act . Some of the pages probably contain Restricted data and Formerly Restricted Information withheld .
 Many FRD withdrawals probably relate to historical nuclear weapons deployments long overtaken by events . Those are legal, if not always legitimate, secrets . FRD withdrawal withdrawals are legal and legitimate .
 CIA's parameters for what constitutes classified sources and methods are always shifting . The parameters of what constitute classified sources, methods, are constantly shifting .
 Some of the 39 percent may eventually be declassified once interagency coordination has occurred and provisions for declassification of fifty-year-old documents have been applied . The 39 percent of the documents will be released in the fall .
 One wonders whether the 39 percent includes records which only the Pentagon sees as ""national security information" and which are no more sensitive than the Cuba ""secrets"" of 1962 .
 It's time to consider new procedures to ensure that declassification decisions meet the rule of reason . As for Defense Department documents held in NARA collections, it's time for new procedures .
 A step forward would be to create a special NDC committee that makes joint decisions on appeals . The NDC has been criticized for being too secretive about appeals appeals .
 State Department officials could offer a reality check on declassifying the Jupiter missiles/Turkey nexus . The Defense Department says declassifying Jupiter missiles would harm U.S. relations with Turkey .