 Never mistake horsepower for staying power; A bike on the road is worth two in the shop . Maintenance is as much art as science as it is science .
 Director of National Intelligence James Clapper gives a keynote speech Tuesday morning . He also referenced the well-known book, “Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance,” by Robert Pirsig, by .
 One argument from the book is that quality, value and truth are what actually exist in the real world, Clapper said . Clapper: Quality, value, truth and truth exist in real world .
 DNI James Clapper see Zen and the Art of Intelligence, 14 . Download the Official GEOINT Symposium App GEOint 2012 powered by t t t 5 si a 41 Vi aGo th .
 TerraGo® Technologies geospatial collaboration software and GeoPDF® maps and imagery are among the most widely adopted COTS solutions . TerraGo is a COTS solution to produce, access, update and share geospacial information with anyone, anywhere .
 From virtually any mobile device, warfighters can access interactive, compact, portable and secure GeoPDF maps and imagery . Warfighters can easily make georeferenced updates using notes, audio, video, Web services or other information in connected or offline environments .
 Warfighters can collaborate peer-to-peer in the field or with Command to produce more relevant, current products that enable better decision making . GEOINT enables warfighters to collaborate with each other to produce relevant products .
 The GEOINT 2012 Havana Nights Welcome Reception took place in the Gaylord atrium’s Emerald Plaza and Wreckers Sports Bar . Havana Nights welcome Reception Pays Homage to History . Check out TerraGo Mobile® for Android™ www.terragotech.
 GEOINT attendees kicked off the week with a networking event that spanned most of the Gaylord Palms . With Cuban-inspired food and live music, there was live music at the event .
 For 13 days in October 1962, the United States came very close to engaging in a major nuclear war . The U.S. came close to a nuclear war for 13 days .
 President Kennedy had publicly warned the Soviet Union not to introduce offensive missiles into Cuba . President John F Kennedy had warned the Soviets not to invade Cuba .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev surreptitiously brought missiles to Cuba, which were discovered by an American U-2 spy plane . However, the missiles were never discovered by the American U.2 .
 Christopher Tucker is USGIF board member and principal of Yale House Ventures . Tucker is also a principal at Yale House Venture Partners . Tucker: "We are committed to the future of innovation in the world" Tucker is a founder of the Yale House Foundation .
 Buses will depart WORKSHOPS from Gaylord Palms and the Caribe continually from 6:30 to 11:30 a.m. for this optional night out . The optional night of fun is optional .
 Everglades, Kew U SGIF’s Commercial Synthetic Aperture Radar Satellite Satellite West, and St. St. Everglade, are among the projects that have been completed .
 Earth Observation Working Groups are offering training than 4.5 acres of space with more than 500,000 sessions throughout the week . NGA/USGIF eye-catching individual plants are part of the tour . The tour spans more than 4,000 acres of land and more than
 Alligacan sign up as well] on various SAR and EO capabilities and application capabilities,” said John Moeller .
 CSARS Working Group will also hold a lunch roundtable Body Wrap for $162 . Rock Massage for $210, and a 50-minute Celestial Massage is $210 .
 These prices include a 20% on Thursday from 1 to 2m. in Sun Ballroom 4-5 .
 DigitalGlobe and GeoEye will highlight the ways to get access to and use commercial, high-resolution imagery through NGA’s EnhancedView program . EO sessions will be held at the U.S. National Geographic Institute of Geography .
 End users will get specific instruction on the benefits and use cases for commercial imagery, plus learn more about future capabilities . End users are encouraged to use commercial imagery in the future .
 To learn more about the agenda, visit the news page at www.usgif.org .
 MyDigitalGlobe, and DigitalGlobe Cloud Services, unlock the power of the world’s largest online library of current, commercial high-resolution imagery and geospatial information to desktops and portals .
 The Challenges and Opportunities of Information Sharing are staggering . T he numbers are staggering. The challenges and opportunities of information sharing are staggering in the world .
 The reality for sharing information across all government levels in the wake of 9-11 is harder than the vision . That’s one reason why the reality is harder for sharing .
 James Kwolek of NGA, Dan Cotter of DHS, and Jerry Johnston of DOI discuss geospatial interoperability during a breakout session Tuesday afternoon . The session was part of the NGA's annual meeting of the Joint Chiefs Chiefs of Homeland Security .
 The rest of the panel, which included Jerry Johnston, with the Department of the Interior, and James Kwolek, of the on authoritative data; and leverage shared computing capability. The panel also discussed the use of shared computing capabilities .
 GEOINT 2012 Breakout Session: “Confronting ize a crisis as it develops in real time.” FEMA and other response organizations with the tools to rapidly visualize . FEMA and others with the . tools . FEMA .
 The company’s process of separating intelligence is complex, using a more than 150,000 sources to create a calendar . From planned unrest to high-level international meetings, the calendar includes everything relationship between the past and future .
 The concept is to find people who are talking about the future, back a week before that and look at publications . The concept of the future is to look back at publications published in the past and present . Back to Mail Online home .
 It’s a way of looking at source credibility the future in recommendations to decision-makers . It's a way to look at the credibility of the sources in the future .
 If you’ve got a source that’s been calling it in the past, you can monitor protests in other countries or meetings between other one making a volume of good calls . Government offi. government officials .
 The business community can investigate risks, their predictions were fast . Businesses can take advantage of the risks, they say . The government has been accused of over-reacting to the risk of terrorism .
 "That’s a source you want to monitor, such as leaked news about upcoming product releases.” such as leaks about upcoming releases. Such as leaked information about upcoming products releases. That's a source of interest,” says COO.
 ITT Exelis handles the government ISR business, but is presenting some new concepts from the overall ITT brand at the GEOINT 2012 Symposium . The company is presenting new concepts at the symposium .
 ENVI software line is in its fifth generation of processing and analyzing imagery and data gathered from airborne and satellite sensors . ENVI Services Engine is a new product, the ENVI Software Engine, which supports the software line .
 ENVI Services Engine, produced by ITT Exelis Visual Information Solutions, uses open source standards and middleware-agnostic architecture UAVS. AND MORE .
 This General Atomics to Display Predator Models and STARE offers potential for a wider range of exploitation and dissemination to end users and warfighters . The Predator models will be displayed on display at the end of the year .
 The openeneral Atomics will have a varied display of UAVs at source standards . The ENVI GEOINT 2012 will use a one-sixth scale model of the Predator B/MQ9. Atomics is based on a one sixth-scale model of a Predator
 The follow-on of the Predator A UAV that established the capability of Services Engine to be integrated into many different types of systems . Services Engine is the latest in a long line of UAVs that can be fitted to many different systems .
 General Atomics recently tested the Predator B/MQ9 Block 1-plus, an “Our message to this marketplace is a cohesiveness upgrade, at its Palmdale, Calif., facility .
 It’s the next generation but also ground and onboard exploitation and processUAV—jet-powered with stealth characteristics . It's the next . generation but . also ground, onboard exploitation, and process.UAVs .
 ITT Exelis will also showcase airborne solutions, Radar and the new System for Tactical Archival, Retrieval and Exploitation such as Jagwire . Jagwire is web-enabled and designed to offer an integrated and unified approach to processing, trial in Brekstad,
 It can store full-motion video and intelligence information in near data for 30 days, retrieve and fuse data sources, exploit and create actionreal-time, while optimizing bandwidth use . The Federated System also plans to showcase the Federated system for data dissemination .
 Embedded inteL-server for Collaborative Operations brings layered intelligence to warfighters more quickly . Embedded InteL server for Collaboration Operations is embedded in the cloud .
 Joint Information Environment and Intelligence Community Information Technology Enterprise are central to the collaboration strategy . U.S. and the U.N. have been in touch with the United Kingdom for more than a decade .
 JIE provides architecture enabling all to use an approved device whether at work, at home, or at any other mobile location . JIE also provides architecture to enable all users to use approved devices .
 The ability to share data securely, independent of the network across which that data travels, was another idea put forward . The idea of sharing data securely was also discussed .
 Rob Carey, deputy chief information officer, DoD, and Al Tarasiuk, Chief information officer for the Intelligence Community, discuss information sense of where their information is going innovation . This will give the data stewards a better, Carey says .
 “Fine grain, attribute-based access control is really critical to innovation,” he said . The panel discussed the importance of collaboration to oversharing information .
 “The relationship between the IC and the DoD is stronger than rity is handled. Cloud-based computing is fundamentally changing the way secu’s security is handled by the IC,“The IC and DoD are stronger than they are handled.”
 From network-layer security, now down to data-layer ever because of the need to become an enterprise that serves the nasecurity, the possibility of exchanging secure, encrypted data across the security apparatus’s security apparatus,” said Rob Carey .
 Intelligence Community chief information officer for the Intelligence Community . Al Tarasiuk: "Open source good. ics, and things like that,” are open source .
 ITT Exelis brings precise, net-centric geospatial intelligence wherever you are, whenever you need it . The company is committed to providing the most accurate and reliable information on the planet .
 This enterprise-ready system can dramatically reduce the time needed to deliver imagery and full-motion video across the globe . The system can also be used to deliver images and video from around the world .
 Jagwire™ is ready now to ingest, process, store and disseminate data for the military, first responders, intelligence community and more . Whatever your platform or challenge, Jagwire will be available now . Jagwire is available now for $35,000 .
 Exelisinc.com/Jagwire and see us at GEOINT and AUSA this fall . Learn more from exelis.com and follow us on Twitter @JagWire .
 ITT is a trademark of ITT Manufacturing Enterprises, LLC., and is used under license under license . ITT manufacturing is a manufacturing company that produces ITT products and sells ITT equipment .
 She was able to create a geospatial rendering of that feature and its associated characteristics . She also created an interactive map of the feature's location .
 Long talks about reducing redundancy and streamlining data at GEOINT 2012 . Long: Streamlining data and making it available is key to reducing redundancy .
 A panel of four of NGA’s strategic objective champions discuss the new NGA 2013-2017 Strategy during a lunchtime panel Tuesday . A Common Desktop Environment is a collaboration between the NGA and Defense Intelligence Agency in which a common desktop environment is a result .
 Long is seeking to foster partnerships with agency partners . The majority of the money came from agency partners, Long says . Long says he wants to see that ratio reversed .
 “My goal is that by July 2013, 75 percent of the apps in our store the horizon the horizon. It’s also a way to cope with what could be draconian budget cuts on ‘My goal was to be 75 percent’ of apps in the store the
 Sequestration, which could hammer defense budgets next will be developed by others,” she said . A commercial year, was on the minds of most who spoke during Tuesday’s general session .
 Long has sought to Lisa Spuria, director of analysis and SOC for analytic capabilities, said that as a change its working environment, there have it comes to analysis . Long has been in charge of the NGA for two years .
 “It’s a huge culture change,” she added . Working Groups that challenge analysts to create new working groups challenge analysts .
 “You don’t even have to step foot in the bank if zones and put them into a place where they collaboyou don't want to. rated and brainstormed with others,” she said . Then came ATMs, now there’s online
 The IWGs have begun a culture change in analythe latest and greatest information we have, Long added . We want to create an online environment, he went on, where you can access all the latest information .
 We invented the processing thread to exploit the largest volumes of data possible . The processing thread is designed to exploit data in the largest quantities possible .
 We deliver clean, correct, useful data – to increase analyst productivity by more than 10 times . We deliver data to increase analysts' productivity by over 10 times. We also deliver clean and correct data to improve analyst productivity .
 The capability for an IC cloud and common IC desktop by March 2013, "holy grail of perfect intelligence” with the full target architecture in place and in use by 2018 . That brings us closer to the truth, to the capability for a cloud and desktop by 2015 .
 The other big idea for the future of the Community is activitydistinct topical areas. based intelligence, which will be fueled by a future generation of overhead architecture, Clapper said .
 Clapper drew again from “Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Mainte” when he spoke about United States allies, referencing the benefits of we can respond on a quick queuing and tipping basis .
 The DNI added that he had just returned last week from a trip to The Intelligence Community should set an example for the whole Australia, where he attended an intelligence policy forum for senior of government .
 The forum concensaid, referencing the two FBI investigations currently underway for trated on strengthening IT and personnel standards, which he said repwhat he called egregious leaks .
 Clapper said he intends to continue the push to streamline the clearance process . Clapper also discussed what he referred to as two big ideas for the fucheck-ups currently in place .
 The first idea is the Intelligence Intelligence underway with the Army and NSA, and have proved promising thus . Community Information Technology Enterprise Enterprise is a Commufar . It's a plan centered on cloud computing and cloud storage .
 “As we execute this right we’ll save a lot of money,” Clapper said . Also important is promoting clearance reciprocity in terms of secu. rity .
 Clapper: "The worst part is that if it happens it would occur during the time of one of the most perverse array of threats I’ve seen in almost 50 years in this business" Clapper said .
 Our company develops the cross-domain information-sharing, system architecture and security solutions that are critical in today’s intelligence and homeland security operations .
 Cubic’s XD-10G, validated by the Unified Cross Domain Management Office, is just one example of the products we are creating to allow our customers to retain technological superiority and ensure the integrity of their data, including streaming video .
 Cubic designs, innovates, manufactures and fields a wide array of technologies for combat readiness, supply chain logistics and national security for the U.S. and allied nations . Cubic is a company that specializes in combat readiness for the United States and allies .
 To learn more about our XD Solutions and other products, go to www.cubic.com/XD-solutions .
 Phillips High School present the colors during the GEOINT 2012 welcoming ceremonies Tuesday morning . Phillips high school students from around the world take part in the opening ceremony . Phillips is the first school to present its colors in the event .
 United States Army soldiers tour the General Dynamics booth Tuesday in the exhibit hall . USGIF’s director of academic programs, Dr. Max Baber, U.S. Army soldiers, attendees enjoy the Cuban-themed Havana exhibit .
 All is quiet and the stage is set for the official kick off of GEOINT 2012 . The stage is now set for an official kick-off of the official start of the event .
 Break-out session will explore integrating data and information sources to create context for a given observed activity . MG John M Custer III, Director, Federal Strategic Missions, EMC will deliver the talk .
 MoD provide repeatable and verifiable signatures which could be integrated into a common operating picture, thereby providing 9:15 A.M. ‘context’ to the activity that originally motivated the question . MoD provides repeatable signatures which can be integrated .
 Young Innovators will come together to discuss how one might add ‘context’ to activations . Entrepreneurs and innovators are building the future vision of ity based intelligence .
 Location based Analytics are creating new data sets and tools . This panel will investigate how the converging WELCOME – Barry C Tilton, P.E., NRO Senior Technical Advisor, is a NRO senior Technical Advisor .
 This change is being lead by a new generation of dynamic thinkModerator – John Morris, Chief Scientist, Riverside Research ers and geodigital natives . MG Steve Fogarty, Commanding General, U.S. Army gies and analytical techniques to vast data sets .
 Moderator Todd Huffman, Private Consultant & Technology Directorate, National Reconnaissance Office . Shay Har-Noy, Chief Executive Officer, Tomnod, Shay Har Noy . Dr. Mark J Choiniere, NGA Liaison to the Advanced Systems Moderator. Todd
 This session targets U.S. technology, intellectual property, trade . Exhibit Hall Open secrets and proprietary information . The session targets United States technology .
 "Our national security relies on our collective success at thwarting these persistent attacks," says President Barack Obama .
 Every 18 | WEDNESDAY OCT 10 GEOINT 2012 SYMPOSIUM 2012 SYmpOSIUM AGENDA time our adversaries gain access to sensitive or classified informa . The meeting will focus on developing more lethal weapons or countermeasures .
 Our national security is also at risk in the potential loss of Geospatial-Intelligence Agency of our technological edge, which is closely tied to the economic . NSA success of the cleared contractor community and the well being of Cyber Task Force and DoD Co-Lead for DHS-Do
 Panel will bring together experts from IndusCoordination Element trial Security, Counterintelligence, Cyber and Industry . Panel will discuss the management of risk, as a function of threat, vulnerability and consequence, across the GEOINT cleared industrial base .
 Panel Interoperability Tech Talks members include subject matter experts from DSS, NGA, NSA Innovation Pavilion, Exhibit Hall, Booth #2003 and key GEOINT industry partners . Panel members include DSS and NGA .