 Fidel Castro was a keen student of Nazi pageantry, often seen around campus with his well-thumbed copy of ""Mein Kampf"" alongside his pistol . The young Castro was often seen with his copy of the book and pistol . Castro was seen with a pistol and a
 Castro has received accolades from foreign fans and well-wishers over the years . Castro has been awarded numerous awards for his work in the arts and culture .
 Sadly, lunacy on the subject of Fidel Castro is hardly confined to the lunatic fringe . Sadly, there is no doubt that this is not the case of lunacy .
 A recent editorial on Castro's legacy in the London Times gives the "mainstream" or "respectably conservative" view on Fidel Castro . The London Times considered one of the world's wisest and most respected newspapers .
 He was referring to the U.S. State Department and CIA's role in aiding the Castro rebels, also to the United States arms embargo on Batista .
 Ambassador Smith personally delivered the messages to Batista . Ambassador Smith knew something about these events because he had personally delivered them to Batistas. Ambassador Smith .
 Castro's group pocketed a check for $50,000 from the CIA operative in Santiago, Robert Weicha . Castro's ""defiance"" of the U.S. at the time also involved his group pocketing a check from a CIA operative . Castro also pocketed $
 Never in history had we accorded diplomatic recognition to a Latin American regime as quickly as we recognized Castro's . The Castro regime was quickly recognized as a regime in Latin America .
 The United States gave Castro's regime its official benediction more rapidly than it had recognized Batista's in 1952 . The U.S. lavished it with $200 million in subsidies, including $100 million in food subsidies .
 In August of 1959 the liberal U.S. ambassador to Cuba, Philip Bonsal, alerted Castro to a conspiracy against his regime by Cubans . In August 1959, the liberal United States ambassador to Cuban President Castro was alerted to the plot .
 The anti-Castro plot was foiled, hundreds of the plotters were imprisoned or executed . Three years later, the regime that came close to vaporizing many of America's largest cities with nuclear missiles survived .
 The cocksure Bundy was a guest on "Face the Nation" while assuring the American people . Bundy was the guest on the show . Bundy is a proud member of the Bundy clan .
 U-2 photos sat on JFK's desk, revealing those ""refugee rumors"" sitting in Cuba, nuclear armed, and pointed directly at Bundy and his entire staff of sagacious Ivy League wizards . Exactly 48 hours later, JFK's .
 Don't think for a second that the Best and Brightest were knocked off balance . But don't think that the best and brightest were knocked out of balance . Don't be fooled by the 'best and brightest' show .
 The Camelot dream team set their jaws, rolled up their sleeves, and met the challenge head on . Camelot is the world's most famous animal, and the Camelot Dream Team is a team of animals .
 Henry Kissinger, as Gerald Ford's secretary of state, renewed the pledge . Henry Kissinger was Kissinger's Secretary of State of State during the Nixon era .
 Castro's ""defiance"" of the United States took the form of the U.S. Coast Guard and even the British navy shielding him from exile attacks . After the Missile Crisis, Castro's "defiance" of the US became more prominent .
 Castro hid behind the skirts of two superpowers, plus the British Empire . Far from ""defying"" a superpower, Castro hid from the skirts .
 In 1958, the Caribbean island had a higher standard of living than Ireland and Austria, almost double Spain and Japan's per capita income, and more doctors and dentists per capita than Britain .
 Today, Cuba's infant-mortality rate is 24th from the top in the world . Cuba has the hemisphere's highest abortion rate, which skews this figure downward .
 Cuba needs machine guns, water cannons and tiger sharks to keep its people from fleeing . Half-starved Haitians a short 60 miles away turn up their noses at any thought of emigrating .
 Cuba spent the most per capita on public education of any nation in Latin America . In 1958, 80 percent of Cubans were literate, and Cuba spent more per capita .
 During its war of independence near the turn of the 20th century, Cuba was devastated, having lost a quarter of its population . Cuba was utterly devastated by the loss of its inhabitants .
 Cuba's achievements in national prosperity, health, and education came practically from scratch . So, Cuba's national prosperity came from scratch and in only slightly more time than Castro's stint in power .
 Cubans today would be allowed to read George Orwell and Thomas Jefferson along with the arresting wisdom and sparkling prose of Che Guevara . Better still, Cubans would be not just literate but also educated .
 I quote ""this intellectual, this most complete human being of our time" exactly exactly . I quote 'this intellectual and most complete'
 Amnesty International: Cuba's classrooms amply qualify for an inspection by Amnesty International . With such reading assignments, Cuba's schools amply qualified for inspection by the group .
 Without Castro, Cuba's full literacy would have come about probably as quickly – and without firing squads, mass graves, and a political incarceration rate higher than Stalin's . Castro's political prison rate is higher than that of Stalin's in Stalin's Soviet-era Soviet Union . Without Castro's
 Most countries in Latin America with lower literacy rates than Cuba had in 1958 have done just that . Cuba's literacy rate is lower than that of any other Latin American country in 1958 .
 Forget for a second that none of those regimes abolished private property, free travel, free speech . Forget for one second that no one abolished the right to freedom of speech, private property or travel .
 None abolished free enterprise and mandated food rations for its subjects . None abolished the system of rationing .
 Pinochet's Chile and Somoza's Nicaragua had economic sanctions slapped on them by Jimmy Carter . Jimmy Carter slapped them with economic sanctions on them . They were not their counterparts .
 The editorial staff of the world's most prestigious newspaper is unaware that Castro's regime killed people . The editorial team is unaware of the fact that the Castro regime killed them .
 No need to consult the ravings of some ""crackpot"" scandal sheet in Miami . Instead, it should be a "scandal" in Miami.
 Castro's regime almost quintupled the alleged murder rate of Pinochet's . And this refers only to Communist Cuba's firing-squad murders .
 The Cuba Archive project, headed by scholars Maria Werlau and Armando Lau, put the death toll from Castro's regime at 102,000 . The project includes deaths at sea and the anti-Communist insurgency .
 This project has been lauded by everyone from the Miami Herald to the Wall Street Journal .
 The mind reels at the Times' ignorance until you recall that such ignorance is practically universal on matters Cuban . It's not surprising that the New York Times is ignorant about Cuba .
 A recent poll conducted clandestinely in Cuba by Spanish pollsters revealed that fewer than a third of the respondents blamed the so-called ""Yankee blockade"" for Cuba's ills . The Cuban people aren't nearly as stupid as the scholars and reporters who continuously parrot the London Times
 Kissinger partly lifted the embargo in 1975, allowing all foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies to trade with Cuba . The embargo was lifted in 1975 .
 U.S. companies have recently done more than $1 billion worth of direct business with Cuba . United States companies have done $1.1 billion in direct business in Cuba . Cuba is a source of revenue for the United States .
 Currently, the U.S. is Cuba's biggest food supplier and fourth-largest import partner . Cuba is currently the fourth largest import partner with the United States .
 Some obscure and long-dead Latin American bandit named Fidel Castro would merit less encyclopedia space than Pancho Villa – and no mention whatsoever in the London Times . Better even still still still, some obscure .