 Television played a crucial role in the drama in some ways a radically different role than it plays today . Four retrospectives over the next few days will look back at the role of television in the 1980s .
 None of the four deals in depth with the impact of the medium itself . However, none of the . four deals with the . impact of . the medium .
 President John F Kennedy shocked Americans with his televised speech on Oct. 22, 1962 . It was the first time a U.S. president used TV as a diplomatic tool .
 Thirty years ago, the Cuban missile crisis almost brought the Cold War, and the world, to an end . Thirty years later, the crisis almost ended .
 Kennedy shocked Americans with his televised speech on Oct. 1962, saying that the Soviet Union was installing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, it was the first time a U.S. president used TV as a diplomatic tool .
 The president was also using regular diplomacy in dealing with then-Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . The president also used regular diplomacy .
 In addition, the attitude of the network news divisions that covered the crisis is almost unrecognizable from today's vantage . In addition to the crisis, the attitudes of the networks that covered it are unrecognizable .
 Robert McNamara said he didn't watch TV during the 13-day crisis . Robert McNama said he did not watch TV once during the crisis .
 There were no "Crossfires" or other shows to endlessly second guess what the president and his advisers were doing . President Obama's administration has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy .
 President Kennedy manipulated reporters into not describing it as an American victory, fearful that this would shame and then anger the Soviets further . After the crisis had passed and the Soviet Union backed down, President Kennedy blatantly manipulated reporters .
 The ABC documentary is hosted by Peter Jennings and opposite the first game of the World Series . It's the only one that's two hours long, and therefore the most thorough .
 "It is a superb history lesson, but doesn't add anything startling to what's already known," says author . "It's a superb lesson but it doesn't give anything startling"
 "Instead of being really close to nuclear war, we were really, really close," says President Obama . "We were really close. Instead of being . close to . nuclear war," he says .
 PBS outing is one episode from the series ""War and Peace in the Nuclear Age,"" Arts and Entertainment has a BBC special making its United States debut .
 It doesn't have can't have the perspective the new shows have, and truly proves the old saw about journalism being the first draft of history . It truly proves that journalism isn't just journalism .
 "We are not, in many ways, as well served by the primary medium in our lives," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "And we're not, by any means, better served by our primary medium," he says .
 Asked if he would accept the missiles, Cuban leader said he would not . Asked what he now knows, the Cuban leader would not accept missiles, he said .
 Kennedy's top advisers -including his brother, Robert -favored launching an air strike against missile sites in Cuba or invading the island . Documents to be made public this week .
 Documents show only the president favored ending the crisis in the way it was ended . Only the president, documents show, favored a diplomatic trade . The deal involved removing U.S. missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba .
 The documents are transcripts of sessions held by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council on Saturday, Oct., 1962, the day before Khrushchev announced that he would remove the missiles from Cuba . The documents will be released Wednesday .
 Official summary records of Executive Committee meetings have been released in sanitized form, some five years ago, some just this month . Official ""summary records' of the Executive Committee meeting have been sanitized in the past five years .
 A former official who has seen both the summary records and the soon-to-be-released transcript says they are very similar in substance . The transcript is expected to be released on Friday .
 The transcripts debunk myths that have been built around the missile crisis during the last 25 years . According to those who have seen them, the transcripts debunk a number of myths about the crisis . The transcripts will be released in the U.S. at the end of the year .
 Some were concerned that the Soviets' next step would be to demand that the U.S. remove all nuclear weapons from Western Europe . Some were worried that the move would lead to the removal of nuclear weapons .
 Those opposing the idea included Paul Nitze, an assistant secretary of defense (now Reagan's chief arms-control adviser) Dean Rusk, the secretary of state; McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser; George Ball, the undersecretary of state . Robert F Kennedy, the
 Only after McNamara's recitation of what might follow a U.S. air strike did some of the advisers apparently start having second thoughts .
 Robert Kennedy met with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador, to convey the president's acceptance of Khrushchev's proposal, with one caveat . The president accepted the proposal, but that night, he met with the ambassador in Moscow .
 The U.S. would take the missiles out of Turkey within five months, Kennedy said . But the Soviets must never publicly reveal a connection between that withdrawal and the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba . The United States would take out the missiles within 5 months .
 This secret conversation with Dobrynin was not made public until 1969, with the posthumous publication of Robert Kennedy's book Thirteen Days . This conversation was made public by Robert Kennedy in 1969 .
 The film was developed in Jacksonville, Florida, in 1962 . Ecker traveled to Washington, D.C. to develop the film .
 One image showed large tent-like constructions that appeared to be sheltering missiles that could travel up to about 1500 miles . CIA analysts said the tents appeared to shelter missiles that were believed to be capable of traveling 1500 miles or more .
 Ecker pulled out his wallet to show the photograph taken by Kennedy in Key West . The photograph was taken the following year when Kennedy presented him with the Distinguished Flying Cross .
 The visits Sunday followed a two-day gathering of American, Cuban and Russian participants in the missile crisis . The visits follow a meeting of the U.S. and Cuban leaders in the crisis .
 The crisis began in mid-October 1962 when President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the U.S. President Kennedy became aware of the threat in October 1962 .
 Former Kennedy aide Ted Sorensen stood next to former Kennedy aide Arthur Schlesinger Jr. underneath a medium-range Soviet R-2 missile displayed outside an old Spanish fortress on Havana Bay .
 Khrushchev erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he hadn't anticipated the U.S. reaction, a participant says . Georgy A Arbatov, head of the U .S.A.-Canada Institute, a Kremlin think tank, told the conference . Kh
 CIA deputy director admitted that the agency stumbled badly by dismissing reports that Soviet missiles were being installed in Cuba . William Studeman, the CIA's deputy director, said the CIA stumbled by dismissing the reports . Studeman said the agency had been wrong for several weeks .
 A U-2 spy flight confirmed the news on Oct., 1962, dangerously compressing the time for U.S.-Soviet diplomacy before the missiles were operational . Ultimately, a spy flight from a U.2 spy plane confirmed the dire news in October 1962 .
 Documents and remarks underscored how the United States nearly missed the deployment of the SS-4 medium-range missiles in Cuba . The documents and remarks underscore how the U.S. nearly missed how the . United States almost missed how .
 The deployment became known more than one month after the first batch arrived on the island . The deployment of the soldiers has been known for more than a month .
 CIA Director John McCone voiced a lone fear among agency chiefs about a Soviet missile deployment as early as August, Studeman says . Ironically, McCone had voiced the lone fear about the missile deployment .
 Officials feared a U-2 might be shot down by the U.S. spy plane . The U.2 was grounded for weeks as a result of the jet's decision .
 CIA informants included a Soviet colonel, Oleg Penkovsky -""one of our most important Soviet agents,"" according to Studeman - whose information was compiled under the code name Ironbark .
 A Castro confidant bragged about the ""wonder weapons"" soon to be deployed on his island, Studeman said . Another key source reported that a Castro . confidant had bragged that the weapons would be deployed soon .
 Recent Cuban emigrants identified the locations of missile sites for CIA analysts and U-2 plane, he says . Recent emigrants had witnessed the dizzying construction efforts in their country .
 James R Killian Jr. Jr. concluded that the agency was slow to recognize the threat, and mobilize its agents and spy planes . Killian: The agency was too slow to mobilize agents and planes .
 Also attending Monday's symposium was Sergei Khrushchev, the son of the former Soviet chairman who had locked President John F Kennedy in the chilling game of chicken .
 The CIA received hundreds if not thousands of such reports, many of which its agents deemed credible . Agency agents in Miami deemed the reports credible, former CIA official says .
 James had been in the Army and had hoped his son would be following his lead . James had hoped he would follow his lead in the army .
 George checks and repairs rails for the Union Pacific Railroad . These days George checks trains for the U.P. Railroad .
 Perino was 35 in 2007, and thus had been born about a decade after the famous '13 days in October' in 1962 . President Kennedy confronted Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev over Moscow's installation of missiles in Cuba .
 History books describe it as the closest the world has come to nuclear war . The history books say it was the closest world has ever seen a nuclear war.
 Perino's ignorance revealed a striking shift in conservative perception . Perino: "I'm not a Republican. I'm a Democrat. I don't understand what I think of Republicans" Perino says, "I don't know what's wrong"
 At the time of the Cuban missile crisis, Republicans expected it would be remembered for generations as a moment when a Democratic president squandered a historic opportunity . Republicans expected the crisis to be remembered as a time of national unity .
 Barry Goldwater, Ronald Reagan and William F Buckley all suggested at the time that Kennedy's handling of the crisis represented a capitulation to the Soviets .
 They believed Kennedy's actions had guaranteed that a communist outpost would remain, 90 miles from our shores . The president should have taken the opportunity to liberate the Cubans from their communist overlords .
 Even the Reagan Library in Simi Valley, Calif., gave no hint of the views Reagan once held on the matter in a Cold War exhibit it had up until recently .
 Reagan, Goldwater and Buckley favored U.S. intervention in Cuba . But at the time, it wasn't just those who favored intervention . In Kennedy's circle of advisers, advocates of an attack on Cuba were led by Gen. Gen. Kennedy .
 Curtis LeMay proposed bombing 1,000 sites in Cuba to be followed by ground invasion by U.S. troops . LeMay was chief of the Air Force, who proposed bombing .
 The Soviets might have retaliated as the first bombers approached Cuba . The Soviet Union might have responded to the threat .
 Even if Khrushchev did not order the firing of missiles, a commander in charge of a missile base in Cuba could have ordered a launch . The launch of missiles is not the first time the U.S. has launched missiles in Cuba .
 The U.S. had eight big missiles fueled, targeted and armed with nuclear warheads that October . The missiles could have reached Manhattan . They could have been able to reach Manhattan .
 If all eight R-12s in Cuba had been launched, the total payload would have been eight megatons -""an explosive force equivalent to all the bombs ever dropped in the history of war,"" according to one account of the crisis .
 If only a single R-12 missile reached a U.S. city, it would have hit with 1 megaton of explosive force - about 80 times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb .
 Even if targeting were off, the city probably would have been destroyed . Even if the city were hit, it probably would've been destroyed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Soviets might not have attacked cities on the East Coast; they might have retaliated by launching tactical nuclear missiles at the United States base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, which could have killed all Americans there .
 Kennedy would have had to retaliate -by attacking a military base or a major city in the Soviet Union . Then he would have to attack a major Soviet city or military base .
 For the past 30 years, historians have largely ignored conservative critiques of the time . Historians have been largely ignoring the conservative critiques .
 Kennedy's actions have been challenged, instead of from the left, by those who question whether the missile crisis was necessary . Kennedy has been criticized for his actions in the 1960s .
 Kennedy advocates have held that the successful resolution of the crisis demonstrated his mastery of world politics . He struck the perfect balance between steely determination and strategic flexibility, they say . The Kennedy advocates say .
 As a result, they say, he prevented nuclear war while removing the threat posed by the missiles in Cuba . They say he stopped nuclear war and removed the threat from Cuba .
 Critics have argued for the past three decades that Kennedy's taking the nation to the brink of nuclear war was an irresponsible and unnecessary risk . The crisis should have been resolved by less dangerous methods involving normal diplomacy and negotiation .
 The Soviet missiles in Cuba, they note, did not represent an increased threat to the United States . Kennedy himself said, "a missile is a missile,"" Kennedy himself .
 The Cuban missile crisis exhibit at the JFK museum in Boston celebrates Kennedy's steely resolve and tactical flexibility . Kennedy's critics on the left and right have been largely ignored .
 By focusing on the 13 days in October, it fails to explain the big picture, the larger context, CNN says . CNN.com's John Sutter says the story should be told more about the events in October .
 The United States sponsored an invasion of Cuba by CIA-trained Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs just two years earlier . The U.S. had sponsored the invasion, attempting to overthrow Fidel Castro by force . The invasion was sponsored by the United States .
 The threat that the United States might invade again was what motivated Khrushchev, and especially Castro, to trade for a U.S. agreement not to invade again . The threat was a bargaining chip to trade with a United States agreement .
 The conventional wisdom these days is that Kennedy was the big winner, Castro the big loser . Castro was a big loser for Kennedy, but Kennedy was not a big winner for Castro, he says .
 Kennedy's prestige soared, while Castro was humiliated and shown to be irrelevant, even to his Soviet overlords . Kennedy was humiliated by Castro, who was humiliated . Castro's prestige was boosted by the humiliation .
 The next year, Kennedy was assassinated by a pro-Castro activist . Khrushchev was deposed by hard-liners opposed to his loss of face . Kennedy was killed in 1968 .
 Kennedy's no-attack pledge guaranteed the survival of Castro's regime, turned out to be right -about that, at least . The conservatives argued at the time that Kennedy's . no attack pledge guaranteed . the . survival of the Castro regime .
 In those days, he was an aviation electrician responsible for keeping the squadron's modified Crusader fighters used by the Navy as aerial mapping planes in the air .
 Air Force U-2 spy plane spotted the missiles from on high . The Crusaders flew over to take a closer look at what the Russians were up to .
 The Russians secretly installed ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba some 90 miles from the coast of Florida which didn't set well with President John Kennedy . What happened?
 For 13 days that October, no one knew whether another world war was going to erupt . No one knew what was going on when the war broke out . The U.S. was in the midst of a world war .
 The United States blockaded Cuba with a massive fleet of war ships after telling Khrushchev his nuclear missiles in Cuba must go . The U.S. Navy blockaded the country with a fleet of warships .
 The Russian premier sent the president a letter containing an offer that would ultimately resolve the problem the U.S. had with the Russian missiles . A short time later, the president received a letter from Russia .
 He proposed removing the offensive missiles from Cuban soil if the U.S. would withdraw its nuclear missiles from Turkey aimed at Russia . The United States would pull the missiles out of Cuba if the United States withdrew the missiles .
 Kennedy told Khrushchev he would accept his offer if he did not tell the public that the U.S. was pulling its offensive missiles out of Turkey . Kennedy said the United States would pull the missiles from Turkey if it was pulled .
 The Russian premier’s proposition worked and both sides withdrew their missiles . Both sides withdrew missiles from each other's missile range .
 His initial experience came almost a half dozen years earlier, shortly after he got out of aviation electronics school in Jacksonville . He says his initial experience was in electronics school .
 There were also some ‘tin can’ sailors and some submariners with us,” he recalled . ‘There were also 'tin can' sailors and 'submarine' sailors .
 Before we could reach our ship, the 'tin can’ sailors and the submariners got in a brawl and before it was over all of us got knocked down at least once . The 'tincan' sailors and 'submarine' sailors got into a brawl .
 When the Saratoga left Guantanamo, it sailed for the Mediterranean and the countries of southern Europe . It sailed to the Mediterranean .
 It was about this point in his career he decided to switch services and go into the Air Force . The Air Force is now the largest military force in the world .
 It wasn’t long afterward he was retrained as an aviation electrician Tech-Sergeant supporting the F-4 Phantom .
 "They gave us our orders, gave us a bunch of shots and put us on a C-130 for Vietnam," he says . "We're going to Vietnam. They gave us their orders," he adds .
 You just can’t imagine the snakes you ran into at that base when it was raining . The snakes were snakes that you encountered at the base .
 “If it bit you, you had just about enough time to say a ‘Hail Mary’ before you died,” he said . ‘If you were bitten by a dog, you would say a Hail Mary,’ he explained .
 He arrived back in the United States in 1965 and as luck would have it he was sent to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa .
 Retired in 1985 after three decades in the service as a chief master sergeant, an E-9, the highest enlisted rate . He retired in 1985 .
 'KENNEDY, KHRUSHCHEV CHILDREN MEET 40 YEARS AFTER CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS', St. Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion The Associated Press .
 Intelligence officials also never found any nuclear warheads, which they later learned had been kept on the island . Intelligence officials say they never found nuclear warheads in the area .
 The historic papers underscored the danger of a nuclear attack either accidental or deliberate that existed during those tense October days .
 Documents show that the crisis did not end on Oct., 1962, with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove offensive weapons, as was widely believed . The documents were made available to The Associated Press .
 Khrushchev worried that an ''irrational'' Castro would renew tensions with the U.S. and perhaps provoke war . Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, the Soviets pulled them out .
 Participants looked at American covert actions following the disastrous CIA-backed invasion of Cuba's Bay of Pigs in April 1961 . Participants also looked at how they intensified Cuban fears of a United States military attack .
 Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen are attending the conference . Former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy wrote the words ""decisions"" and ""leaders"" on his pad as his advisers debated the next step in the Cuban missile crisis . Over and over, the words were written on the pad .
 Khrushchev offers to withdraw missiles from Cuba if the U.S. pledges not to invade Cuba . Four days letter was toned down the volume and the rhetoric . Khruschev offered to withdraw the missiles if the United States pledged not to invasion Cuba .
 Co pyrig ht 20 0 2, The Re co rd. Ran with ""IF YOU GO"" which has been appended to the end of this story .
 Co pyrig ht 20 0 2, The Gue lph Mercury . Ran with ""IF YOU GO"" which has been appended to the end of this story .
 Maiolo dramatizes the “other story” taking place in Turkey in a compelling and frightening account of his experiences on the front line of the Cold War . While the crisis seemed to play out between Cuba, the United States and the Soviet Union .
 At 5pm Washington time on October 18, President Kennedy welcomed the Soviet’s Foreign Minister, Andrei Gromyko, to the White House .
 Berlin and Cuba were both raised during the two-hour encounter in the Oval Office . But one key issue was not discussed at all . Berlin and Havana were not discussed .
 Gromyko had promised to be frank but he did not address the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba . He did not discuss the existence of Soviet missile missiles in Cuba .
 He was unaware that Mr Kennedy already knew of their existence but had also chosen not to discuss them . Mr Kennedy was unaware of the existence of the new laws .
 Mr Gromyko: For quite some time, there had been an unabated anti-Cuban campaign in the US . He said the Kennedy administration had backed the campaign, apparently backed by the Cuban government .
 U.S. wished to institute a blockade against trade with Cuba, Cuba . Now the United States wants to impose a blockade . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the blockade .
 All of this, he warned, could only lead to great misfortunes for mankind . All of the world's problems could only be solved, he said .
 The Soviet Government stood for peaceful coexistence and opposed interference by one state in the internal affairs of another . The Soviet government stood for peace and stood for non-interference .
 Compare the two countries’ human and material resources and you would see that the U.S. was a giant and Cuba a mere baby, Mr Gromyko said . Compare the United States with Cuba, he said .
 Mr Kennedy, he added, was surely familiar with a speech made by the Cuban president at the UN general assembly, at which he said Cubans only wanted to make their home and country secure .
 Soviet assistance to Cuba was intended to add to the island’s defensive capabilities, Mr Gromyko insisted . Soviet assistance was meant to help develop its agriculture, he said .
 Kennedy knew Mr Gromyko was lying about the purely defensive capabilities, but he kept his counsel . Mr Kennedy knew he was lying, but kept counsel .
 The US, he said, had tried to push the Cuba issue aside but that the Soviets had made a serious mistake on July by starting to supply arms to Cuba without informing him .
 The Bay of Pigs operation in April 1961 had been a mistake, but the Soviets’ intervention had complicated matters and created grave danger . The U.S. had no intention of invading Cuba . The United States itself had no intentions of invasion .
 The wider world was still unaware of what was really happening on Cuba . Thus far, the wider world still has been unaware of the situation .
 A number of American newspapers were already reporting a substantial U.S. military build-up in the southeastern states .
 Reporters had also noticed an increase in the number of comings and goings of top government officials . Reporters have also noticed a rise in the numbers of top officials .
 Mr Kennedy did not express an open preference for any of them but a number of his advisers thought he might be favouring a blockade .
 The Glasgow Herald’s report for October 18 said merely that the president was still considering the final details of a plan to quarantine shipping to Cuba . The report said that the plan was still being considered .
 It started as one man's obsession, developed into the only nuclear military crisis in history . The lessons are still being argued today .
 The Cuban missile crisis of 1962 brought the world to the threshhold of a U.S.-Soviet war . A clash that almost certainly would have involved nuclear weapons almost certainly involved nuclear arms . The Cuban missiles crisis almost ended in 1962 .
 It was the chilling thought of Soviet and American cities being vaporized by H-bombs that broke the war fever, and persuaded the leadership on both sides to draw back and work out an accommodation in which both could claim victory .
 25 years ago this week marks the 25th anniversary of the fall of the Soviet Union . President Kennedy made the remark in a reflective moment at the beginning of the crisis . President John F Kennedy was speaking at the time .
 He decided that the Soviet Union had to establish a visible response to overwhelming U.S. military power . The Soviet Union decided that it had to respond to overwhelming American military power.
 He specifically decided on nuclear missiles, and insisted they be put in secretly to present the Americans with an accomplished, unremovable fact .
 The die was cast, although that did not become clear to the American side until the missile positions were spotted by American U-2 planes in the late summer . The U.S. didn't see the missile sites until they were spotted in the summer .
 His only goal, he wrote, was to win a guarantee that the U.S. would not try to invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro by military force . The Bay of Pigs fiasco of 1961 led to the death of Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 Kennedy had solid photographic evidence in mid-October that the Soviet missiles were being installed - despite Soviet denials . The 13 days of October began, with the two superpowers groping for a solution .
 Khrushchev had decided on the tactic of deception to give the Soviets time to install the weapons . Not only was there a problem in knowing what the other side was doing - especially difficult . The problem was the difficulty of communicating accurate and timely messages to each other .
 The flurry of messages and signals between Moscow and Washington was frequently impossible to know whether the latest message from the Soviets took into account the latest word from the White House .
 There also was the impact of ''McNamara's Law,'' the rule laid down by the secretary of defense after an American U-2 wandered into Soviet airspace in Siberia at the height of the crisis .
 President George W. Bush agreed that Soviet missiles were an intolerable threat to the U.S. mainland . A unilateral shift of the military balance that would destroy the American nuclear advantage, he says .
 The hawks, led by former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, wanted a military strike against the Soviet missiles and bombers . The sooner the better, the hawks wanted a strike .
 The hawks argued that the missiles in Cuba could wipe out as much as 40 percent of the U.S. strategic bomber force . The missiles could also wipe out up to half of the United States strategic bomber forces .
 Theodore Sorenson, Kennedy's special counsel, recounted a conversation between Acheson and the president . Theodore Soreson: "The conversation was a very important moment in history" Soresson: "I don't think it was a mistake"
 Kennedy asked what the Soviets might be expected to do if the U.S. attacked the missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy asked if the Soviets would respond if the United States attacked them . Kennedy: "The Soviets might not be able to do anything"
 Acheson said that the U.S. forces would then be obligated to knock out missile sites in the Soviet Union . The United States would then have to knock them out, he said .
 The doves argued for a diplomatic solution, possibly trading off some of the old U.S. Jupiter missiles based in Turkey for Soviet concessions in Cuba . The U.N. envoy to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, argued for the deal .
 The owls pushed for a combination of military and diplomatic moves, including a naval quarantine of Cuba and a flurry of messages to the Soviets warning them of the danger of a U.S.-Soviet war . They pushed for diplomacy and a compromise that would defuse the larger crisis .
 At one point, the Soviets sought out American newsman John Scali to relay urgent messages to the State Department . The Soviets, obviously just as worried as the Americans were, sought out Scali for help .
 The tense crisis reached its peak at midday on Oct. 31, when a group of Soviet cargo vessels approached the American naval quarantine line . The aircraft carrier Essex was among the ships involved in the crisis .
 A Soviet submarine was detected near the American ships and the American flotilla commander was ordered to make the Soviet sub come to the surface if there was any confrontation . As the Soviet cargo vessels approached, a Soviet sub was detected .
 The immediate crisis dissolved when the Soviet sub slipped away . The Soviet cargo ships either stopped dead in the water or turned around and headed back east .
 An American U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a Cuban missile, and the White House insisted on a ''surgical strike'' against all surface-to-air missiles in Cuba . Three days later there was another tense point when an American . U.S. missile was shot
 It was finally Robert Kennedy who landed on the formula that ended the crisis without humiliation or victory for either side . Kennedy's formula was the formula for the end of the crisis .
 Khrushchev suggested that the United States respond to an earlier note, in which he would permanently withdraw his missiles and bombers if the U.S. would bind itself not to invade Cuba, and withdraw the naval quarantine, he suggested .
 Khrushchev got his guarantee against a U.S. military strike against Cuba and the Soviet weapons were withdrawn . The Soviet weapons had been withdrawn .
 Every available channel of passing information, including the United Nations, was used . The use of overt military threats and secret ''back channels'' was also used .
 The lessons of the Cuban missile crisis were later misapplied and led directly to the Vietnam War . Peter Rodman, now of the National Security Council staff, argues that the lessons were not learned . The U.S. military was sucked into the swamp of the swamp with no hope
 There were miscalculations on both sides in the missile crisis and misunderstandings of the other's intentions, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There were two leaders who were in control and they were able to keep a firm leash on the hounds of war . But there was no one who was in control of the situation in Syria .
 One year and one month after the missile crisis, John F Kennedy was killed in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963 .
 Khrushchev was stripped of power by the rest of the Kremlin leadership in a bloodless shakeup . Two years after the missile crisis, almost to the day, he was stripped from power in a bloody shake-up .
 The bill of particulars against Khrushchev in the Soviet Politburo gave much more weight to his disastrous agricultural and economic policies . It was suggested at the time that the Soviet leader paid the price for his Cuban adventure, but the .
 He spent the rest of his life in retirement, writing his memoirs and listening to Western Russian radio broadcasts in his dacha near Moscow .
 Kennedy said he worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect the U.S. ability to respond if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked a pro-American country such as Guatemala .
 Ball says the U.S. has a right to take action under the Rio Pact . Ball: The Rio Pact is the common defense treaty of the Western Hemisphere .