 Khrushchev’s first deputy, Anastas Mikoyan, immediately raised a practical objection to the proposal . The proposal was rejected .
 The U.S. would easily detect missile launchers, he says . There is no good place to hide them on the subtropical island, he adds .
 The U.S. would likely kill Soviet soldiers in the strike, Mikoyan says . The launchers would be discovered, he says, and the United States would kill them .
 The Cold War was the closest the world’s two superpowers of that tense era came to an outright nuclear exchange . It is tempting to think that, 60 years and multiple historical accounts later, there is nothing new to be learned or said about this seminal episode of the Cold War
 This perspective yields a kind of dark comedy of miscalculations, near fiascoes, and outright blunders . The spectacle is the true tale of the crisis by the author's account .
 The Americans did quickly detect the missile sites through overflight photography . The U.S. did quickly find the sites using overflight photographs .
 U-2 incursions into Cuban airspace continued . Khrushchev became more cautious in his posture toward Washington . A middle-rank Soviet military officer on the ground in Cuba gave an order for a missile strike on an American plane .
 He did so without authorization from his superior, Colonel General Issa Pliev, the nominal commander of the Group of Soviet Troops in Cuba, who was confined to his bed by a painful kidney ailment . Pliev did so .
 Perhaps Soviet troops felt mutinous because they were left unprepared for the humid, mosquito-plagued climate, they had to eat worm-infested borscht .
 The U-2 was shot down and the pilot killed, but luckily the incident did not ignite wider hostilities . The pilot was killed .
 General Curtis LeMay, the air force chief of staff, stayed wedded to the axiom that an all-out invasion of Cuba was the only solution . LeMay: The only solution was an air strike followed by an amphibious assault with tanks .
 The failed Bay of Pigs operation of the year before, involving U.S.-backed Cuban exiles, would be avenged . Castro would be toppled, the Soviets would be driven out, the Cuban people would be liberated from Communist rule .
 LeMay evinced scant respect for his commander in chief, President John F Kennedy, 11 years younger . LeMay was mastermind of the firebombing of Tokyo in World War II . His PT boat mishap during that war was magically spun by the Kennedy clan into a fable
 In Moscow, Khrushchev calmed down and extracted from “that viper,” as he had once called Kennedy behind closed doors, a secret pledge to remove U.S. medium-range nuclear missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet nuclear weapons from Cuba .
 Khrushchev was an “asshole,” he exclaimed to a Cuban newspaper editor . The cooler heads of the two principals prevailed . The two principals of the Soviet Union and the United States prevailed .
 This treatment of the harrowing affair persuasively shows that triumph was only narrowly gained . Still, as this treatment of this harrowing affair shows, that triumph is only narrowly won .