 50 years ago this month, the world got lucky . The first responders to the U.S. were killed by a plane crash in 1968 .
 Richard M Nixon was widely favored to win that year’s presidential election over Kennedy, who had a well-justified reputation as a lightweight playboy senator . The 1960s came within an eyelash of living in such a world, writes Julian Zelizer .
 Some have argued Nixon was, in fact, the rightful winner of what turned out to be the closest presidential election in history . Nixon had traveled the world extensively during his eight years serving in the White House with President Dwight D Eisenhower .
 President Kennedy’s first reaction was that U.S. military action -bombing Cuba and possibly invading the island - would be necessary . If so, it was a wise choice .
 The president decided to try a military blockade, or quarantine, around Cuba to prevent more missiles from reaching the island . In short order, that was the unanimous recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 Kennedy persuaded Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles from Cuba . With that and a secret agreement to dismantle NATO missiles in Turkey -a major concession to the Communists - he persuaded him to withdraw .
 If Nixon had been president during the Missile Crisis, there is no reason to believe he would not have shared Kennedy’s initial instinct for military action . The Madman Theory is a counterfactual examination of a 1960 Nixon administration at the time of the Crisis .
 Nixon is likely to have also received advice that he try to resolve the crisis peacefully . Nixon is unlikely to have received advice he should not try to solve the crisis .
 In The Madman Theory, Leonard Hall -a close Nixon associate – serves as Attorney General . Hall is one voice for moderation in moderation in his book .
 The same Joint Chiefs who advised Kennedy would have been in place were Nixon president, except for the chairman . But Nixon is known for making end runs around administration officials he does not trust or agree with .
 On October 1, 1962, President Kennedy replaced General Lyman Lemnitzer with General Maxwell Taylor . President Kennedy had replaced the general with general Maxwell Taylor.
 Taylor was among those who favored military action against Cuba . He was a reformist compared with Lemnitzer, who I believe Nixon would have nominated for another term .
 Lemnitzer had earlier approved Operation Northwoods, which proposed staging terrorist acts in the U.S. that could be blamed on Cuba and used as a pretext for an American invasion to topple the Castro government . Both Nixon and Kennedy wanted desperately to get rid of Castro .
 The culmination of Kennedy’s efforts to topple Castro came when he approved an invasion by CIA-trained Cuban exiles, who came ashore in Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 .
 The Bay of Pigs was a spectacular failure for Kennedy . The plan had been hatched in the Eisenhower administration . Vice President Nixon had been the White House point person for the operation .
 It taught him to be wary of the military’s advice - a lesson that served him well in resisting the Joint Chiefs when they called for military action during the Missile Crisis .
 Nixon would have had fewer qualms about maintaining the pretense that the U.S. had nothing to do with the 1961 invasion . Nixon would not have vetoed the CIA’s original, more suitable landing site, as Kennedy did .
 Military action against Cuba would have presented the same danger for Nixon as Kennedy envisioned when he considered what might occur if the blockade failed to end the crisis . This would have been followed by a full-scale invasion to assure all the missiles had been destroyed .
 Kennedy believed Khrushchev might take over West Berlin or attack NATO’s nuclear missiles in Turkey . Kennedy believed he might take control of West Berlin, or take over NATO's nuclear missiles . Kennedy: "Khrrushchev, Kennedy believed, might attack NATO's missile missiles in
 To prevent this or other Soviet moves, Nixon had a plan . Either move could easily escalate into global nuclear war . Nixon's plan was to prevent this from happening .
 Nixon could effectively demonstrate his determination to fight a nuclear war by transferring government operations to Mount Weather, in Virginia . If he could convince Khrushchev he was crazy enough to launch an all-out nuclear war, the Soviet Union would be deterred from attacking .
 Known as the alternate White House, this massive underground complex had been completed just four years earlier . It was completed as part of a network of sites outside Washington that could be used to continue government operations in the event of nuclear war . The underground complex was completed four years ago .
 President Kennedy decided against going to Mount Weather, also known as the Special Facility . To be effective, the president would need to relocate before missiles were launched .
 Nixon’s move to Mount Weather would have made nuclear war more likely, not less . Jackie Kennedy didn’t want to leave Washington and there was some fear that Cabinet officials, barred from bringing family members, would refuse .
 If Khrushchev believed the U.S. was preparing to launch nuclear missiles and bombers against the Soviet Union, he might decide it would be best to strike first . He would also have other cause to fear the worst .
 Khrushchev had given General Issa Pliyev the right weapons for a successful defense of Cuba . The city-destroying nuclear missiles aimed at the U.S. were among the weapons of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet forces in Cuba were equipped with tactical nuclear missiles . The missiles were designed to be used on the battlefield to destroy enemy ships and troops . The Cuban government was forced to withdraw from Cuba in order to protect its citizens .
 Soviet Luna rockets had a range of 20 miles and carried a two-kiloton warhead . The rockets were launched in the Soviet Union in the 1960s and 1970s .
 In the event of massive U.S. bombing it would have been difficult for Khrushchev to either revoke these orders or for Pliyev to communicate with Moscow . In the case of massive United States bombing, it would not have been possible to revoke the orders .
 The result would have been the first-use of nuclear weapons against United States forces . The U.S. had a longstanding response prepared for such an attack . The United States had a long-planned response .
 President Kennedy favored giving the president a wider range of options . Known as the Single Integrated Operational Plan, or SIOP, it called for a highly coordinated nuclear attack on more than 3700 targets .
 Nixon would be hard pressed to resist the inevitable calls for U.S. retaliation . Nixon would have to resist calls for United States retaliation .
 He might have tried to resist the institutional forces at work urging him to implement the SIOP . Instead, he might have responded with a limited nuclear strike against a single Soviet military installation .