 The request by an escorting U.S. destroyer to uncover all missiles aboard is refused . A crew member partially reveals one of the missiles .
 In 1962, the Soviet Union and U.S. squared up to one another over Cuba, that logic broke down . But in 1962, when the two nations squared up, that was not the case, logic broke .
 His first error was to mistake the U.S. president for a callow weakling, he said . Obama's first mistake is to mistake him for a weakling .
 Khrushchev wanted the city to himself and Kennedy worried that the Soviets might use force to get it . Kennedy worried about the use of force to seize it .
 Khrushchev’s real focus lay further west . The United States has a long history with Cuba . Khruschev's real focus was in Cuba .
 Jefferson considered it a candidate for U.S. statehood in 1820 . Jefferson had considered it for United States statehood .
 In 1901, a new U.S. law gave Washington a legal basis for intervening in Cuba . In 1959, in 1959, Castro’s revolution tempered this influence, Eisenhower wanted to get rid of him .
 Kennedy tried regime change, but this ended disastrously in 1961 at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy's attempt to change the regime in Cuba was disastrously unsuccessful .
 Khrushchev said he wanted nuclear weapons on Cuba to prevent a second U.S. invasion . That's what he told Castro, at least .
 The Americans had atomic weapons in Turkey which could hit targets deep inside the USSR . For Khrushchev, the United States mainland was out of range . The U.S. mainland is out of the range .
 Soviet arms and advisers had been heading into Cuba since 1960; but in September 1962 things changed . Getting warheads onto Cuba, 90 miles off the Florida coast, would change all that .
 Khrushchev sent in the 27th anti-aircraft missile division . The rockets were meant to deter overflights by the CIA’s U-2 spy planes .
 The nuclear arms arrived in two phases — the rockets, then the warheads, the first of which reached Cuba on 4 October . The first of two phases was the rockets .
 The heat was so intense that their cans of rations swelled up and exploded . Their cans of food swelled and exploded in the intense heat .
 The Soviets had also failed to appreciate that the Caribbean has a hurricane season, a complicating factor when installing — and using — nuclear weapons .
 Cuban roads were often little more than lanes, making it tricky for a lorry carrying a 70ft-long nuclear missile to turn corners .
 Cuban palm trees had very light foliage, offering almost no cover for their launch sites . The Americans spotted the missiles almost immediately and knew exactly what they were .
 Kennedy’s reaction was one of horror, and his first instinct was to launch a conventional attack . Kennedy's reaction to the attack was that of horror . Kennedy was not prepared to launch an attack .
 The scenario he faced was nightmarish. If they hadn’t, the outcome could have been catastrophic. The situation was a nightmare .
 More nuclear weapons are heading for the Caribbean carrying more nuclear weapons . More ships are heading to the Caribbean with more nuclear arms .
 Khrushchev tried to write to Kennedy, offering to withdraw his missiles as part of a wider deal on disarmament . Kennedy refused to accept the offer, saying it was part of an agreement to withdraw missiles .
 Khrushchev’s attempted peace overture caused the United States military to raise its state of alert to DEFCON2, one step below all-out war . The Americans showed pictures of the missile sites at the UN, and global opinion turned against Moscow .
 Khrushchev realised he needed a way out . Under relentless pressure from Kennedy, he came grudgingly to respect him . He was forced to resign in 1961 .
 After a frantic round of deal-making with Bobby Kennedy, the Soviets agreed to withdraw from Cuba . The Soviet Union withdrew from Cuba in 1961 .
 The U.S. would inspect the departing missiles, but Castro wouldn’t let United States personnel into Cuba . In return, the United States would remove its missiles from Turkey . The deal was made with Castro in Cuba .
 This meant inspections had to take place at sea, so they were forced to be carried out at sea . This led to a terrifying moment when the ship was inspected by the crew of the ship .
 A Soviet submarine commander mistakenly thought the Americans were attacking . The incident occurred during a U.S. inspection ship's visit to an inspection ship .
 The captain ordered a nuclear-tipped torpedo to be loaded, a weapon with an explosive yield approximately two-thirds that of the Hiroshima bomb . The captain of the ship ordered a torpedo with a bomb with a nuclear explosive yield . The torpedo was loaded with a torpedo that had a nuclear
 The sub turned towards the American ship, preparing to fire, but a Soviet crew member got stuck in the shaft of the upper hatch . The American ship apologises and explains it was a mistake . The sub was about to fire at the time .
 If the submarine had fired, it would have been the first shot of the third world war . If the sub had fired it would be the first of three world war shots .
 Khrushchev tried to frame the Cuban confrontation as a great victory, but for him it was a disaster . Instead, the Soviet captain shut his torpedo tubes and moved on .
 Serhii Plokhy’s book is remarkable and troubling, especially for the insight it gives into Khrushchev's thinking . The book, published in Moscow, Russia, is published by Vladimir Putin .
 The author turns to the present day that the writing becomes most urgent . He turns to present day when he writes most urgently .
 Modern atomic weapons are more efficient and precise than their Cold War predecessors . The British government now intends to develop the weapons .
 Present-day nuclear-armed states such as China, Pakistan and India would act if a similar crisis were to arise . But what lingers is the question of how present-day nations would act .
 The Cold War 'balance of terror' has gone. There is no answer to that, but what is certain is that the Cold War ‘balance of . terror’ has gone .