 Formal authorization for action 2 Planning 3 Execution 4 Assassination proposals . Assassination plans 4 Assassinations proposals 4 Assassinated proposals .
 Fidel Castro's rise to power had been watched by the CIA since 1948 . Late 1962 until well into well into 1963, Castro was in power until 1963 .
 As he rose to power, the CIA became increasingly concerned with his actions and political views . The CIA was concerned about his political views and actions .
 In the late 1950s, the CIA began gathering more intelligence on Castro, suspecting that he was a communist . The CIA began collecting more information on Castro in the late '50s .
 The organization could not initially discover hard evidence that Castro was a communist . The organization was unable to find hard evidence of Castro's communist tendencies .
 CIA remained concerned with how Castro's government took pro-communist stances . CIA was concerned with Castro's pro-Communist stance . CIA believed Castro was a communist .
 CIA intelligence concluded that Castro's close confidants, Ernesto Che Guella and Raul Castro Ruz, both had communist tendencies .
 Cabell noted in November 1959 that while Castro was not a communist he allowed free opportunity to the communist party in Cuba to grow and spread its message . Cabell: While Castro allowed the party to grow in Cuba, he allowed it to grow .
 By December plans were already being tossed around between high ranking U.S. Foreign Policy Officials that called for overthrowing the Castro government . The Castro government was overthrown in December .
 CIA report states that by March 1960, the U.S. had already decided that Fidel Castro must be displaced . CIA report: By March 1960 the United States had decided to remove Fidel Castro from Cuba . Report: The United States decided that Castro must have been removed from Cuba by March
 Due to the United States' fear of repercussions from the United Nations, the plan was kept at the highest level of secrecy, and as thus, ""plausible deniability"" was made a key focal point in American clandestine service policy .
 The CIA estimates the cost of the covert operation was approximately $4. million . The CIA's budget estimation for this covert operation is approximately $3 million .
 The paper signed by Eisenhower was also the sole report issued by the government throughout the entire project . Eisenhower signed the paper .
 This program required the agency to work around the clock and collect a large amount of detail-specific information, as well as to cooperate with other agencies . This program was required to collect the information .
 The "Bender Group" was developed as an organization that would provide American businessmen a secret avenue through which to trade with Cuban groups . To secure the needed financial backing, the “Bender’s” group secured the necessary funding .
 Propaganda activities included using print and radio mediums to broadcast anti-Castro messages . Propaganda was used to broadcast messages against the government of Cuba .
 Large amounts of real estate were purchased by the agency for use in this operation . The agency purchased real estate for use .
 A communications station was also established on June 15 by using an Army operation as a cover . The operation was also used to establish a communications station .
 CIA acquired properties in different U.S. cities and abroad for various reasons . CIA also acquired properties abroad and in the United States and abroad . CIA has acquired properties around the world .
 From March through August 1960, the CIA had plans aimed at undermining Castro's appeal to the public by sabotaging his speeches . The CIA planned to sabotage Castro's speeches and undermine his appeal to voters .
 The schemes thought up were aimed at discrediting Castro by influencing his behavior and by changing his appearance . The schemes were intended to discredite Castro . Castro's behavior was influenced by the schemes .
 One plan discussed was to spray his broadcast studio with a compound similar to LSD, but was scrapped because the compound was too unreliable . The plan was scrapped as the compound is too unreliable to be sprayed .
 The CIA's plans to undermine Castro's public image went so far as to even line his shoes with thallium salts which would cause his beard to fall out . Castro's shoes were even laced with the substance .
 The plan was to lace his shoes with the salts while he was on a trip outside Cuba . The plan is to lace the shoes with salts .
 He was expected to leave his shoes outside his hotel room to be polished . The salts would be administered to him after he left his shoes polished .
 The United States' opposition to Castro was based on the U.S. government's position that coercion inside Cuba was severe and that the government was serving as a model for allied anti-colonial movements elsewhere in the Americas .
 A month after the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the CIA proposed a program of sabotage and terrorist attacks against civilian and military targets in Cuba . The CIA proposed the attacks in Cuba in a month .
 Robert Kennedy and Richard Goodwin suggested to President Kennedy that the U.S. government begin this campaign . President Kennedy authorized the campaign in November 1961 .
 A centralized effort led by senior officials from the White House and other government agencies to remove Fidel Castro and overthrow the Cuban government was the best course of action . The White House believed that a centralized effort to remove Castro and oust the government of Cuba was best way of action.
 Following a meeting in the White House on November 3, 1961, this initiative became known as Operation Mongoose . The initiative was led by Air Force Brigadier General Edward Lansdale on the military side and William King Harvey at the CIA .
 Representatives from the State Department, the Defense Department, and the CIA were assigned larger roles in implementing the operation . Representatives from U.S. Information Agency and the Department of Justice were also called on occasionally to assist with the operation.
 Under Eisenhower, four major forms of action were to be taken to aid anti-communist opposition in Cuba at the time . Four major forms were taken to help Cuban opposition in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Some of the outlined goals of the operations included intelligence collection and the generation of a nucleus for a popular Cuban movement, along with exploiting the potential of the underworld in Cuban cities . At this stage, it was still not clear that these efforts would end up leading to an invasion .
 The Departments of State, Defense, and Justice were responsible for a combination of these objectives . The State Department was responsible for the objectives .
 Kennedy and the rest of SG-A hoped to dispose of the Castro regime and bring change to Cuba's political system . Kennedy and other members of the group hoped to end Castro's regime .
 President Kennedy, the Attorney General, CIA Director John McCone, Richard Goodwin, and Brigadier General Lansdale met on November 21, 1961, to discuss plans for Operation Mongoose . The operation was the brainchild of Lansdale .
 Robert Kennedy stressed the importance of immediate dynamic action to discredit the Castro regime in Cuba . Kennedy stresses the need to take immediate action in order to discredit Castro .
 He remained disappointed from the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion just a few months prior to the invasion .
 By the end of November, President Kennedy had finalized details for Operation Mongoose . The operation was the first of its kind in the world .
 Operation Mongoose remained strictly confidential and limited . Lansdale remained in charge of the operation, and access to the operation was strictly confidential .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff saw the project's ultimate objective was to provide adequate justification for U.S. military intervention in Cuba . The project was intended to provide justification for military intervention .
 They requested that the Secretary of Defense assign them responsibility for the project . But Attorney General Robert F Kennedy retained effective control .
 General Cabell held a joint briefing on Cuba for the Department of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Cabell was the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence in 1960s .
 White had mentioned that Fidel Castro was going to need to be dealt with . White had said that Castro would be going to have to deal with him .
 The DDCI also discussed the need to increase covert and semi-covert programs aimed at Castro . At this time they also discussed increasing covert programs aimed towards Castro .
 These programs included psychological warfare, political action, economic action, and para-military action . These programs were designed to target the U.S. military .
 By the 18th of January, the DDCI had come up with various Cuban operations . By the end of the month, it had come to an end .
 Later it was discussed that a separate branch should be created to handle everything about the anti-Castro movement . It was also discussed that it should be set up to handle all about the movement .
 The White House division organized Branch 4 as the new task force to run Cuban Operations . Branch 4 will run the White House's Cuban operations .
 The task force included 40 personnel, with 18 at headquarters, 20 at the Havana station, and two at Santiago base . It included 18 personnel at headquarters and 20 at Havana station .
 The state department was concerned that if Castro were overthrown, then the people to come after him would be worse than him – primarily Che Guevara and Raul Castro . State Department was worried that if the people who came after him were worse than he was .
 They proposed a way of getting a better leader that they approved of in his place . So they proposed a plan to get a new leader in place of Obama .
 CIA began to worry that their involvement with the anti-Castro movement would lead to an anti-US movement . CIA worried that the movement could lead to a new anti-U.S. movement .
 On March 14 of 1960, 1960, Dulles presented a “General Covert Action Plan for Cuba” that would focus only on the Cuban problems . The plan was presented in March 1960 .
 Guerrilla capacity in the anti-Castro groups both in and out of Cuba was discussed . Richard Bissell asked Sheffield Edwards, Director of Security, if he could establish contact with the United States gambling syndicate .
 The objective clearly was the assassination of Castro, Edwards claims . Edwards claims that there was a studied avoidance of the term in his conversation with Bissell .
 Former WH Chief of WH Division recalls having only limited knowledge of such a plan and at a much later date .
 The press statement announced the unification of forces against Castro . The statement outlined the platform of their mission .
 The press statement listed the prerogatives for agrarian policy, economic policy, systems of law, education reform, military structure, etc. etc. The statement also listed the country's economic policy and education reform .
 The Cuban Opposition Front aims to restore the 1940 Cuban constitution . Specific goals have been identified for Cubans on board .
 The Cuban Opposition Front's purpose is to attract other anti-Castro groups, attract other groups, and to serve as a scapegoat in case covert operations were discovered . The front was created to act as a potential replacement to Castro after his fall . The Front was created in order to
 For the Cuban Operation, the CIA made a list of potential guerilla fighters within the Cuban provinces . The CIA made the list of possible guerillas .
 Political prisoners and guerillas that the CIA believed could be convinced to enlist in the operations against Castro . The CIA believed they could be persuaded to join operations against the Castro regime .
 Due to a recent declassification of thousands of pages from the CIA in 2011, it is now known that the CIA task force in charge of the paramilitary assault knew the operation could not succeed without becoming an open invasion supported by the United States military .
 On April 12, 1961 the CIA prepared a full report on the Cuban Operation that outlined its orientation and concept . According to Peter Kornbluh, this was the most important revelation of the declassification of the official history .
 The report further emphasized particular steps to be taken to achieve the appearance of internal revolution . The report also emphasized steps to achieve an internal revolution.
 San Antonio Air Base, Campo Liberated Air Base and Nueva Gerona were the first 4 air bases in the country's history . The bases are located at Batabanó and Nueva Gerona . The military bases were located at San Antonio and Campo
 The number of B-26 crafts to be used in the strike was reduced from 15 to 5, which ultimately limited the United States air coverage . The U.S. air coverage was also limited by the reduced number of aircraft .
 The CIA's Official History of the Bay of Pigs Operation notes that limited air cover left the Brigade air force open to attacks by Castro's forces . The operation was part of the CIA's official history .
 Both Kennedys ignored the fact that limited air strikes would prevent the Brigade air force from being effective because of the risk of counterattack .
 A White House staffer was quoted as saying, ""...the plan was to destroy Castro's air force on the ground before the battle began and then provide air support, with an anti-Castro ""Air Force"" consisting of some two dozen surplus planes flown by Cuban exiles .
 On the 18 April there was an air transport scheduled from the USAF and that was the best day for the Brigade B-26's mobilization to occur . The Brigade's mobilization occurred on that day .
 During this strike there were no aircraft lost and there was a successful strike made on the Castro column moving from Playa Larga to Playa Giron . No aircraft were lost in the strike .
 Use of napalm had not been officially approved until the next day, April 18, 1961 . 10 days later TIDE dropped 5 B-26 bombs . The Official History notes that napalm was not officially approved .
 Lansdale was chosen due to his experience with counter-insurgency in the Philippines during the Hukbalahap Rebellion, as well as because of his experience supporting Vietnam's Diem regime .
 The formerly classified memo depicts the way in which the CIA and the Joint Chiefs of Staff sought a reason to invade Cuba that would be acceptable to the U.S. The memo was classified and classified by the CIA .
 Any U.S. military intervention in Cuba should not involve the Soviet Union . Another significant consideration was that any . United States military intervention should not . involve the . Soviet Union.
 There were 32 tasks or plans considered under the Cuban Project, some of which were carried out . Cuba was not a part of the Warsaw pact, and there had yet to be any significant evidence of a connection between Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 The plans varied in efficacy and intention, from propagandistic purposes for effective disruption of the Cuban government and economy, to effective disruption . The plans vary in efficacy, intention, and intention .
 Plans included use of United States Army Special Forces, destruction of Cuban sugar crops, and mining of harbors . Plans included the use of U.S. Special Forces .
 There was a meeting of the Special Group in Secretary of State David Rusk's conference room on August 10, 1962 at which Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara broached the subject of the liquidation of Cuban leaders .
 Special Group on Operation Mongoose met to discuss proceedings . Project MONGOOSE action memorandum was prepared by Edwards Landsdale .
 The Attorney General, Mr Johnson, and General Lansdale were there amongst others .
 Participants discussed some self-interests in acquiring Cuban waters for mining rights, planning military contingency plans, and attacking Guantanamo . These beliefs and ideas not shared by all participants .
 "They needed to increase the amount of sabotage their agents were involved in," says CNN.com's John Defterios . "I'm not going to be surprised," he said .
 That regulations and restrictions needed to be realized so that the CIA could take some shortcuts in training and preparations . The CIA as an agency and their operation agents could take advantage of the regulations .
 That the CIA would do anything they could to dispose of Castro and stop the spread of communism into the Western Hemisphere . That would be the case . The CIA would try and dispose of the Castro .
 Operation Northwoods was a plan to use false flag operations to justify intervention in Cuba . It was proposed in 1962, signed by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and presented to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara for approval .
 Among courses of action considered were real and simulated attacks on U.S. or foreign soil which would be blamed on the Cuban government . The attacks would be carried out in Cuba or other countries .
 False-flag attacks would have involved attacks on Cuban exiles, damaging U.S. bases and ships, attacking Central American countries such as Haiti or the Dominican Republic, having shipments of arms found on nearby beaches, faking a Cuban military plane destroying an American civilian aircraft .
 The Project's six-phase schedule was presented by Edward Lansdale on February 20, 1962 . It was overseen by Attorney General Robert Kennedy, who oversaw it .
 President Kennedy was briefed on the operation's guidelines on March 16, 1962 .
 Lansdale outlined a coordinated program of political, psychological, military, and intelligence operations as well as assassination attempts on key political leaders . Lansdale also outlined a program of psychological, psychological and military operations .
 Each month since his presentation, a different method was in place to destabilize the communist regime . Each month, a new method has been put in place for destabilizing the regime .
 Plans included publication of Anti-Castro political propaganda, armaments for militant opposition groups, establishment of guerrilla bases throughout the country, and preparations for an October military intervention in Cuba .
 CIA covert operations and intelligence gathering station JM/WAVE in Miami was established as the operations center for Task Force W, the CIA's unit dedicated to Operation Mongoose . The CIA's task force was established in Miami in 2007 .
 The mafioso John Roselli was introduced to the CIA by former FBI Agent Robert Mahue . Roselli worked for the CIA in the 1980s and '90s .
 Mahue had known Roselli since the 1950s and was aware of his connection to the gambling syndicate . Mahue knew Roselli well enough to know he was connected to the syndicate, he says .
 Under the alias ""John Rawlson,"" Roselli was tasked with recruiting Cubans from Florida to help in the assassination of Castro . Roselli recruited Cubans to help with the assassination .
 Rabe writes that reports from the Church Committee reveal that from June 1963 onward, the Kennedy administration intensified its war against Cuba while the CIA integrated propaganda, ""economic denial,"" and sabotage .
 At this time, the CIA received authorization for 13 major operations in Cuba . Attacks on an electric power plant, an oil refinery, and a sugar mill were planned .
 Rabe has argued that the Kennedy administration showed no interest in Castro's repeated request for the U.S. to cease its campaign of sabotage and terrorism against Cuba .
 Harvard Historian Jorge Domínguez states that Operation Mongoose's scope included sabotage actions against a railway bridge, petroleum storage facilities, a molasses storage container, a power plant, and a floating crane . The scope of the operation included sabotage against railway bridges, power plants, a
 Actions were carried out against a petroleum refinery, a power plant, a sawmill, and a floating crane in a Cuban harbor to undermine the Cuban economy . Actions were subsequently carried out .
 Operation was suspended on October 30, 1962, but 3 of 10 six-man sabotage teams had already been deployed to Cuba . The operation was suspended in 1962 . Operation was called off October 30 .
 Operation Mongoose consisted of a program of covert action, including sabotage, psychological warfare, intelligence collection, and the creation of an internal revolution against the communist government . The operation was part of a covert program of operations against the government .
 The United States still lacked the capability of effectively getting information to the majority of the Cuban people . The U.S. still lacks the capability to effectively get information from Cuba, the U.N. says .
 They had a trade embargo, denial of bunkering facilities, increased port security, and control procedure on transshipment, technical data, and customs inspection .
 The United States also used diplomatic means to frustrate Cuban trade negotiations in Israel, Jordan, Iran, Greece, Greece and possibly Japan . The U.S. also frustrated trade talks in Israel and Jordan .
 From the outset, Lansdale and fellow members of the SG-A identified internal support for an anti-Castro movement to be the most important aspect of the operation, he says .
 American organization and support for anti-Castro forces in Cuba was seen as key . U.S. involvement expanded from what had been economic and military assistance of rebels .
 Lansdale hoped to organize an effort within the operation, led by the CIA, to covertly build support for a popular movement within Cuba . Lansdale's plan was to build support within the CIA for the popular movement in Cuba .
 It was difficult to identify anti-Castro forces within Cuba and there lacked a groundswell of popular support that Cuban insurgents could tap into . The Cuban government failed to defeat the Castro regime in the 1960s .
 By January 1962, the CIA had failed to recruit suitable Cuban operatives that could infiltrate the Castro regime . The CIA tried to recruit Cuban operatives but failed to find suitable operatives .
 Lansdale criticized the CIA effort to ramp up their activities to meet Operation Mongoose's expedient timelines . Lansdale said the CIA is ramping up their efforts to meet the timeline of the operation .
 Robert McCone of the CIA complained that Lansdale's timeline was too accelerated . He said it would be difficult to achieve the tasks demanded in such a short timeframe .
 In February, Lansdale offered a comprehensive review of all Operation Mongoose activities to date . Lansdale: "Operation Mongoose has been successful"
 He asked for a ramp-up of efforts from all agencies and departments to expedite the execution of the Cuban Project .
 He laid out a six-part plan targeting the overthrow of the Castro government in October 1962 . Castro's government was overthrown in Cuba in 1962 .
 In March 1962, a key intelligence report, written by the CIA, was produced for Lansdale . Lansdale was the CIA's top CIA official .
 Only a quarter of the Cuban population stood behind the Castro regime . But the rest of the population was both disaffected and passive .
 Large-scale amphibious landing military exercises were conducted off the coast of North Carolina in April 1962 . McCone criticized the handling of the operation, believing that national policy was too cautious .
 The Special Group provided plans on March 14, 1962, for the first phase of the operation . The operation lasted until the end of July 1962 .
 There were four main objectives for Phase 1; was to gather hard intelligence on the target area, Undertake all other political, economic, and covert actions short of creating a revolt in Cuba or the need for armed intervention .
 During Phase I the Punta del Este conference was a major U.S. political action to isolate Castro and neutralize his influence in the Hemisphere . The conference was part of Phase I of a U.N. effort to neutralize Castro .
 President Kennedy's successful visit to Mexico was another major U.S. political action with an impact upon the operation but was not directly tied to the operation . The operation was a major political action in the United States .
 Operation Mongoose was thought they wanted to overthrow the Communist regime in Havana and recapture their homeland . Another key interest was the Cuban refugees as it was thought to want to overthrow their Communist regime .
 The refugees were given open U.S. assistance to remain in the country, yet were involved in covert actions in a limited way . The refugees are given open United States assistance .
 Policy limitations of audibility and visibility were taken into consideration for the handling and use of the refugee potential . Policy limitations were also taken into account .
 As Phase 1 drew to a close Phase II projected plan was written up and considered four possibilities . Phase II of Phase II considered four possible scenarios .
 The first option was to cancel operational plans and treat Cuba as a Bloc nation and protect Hemisphere from it. The other was to treat it as an ally of the U.S. and protect it from it .
 The next possibility was to exert all possible diplomatic, economic, psychological, and other pressures to overthrow the Castro-Communist regime without overt employment of U.S. military .
 Another possibility was to help the Cubans overthrow the Castro-Communist regime with a step-by-step phase to ensure success including the use of military force if required . Another possibility is to help with the overthrow of Cuba's Castro-communist regime .
 The last possibility was to use a provocation and overthrow the Castro-Communist regime by U.S. military force, he says . "The last possibility is to use provocation," he said .
 Lansdale recommended a more aggressive short-term plan of action in July . Lansdale's review of the situation was published in July, but Lansdale said it was necessary .
 He believed that time was of the essence, especially given intensified Soviet military build-up in Cuba .
 Soviet military build-up in Cuba disgruntled the Kennedy administration . New plans were drawn to recruit more Cubans to infiltrate the Castro regime .
 The fear of open military retaliation against the United States and Berlin for the U.S. covert operations in Cuba slowed down the operation . The fear that open military reprisals against the US and Berlin would have led to a halt .
 The CIA allegedly recruited Mob bosses Sam Giancana , Santo Trafficante and other mobsters to assassinate Fidel Castro . The mobsters were allegedly recruited by the CIA to assassinate Castro .
 In April 1967, the Inspector General issued a report on the various plots conceived to assassinate Fidel Castro . The report was published in April 1967 . The Inspector General later issued a statement on the plots .
 A key form of documentation used to construct the timeline of plots was oral testimony collected years after the plots were originally planned . Oral testimony was collected years later after plots were planned . The timeline was used to build the timeline .
 Inspector General report details “at least three, and perhaps four, schemes that were under consideration” during a time range between March and August 1960 . Prior to August 1960 The Inspector General said there were at least three or perhaps four schemes under consideration .
 It is speculated that all of the schemes considered at this time could have been in the planning process at the time .
 Esterline later admitted that even though he couldn't exactly recall what the cigars were intended to do, he didn't believe they were lethal . He later said that he later said he believed they were not lethal .
 Richard Bissell had CIA contact Robert Maheu pull in Johnny Roselli . Roselli was a member of the syndicate of Las Vegas . Bissell was a CIA contact who pulled in Roselli from the CIA .
 Maheu disguised as a personal relations executive for a company suffering financial losses in Cuba due to Castro's actions, offered Roselli $150,000 for the successful assassination of Castro . Roselli offered the money for Castro's assassination .
 Roselli provided involved a co-conspirator, ‘Sam Gold’ and ‘Joe, the courier’, identified later as Santos Trafficante, the Cosa Nostra chieftain of Cuba . “Joe’s” later identified as Santos
 According to Bissell, the most viable option presented was bacterial liquids . Bissell says bacterial liquids are the only solution to the problem .
 The final product, however, was solid botulin pills that would dissolve in liquid . Botulin pills would dissolve into a liquid liquid .
 Roselli, along with associate “Sam Gold,” used their connection to coerce Cuban official Juan Orta to perform the assassination through his gambling bills . Orta's gambling bills were used to pay Roselli for the assassination .
 The Inspector General's report asserts that Orta had lost his access to Castro prior to him receiving the pills and thus could not complete the task . Orta received the pills from Castro, the report says .
 The plan to assassinate Castro by poison pill was canceled after the Bay of Pigs . The Inspector General's report speculates that this attempt failed because Castro no longer visited the restaurant where the pill was supposed to be administered .
 Harvey was responsible for eight assassination attempts on Castro . None of these attempts were proficient at accomplishing any foreign policy objectives . Harvey's assassination attempts failed to achieve foreign policy goals .
 Project ZRRIFLE's main purpose was to spot potential agents and research assassination techniques that might be used . Project Z RRIFLE was to find out if agents could be used in assassination .
 Project ZRRIFLE and the agency's operations in Cuba funneled into on program in November 1961 . Harvey became the head of the task force for Cuba when he was head of program .
 Conflicting accounts in the Inspector General's report of how later events during this time period played out make it difficult to discern the path of how the Cuba task force handled its operations .
 There was a consensus that Roselli again became involved with the agency along with Verona . Roselli is expected to return to the agency after his retirement .
 The connections between Roselli and the CIA fell apart when Harvey was notified that Roselli was on the FBI's watch list . Harvey had been notified that the FBI had placed Roselli on the list .
 Chomsky says this sabotage killed “four hundred workers’s workers, according to a Cuban government letter to the UN secretary general . Such direct provocations ran at odds with JFK's Missile Crisis-defusing pledge to remove United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of
 The missile swap had been seen by many as an even trade that saved face for both sides . The deal was seen by some as a deal to avoid a serious strike to the other .
 Kennedy had sought dialogue with Castro to reverse the two nations' acrimonious relationship . Kennedy had subsequently sought dialogue between Castro and Kennedy .
 As a result of the CIA's continued defiance, tensions between the President and the Agency, festering since the failed failed Bay of Pigs invasion, continued to escalate .
 The plan was never implemented but it is speculated that a diving suit had been purchased with the intention of giving it to Castro . It is believed that a dive suit was intended to be given to Castro in the future .
 Various other methods of assassination that had been thought of by the CIA included exploding seashells, having a former lover slip him poison pills, and exposing him to various other poisoned items such as a fountain pen and ice cream .
 Along plans to assassinate Castro was one to eliminate Rolando Cubela, a Cuban revolutionary hero . The plans to eliminate Cubela was one of the plans to kill Castro .
 The plot for Cubela began as an operation to recruit someone close to Castro to launch a coup . The United States Senate's Church Committee of 1975 stated that it had confirmed at least eight separate CIA run plots to assassinate Castro .
 CIA's inspector general in 1967 admits that this is the reason behind the fanciful nature of many of the assassination attempts . In a report written in 1967, he admitted that this was the reason for the elaborate attempts .
 He also warned that assassinating Castro would not necessarily destabilize the government in the manner that is desired . He also said he warned that assassination would not mean destabilizing the government .
 He didn't think the assassination of Castro would do much to free Cuba from communist control . He thought the assassination would do little to free the island nation .
 He mentions that people became too focused on the idea of killing Castro when ""getting rid of Castro"" doesn't have to mean killing him . He says that getting rid of the Castro doesn't need to kill him .
 Many assassination ideas were floated by the CIA during Operation Mongoose . Due to this micro-focus, more complex plans with greater chances of success were not made .
 While numerous sources state the exploding cigar plot as fact, at least one source asserts it to be simply a myth, and another dismisses it as mere supermarket tabloid fodder .
 Another suggests that the story does have its origins in the CIA, but that it was never seriously proposed by them as a plot . The CIA is said to have never seriously considered the story .
 Another attempt at Castro's life was by way of a fountain pen loaded with the poison Black Leaf 40 and passed to a Cuban asset in Paris the day of President Kennedy's assassination, November 22, 1963 . The plot was made up by the CIA as an intentionally ""silly"" idea
 Evidence also indicates that these two events occurred simultaneously, in the same moment. Notably, the evidence also indicates .
 Rolando Cubela, the potential assassin, says Black Leaf 40 was not in the pen at the time of the attack . Cubela says the assassin was killed by a single bullet bullet . The potential assassin says the bullet was fired from the pen .
 U.S. Intelligence later responded to say that Black Leaf 40 was merely a suggestion . Cubela thought that there were other poisons that would be much more effective .
 Operation Mongoose was ended by the Kennedy Administration . Kennedy Administration made some attempts to mend relations with the Cuban government . The Kennedy Administration was involved in the Cuban operation .
 Documents released by the National Security Archive show that the project was over soon after it was finished .
 One document comes in the form of an options paper from a Latin American specialist about how to fix relations relations . The document comes from an expert on Latin American relations .
 The document goes on to push for further studies into how exactly they would go about improving relations .
 The document also states the two possible outcomes that would come along with a better relationship with Cuba . It also lists possible outcomes of a better Cuba relationship .
 The effort to mend the relationships would be framed heavily by the negative relations formed due to Operation Mongoose . One issue that caused distrust between the relations of US-supported Cubans and the Agency was a ""shaky" front .
 A commission led by General Maxwell Taylor, known as the Taylor Committee, investigated the failures of the Bay of Pigs invasion . Further investigation proved that the 1,500 men would not have been enough from the start against Castro's large military forces . Agencies' lack of ""top-flight
 In one of his volumes of an internal report written between 1974 and 1984, CIA Chief Historian Jack Pfeiffer criticized the Taylor Committee's investigation, as it held the CIA primarily responsible for the Bay of Pigs fiasco .
 Church Committee traced documented plots against Castro to have originated in 1962 . Church Committee tracing documented plots originated from 1962 .
 Desmond Fitzgerald, a friend of future CIA Director William Colby, pursued Cubela's clandestine services . Fitzgerald was a high-ranking official once under the tutelage of Frank Wisner . Fitzgerald had served in CIA stations across the Far East during the 1950s .
 Fitzgerald duplicitously presented himself as U.S. Attorney General Robert F Kennedy's personal representative . Fitzgerald claimed he was representing the Kennedy family . Fitzgerald was the son of Robert Kennedy .
 Some scholars saw this plan-of-attack as a ""carrot and stick"" approach of Kennedy in dealing with Castro . Some scholars said it was a 'carrot-and-stick' approach to deal with Castro.
 Other historians, however, see these efforts by the CIA as the means to undermine President John F Kennedy's peace initiative toward Castro .
 Historians claim attempts to eliminate Castro represented a facet of a ""Kennedy obsession"" purportedly unshared by the rest of Washington . Some revisionist historians claim attempts were part of a Kennedy obsession .
 In the Oliver Stone film JFK, Operation Mongoose is portrayed in flashback sequences as a training ground where Lee Harvey Oswald becomes versed in anti-Castro militia tactics . In the movie JFK, Oswald is portrayed as a key figure in the assassination of Fidel Castro .
 The United States favored only peaceful means to pressure Cuba . Officially, the U.S. favored peaceful means of pressuring Cuba .
 United States operatives attacked civilian targets, including sugar refineries, saw mills, and molasses storage tanks . U.S. operatives attacked sugar factories and saw mills .
 Operation Mongoose and various other terrorist operations caused property damage and injured and killed Cubans . The attacks on Cubans were carried out by the Cuban government .
 JFK authorized the CIA's ""Program of Covert Action" in early November, six months after the Bay of Pigs . Lansdale was named chief of operations . Operation Mongoose is now known as Operation Mongoose .
 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain . Use this article to help students understand today's featured news stories .
 Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 2019-03-01 . Volume 1 Cuba Plans. Volume 2 Cuba Plans .
 History Matters Archive – 00/00/67 Report on Plots to Assassination Fidel Castro, pg. www.history-matters.com.org .
 www.maryferrell.org.com . AP.com.com: "Castro Assassination Plots" "The Assassination of Fidel Castro" is a reference to the assassination plot .
 Chomsky cites Garthoff but erroneously cites the wrong work by the wrong author . In this passage, Chomsky cites the right work by Garthoffs . Chomsky says the work was published in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Meeting with the Attorney General of the U.S. Concerning Cuba, CIA minutes, 19 January 1962 . CIA minutes: CIA minutes from January 19, 1962 . Meeting with attorney general of the United States Concerning Cuban Affairs .
 Justification for U.S. Military Intervention in Cuba, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 13 March 1962 . Joint Chiefs' rationale for intervention in Cuba was "justification for United States Military Intervention"