 Kennedy replaced CIA Director Allen Dulles with John McCone after the Bay of Pigs . McCone replaced Dulles as CIA Director . Kennedy felt that he had not been served well by the CIA in the Bay .
 President also felt advice he had received from Joint Chiefs of Staff was not up to par . He brought General Maxwell Taylor back to active duty in the newly created post of military representative to President .
 On 1 October, Taylor was formally named Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Taylor has been in charge of the U.S. military since 2001 .
 Kennedy sought to bring the reins for foreign policy and national-security management more fully into his hands . Kennedy sought the reins of foreign policy in the White House more fully .
 McGeorge Bundy was the first national security adviser to the President, with his office in the West Wing . Bundy was named the National Security Adviser to President Obama . Bundy's office is located in the White House .
 President Obama created his own national-security information staff in the West Wing . The Situation Room was created in the White House .
 Kennedy met regularly with the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Kennedy was criticized for bypassing his military advisors in his decision to make changes .
 The President centralized military decision-making in the office of his civilian Secretary . But the President centralised military decision making in the . office of the civilian Secretary.
 “Whiz Kids” supplemented the military experience of the generals and admirals with economic, political, and other analyses . These ‘Whiz kids’ were nicknamed . They supplemented the . military experience with economic and political analysis .
 General Curtis E LeMay joined the chiefs of the Air Force in 1961 . LeMay was the first Chief of Staff to join the chiefs .
 President Kennedy and Bobby Kennedy "competitiveness of the competitiveness of President Kennedy," says Sen. Ted Kennedy . "I personally sensed that there was a very high manifestation" of their competitiveness, Sen. Kennedy says .
 As soon as I became a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, it was clear that there was a weekly meeting at the higher political State Department level as to what could be done to redress the situation .
 Lemnitzer arranged the meeting, and McNamara came down accompanied by Deputy Secretary Roswell Gilpatrick . The Chiefs agreed to meet with McNamara, who was in the Air Force .
 Castro announced on 27 July that Cuba would soon have new defenses against the United States . Castro announced that Cuba will soon have a new defense system against the US .
 Sites were being constructed in the outlines of trapezoids, which indicated to U.S. photo interpreters and analysts that they were not there to guard against air attack . The sites were not being constructed to protect against air attacks .
 Point defenses were point defenses, similar to SAM sites protecting ballistic-missile launch sites in the Soviet Union . They were point-defence sites .
 On 15 October, U-2 film revealed ballistic-missile carriers, associated equipment, and support trucks . U.2 film reveals missile carriers and associated equipment in U.S.
 The camera had caught a medium-range ballistic-missile convoy pulling into the cover of a wooded area . The convoy was carrying a medium range ballistic missile convoy .
 The President, Secretary of Defense, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were shown the photographic evidence . The President was shown the evidence .
 The President then convened the first of many Executive Committee meetings in the White House . The meeting was held in the Oval Office .
 U-2 photographs taken on 17 October revealed construction of an intermediate-range ballistic missile site just west of Havana . U.2 photographs reveal construction of the missile site .
 The SS-5 IRBM had a range of over 2,200 miles and could hit almost any U.S. target . The SS 5 IRBM could be used to target almost any target in the United States . It was designed to launch a nuclear missile capable of hitting almost any
 Intelligence analysis showed that the Soviets and Cubans were working nonstop to set up 24 MRBM launchers plus 18 reserves for a total of 42 SS-4 MRBM nuclear missiles . The Soviet-Cuban plan was to use up to 42 nuclear weapons .
 If these sites are completed, their missiles would significantly alter the strategic balance . The missiles would change the balance of the country's balance .
 Intelligence had additionally photographed the shipboard arrival of the first of 42 disassembled, nuclear-weapons-capable Ilyushin Il-28 bomber aircraft .
 On 18 October, the President proceeded with an office call by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko . The appointment had been made many weeks before .
 The President underscored to Gromyko the unacceptability of Soviet offensive nuclear weapons on Cuba . Without tipping his hand about the U.S. discovery of the Soviet MRBMs, IRBMs and bombers in Cuba, the President .
 Gromyko responded that the weapons being introduced were strictly defensive weapons . The weapons will be introduced in the United States in the future .
 Those favoring a quarantine, which would not be an act of war, included McNamara . McNamara: A quarantine would be not a war act .
 They argue that it applied pressure on the Soviets at the same time that it did not risk pushing Khrushchev beyond the brink . They argued that the move was done at the time when it was in danger .
 It would demonstrate U.S. resolve, while giving the President time and leverage in demanding that the Soviet Union withdraw its missiles and bombers from Cuba .
 McNamara said a surprise U.S. air strike against missile bases alone was impractical . A surgical strike was impractical, even in the eyes of the military, he said . All military installations would have to be attacked, he added .
 On 19 October, with the United States response still undecided, the President invited the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the White House . The Joint Chiefs' response to the U.S. response was still undecided . The President invited them to meet with him to discuss the situation .
 In an Executive Committee meeting on 21 October, at the request of the President, Anderson described in detail how the Navy would carry out the quarantine . The Navy would use the first signaling to approaching ships, to boarding procedures, to warning shots .
 "We had gotten into the position of moving our forces around to the best military posture the Navy could adopt," he says . The Navy had a "pretty formidable position" at the time, he adds .
 For example, we had all available Polaris submarines at sea; we had a line of defensive submarine barriers across the Atlantic . We had our patrol squadrons scouring the Atlantic from the best possible bases .
 The President gave his radio and television report to the American people on the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba . With the Navy already moving into position, on 22 October at 1900, the President .
 To halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine of all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated . A strict quarantine will be initiated to halt the offensive buildup .
 U.S. Navy units operating under the flagship heavy cruiser USS Newport News steamed into place implementing the quarantine around Cuba .
 Army troops boarded trains and convoys for a potential invasion jumping-off point in southern Florida . The U.S. Army says it is preparing for an invasion of southern Florida in the fall .
 On 25 October, the United States raised the readiness of Strategic Air Command forces to DEFCON 2 . The U.S. raised the alert level of readiness of the Air Force on 25 October .
 Anderson and his Navy staff managed control of the naval operation in the Pentagon’s Flag Plot . Anderson was in charge of the operation during the operation .
 With the quarantine in place, as the Navy tracked surface shipping and Soviet submarines, he recalled . One incident occurred .
 McNamara, Gilpatric, and an entourage of his press people came down to Flag Plot and, in the course of their interrogations, they asked why that destroyer was out of line . One evening, McNamara .
 I sort of tried to pass it off because there were some of McNamara’s people there who were not cleared for this information, but some of my own watch officers were not clear for it . Some of the staff at the Flag Plot were cleared for it in the general area
 "Come inside, McNamara kept pressing me," she says . "I explained the whole thing to him and to his satisfaction, as well," she adds .
 I heard nothing of that until after the TFX , then the story was leaked through his own public information people that I had insulted him by making this remark over the incident in Flag Plot . He said he was insulted by making the remark .
 The Soviets’ measured response to the quarantine was of critical importance to the President’s measured approach to the crisis . The Soviets' measured response was critical importance .
 No ships with prohibited or even questionable cargoes tried to run the blockade . No ships carrying questionable or prohibited cargues tried to block the blockade.
 The first couched the Soviet Union’s conditions for the withdrawal of its missiles and bombers from Cuba in terms of a requirement for an end to the United States blockade and a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba .
 The second message added an additional, more difficult demand, that the United States also remove its missiles from Turkey . The U.S. also demanded that the U.K. also remove the missiles .
 Robert Kennedy proposed that the U.S. reply to Khrushchev’s first message . Kennedy proposed a reply in a 27 October meeting of the Executive Committee .
 He stressed that work had to stop on the missile bases and that all offensive weapons had to be removed from the country . The North Korean leader said that work must stop on missile bases .
 The United States, in turn, would lift the quarantine and assure the Soviets that it would not invade Cuba . The U.S. would then assure the Soviet Union that it wouldn't invade Cuba, the U.N. would lift its quarantine .
 United States surveillance units and the United States Navy monitored the withdrawal . The withdrawal was monitored by the U.S. Navy .