 The U.S. was placed on a Defcon 2 alert and ready to rain 2,952 nuclear missiles on the Soviet Union . Jefferson Citians who lived through that dark day in history can always remember were they were and what they were doing .
 Dino Brugioni was a senior photo interpretation expert with the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency . He is a former Jefferson Citian who at the time was an expert in photo interpretation .
 U-2 spy plane photos provided unmistakable evidence of the clandestine insertion by the Soviet Union of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. was just 90 miles from the United States.
 Low-flying U.S. jets later captured even more detailed photos of missile sites . The missile sites were captured by the United States in 2009 .
 Brugioni was one of a 10-member U.S. National Security Archive delegation who traveled to Cuba last October to meet with retired Russian and Cuban military officers who orchestrated the insertion of nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 The former Jefferson Citian was an eyewitness to history on Oct. 22, 1962 . He was eyewitness to the events of that day in 1962 .
 He had first-hand knowledge of U.S. spy plane photos of secret Soviet nuclear missile buildup in Cuba . He also knew about the secret Soviet missile buildup .
 Brugioni prepared the CIA briefing that was given to President John Kennedy informing him of the secret missiles in Cuba . He was the CIA director of the CIA during the Kennedy administration . He prepared the briefing that informed Kennedy of the missiles .
 He joined the CIA in 1948 and became one of its top photo analysts . He retired in 1982 as a senior CIA officer . He was one of the CIA's most senior photo analysts before his retirement .
 Brugioni asked the Russian general in charge of the missile project why the Russians thought they could build the missile sites undetected . The Russian general said the sites would not have been detected .
 The Russian general replied that he had informed his superiors in Russia that the Americans would detect the missiles . But he was ordered to continue building the sites, he said .
 At least 24 Soviet medium-range ballistic missile sites were operational in Cuba, each with nuclear missiles capable of reaching Washington, D.C., and states throughout the South . The sites are located in Cuba .
 The Russians also had 24 more much larger missiles on the way to Cuba in ships that were turned back by the United States . The U.S. naval quarantine turned back the missiles .
 Those missiles were capable of reaching virtually every city in the United States . The missiles were able to reach virtually every U.S. city .
 Eventually, the Soviets agreed to withdraw all of the nuclear missiles in exchange for a secret pledge by the U.S. not to invade Cuba . The Soviets eventually agreed to pull the missiles from Turkey that were aimed at Russia . In exchange, the United States agreed to remove missiles aimed at
 Cuba has preserved some of its missile sites and deactivated missiles as museums . Cuba has deactivated some of the missile sites as museums, including some that have been preserved .
 Brugioni and other participants of the 40th anniversary reunion last October of American, Russian and Cuban officials toured the missile site museums .
 Since his 1982 retirement from the CIA, Brugioni has written numerous scientific articles on peaceful uses of satellite photos as well as articles on the United States Civil War .
 In addition to ""Eyeball to Eyeball" he has written ""Photo Fakery,"" the history and techniques of photographic deception and manipulation .
 The book includes numerous fake photos of purported Soviet technology . It includes numerous Russian fake photos .
 He joined the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency in 1948 . He was a founding officer of the National Photographic Interpretation Center .
 Since his retirement from the CIA, Brugioni has become known around the world as a leading satellite photography expert .
 Today, the site serves no official use, but is a relic of the height of the Cold War in South Florida . Today, it is a site that is no longer used by the government, but a Cold War relic . The site is located in Miami, Florida .
 Everglades National Park is seeking volunteers to lead tours and collaborate with veterans . To continue to preserve the oral history of the site, the park wants to preserve it's oral history .
 The site's official use ended in 1979, but remnants of a pivotal point in contemporary U.S. history are open to the public . The site was used as a landmark point in American history .
 In 2004, the U.S. Department of the Interior's National Register of Historic Places listed the missile base as a historic district . The missile base was listed in 2004 .
 The site serves no official use, but is a relic of the height of the Cold War in South Florida . The park is seeking volunteers to lead tours and collaborate with veterans to preserve the oral history of the site .
 Ted Swanson served on the base from 1966 to 1968 . He says missiles at the center were capable of traveling 2,700 mph and could be launched in just 15 minutes .
 Swanson collects the names of veterans who served at the base . Swanson began collecting the names as the base became recognized as an historical site .
 "It was a nervous time period and they brought missiles down in planes and on trucks and trains,"" he said . "They brought missiles . down on planes and trains"
 To preserve oral history of the site, the park is seeking volunteers to lead tours and collaborate with veterans . The park is also seeking volunteers who lead tours of the park .
 "" reminds people that with a strong military you can actually avoid a conflict. But the true impact is that the base serves as a reminder that there wasn't nuclear war and that these fears were alleviated. "" .
 "It's part of our history and if you don't pay attention to history you're going to relive it,"" Swanson said . Swanson said.
 A mandatory volunteer training for the Nike Missile Base programs will be held from 8:45m. to 3m. starting at the Ernest F Coe Visitor Center, 40001 State Hwy.36 .
 Volunteers are expected to read Appendix One of Cold War in South Florida Historic Resource Study before the training . Lunch will be provided and volunteers will be required to read the study .
 A U.S. Navy destroyer dropping depth charges off the Cuban coast almost hit the hull of a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear warhead . The most dangerous day of all was Oct. 1962 when a U. States Navy destroyer almost hit a Soviet sub carrying a nuke .
 The U.S. military "did not have a clue that the submarine had a nuclear weapon on board,"" Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archives, says .
 The depth charges ""exploded right next to the hull,"" Vadim Orlov, the submarine's signals intelligence officer, said in a written account of the incident . Orlov: "The depth charges exploded right next door to the . hull"
 At first, submarine crew members considered using the nuclear weapon, thinking that war had erupted, Orlov wrote in his account . Orlov: "At first, we considered using a nuclear weapon because of the threat of war"
 They surfaced, showing themselves to their American pursuers and defusing tension . But they ultimately surfaced, defusing tensions .
 U.S. intelligence officials had photographed only 33 of the 42 mediumrange missiles in Cuba that the Americans later discovered were there at the time . Another document showed that the United States had only photographed 33 of 42 missiles in the country .
 Intelligence officials never located any nuclear warheads, which they later learned had been kept on the island . Intelligence officials also learned that they had also located nuclear warheads .
 The historic papers underscored the danger of a nuclear attack either accidental or deliberate during those tense October days . The papers underscore the danger .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro participated in the conference's closed-door sessions Friday and yesterday . Former Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara and other key advisers from the Kennedy administration also attended .
 Castro began expecting a United States air strike on Soviet facilities on the island in October 1962 . Castro was prepared to shoot down American combat aircraft if they invaded Cuba .
 Documents show that the crisis did not end, as was widely believed, with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove offensive weapons . Documents were made available to the Associated Press in Washington .
 Nikita Khrushchev worried that an ""irrational" Castro would renew tensions with the United States . The Soviet Union agreed to pull missiles from Cuba .
 Participants also looked at American covert actions following the disastrous CIA-backed invasion of Cuba's Bay of Pigs in April 1961 . Those actions intensified Cuban fears of a United States military attack .
 With graduation approaching and college deferment about to expire, he enlisted in the Navy . He enlisted with the Navy in 2010 .
 Because he'd studied the effects of radiation on living creatures in college, Hays was selected for training as a nuclear weapons officer .
 By 1970, the young man had grown up during the Cold War with the specter of nuclear annihilation hanging over his head . He was put in charge of around two dozen nuclear warheads aboard the USS Oklahoma City, a Navy guided missile cruiser .
 The USSR was not officially involved in the war, but provided lots of support for their North Vietnamese proxies . Mobile radar units tracked U.S. ships and aircraft, including radar units .
 Hays was on station in the Gulf of Tonkin aboard the Oklahoma City . He helped take out one of the Soviet radar trucks with a missile strike .
 Like every other missile fired by either side in that war, the one Hays launched that day was a conventional weapon . There was no shortage of nukes in the theater of operations .
 He has no idea how many nukes the Army, Air Force and Marines may have had or how big the Soviet nuclear arsenal in the area might have been . He says he doesn't know how many Soviet nukes may have been in the region .
 There were more than enough nuclear weapons on both sides in Vietnam to have created a holocaust if anyone had gotten trigger-happy . But he says he has no doubt there were more . Enough nuclear weapons in both sides could have caused a nuclear holocaust .
 As a nuclear weapons officer, Hays had access to classified information about mishaps involving America's arsenal . Hays says the U.S. and USSR never really came close to blowing each other up after those tense days .
 Both sides took a step back after that, installing a hotline between Washington and Moscow . Both sides installed a series of fail-safes intended to prevent accidental or hasty use of nuclear weapons .
 At no time during Hays' service did he ever receive an order to prepare a warhead for launch, much less fire one . Hays says he never received an order for a launch, even if he was in danger .
 He spent much of his time making sure the warheads were properly stored, handled correctly and kept secure .
 He says he didn't consider the possibility that he might actually be called upon to push the button and what it would mean if he did . But that doesn't mean he did, he said, "It's a dream," he said .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, Soviet nuclear brinkmanship caused the world to hold its breath . President Kennedy battled with Nikita Khrushchev to prevent Moscow installing nuclear missiles on the island .
 Western diplomatic sources said that the Russian leader was resorting to strong rhetoric to appease his political opponents . Western diplomats said that Russia is resorting in to appease its opponents .
 He is under pressure from Communists and nationalists who argue that he is selling out his country's interests . He is also under fire from nationalists who accuse him of betraying his country and selling it .
 President Yeltsin's comparison with 1962 precedes next week's Nato meeting . Nato Secretary-General Javier Solana will try to agree a special security charter between Moscow and the West .
 President's remarks seen as part of Moscow's attempts to gain last-minute concessions . Both sides want signed before the Nato summit in Madrid in July, when Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary will be invited to join the organisation .
 Mr Yeltsin said an agreement with Nato was nearly ready to be reached . The Russian president has been critical of Nato expansion plans .
 President Vladimir Putin says he might join talks between Primakov and Senor Solana next week . He told reporters at a Victory Day ceremony in the Kremlin that he may join the talks .
 Nato sources said a deal with Russia was ""very close" and should be ready in time for a summit in Paris . But final agreement is being held up by Moscow's attempts to stop the alliance from constructing any form of military infrastructure on the territory of new member states .
 A number of compromises are being discussed with the Russians, sources say . The sources said a number of compromise compromises were being discussed .
 Nato agrees to abandon plans to create basic infrastructure on the territory of the new East ern European members . There is no question of Nato agreeing to abandon the plans .
 Nato did not intend to build bunkers for tactical nuclear missiles or new garrisons for the permanent stationing of alliance troops, it has said . Nato would be reassuring Moscow that Nato does not want to build new bunkers or new bases for nuclear missiles .
 Nato has already included in the draft text of an agreement a declaration that it has no intention, no plans and no reason for deploying nuclear weapons on the territory of the new member states . Nato has also included a declaration of no intention to deploy nuclear weapons in the new countries .
 If successful, a ""Nato-Russia Act" will be signed in Paris on May 27 by Nato's 16 heads of government and Mr Yeltsin . A 'Nato' Act' laying down a new strategic partnership between the alliance and Moscow is expected to be signed .
 Opposition leaders in Russia have denounced the proposed agreement . Opposition leaders have condemned the proposed deal .
 Russia has been trying to improve relations with former Soviet republics . As a counter to Nato's expansion plans, Russia has tried to improve its relations with ex-Nato .
 President Yeltsin presided over the signing of a peace memorandum between Moldova and its breakaway Russian-majority region of Transdnestr. Moldova . Negotiations are under way for economic and political union with Belarus .
 Brookings Institution senior fellow at Brookings Institution: Soviet sources are beginning to publicly discuss formerly taboo subjects . State Department participant in crisis based on Soviet sources, he says .
 The highest official U.S. intelligence estimate was 22,000 in early 1963 . Highest official United States intelligence estimate in early '60s .
 Khrushchev secretly placed nuclear-tipped SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba without a formal decision by the ruling Politburo . The decision was made by then-Khrrushchev, then the Kremlin leader .
 Khrushchev considered running a naval blockade ordered by President Kennedy, but was dissuaded by Anastas Mikoyan, then deputy Soviet premier . President Kennedy ordered a blockade of the Soviet Union in 1960s .
 Khrushchev did not authorize a proposal by Alexander Fomin, KGB station chief in Washington, to U.S. journalist John Scali that was long thought to have been the key to ending the crisis . Fomin's proposal was thought to be key to the end of the crisis
 The deal called for withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba in return for removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey . The deal was very close to the final resolution, which was very near .
 Soviet leaders cut a diplomatic deal to get their missiles out of Cuba because they thought a U.S. invasion of Cuba was imminent . Soviet leaders hurriedly cut a deal with the United States .
 The decision to shoot down a U.S. U-2 spy plane over Cuba during the crisis was made by a Soviet onestar general on the scene . Igor Statsenko made the decision to do so during the Cuban crisis .
 Fyodor Burlatski was a member of Khrushchev's inner circle . Sergo Mikoyan, the son of Anastas Mikoyans, was an expert of Cuban relations .
 The world was unaware of the discovery of offensive Soviet nuclear weapons on the island that were capable of reaching the American mainland . CUBA remained in the news but as yet the world remained unaware of its discovery .
 U.S. press intrigued by rumours of a coup or crisis in Cuba . The United States press had been intrigued by the rumours .
 The previous week, a Cuban exile group, Alpha 66, had staged a raid on the Cuban coast and killed a number of Russians . It had killed several Russians .
 A reported sinking of a Cuban patrol boat by exiles in the Bahamas coincided with news of a Soviet protest to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow over the impounding of a cargo of Cuban sugar in Puerto Rico . And a reported sinking by ex-cuba exiles coincided with
 The U.S. alleges Russian troops and military equipment in Cuba were requested by the Cuban government to protect itself from the Cuban people . The United States alleged today that Russian troops in Cuba had been requested by Cuban government .
 The head of the United States delegation to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, made this charge in a document circulated to all UN members . Stevenson was responding to a speech by President Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado of Cuba in the General Assembly .
 Mr Stevenson did not reply in the assembly because, he said, a reply to a Head of State would be a violation of UN traditions .
 Cuba was also proving an attractive issue for Republicans gearing up for November’s midterm elections . Cuba is also proving to be an important issue for the GOP .
 Foreign policy will become increasingly a matter for partisan controversy in the next three weeks . Foreign policy now seems to be a matter of partisan controversy, writes Mr Kennedy .
 The President has carefully refrained from replying in kind to predecessor General Eisenhower’s rootand-branch condemnation of the conduct of foreign policy by the Kennedy administration .
 Mr Kennedy brushed aside Mr Eisenhower’s criticisms with the quiet rejoinder that former presidents were always eager to defend their record of leadership with some vehemence .
 They increased the campaign of criticism which they had been directing for some days against the administration . The administration increased the criticism of the White House .
 Kennedy and his senior advisors were understandably pre-occupied by the discovery of Soviet missiles . Kennedy was pre-occupying himself with Soviet missiles in the 1960s . He says he was "prepared to deal with the problem"
 On October 17 American military units began moving en masse to the south eastern US . Intelligence photos gathered from another flight showed the presence of additional missile sites on Cuba and between 16 and 32 missiles .
 National Day of Prayer is observed at St. Matthew’s Cathedral in Washington, D.C. It is the first day of prayer at the cathedral .
 Afterwards, he had lunch with the Crown Prince Hasan of Libya . He then made a political visit to Connecticut to support Democratic congressional candidates . He also met with the crown prince of Libya, Hasan, and toured the state of Connecticut .
 October 17 was also notable for more than 40 U.S. warships heading for the Puerto Rican island of Vieques to stage a practice invasion of Cuba . More than 40 United States warships were headed for the island, Vieques .
 Michael Dobbs’s bestselling book on the missile crisis, One Minute to Midnight, says the five U.S. Joint Chiefs were sceptical of the ongoing and top-secret Operation Mongoose .
 Months earlier, they had warned Mr Kennedy that the United States could not tolerate the permanent existence of a communist government in the Western hemisphere .
 Once the task force got to Vieques, the Marines would storm ashore, depose an imaginary dictator, and secure the island for democracy . The fictional dictator would be deposed by the Marines .
 Hurricane Ella makes its presence felt, compelling the task force to switch course in order to avoid its worst effects . Plans for an amphibious landing by 4,000 Marines were delayed by the storm .
 Most Americans believe 'twas a famous victory won by a resolute president prepared to take the world to the brink of nuclear war . Most Americans think 'twa won' was 'a famous victory' in a famous battle .
 There was not much of a brink, and no triumph worth celebrating. Actually, there was not a brink of victory, and it's not worth celebrating .
 The meeting was last April at a Florida resort with the wonderfully inapt name of Hawk's Cay . The meeting took place in April last year .
 The crisis began when the Soviet Union began putting missiles in Cuba and ended when the missiles were removed . It was considered an unambiguous triumph achieved by a president more hawkish than some dovish advisers .
 Much is being made of a letter from former Secretary of State Dean Rusk . Rusk's letter was read at the April reunion . The letter is part of a series of letters from Rusk to the U.S. Senate .
 In the crisis, Robert Kennedy notified Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin that U.S. missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn within months of withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . It was imperative (obviously for domestic political reasons) that the linkage of the withdrawals not be announced .
 Rusk's letter reveals that if the Soviet Union had insisted on public linkage, Kennedy would have complied . Rusk: Kennedy would've complied if he had complied .
 JFK succeeded because his military advantage was huge and his goal was tiny . Kennedy succeeded because he had a military advantage that was very small, says historian .
 The Soviet Union was not going to war at a time when U.S. advantages were three to one in bombers, six to one long-range missiles and 16 to one warheads . The Soviet Soviet Union did not go to war .
 The Kremlin must have been astonished and elated when Kennedy sought only removal of the missiles . Kennedy had advantages that would have enabled him to insist on severance of Soviet military connections with Cuba, but they were not .
 The stunning revelation in Lukas' report is not Rusk's letter; it is something said at the reunion by Ted Sorensen, the aide closest to Kennedy . Lukas: "The letter was written by Ted Rusk, a friend of Kennedy's, a former aide
 Kenneth Keating, trusting information received from intelligence, said offensive missiles were going into Cuba . Keating said he was trusting information from intelligence and refugee sources .
 Republicans were making an election issue out of Soviet shipments to Cuba . Republicans made the election issue of the Soviet shipments .
 Kennedy wanted to practice appeasement but calculated incorrectly, he says . Thus it is fascinating that he says, in praise of Kennedy, that Kennedy wanted a deal with the world .
 In 1978, MIG-23s (nucleardelivery vehicles) were introduced into Cuba . The missiles were far more menacing than the 1962 missiles were introduced in Cuba .
 Kennedy's noninvasion pledge guaranteed the survival of this hemisphere's first communist regime and makes attempts to remove or reform the second seem disproportionate . Kennedy gave the pledge as part of the crisis-ending deal .
 Reagan administration began by talking about dealing with Nicaragua by ''going to the source'' Cuba . Reagan administration is reduced to clawing for piddling sums for Contras, a recipe for another protracted failure .
 Most ''peace plans'' for Central America postulate moral equivalence of U.S. and Soviet involvements in the region . The Monroe Doctrine was a legacy of the missilecrisis ''triumph'' that killed the Monroe Doctrine .
 The romanticizing of the missile crisis makes such triumphs more likely, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The romanticization of the crisis makes it more likely .
 Frankel wrote that previous accounts of high-stakes tension on the thermonuclear brink had misstated the danger . Frankel: Previous accounts of tension misstated danger had been wrong .
 Frankel said neither John F Kennedy nor Nikita Khrushchev would have allowed a nuclear war over a marginal issue like Cuba . Frankel: Neither would have been willing to use nuclear weapons over marginal issue .
 Ulster-born, British-educated historian Michael Dobbs is now living in Maryland . Dobbs was born in Ulster and studied in the U.S.
 He has written ""One Minute to Midnight,"" yet another history of the crisis . He has also written "One Minute To Midnight"
 In great detail, and in a tight chronological order that lends the tale a touch of a Tom Clancy thriller, ""One Minute to Midnight"" explores some of the slip-ups that set pulses pounding . The book is published by Tom Clancy .
 For example, an American U-2 spy plane went astray over Soviet Siberia at the worst possible time . The plane went missing over the Soviet Union at the time of the crash .
 In this day and age of GPS navigation, we may find it hard to believe that the U-2 pilot was navigating the old-fashioned way, by the stars and with a sextant .
 Northern Lights masked the stars and led the pilot perilously astray . But he was, until an outburst of the Northern Lights masked the stars . The pilot was led astray by the lights, but he was not hurt .
 F-102 deployed to auxiliary base in Wisconsin with nuclear air-to-air missile aboard ran off end of runway and could have spread radioactive toxins . The plane was carrying a nuclear missile and a nuclear bomb .
 In northern Minnesota, a Soviet commando tried to sabotage an interceptor base . The incident took place in northern Minnesota .
 Only at the last minute did officials halt a massive launching of interceptors . Turns out that the ""commando"" was a bear . Officials halt the launch .
 U.S. recon planes looked high and low in Cuba for the central marshalling point for Soviet nuclear warheads . At great risk, American recon planes flew over Cuba to look for Soviet warheads .
 The Soviets had been forced to store the warheads at a humble, singlefence site . The site was located in a single-fence .
 Some of the warheads found their way to a Soviet cruise missile site just 15 miles from the U.S. base at Guantanamo Bay . Some of those warheads were found in the Soviet missile site .
 The Soviets were prepared to close Guantanamo forever, with a Hiroshima-size blast . The U.S. was prepared to shut Guantanamo forever with the threat of a nuclear bomb .
 Dobbs steps back from the details to take in the Big Picture and counter what he calls myths . Dobbs: "Now and then, I step back and counter myths" Dobbs says, "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future"
 The famous ""back channel"" in Washington between a Soviet diplomat and ABC reporter John Scali was a dead end that led nowhere . The decision to sidestep Khrushchev by ignoring an angry message and instead respond to an earlier, more conciliatory message was less a matter of
 Dobbs says by that time, United States decision-makers were hollow-eyed from lack of sleep . Dobbs: U.S. decision-making was still being made by U.K. decision makers .
 The missile crisis is merely the best known of the close calls with nuclear war . The crisis was only the closest call to nuclear war in the world .
 American intercontinental ballistic missiles were alerted, jet fighters were scrambled, and an airborne command center took to the air . The U.S. was alerted, and a command center was scrambled .
 Ground-based radars showed no incoming missiles, no counterattack launched . No counterattack was launched when radars show no incoming missile missiles .
 A training tape simulating a Soviet attack was mistakenly inserted into the computer system . It was later determined that a training tape had been mistakenly inserted in the system .
 The commander in the Soviet early-warning bunker went with his instincts, overrode his computer and told his superiors up the line it was a false alarm . But the commander overruled his instincts and said the alarm was false .
 The rocket was headed away from Russia, but Russian radar technicians thought it could be a United States Trident submarine-launched missile intending to blind Russian radars by detonating a nuclear warhead high in the atmosphere .
 He was appointed to the inter-American affairs post in March 1962 . An expert on economics, he was appointed by the U.S. in 1962 .
 Kennedy administration was seen as moving to reinforce the Alliance for Progress, a U.S. aid program for Latin America . In choosing him, Kennedy administration seen as reinforcing the alliance for Progress .
 By late April 1962, he had become the closest thing to an overall ""boss"" of Latin American policy that the Kennedy administration had had . But by late 1962, the indications were that he had . become .
 Before the missile crisis began, he coordinated U.S. efforts to cut Cuba off from other Western Hemisphere governments . He also coordinated United States efforts to stop Cuba from reaching out to Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev made a secret decision to put Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba in 1962 . The decision was made in the summer of that summer .
 U.S. aerial reconnaissance showed that missile-launching sites were being secretly built on the island . Then United States aerial reconfigured missile launch sites were built on island .
 President John F Kennedy formed a special group of advisers after he learned about the missiles . It came to be known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council .
 Kennedy announced a U.S. naval and air ""quarantine"" -a blockade - on the shipping of offensive military equipment to Cuba . Kennedy announced the blockade on Oct. 31, 1962 .