 President John F Kennedy avoided nuclear devastation of the globe . President Kennedy was president of the United States .
 This essay seeks to explore Khrushchev‟s role in the crisis and to discuss its effects, including the further SinoSoviet split, and the downfall of the Soviet Union leader . It also discusses the effects of the crisis on Cuban relations .
 The actual crisis began on October 16 and 17 of 1962, when President Kennedy and members of his administration saw photos taken by American U-2 of missiles on Cuban soil that had nuclear capabilities and a range of over 1,600 kilometers .
 The origins of the crisis and Khrushchev‟s involvement, however, occurred three months earlier in July when the Premier met with Fidel Castro”s brother Raúl. The origins began in July .
 Khrushchev would later write in his memoirs that the purpose of the placement of the missiles in Cuba was “to maintain the independence of the Cuban people” after Kennedy endorsed the United States orchestration of an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 .
 The U.S. had no evidence that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear warheads in Cuba . Strong, forceful reactions on part of the United States would take Khrushchev by surprise .
 Khrushchev‟s actions during the crisis underscored his resolve to avoid a nuclear Third World War with the U.S. It is not surprising, then, that it is unsurprising that Khrushchev's actions in the 1950s were not surprising .
 Kennedy announced a blockade of Cuba on Monday, October 22, in order to prevent further Soviet ships from reaching the island . Khrushchev could have plowed ahead and made the blockade illegal . Kennedy announced the blockade on October 22 .
 Kennedy administration received intelligence report of plans of a U.S. invasion of Cuba . U-2 photos were sent to the Cuban premier ten days after the photos were taken .
 Khrushchev was shocked; he knew then that the U.S. was serious about removing Soviet missiles from its Cuban neighbor . He knew now that the United States was serious .
 Khrushchev decided “not to complicate negotiations” and only requested in his letter a pledge from Kennedy that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . That same day, on October 26, rather than request the removal of certain United States missiles in Europe as he had previously
 The next day, however, the Premier awoke to news that an invasion would not happen so soon . The Premier awoke the next day to find out that the invasion was not imminent .
 The information was obtained in informal meetings between Soviet embassy official Georgi Kornienko and reporter Warren Rogers . The information related to the threat of invasion was obtained through informal meetings .
 There were the immediate outcomes of the negotiations during October . There were also immediate outcomes from the negotiations .
 The U.S. was determined that the Soviet Union would withdraw its nuclear-capable missiles from Cuba . In return, the United States would pledge not to invade Cuba and promise to dismantle its Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 The United States had already considered dismantling the missiles in Turkey . The U.S. replaced them with more effective nuclear rockets that could be launched by submarines . The latter can be considered rather insignificant .
 The United States‟ non-invasion pledge yielded more significant effects . The pledge was part of a U.S. effort to prevent invasion of Cuba .
 USSR succeeded in securing the survival of its fledgling ally in Cuba . After a failed invasion, assassination plots, and myriads of other schemes to kill or oust Fidel Castro, the USSR succeeded .
 Relations between the two nations “remained firm,” with Fidel Castro taking a forty-day tour of the Soviet Union only six months after the resolution of the crisis, despite his anger over the removal of the missiles .
 Soviet Union dependency of Cuba on Soviet economic assistance was also a negative side effect for the Soviet Union . Cuba's dependence on Soviet aid was also negative side effects for Soviet Union in Cuba . Cuba was dependent upon Soviet economic aid .
 After the U.S. eliminated exports of oil and prohibited sugar imports from Cuba, the Soviet Union stepped in and footed the bill in order to keep the Cuban economy from collapsing, buying sugar that it did not need .
 By the early 1980s, Cuba had become a $4.4 billion liability per year for the Soviet Union . Cuba had also become a liability for Soviet Union in 1980s .
 Khrushchev achieved one of his objectives by securing the safety of his ally, but it was not enough to maintain his reputation . Even though he had secured his ally's safety, he failed to maintain the reputation .
 The withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba loomed much larger than the American noninvasion pledge . As Jeremi Suri writes, “The withdrawal of . Soviet missiles loomed bigger than the U.S. noninvasions pledge .
 Khrushchev discredited Moscow‟s commitment to its allies, most notably China, most likely China . Instead of bolstering the international prestige of the Soviet Union, Khrushche discredited the country's commitment to allies .
 In October 1964, two years after the Cuban missile crisis, Nikita Khrushchev was peaceably removed from power . In November 1964, the U.S. was forced to accept the Soviet Union's decision to pull out of Cuba .
 The crisis had still more effects that produced different agreements, policies, and reactions . The crisis was still more than a decade long and produced different reactions .
 Washington-Moscow hotline was established between Washington and Moscow . One example is the infamous ‘crisis hotline’ that was established by the two countries .
 The direct result, Suri says, was an acceptance of the situation as it was, or the ‘status-quo,” in order to maintain security at the expense of progress . Suri: “The direct result of this is to maintain the status-qu
 Instead of producing the security that was so ardently sought, improved Soviet-American relations contributed to the destabilization of many areas of the globe that would mark the rest of the sixties and seventies .
 Nikita Khrushchev arguably made a serious tactical blunder by secretly sending nuclear-capable missiles to Cuba . Kennedy‟s own response to the crisis prevented atomic war from scarring the globe .
 It is possible to speculate as to whether Khrushchev could have struck a better deal for the Soviet Union . The deal was signed in 1956, but the deal was never finalised . It is not known if the deal would have been better for the Soviets .
 Khrushchev deserves respect for setting aside his pride, risking his career, and withdrawing the missiles . Hindsight provides a very different perspective of the situation, however .
 The crisis perhaps provided a more realistic grasp of what nuclear war would mean to Soviet and American policy-makers, which produced a stronger resolve to avoid it . The crisis may have provided a better grasp of the consequences of nuclear war .
 The U.S. has sought through various means to topple the island nation‟s government, including the establishment of a trade embargo . This has represented a thorn in the side of the United States, which has sought to topple its government .
 Castro government still dedicated to communism, despite recent, small changes, inspires others . Castro government continues to be dedicated to the ideals of communism .
 Socialist leaders Hugo Chavez of Venezuela and Evo Morales of Bolivia find inspiration and friendship in Cuba . Chavez and Morales have been friends since the Cuban revolution .
 In 2007, Michael Moore released his documentary Sicko, which included an excursion to Cuba . Moore praised the socialized medical system of Cuba and encouraged the United States .
 The unbroken presence of a Cuban socialist state since the crisis of 1962 is a successful product of Cuban-Soviet relations . The Soviet Union continues to be a victory for the Soviet Union, even though it no longer exists .
 The Cuban missile crisis produced important consequences for the twentieth century, and it continues to do so in the next . The crisis was a major event in the United States' history .