 CNN's Don North witnessed up close a half century ago in the Cuban missile crisis . The winning candidate for President has the power to annihilate all life on the planet .
 Saturday, Oct., 1962, now known as “Black Saturday, was the day I arrived in Havana to report on the Cuban missile crisis . 50 years later it would be considered “the most dangerous moment in human history,” the day .
 CNN's John Sutter visited Cuba as a freelance journalist six months earlier . He was fascinated by the country and was fascinated with the country . Sutter: "I had visited Cuba six months ago and I had been fascinated"
 A hush fell over the bar and waiters stopped serving to hear his words . The bar was filled with people who had not heard him speak at all .
 A United States naval blockade of Cuba had begun the day before Kennedy’s speech . A U.S. naval blockade had begun day before JFK's speech .
 As Kennedy spoke, the U.S. Strategic Air Command had gone to DEFCON-3, two steps down from nuclear war, and dispersed its nuclear-armed bomber fleet around the United States . The U.N. had deployed nuclear weapons around the country .
 Bobby Kennedy made a pre-emptive strike on history by writing and publishing his book, Thirteen Days, a self-serving recollection of the crisis . "Thirteen Days" will be released on Friday at 10 p.m. ET .
 JFK’s covert war against Cuba dubbed “Operation Mongoose” was a campaign of harassment and sabotage . The Russians stepped in to step in to the defense of Cuba . The campaign of sabotage and sabotage had contributed to the war of nerves that led to the Russians to step
 JFK used cool political skill and all his intellect to prevent a possible nuclear war . Transcripts of taped White House meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council would reveal when declassified decades later .
 JFK played his hand trying to contain the chaotic forces of history in the face of unyielding pressure from hawkish advisers like Generals Curtis Le May and Maxwell Taylor . The crisis was a supreme test of the President’s ability to maintain an open mind, while holding to his
 We fear a possible future showdown with a nuclear-armed Iran and are about to choose a President in an election 50 years after the missile crisis of October 1962 .
 Sound judgment can make the difference between a peaceful compromise and a catastrophic war . Sound judgment and emotional stability can make a difference between peace and war .
 A few weeks earlier I had finally landed a job as a news writer on the NBC evening news . I was ready to chuck it for the opportunity to report from a key city during the missile crisis .
 Life magazine office in Rockefeller Center is located across the street from NBC studios to Life magazine's office . Life magazine was founded in 1950s .
 A senior editor was brought in with several Leica camera bodies, lenses and a brick of fast 35mm film film . Although I hadn’t worked for Life before and only owned an inexpensive Kodak .
 Life didn’t have a man in Havana and for this story they would risk taking a chance on a youthful broadcast news writer with some Cuba contacts willing to travel into ground zero for American ICBM's and bombers .
 Friends made plans to drive their children to relatives' homes in less vulnerable areas of the country . Friends plan to drive them to relatives’ homes .
 My sister Helen had recently arrived from Canada to work as a nurse at the Roosevelt Hospital in central Manhattan . Helen's sister Helen was recently moved to New York City from Canada .
 I was reluctant to leave her alone in a city perhaps facing a devastating enemy attack . She was at risk of being left alone in the midst of an enemy attack, she says .
 Time magazine's Miguel Acocca is Time magazine’s man in the Caribbean . Time is Time's Caribbean man in charge .
 The first was to link up with the United States Second Marine Division preparing landing craft in Key West for an invasion of Cuba . The first part of the U.S. invasion was to prepare landing craft for Cuba .
 Operation Scabbards would be comparable to the Normandy landings in 1944 . Operation would be similar to the D-D-Duel landings that took place in Normandy, France, 1944 .
 It would involve eight divisions, around 120,000 troops, and land on a 40-mile front between Mariel and Tarara Beach, east of Havana .
 Cubana Airlines flight left outside Cuba when the blockade went into effect would be returning to Cuba in the next few days from Mexico City . Or a Cubana flight from outside Cuba that would return to Cuba would be flying from Mexico .
 Former Cuban delegate and U.N. announcer shared rum and coke at the Delegates Lounge in the United Nations . He was Cuban delegate when he was an announcer for UN General Assembly sessions .
 If there is any chance of a visa and a ticket on that flight, Mario could arrange it . Mario could also arrange it. If there was any chance, Mario would arrange it, Mario said .
 "I cabled the Embassy explaining my situation and took the next flight to Mexico," says CNN.com correspondent . "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with my family," she says .
 With a visa in hand, purchasing a ticket on the Cubana flight was easy . With the help of a visa, buying a ticket was easy for the first time .
 The only passengers confirmed were members of an East German soccer team .
 Radio broadcasts have been monitoring recent radio broadcasts that it was a sensitive time to be arriving in Havana, Cuba, says CNN.com correspondent .
 The Grozny was reported about to encounter the United States Navy ships . The first Soviet ship to test the U.S. blockade was reported to have encountered the American Navy ships in the early 1950s .
 Costumed guitarists strummed a welcome as we entered the passenger terminal . Walking from the plane into the dark, hot, humid Havana air was not unpleasant .
 A giant poster declaring that Cuba was “en pie de Guerra” graced the terminal building in Cuba . Cuba is now in a state of war with the United States .
 A letter listing the names and nationalities of detained journalists is dropped from the ninth floor of The Capri hotel . It lands on a guard outpost causing the arrest of two of North’s friends . Two of the friends were arrested .
 Inside, men in battle fatigues with side arms or carrying machine guns eyed arriving passengers suspiciously . Inside, they eyed arriving arrivals suspiciously, with side-arms and machine guns .
 My visa was stamped and I was directed to an adjacent room where my fellow journalists were being held . I was then taken to a separate room where I was met with other journalists .
 In a few minutes, soldiers with machine guns at the ready ordered us in Spanish to take our luggage and board an army truck waiting outside . In a short time, the soldiers ordered us to board the truck and board the vehicle .
 The Capri is a small, modern hotel in Havana, Cuba . It is located in the center of the city .
 We were escorted under armed guard to rooms on the ninth floor . We were given room keys and escorted to rooms by armed guard .
 The Capri Hotel was located in the heart of downtown Havana, a few blocks from the Havana Hilton and the old Hotel Nacional . It was located just a block from the old Havana Hilton .
 U.S. Pentagon study of nuclear war effects on different size cities . "I lay in my bed trying to sleep but kept thinking about the study," author says .
 Of the two million inhabitants hundreds of thousands living in central Havana would be killed instantly . Hundreds of thousands of people would have been killed instantly if they were killed .
 Fires would rage across the rest of the city as far as the Soviet military headquarters in El Chico, 12 miles from city center . The fires would rage 12 miles away from the city center, but would not reach the Soviet headquarters .
 Any one of these incidents could have provoked a nuclear response . "Eye-ball to eye-ball" atmosphere prevailed that day .
 CIA flew slightly better U-2’s than the U.S. Air Force . They had a more powerful engine and could fly 5,000 feet higher . The CIA flew a better version of U.2's than the Air Force's .
 President Kennedy preferred to have Air Force pilots flying over Cuba than CIA pilots as fewer questions would be asked if they were shot down . Kennedy preferred the Air Force to fly over Cuba over the Cuban border .
 The CIA reluctantly agreed to lend several of its U-2’s to the Air Force . They were repainted with Air Force insignia . The CIA was forced to lend the planes to the U.S.
 Soviet military headquarters in El Chico near Havana, Cuba, ordered to destroy target number 33 . U-2 approached missile site at Banes, in Western Cuba near Guantanamo, Cuba .
 A proximity fuse detonated the SAMs as they closed in, spraying shrapnel and killing Major Rudolf Anderson instantly . Anderson was killed instantly by the blast .
 Declassified Soviet sources confirm the missile was not cleared to fire by the Kremlin . Declassified sources have confirmed that the missile is not clear to fire .
 Furious, Krushchev ordered no further firings take place without his direct orders . Furious, he ordered that no more firings be made without orders from him .
 Curtis Le May ordered rocket-carrying fighters readied for an attack on the SAM site . The U.S. commander of the Air Force ordered a strike on the site in May .
 The White House ordered Le May not to attack unless he had direct orders from the President . Le May was ordered to stay away from the White House until he had clear orders .
 The Soviets could well have regarded this U-2 flight as a last-minute intelligence reconnaissance in preparation for nuclear war . The Soviets may have regarded the flight as intelligence reconnaissance .
 Soviet MIG aircraft tried to intercept the U-2 flying at 75,000 feet but could not reach that altitude . The U.2 was intercepted by Soviet aircraft but was not able to intercept .
 Alaskan Command sent up two nuclear armed F-102 interceptors to protect the U-2 . The interceptors were armed with nuclear weapons .
 Six U.S. Navy “Crusaders” flying at tree-top level under Soviet radar headed westward to photograph the missile sites of Pinar Del Rio .
 Antiaircraft guns manned by Cuban crews opened fire as the Crusaders approached the San Cristobal missile site . The Crusaders were attacked by Cuban forces during the mission .
 The pilots aborted the mission and flew home to Key West . The pilots, aware of multiple hits, aborted the flight .
 The unstable conditions on board the subs raised the specter of an accidental nuclear launch . Soviet submarine commanders were highly disciplined and unlikely to trigger their nuclear torpedoes by design .
 United States Navy ships had located four Soviet “Foxtrot’s submarines lurking in the waters south of the Turks and Caicos Islands . The U.S. Navy ships found the submarines in the area of the islands .
 Each day the subs had to surface to charge their batteries and report to Moscow . Each day they would have to surface in order to report back to Russia .
 Once located the subs were forced to surface by United States Naval ships dropping hand grenades and practice depth charges . Once located, the subs had to be forced to come back to shore .
 On “Black Saturday,” Oct., 1962, one sub B-59, commanded by Captain Valentin Savitsky, had been chased for two days . On ‘Black Saturday’s’ Oct. 1962, a sub was chased by two days for two
 His batteries were low and he had not been able to communicate with Moscow . His batteries had been running low, and he was unable to contact Moscow .
 Carbon dioxide levels were becoming critical and sailors were fainting from heat and exhaustion .
 Sub came under attack from USS Randolph dropping practice depth charges from the USS Randolph . Sub was submerged several hundred feet and was under attack .
 There is no greater humiliation for a submarine captain than to be forced by the enemy to surface .
 Captain Sevitsky lost his temper during the attack on B-59, a sub officer on the aircraft described it as 'the worst of all things'
 He summoned the officer in charge of the nuclear torpedo, and ordered him to make it combat ready . The torpedo was the first ever to be made combat ready in the US .
 Fellow officers persuaded Savitsky to calm down and a decision was made to surface in the midst of four U.S. destroyers .
 Russian KGB officer and ABC News reporter insert themselves in the drama . The pair are caught up in the Washington-based drama .
 Aleksandr Feklisov approached ABC News State Department correspondent John Scali with a plan to dismantle missile bases in Cuba in return for a U.S. pledge not to invade . The KGB station chief had approached the State Department with an offer to dismantle the bases .
 Moscow meddling was a classic case of miscommunication between Washington and Moscow at a time when a misstep could have led to nuclear war . Moscow's meddling is a classic miscommunication .
 Scali thought was a feeler from Moscow was in reality an attempt by the KGB to measure Washngton’s conditions for a settlement . The KGB wanted to measure the conditions of a settlement in the area .
 Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin refused to send Feklisov’s messages to Moscow . He said he had not authorized this type of negotiation and refused to .
 Feklisov could only send his negotiation report with Scali by cable to KGB headquarters . He could not send his report to the KGB headquarters because of his lack of access to the country's intelligence .
 There is no evidence the cable was ever read by Khrushchev or played any part in Kremlin decision-making . The cable was never read by the former Soviet leader .
 Scali-Feklisov meetings would become part of the strange mythology of the Cuban missile crisis . Yet, the meetings would be part of a strange mythology .
 I later came to know Scali as a very undiplomatic diplomatic correspondent given to outbursts of temper . Scali was known for his 'outburst' temper .
 I was a correspondent for ABC News in Vietnam and not supportive of the war . I was not a war correspondent, but I was supportive of Vietnam .
 Scali was a hawk whose Vietnam visits were choreographed by President Lyndon Johnson and Gen. Gen. John Scali . Scali visited Vietnam on behalf of President Johnson .
 He often trumpeted his role as mediator in the missile crisis . He was later named United States Ambassador to the U.N. by President Nixon .
 CIA determined that five out of six medium-range missile sites in Cuba were fully operational . CIA determined for the first time that five of six sites were operational in Cuba . CIA: Five of six Cuban missile sites are operational .
 The sand in the glass almost gone that evening, Kennedy sent his brother Robert to meet with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to warn him United States military action was imminent . The sand was almost gone when Robert Kennedy met with the Soviet ambassador .
 Pull his missiles out of Cuba and the United States would promise not to invade and also withdraw missiles from Turkey . Pull out missiles from Cuba and pull out of Turkey, the U.S. would promise to not invade, the president would say .
 Japanese colleague Horikawa had a powerful Zenith shortwave radio . We spent a lot of time listening to news broadcasts from Miami .
 Moscow radio broadcast a long letter Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy agreeing to remove missiles from Cuba under U.N. inspection . The letter was broadcast on Moscow radio . Kennedy agreed to remove the missiles under UN inspection .
 Fidel Castro was furious over the settlement and felt betrayed by his Soviet friends . Fidel Castro believed the settlement was a betrayal by the Soviet Union . However, Fidel Castro felt betrayed and was furious at the settlement .
 Cuban cigars and Russian Vodka are available at a nominal price in U.S. dollars .
 We spent a lot of time trying to be journalists, jotting in our journals from our room windows . We spent most of this year trying to make the most of the time possible to be a journalist .
 Looking down toward the harbor, we could see a lot of ships, including Soviet freighters that had passed through the blockade . We could see many of the ships that had come through the Soviet blockade .
 On the Malecon, the seaside street, we could see an anti-aircraft battery manned by Cuban soldiers . Cuban soldiers are stationed in Cuba's capital, Havana .
 Regularly, United States Navy “Crusader’s reconnaissance planes flew over our hotel very low . U.S. Navy ‘Crusaders’ flew over hotel .
 Anti-aircraft battery engaged as jets screamed overhead . But we never saw the anti-aercraft battery engage them as they screamed overhead.
 Platoons of “milicianos” male and female civilians on military duty, often marched through the streets in view of our hotel . "Milicianos" are male, female and male military personnel .
 On Cuban radio or even the hotel sound system, patriotic music interrupted by urgent announcements of news bulletins and excerpts from speeches of Fidel kept the country charged up for war .
 "From the first day we began plotting ways to draw attention to our dilemma," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It's not the first time I've seen this kind of thing," he says .
 Two old friends from my childhood in Canada were drinking at an outdoor cafÃ© just below my window . One afternoon I could hardly believe my eyes when I saw two old friends .
 Doug Buchanan and Rod McKenzie were pilots for International Air Freighters flying Toronto to Havana . They flew from Toronto to Cuba in the 1960s .
 We hastily wrote a letter addressed to the Havana Associated Press office listing our names, nationalities and the circumstances of our house arrest . We tossed it through the window louvers to the old friends lurking below .
 As fate would have it, the letter floated down nine stories and came to rest on the roof of a guard post below .
 The two pilots perhaps emboldened by rum and cokes climbed up to the roof of the guard post to retrieve the letter . Guards seized them and marched them off at gunpoint .
 The next day, Alan Oxley spotted a girlfriend in a bikini sunning herself on the roof of an apartment building adjacent to our hotel . Oxley was a British journalist whose home was Havana .
 Alan shouted to her to bring her baby and try to visit us in the hotel . Alan shouted that she should bring the baby to the hotel in a bid to keep her company .
 Within an hour she arrived pushing a baby buggy and the guards allowed her in to visit with Alan . The guards allowed the mother-of-one to visit Alan in the hospital .
 Before she left we slipped the letter to AP into the baby’s diaper . But the crafty guards searched on the way out and found the letter .
 The following day, Horikawa, a Japanese journalist suggested a new plan to make contact with the outside world . Phone Home was suggested by Horikawa .
 We screwed off the plates in the wall where the phone wires entered and found a gathering of multicolored wires . The wires were in the walls where the phones entered .
 With a razor blade we slit each of the wires and inserted the phone terminal connections . We slit the wires to insert the phone connections .
 Our theory was that by trial and error we would eventually tap into wires connected to another room and the call would register at reception as coming from another room . We would then try and try and tap into wire connected to other room . Our theory is that the call registers at reception at reception
 We intercepted conversations in Russian, Spanish and Chinese, before finally tapping into phone lines of an empty room . We then tapped into the empty room to listen to the conversations .
 At last we got a dial tone and called the number for the Associated Press . The Associated Press was finally able to make contact with the phone .
 The AP already knew who we were, but promised to contact the Embassy of each of us being held . The AP has already contacted each of the journalists who have been held .
 All the wires were somehow jammed back into the wall as if they had never been tampered with . The wires had somehow been jammed back in the wall .
 The hotel manager and receptionist ordered guards to inspect an empty room where they claimed telephone calls were being made . It was just in time, as the hotel manager came to the ninth floor and ordered the guards to search the room .
 Later that day, the Miami radio station reported our names and that we were being held under house arrest in The Capri . We were held on house arrest, according to reports .
 It involved hitting a half penny with a palm with your palm and sending it into a pattern of lines on the table . A half penny was sent into pattern of patterns on the floor .
 Castro rejected Washington-Moscow settlement, Castro rejected it . Castro's rejection of the deal was announced on the fourth day of his confinement .
 The Soviets sent in their prime negotiator, Anastas Mikoyan, to reason with Castro . Three days later, on Nov. 11, the Soviets sent their prime negotiators in to Cuba . The Soviet Union sent in Mikoyans to reason Castro .
 Raul Lazo, a young junior officer at the Cuban Foreign Ministry, quietly called on us that evening . He simply said we were free to go and report as we liked . Lazo: "We are free to do whatever we want"
 To celebrate our freedom, Robert MacNeil and I checked out the thriving nightclub in The Capri, whose loud music had kept us awake while under house arrest . The nightclub was the place we had been kept awake during our house arrest.
 The big Havana hotels still featured lavish floor shows, typical of pre-revolutionary decadence with leggy dancers in brief costumes .
 Enjoying our first night of freedom we took a late night stroll that took us past the Havana TV station .
 A large black limousine pulled up and out stepped Commandante Che Guevara wearing army fatigues, his signature beret with a red star and a large Cohiba cigar clenched in his teeth . Che was in the military when he was assassinated in 1968 .
 Che had been in his military headquarters in a limestone cave in Pinar Del Rio throughout the crisis . Che was in the cave at the time of the crisis in which he was fighting for his country .
 A small group of admirers quickly surrounded him and he signed a few autographs . He signed autographs and posed for photos .
 Che smiled without removing his cigar and I shot a close-up head shot against the night background . Che smiled and laughed as he posed for the picture .
 Robert and Robert ordered a final Daiquiri to toast our freedom . "Robert and Robert and I took a table and ordered a last Daiquir," he said .
 Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the famous Russian poet, sat in the spotlight at the memorial service . The poet is famous for his work in Russia .
 America, I’m writing to you from Cuba, Where the cheekbones of tense sentries And the cliffs shine anxiously tonight Through the gusting storm . America, America, Cuba, writes .
 A shoemaker cleans an old machine gun, A showgirl in a soldier’s laced-up boots, Marches with a carpenter to stand guard . Showgirl, in a showgirl, walks with carpenter, in the showgirl's boots, .
 America, it will be difficult to regain the grandeur that you have lost Through your blind games, America, became a great country . America will never regain its grandeur .
 Six journalists who were held in The Capri turned up at the Foreign Ministry to obtain press credentials . They were instructed to obtain credentials so we could cable or phone our reports .
 Larry Lunt owned a large ranch called Finca San Andres in Pinar Del Rio province, about a hundred miles west of Havana . The ranch was owned by Lunt, a friendly American who lived in the province of Pinar del Rio .
 He had been very helpful to me and had brought me along to many Embassy parties, she said . She said: 'He had been a very helpful and very helpful'
 Larry was a World War II and Korean War veteran . Larry had been a rancher in Wyoming until moving to Cuba in 1955 . Larry moved to Cuba from Wyoming in 1955 and had been there since 1955 .
 He had not been a fan of Batista and was pleased when Castro took over in 1959 . He had been pleased when he took over from Batista .
 He was appalled by Fidel’s move to Communism, but in conversations with me did not harshly denounce the regime or its ruinous economic policies . Soon he was appalled .
 The maxim that a person is known by the company he keeps is especially true in Cuba . Cuba is known for its reputation as a place to be known by a person's company .
 In Cuba as a journalist and a tourist I always assumed the phones in my hotel were bugged, but I never felt I was under surveillance . In numerous trips to Cuba, journalist and tourist he always assumed phones in his hotel had been bugged .
 Larry Lunt was under surveillance when I befriended him in March 1962 . Larry was under a surveillance when he befriended Lunt, who had been under surveillance . Lunt died of a heart attack in March 1963 .
 I read a newspaper in 1965 that reported Lunt had been arrested and imprisoned in Havana . Lunt was reported to have been imprisoned in Cuba in 1965 .
 There were no other reports that came to my attention until I learned of a book he had written and published in 1990 Leave me my Spirit . There were also reports of his suicide in the 1980s .
 Lunt spent 14 years in a Cuban prison and his work as a CIA agent . The memoir is a remarkable memoir of Lunt’s 14 years there .
 Under the agency’s guidance, he bought the farm as a base for secret operations . The farm was used by the U.S. State Department as part of a secret operation .
 Lunt described running Cuban agents who were in a position to provide intelligence . In his book, Lunt describes running numerous Cuban agents .
 His ranch covered hundreds of acres and was ideal for air drops of saboteurs, arms, explosives and ammunition . His ranch was used to drop arms and ammunition from saboteur's hands .
 He had provided early reports that the San Cristobal missile site photographed by U-2’s in October 1962 was Soviet intermediate-range missile site .
 Each month, Larry relayed a report from an engineer at the Matahambre copper mine near his ranch . Larry relayed the report from one agent who was an engineer .
 The mine produced 20,000 tons of copper a year, mostly for export to the Soviet Union . The mine was located in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The CIA unsuccessfully tried to sabotage Matahambre 25 times . The CIA in its “Operation Mongoose’s” attempt to sabotage the site was unsuccessful .
 Two agents who planted bombs at the mine were captured by Castro forces . Even during the October crisis, two agents planted bombs were captured .
 His book is an eloquent view of inhuman conditions in Cuban prisons and of his unconquerable spirit that helped him survive . However, his book is not only eloquent but also a view of the inhuman conditions .
 Every day we assembled at the Foreign Ministry in quest of Cuban press cards and every day we were told to try again tomorrow . We were told we would not be able to get a press card .
 Fidel was furious with his Soviet friends for caving in to U.S. demands . He rejected a Soviet proposal for international inspection . Fidel rejected a proposal for an inspection .
 Krushchev’s principal deputy Anastas Mikoyan arrived in Havana to persuade Fidel to agree to inspection and removal of the Ilyusian-28 bombers . U Thant had come and gone from Havana, and on Nov. 11, the U.S. had
 Castro grudgingly met Mikoyan’s plane, but refused to meet with him for days . Castro refused to speak with him again for days, refusing to meet again . Castro's government refused to negotiate with the Russian president .
 At the bar of the Havana Libre Hilton, I chanced to meet a Canadian pilot who had flown in with Mikoyan’s plane . The Canadian pilot was flying in with the plane .
 In 1962, Canadian pilots were required on flights out of Gander airport in Newfoundland . Gander was a popular destination for Canadian air travel .
 He would be pleased to keep me informed on Mikoyan’s schedule and planned departure date . This would indicate his tough negotiations with Castro were over, which would indicate he is leaving .
 The Hilton bar was probably the most conspicuous watering hole in Havana . If Cuban intelligence was noticing the company I kept, it would not enhance my daily request for a press card .
 Dwight Fullford was Canada's second secretary at the Canadian Embassy in Havana . He was one of the most well-informed diplomats in Cuba .
 I learned he had pressed the Foreign Ministry hard for my release from house arrest . I learned that he pressed the foreign ministry hard for me to be released . I also learned he pressed for his release from his house arrest.
 Dwight and his wife Barbara invited me for dinner at a popular Havana restaurant . Dwight and Barbara were in Havana for the fourth evening after his release .
 Dwight Drexler met Dwight on a street corner and asked him to buy cigarettes . Dwight excused himself to buy a cigarette when he first encountered him . Dwight's career spanned four decades .
 "I was astonished to see a black limousine pull up and two men in suits jump out of the car," says Bob Greene . He says he was astonished when he saw the men jump out .
 They grabbed me forcefully, shoved me into the car and in a screech of tires sped away leaving Barbara to explain the sudden disappearance of their dinner guest . Barbara had to explain to Barbara that she had been forced into a car by the family .
 Dwight, like a responsible diplomat, went back to the Embassy to again work the phone lines on my behalf to the Foreign Ministry . "Dwight, like the responsible diplomat he was," he said. "He went back and again worked the phone calls on behalf of me"
 I was taken to a small jail near the harbor which was used for immigration cases . The jail was used to hold immigration cases and was used as a jail for illegal immigrants . It was the first time I had been taken to such a jail in the US .
 Most of the journalists held in The Capri had been rounded up and again became guests of the government, this time in a grimy cell . Within an hour most of the journalist were rounded up .
 The next morning a diplomat from the Canadian Embassy dropped by to say the Cubans had decided to deport us to Mexico . It was the only place Cubana Airlines was flying that week . The next day a diplomat told us to fly to Mexico, the only plane Cubana was flying .
 Mexicans refused to receive supposed criminals from a Cuban jail . The Mexicans had refused to give them supposed criminals .
 We scratched our names and the date on the cement wall along with thousands of other past prisoners . We scratched their names, the date and the name of the prisoners, on a cement wall . "We scratched our name and date along with others," they say .
 A young Nicaraguan who spoke excellent English said his name was Raul and tried to engage us in constant conversation with us . A young man from Nicaragua tried to talk to us about his work in Nicaragua .
 We regaled him with glowing admiration for the Cuban revolution, Fidel and Che, hoping he would report on us favorably . He was obviously a government plant and he was obviously an obviously government plant, he said .
 There was a TV set mounted high on the wall that we could view through the bars . The TV set was mounted high above the bars, and we could see it through bars .
 Each evening of our stay they broadcast a serial based on Ernest Hemmingway’s For Whom the Bell Tolls . The series is based on the famous author's novel for the first time .
 In his later years Hemmingway had lived in Havana and his books were still popular there . In Havana, he wrote about his work in Cuba .
 One morning our luggage that we had left in the hotel when we were seized was brought to our cell . We were taken to a cell where we were held in a cell, where our luggage was brought back to us .
 Nothing seemed to be missing from mine, but books, letters and private papers had notes pinned to them with Spanish translations written on stationery of the Cuban Security police . The Cuban Security Police were responsible for the deaths .
 Several songs, like a Scottish drinking song, had been labeled as secret code . Several of the songs were labeled as Scottish drinking songs .
 The next morning, the head guard announced we would be released later that day . The next day, we were released from the prison .
 Cuba tells CNN's John Sutter that he must shave his beard before he can be released from prison . Cuba's president tells him to shave it before he is released from jail .
 A dull Gillette was produced with no shaving soap or hot water and with a gun in my back I stood at the sink and painfully shaved . A dull shaving soap and hot water was produced without hot water or soap .
 Perhaps the best book looking back on the dark days of October 1962 is One Minute to Midnight by journalist Michael Dobbs . Summing Up Fifty Years is a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the events .
 Nikita Krushchev and John Kennedy both understood that such a war would be far more terrible than anything mankind had known before . Such a war was a terrible thing mankind had never known before, they said .
 They understood that a commander in chief could not always control his own armies . They also understood that they could never always control their own armies.
 The danger which troubled my husband was that war might be started not so much by the big men as by the little ones, he said . The danger was that the little men might start the war, he added .
 In retrospect it is clear the U.S. needs its President not to be so overdosed with his own testosterone or obsessed by his own insecurities that he not only understands the meaning of nuance .
 John Kennedy would show the judgment of a John Kennedy rather than the belligerence of a Gen. Gen. John Kennedy . Ultimately it means showing John Kennedy's judgment .
 The danger today may not be as high as in October 1962, but it's not hard to imagine that another nuclear crisis could arise . The danger of a nuclear war is not as high today as in 1962 .
 Arthur Schlesinger had been a close adviser and speech writer for Kennedy at the time of the crisis . He spoke at a conference on the missile crisis held in a hotel at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba .
 No historian would use the word definitive because new times bring new preoccupations, historian says . Historians realize we are prisoners of our own experience, he says .
 Don North has covered some of the most dangerous stories of the past half century . He has covered the Cuban missile crisis and conflicts in Vietnam, Afghanistan, El Salvador, Nicaragua and the Middle East .
 North’s upcoming book, Inappropriate Conduct, will be published in November . It tells the story of a Canadian war correspondent in Italy in 1944 who operated at the front line between truth and propaganda in wartime .
 “At the same time, Krushchev was offered a possible way out.” “Krushchev’s offer was ‘a possible way’ out of the closet,” says historian .
 Teddy Roosevelt’s presumptive occupation of the Cuban playground was effectively guillotined . In truth, it was the U.S. way out; and Teddy Roosevelt's presumptive occupation in Cuba effectively guilledotined. In truth it was a US way out .
 One of the best articles on the “DAY WE CAME CLOSET TO NUCLEAR ARMAGEDDON’ – BLACK SATURDAY, 27 OCTOBER, 1962 .
 Two F-102s sent to protect the lost U-2–were armed with NUKE WARHEADS–DEFCON #2 . Note that those two F.102s were armed with ‘NUKEWARHEADS’ – DEFCON .
 NEW: ORDERS in English were given to U-2 to turn WEST DEEPER into RUSSIA, rather than EAST toward Alaska . NEW: NEW: OrDers were given in English to turn west to Russia rather than east .
 Interesting to see the old anticommunist fear and to see mention of nuclear-armed Iran as if it were a fact .
 One wishes that Mr North had put this text aside for a few days before submitting it . One wishes he had put it aside for more than a week .
 Members of Independent Journalism Consortium for Independent Journalism, Inc. Send your photos to CNN.com/Heroes .
 Board of Directors Diane Duston, President Chris Hedges Diana Johnstone Margaret Kimberley John Kiriakou Garland Nixon Nat Parry John Pilger Gareth Porter Julie Bergman Sender Jill Stein Sen. Jill Stein .