 He has written books, essays and articles on Latin American history, intelligence, espionage, and semiotics .
 Without advertising revenue, our site may fade from existence . Server costs, site development and maintenance, research, and creating content all cost a lot of money .
 He is the author of several books on the subjects of globalization, the New World Order and the 9/11 events .
 Until recently, I didn’t know that Professor Chossudovsky had a soft spot for Fidel Castro . Until recently I didn't know that he had a softer spot for Castro .
 From October 12 to 15, 2010, Professor Chossudovsky had extensive and detailed discussions with Castro in Havana, Cuba, pertaining to the dangers of nuclear war, global economic crisis and the nature of the New World Order .
 Castro expressed concern about the threat of nuclear war and the future of mankind . Castro expressed his concern about nuclear war in a letter to the U.S. Castro also expressed concern for the future .
 It seems either Chossudovsky is a careless researcher or he doesn't want to see the facts that deny his beliefs of a Castro pacifist and anti-nuclear war advocate .
 Fidel Castro has always been an advocate for nuclear war, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Castro has 'always been a supporter of nuclear war,' he says . Castro's government has been criticized by the U.S. for not backing nuclear war .
 Fidel Castro is the man who in 1962 brought the world closer to a nuclear Armageddon than never before or after . Fidel Castro's Cuba was a major factor in the nuclear arms race, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Castro’s true feelings about nuclear war are revealed in a new book . Castro's true feelings were revealed in an interview with CNN's John Defterios .
 Che Guevara said that if the missiles had been under Cuban control, they would have fired them off . Che gave a few weeks after the crisis to Sam Russell, a British correspondent for the Daily Worker .
 Castro was extremely dissatisfied with the peaceful solution of the Cuban missile crisis, Castro says . Castro was unhappy with a peaceful solution to the Cuban crisis, he says .
 The fact that nuclear war had been averted, and the Russians had allegedly received from the U.S. government a pledge for the non-invasion of Cuba, was apparently not important for Castro . The Russians allegedly received a pledge from the American government .
 Castro was itching for a fight, and it was the definitive fight, a nuclear one . Castro said he was itching to fight, but it wasn't a fight . Castro: "I'm looking forward to a fight"
 Castro admitted to laughing with his advisers even as the possibility of nuclear war loomed . Documents published by the French daily Le Monde show. Castro admitted laughing with advisers .
 Santiesteban had just been appointed to a minor post at the Cuban mission to the U.N. He was appointed to the post by the government .
 His diplomatic passport identified him as an ‘attaché’ to the Cuban mission . He was an "attaché" to Cuba's Cuban mission, his passport said .
 The Cuban terrorist was an expert in terrorist techniques . He had just graduated from a highly secret school of sabotage and subversion in Havana .
 FBI estimates of how many others were involved in the plot range from twenty-five to fifty people . FBI estimates range from 25 to 50 people were involved, FBI says .
 The secret mission of the terrorist team was to accomplish Castro’s orders to blow up a big portion of Manhattan, including the Statue of Liberty, Macy’'s department store and several subway stations . The Humble Oil and Refining Company in Linden, New Jersey, was
 Garcia's shop stored a huge cache of explosives at Garcia’s shop . To this effect they stored a . huge cache . of explosives . Garcia's store was used to store explosives .
 Had their plan worked out the way it had been conceived, it would have ignited American public opinion and prompted retaliation against Cuba .
 Had it occurred during the tense days of the missile crisis, as Castro had planned, it may have been taken for a Russian preemptive attack on the U.S. It may have triggered a spasm-like retaliatory strike on the Soviet Union .
 Castro pulled another ace from his sleeve after his failed attempt to create a provocation that may have brought a nuclear confrontation between the superpowers . Castro: "I'm going to use this as a way to get around the world," he said .
 Castro told Senator George S McGovern that he would have taken a harder line than Khrushchev . Castro said in 1975 he would've taken a tougher line in response to the crisis .
 Castro took some specific steps to “help” Khrushchev push the button . But, apparently not happy with the Soviet premier’s non-committed answer to his plight, Castro said .
 Cuban antiaircraft batteries fired at American low-flying reconnaissance planes, damaging at least one . The Cuban army fired at the U.S. reconnaissance planes in Cuba .
 An American U-2 was shot down by a SAM fired from a battery at Los Angeles, near Banes, Oriente province, in the eastern part of Cuba .
 According to Seymour Hersh, there is strong evidence that a Cuban army unit attacked and overran a Soviet-manned SAM base at Los Angeles, killing many Soviet soldiers in October 1962 .
 Hersh based his article on information partly drawn from an interview with Daniel Ellsberg citing classified material from a post-crisis study of the event .
 The speculation is based on an intercepted transmission from the Soviet base at Los Angeles indicating heavy fighting and casualties . The Soviets are believed to have been involved in heavy fighting .
 Adrián Montoro, former director of Radio Havana Cuba, and Juan Antonio Rodríguez Menier, a senior Cuban intelligence officer who defected in 1987, confirmed Ellsberg’s report .
 The Cuban army did surround the Soviet missile bases for three days, a former State Department official claims . Both Castro and the Russians have denied that the attack took place .
 Castro was trying to precipitate a nuclear confrontation between the Soviet Union and the U.S. which would have destroyed most human life in the Northern hemisphere . It is evident that, whatever really happened, Castro was frantically trying to provoke a confrontation .
 There is evidence that this is exactly what Castro had in mind . Actually, there is evidence . Castro had a plan for Castro to use the CIA .
 Late in the night of October 26, Castro visited the Soviet embassy in Havana and stayed through the early hours of the next day writing a letter to Khrushchev . Castro stayed at the embassy to write the letter .
 Castro tried to convince Khrushchev that an American invasion of Cuba was imminent . He asked for a preemptive nuclear attack against the U.S. against the United States .
 Castro’s words were, I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists’ aggressiveness is extremely dangerous . If they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger .
 Instead of a simple strike, it would have been the start of a thermonuclear war . Rather than a simple . strike, the strike would have . been the . start of the . war, the North Korean leader said .
 During Castro’s visit to the Soviet Union in 1963, he brought the subject up again, but Khrushchev energetically refuted him . Castro's visit to Russia in 1963 was the first time he brought up the issue .
 Khrushchev mentioned in memoirs that he explicitly told Castro “You wanted to start a war with the United States.” In his memoirs, he mentioned that he told Castro that he wanted a war .
 If the war had begun, Cuba would have ceased to exist, Cuba no doubt would have survived . Cuba would no doubt have survived, but it would have been destroyed, he says .
 The Cuban missile crisis was finally resolved in a peaceful way, which apparently was not the way Castro envisioned . Castro: "The Cuban crisis was resolved in peaceful way"
 Strangelove Castro was still planning to destroy the U.S. and the world in a nuclear Armageddon, and took strong steps to fulfill his cherished dream . Castro planned to kill the United States, the world, and take strong steps .
 Castro ordered Cuban MiG 23 pilots to program their computers to attack targets in Florida . In 1989 General Rafael del Pino Díaz, the highest ranking Cuban defector, said that at the time of the Grenada operation in 1983, Cuban pilots were ordered to use their MiG
 Castro said Turkey Point nuclear plant had potential of producing a nuclear disaster larger than Chernobyl . Castro said the Turkey Point plant had the potential to produce a larger nuclear disaster . Turkey Point was among the selected targets .
 Gen. del Pino claims Cuban agents secretly made detailed photographs of Homestead Air Force Base in Florida . In 1968, a group of Cubans were authorized to recover a MiG-17 taken to the U.S. by a defector .
 Gen. del Pino said the base was targeted for an air attack by Cuban planes . The base, he said, had been targeted for air attacks by the Cuban government .
 Castro’s dreams of nuclear Armageddon are still alive, according to Castro . Even more, it seems that Castro's dreams of a nuclear Armageddon still alive . Castro's dream of Armageddon is still alive.
 Castro has been consistently warning the world about the inevitability of nuclear war . Since 2010, Castro has warned the world that nuclear war is inevitable . Castro has also warned that nuclear weapons are inevitable .
 Castro is old, but he is not finished yet, and it is too early to tell his whole story . Castro is a man who has been in the news for more than a decade . Castro's story is not over, but it's too soon to tell it all .
 As long as he is alive and in power in Cuba he will persist in his nuclear Armageddon dreams . He will continue to dream of a nuclear Armageddon apocalypse .
 Seemingly his grandiose plan is to go to the trashcan of history with a big bang, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Like an ancient hero, Castro wants to go to his grave with human sacrifices . Castro wants human sacrifices to be made for his grave . Castro has a history of human sacrifice .
 Castro’s own sister, Juana, said a long time ago that her brother's plans for Cuba are as sinister as Nero's for Rome . Castro's own sister said long ago that she believes Castro's plans are sinister .
 Juana Castro testified before the House Committee on Un-American Activities . “Fidel’s feeling of hatred for this country cannot even be imagined by Americans," she said .
 Despite his pacifist claims in Chossudovsky’s interview, the available record shows that if Castro did not become the greatest eugenicist of all times, it was not for lack of trying . Castro murdered more people than Attila, Stalin, Mao and Hitler together
 Castro's efforts to spoil our day were a few of his efforts to ruin our day . Castro has been accused of trying to spoil the day with a series of political stunts .
 Professor Chossudovsky must keep in mind that, even though it is true that the enemy of my enemy is my friend, the pseudo-enemy of my . enemy most likely is still my enemy .
 Professor Chossudovsky is a strong fighter against globalization . But he has failed to realize that Fidel Castro is a secret agent of David Rockefeller and the CFR conspirators .
 Some key CFR members are convinced that Castro’s Cuba is the socioeconomic model to follow . He also failed to see that Castro, following his masters’ orders, turned Cuba into a proving ground for the New World Order .
 Professor Chodussovsky agrees with the CFR globalist conspirators that Castro’s Cuba is the model to follow . It is difficult to understand that Professor Chododsovski, the alleged anti-globalist and fighter against the New World Order, fully agrees with
 Global Research has devoted a large part of his site Global Research to publish the lies of globalist Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro is a globalist globalist, according to Global Research .
 Some time ago Castro provided himself definitive proof that he is actually an agent of change working on behalf of the New World Order globalist conspirators . Castro is a globalist globalist .
 On October 12, 1979, Castro gave a surprisingly short speech at the 34th UN General Assembly . Castro spoke to the UN in New York City, New York .
 The fact that Castro’s words are so similar to CFR agent Bush's cannot be the product of happenstance or a coincidence . Castro's words are similar to that of CFR agent George W. Bush .
 I suspect that both scripts were written at the same place — most likely, the Harold Pratt House in Manhattan, headquarters of the Council on Foreign Relations . Both scripts were likely to have been written in New York .
 There is the possibility that Professor Chossudovsky is just another naïve, gullible academic who fell under Castro’s mesmerizing powers . There is also the possibility he is just a gullible fool .
 The most virulent parts of Guevara’s words were suppressed by the Daily Worker . But a full version of the interview was obtained and published by United Press International .
 Le Monde: “Castro Fond of Missiles,” AP report, August 16, 1997 . AP: ‘Castro is a great admirer of the weapons,’ he says .
 Tully mistakenly believes the plot was a Soviet idea, but it was Castro’s . The plot was Castro's idea, Tully says . Tully believes it was the Soviet idea .
 McGovern to the Committee on Foreign Relations, August 1975, 14. May 1975,” a Report by Senator George S. McGovern .
 Castro’s letter to Khrushchev of October 26 is part of a set of documents obtained by the Cold War International History Project, Woodrow Wilson International Center .
 Castro’s letter of October 26, 1962, to Khrushchev is part of a set of documents obtained by the Cold War International History Project, Woodrow Wilson International Center .
 Ernesto Betancourt, “Is Castro Planning a Preemptive Strike Against the U.S.?” , 4.4.5.5 . The Castro government has been accused of plotting a pre-emptive strike against the United States .
 Report of the Committee of Un-American Activities, House of Representatives, June 1965 . Report: Report of un-American activities . Report . Report of committee .
 In 2001, World Bank President James Wolfensohn praised Castro for doing “a great job” in providing for the social welfare of the Cuban people .
 A search on Global Research’s site shows that Castro is mentioned 2,550 times . A search for Castro is also found to have been conducted by the Global Research site . Castro has been mentioned more than 2,500 times on the site .
 Notable among the people who have fallen under Castro’s spell are ex-Soviet ambassador and KGB officer Aleksandr Alekseev, Colombian Nobel Prize-winner Gabriel García Márquez, former Head of United States Interests Office in Havana Wayne S Smith .
 The opinions expressed in each article are the opinions of the author alone and do not necessarily reflect those of SonsOfLiberty.com .
 Servando Gonzalez is a Cuban-born American writer, historian, semiologist and intelligence analyst . He is the author of the book, "Servando Gonzalez" and a historian . Gonzalez is also a semiologist, analyst and author of a book about intelligence intelligence .
 If you see something that needs updating or correction, please click the contact link at the top of the page and advise of correction with a link to the article .
 We believe that the Judeo-Christian ethic has provided the principles upon which this nation was founded . We are proud of our Judeo, Christian ethic .
 It is our belief that these principles provide not only the foundation and framework for American government and society, but are also essential to the maintenance of a fair and just society . We are committed to the principles of U.S. government .