 The 13-day showdown brought the world’s two superpowers to the brink of nuclear war . The 13 days were spent in the nuclear showdown .
 The U.S. demanded that the Soviets halt construction of newly-discovered missile bases in communist Cuba . The bases were just 90 miles from United States shores . In the Fall of 1962 the United States demanded the Soviets stop construction .
 Nikita Khrushchev had assumed that the United States would not try and prevent the installation of mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles in the communist Caribbean country .
 What followed was a tense standoff played out almost exclusively at the highest levels . What followed is a tense stand-off between the U.S. and Russia .
 U.S. President Kennedy and Khrushchev did all the negotiating, with little input from the foreign policy bureaucracies of either country . United States President John F Kennedy and a handful of their top aides did the negotiating .
 The crisis was rife with miscommunications, threats and miscalculations, but was ultimately diffused . The crisis is rife with miscalculation, but it was eventually diffused.
 Richard Heyser takes hundreds of photos of newly-built installations in the Cuban countryside . The Cuban countryside is full of new installations .
 Heyser worries that he will be looked upon as the man who started a war . As he recalls years later in an Associated Press interview, he worried that he would be remembered for his actions .
 CIA analysts spot launchers, missiles and transport trucks that indicate the Soviets are building sites to launch missiles capable of striking targets across the U.S. CIA analysts see launchers, missile launchers, transport trucks in Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy meets with a team of advisers known as Ex-Comm to discuss how to respond to the missile threat . Kennedy met with advisers to discuss the threat to the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy favors quarantine to buy time to negotiate a missile withdrawal . Kennedy rejects the attack, and favors a quarantine . Kennedy says quarantine would buy time for negotiations to withdraw missiles .
 JFK and his advisers are careful to call it a quarantine because a blockade is considered an act of war . JFK's administration is careful to say it is a quarantine, but it is not a quarantine .
 JFK shocks Americans by revealing ‘unmistakable evidence’ of the missile threat . U.S. will prevent ships carrying weapons to reach Cuba, while demanding that the Soviets withdraw their missiles . JFK: The United States will stop ships carrying missiles to Cuba .
 JFK's letter was sent to Khrushchev by Foy Kohler . JFK was JFK's ambassador to the Soviet Union . The letter was signed by the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, Russia, in 1961 .
 Kennedy writes back, bluntly reminding Khrushchev that he started the crisis by secretly sending missiles to Cuba . Kennedy: "I started this crisis by sending missiles into Cuba" Kennedy also points out that he also sent missiles into the country .
 United States ships already move into position in the waters around Cuba . U.S. ambassador Adlai Stevenson explains the situation to the U.N. Security Council .
 Soviet submarines menacingly move into the Caribbean as well, posed as if they might try to break a blockade . The U.S. Navy says it has no intention of sending any of its submarines to the Caribbean .
 Soviet freighters bearing military supplies headed for Cuba stop in their tracks . Soviet military supplies heading to Cuba stopped in the wake of the bust . The Cuban government says military supplies will be sent to Cuba .
 Khrushchev sends an indignant letter to Kennedy, accusing him of threatening the Soviet Union . Khruschev sent the letter in response to Kennedy's letter . Kennedy was president of Soviet Union in 1961 .
 The oil tanker Bucharest approaches the United States quarantine zone, directly headed for Cuba . The Soviet arms freighters turn back toward Europe, but the freighters head to Cuba .
 Two American warships, the USS Essex and the USS Gearing, prepare to intercept it, which could have led to war . The two American warships were preparing to intercept the ship .
 Castro sends a letter to Khrushchev, urging him to launch a nuclear first strike against the United States, which he disregards . The Soviet leader disregards Castro's request . Castro's letter was the first of a series of letters sent to him .
 JFK correctly concludes that Khrushchev had not, himself, given the order to shoot down Anderson's plane . However, JFK concludes that the order was not given to shoot it down .
 Both leaders realize the situation is spiraling dangerously out of control . The incident prompts both leaders to realize that .
 Khrushchev demands that the United States withdraw missiles from Turkey as part of the deal . The same day, Kennedy sends another letter to Kennedy, demanding that the U.S. withdraw missiles . The letter was sent to Kennedy in which he demanded that the missiles be withdrawn from Turkey .
 JFK responds by offering to promise not to attack Cuba after the Russians withdraw . JFK responds to offer to promise to not attack Cuba if Russia withdraws from Cuba . JFK: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 JFK’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, meets with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . The United States already planned to remove its missiles from Turkey, but could not say so .
 Stallard-Blanchette sees this as the moment that both nations stepped back from the brink of war . Stallard says this is the moment when both countries stepped back .
 Khrushchev concedes, writing an open letter to Kennedy saying that the Soviet missiles will be dismantled and removed from Cuba . Kennedy says that the missiles were removed from the Soviet Union .
 The Kennedy White House portrayed the withdrawal as the result of the president’s tough stance in the face of Soviet aggression . The withdrawal was seen as a result of President Kennedy's tough stance against Soviet aggression.
 These are the steps that brought the U.S. and Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 .
 The 13-day showdown brought the world’s two superpowers to the brink of nuclear war . The U.S. demanded that the Soviets halt construction of newly-discovered missile bases in communist Cuba .
 What followed was a tense standoff played out almost exclusively at the highest levels . The weapons could potentially reach much of the United States .
 CIA analysts spot launchers, missiles and transport trucks that indicate the Soviets are building sites to launch missiles capable of striking targets nearly across the United States .
 JFK offers to promise not to attack Cuba after the Russians withdraw . Attorney General Robert Kennedy says the U.S. already planned to remove missiles from Turkey .