 During August 1962 April 1963 July, August and September 1962 U S. naval units photographed all Soviet ships bound for Cuba . U.S. naval forces photographed all . ships bound . for Cuba.
 The Cuban government has cut off trade with Cuba . Cuba has been a source of tension in the region for decades . The U.S. has been trying to isolate the communist regime in Cuba .
 Mentioned more ominous reports that the Soviets are constructing missile bases and sending over technicians and troops to man them . Said there are also reports that Soviet missile bases are being constructed in the region .
 If you press us in Berlin, then we will put the screws on you in Cuba, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . But if you press them, then you will be put on the screws in Cuba .
 The number of troops or technicians, the types of equipment, the number of missile bases, the length of time required to convert what are now called defensive missile installations to offensive ones, is no justification for not fully disclosing the activities of the Soviets .
 Soviet medium range ballistic missile complex at San Cristobal . Photographed Soviet medium-range missile complex . Soviet missile complex was built in 1950s and 1960s .
 During the following week, military preparations for blockading Cuba were completed . The Cuban blockade of Cuba was completed .
 In the past week, unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series of offensive missile sites is now in preparation on that imprisoned Island . ""Our goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication of right -not peace at the expense of freedom, but peace and freedom
 President stated further action would be taken to achieve the second objective . The President, speaking to the Nation last night, said further action will be taken .
 There are eight to ten bases in areas near the cities of Cuanajay, Remedios, San Cristobal, Sagna LaGrande . Each base has about four launchers, more or less .
 Reports from all intelligence sources confirm at least 30 missiles, and more than 20 IL-28 jet light bombers are present in Cuba . More than 30 missiles are believed to be in Cuba, according to reports .
 The intermediate range ballistic missile did not reach an operational status . The missile was launched in 2007, but did not have a target list .
 There are certain evaluation procedures to be observed in order to insure accuracy of the results obtained . One has to be careful about making conclusions because there are certain evaluations procedures .
 In a'ddition, the time since Chairman Khrushchev's message Sunday morning is too short to allow us to expect conclusive evidence . The time since the message was posted Sunday morning has been too long to allow for conclusive evidence.
 The cable conduits between the control points and the launch pads have been broken up . The cable lines between the launch points and launch pads are now being broken up.
 The concrete pads at the launch erectors appear to have been broken up by an air hammer . Air hammer appears to have broken up the concrete pads .
 Soviet Union has reported that ships are leaving Cuba with missiles aboard . Assistant Secretary of Defense Arthur Sylvester's Statement .
 Arrangements are being made with Soviet representatives for contact with these ships by U.S. naval vessels and for counting the missiles being shipped out .
 Premier Castro announced that if the Soviet Union wished to remove the IL-28 bombers he would not obstruct such a move . Castro said that if such a decision was made, Castro would not be obstructing it .
 Senator Keating said he made his first speech on the military build-up in Cuba on 31 August 1962 . Keating: "I made my first speech about the Cuban military in 1962"
 Between 31 August 1962 and 12 October 1962 he made 10 Senate speeches and 14 other public statements or speeches in which he urged that something be done about this build-up .
 There were no U-2 flights from 5 September to 14 October 1962 . He did not understand why there were no flights .
 Does not believe our information is sufficiently accurate to know the number of missiles the Soviets have in Cuba, even though we could count those being taken out of the country .
 Chairman Khrushchev agreed to remove from Cuba all weapons systems capable of offensive use, halt the further introduction of such weapons into Cuba, and to permit appropriate U N. observation and supervision to insure the carrying out these commitments .
 Britain agreed to remove naval quarantine and give assurances against invasion of Cuba . We agreed that once these adequate arrangements had been established, we would remove our naval quarantine .
 IL-28 bombers and 36 of the missile/transporters were uncovered for photographic and visual inspection, while Soviet vessels were at sea . The remainder of the missiles were observed and covered in exactly the same observable condition at the specific missile sites .
 Photographic evider.ee ai^o supported the outioading and outshipping of missile erectors and of fuel and oxidizer trailers . The out-of-the-air missile and fuel trailers .
 Senator Keating was one of the first to sound the alarm last year over reports of offensive Soviet missiles in Cuba . He has confirmed by official government sources that a new intensive build-up is under way .
 I have no confirmed evidence now that there are still ground-toground missiles or mobile missile launcher o or aimers for these missiles in Cuba . But the Soviet activity around these sites cannot hep but raise a number of serious 17 ""questions"
 Without on-size inspection, it's hard to see how we will know for sure the true missile situation in Cuba .
 Senator Kenneth B Keating told the Senate yesterday that the Soviet Union is pressing a new military buildup in Cuba . Heports said that ""Senator Kenneth B. Keating . told the . Senate that the . Soviet Union was pressing a . new military build-up in Cuba. Heports
 There is no evidence that these sites are being used for any military purpose t or thai they are being maintained .
 Ke wanted to know where Defense information differed from his own in regard to these statements . Ke wanted the Defense information to be different from that of his own .
 Kis fourth point was, • ""I stated that the medium {not intermediate) range missile sites (not the missiles or the mobile equipment or the launchers) are still in place, under Soviet Surveillance" -"".
 Defense Intelligence Agency reviewed evidence that ail offensive missiles and bombers known to have been delivered to Cuba have been removed .
 Secretary McNamara affirmed specifically that the only Soviet weapons that, we can detect in the Island are defensive . McNamara said the only weapons detected in the island were defensive weapons .
 Senator Keating said Secretary IvicNamara "did not dispute" any of the statements that I have made . Senator said it was "interesting to note that the Secretary did not dispute in any manner" after the appearance .
 "He exposed a good deal of information, and also he went further than under ordinary conditions we would have liked to have gone in telling our story. As he pointed out, he exposed a lot of information," he said .
 McCone has asked, that if anybody has any information in regard to the presence of any military force or weapons on the island of Cuba, they should make it available to General Carroll .
 Keating said he had turned over to the CIA Chief new information on the Soviet build-up in Cuba that he has not released to the public and has not been able to confirm . Keating says he has turned over new information to CIA Chief .
 Soviet-bloc military base in Cuba continues to be a source of menace provided by the continued ercistonce of the menace .
 The presence of Soviet MIGS, torpedo ""ooats, tanks, missiles and other equipment in Cuba cannot be tolerated . Discard the sharp distinction between offensive and defensive weapons .
 Make it clear that in the absence of on-site inspection, it is impossible to obtain adequate assurance that nuclear weapons are not in or will not be brought into Cuba . Cuba must not bring in nuclear weapons in or out of Cuba, the Cuban government says .
 Embarking on an effective and increasingly severe program of economic sanctions . Embark on an 'increasingly severe' program of sanctions against Russia and China .
 Steps should be taken to increase the effectiveness of anticommunist propaganda inside Cuba, to infiltrate Castro -gencies, to encourage guerrilla activities, and :o block Castro-inspired terrorism in Latin America .
 Senator Keating reiterated the substance of his 31 January 1963 Senate remarks on the ships bearing military equipment to Cuba . Keating said the ships were carrying military equipment .
 The only way to prove that is by an on-site inspection, the Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, said recently, is by inspecting .
 I am r;oir.; ;o assume that those missiles and bombers are out of there as we have been told they are . But, in whr^'; I am about to say, I am . about to . say, "I am . assuming that those . missiles and
 This gives rise to the very reel possibility that the Russians hope to return heavy missiles to Cuba or even more ominous --is they may have missiles left on the Island and need only to wheel them out of caves . This gives up to the possibility that they may need to wheel missiles out of
 I don't believe there is any way of finding that out except to go there and look . I have no evidence that there are — or that there aren't — there are any ways to find that out .
 A tank or a I.IIG fighter or a gun has both offensive and defensive capabilities . The IIIG has a range of capabilities, including a tank and a gun .
 It's little hard to view torpedo boats or amphibious vehicles as defensive weapons . The U.S. military says it's not hard to see torpedo boats as a defensive weapon .
 Anti-aircraft guns and ammuni.ion, on the other hand, have greater defensive than offensive connotation . They seem to have more of an offensive than a defensive character but perhaps it would be fairer to say that anti-air craft guns are more offensive than defensive
 IviIG's --in fact, even later and better models man those available to Castro in April 19cl -are no cause for concern and no threat whatsoever to the United States or to our Latin American friends . Yet, today, we are told that the same Iviig's
 Deputy Secretary of Defense, Roswell L Giipatric made a statement on November 11, 1962 . The statement was made by Roswell Giroiroiro .
 '12 was the mar:imum number that the Soviets brought into Cuba, the Cuban government says . Until we. have so called ensize inspection of the i3land of Cuba, we could never . be sure that '12' was the . number . of the Soviet Union's
 I am satisfied that there are no major elements of . offensive weapons systems in the caves of Cuba . I'm satisfied that . there is no major . elements of offensive weapons . systems in Cuba's caves, he says .
 U.S. knowledge of the cargo of certain vessels landing in Cuba is considerably less than we would like . And it is a fact even now that U S. knowledge . knowledge of certain ships landing in Cuban waters is less .
 The director of the CL ; 29 admitted that without on-site inspection, we can't have no absolute assurances that these .missiles have been completely removed .
 It would be placing the onus on the fact gatherers rather than the policy makers for the failure to give the American people an accurate and complete picutre of Ccmmuni-t activities in Cuba .
 Senator Keating said that on19 February he inquired whether at that time it was considered advisable to discuss publicly these recommendations . Keating asked whether it was 'considered advisable'
 On 20 February, he said he v/as advised by Mr McCone that the President was not attempting to inhibit any Senator from discussing any matter . The President felt that disclosure c£ these subjects at that time might be harmful and adversely affect the promised Soviet troop withdrawal go counter to the