 Skyhorse® and Skyhorse Publishing” are registered trademarks . Skyhorse is a Delaware corporation and a registered registered trademark .
 The weekly tabloid was not generally known for its investigative veracity, but this particular story was thoroughly documented . This particular story is thoroughly documented.
 Mary Pinchot Meyer was shot twice and murdered while walking near the Potomac River on October 12, 1964 . Meyer was a Washington socialite who’d been shot and murdered .
 Since the original accused assailant had been acquitted, the identity of her killer remained unknown . The identity of the killer was unknown until now .
 The Enquirer alleged that for almost two years before his assassination, Mary Meyer had been having an affair with President John F. Kennedy . Publicly, so did the identity of her lover, until the assassination .
 The Enquirer recounted that Mary had kept a diary . Mary's diary was later corroborated by other periodicals .
 The weekend after her death, a small group of people are said to have gathered at her Georgetown home in search of it .
 James Angleton, head of the CIA’s counterintelligence division, and his wife, Cicely, were close friends of Mary . Mary's friend Mary was a close friend of Angleton and Angleton's .
 Mary Bradlee is the wife of Washington Post editor Ben Bradlee . Tony Bradlee, Mary’s sister, was also present at the ceremony .
 For more than twenty years, Angleton had been a “spook’s spook” who roamed the Agency corridors looking to ferret out penetrations by the Soviet Union . Angleton was a "spook's spook" for more than 20 years .
 Angleton had also been in charge of Operation Chaos, a domestic intelligence-gathering program that far exceeded the CIA’s original charter . Angleton was the CIA's first CIA director in the early 1970s .
 Not long after, he began meeting with journalists for the first time . Not long thereafter, he met with journalists to get his side of certain stories on the record .
 Angleton dined three times at his customary meeting place, Washington's Army and Navy Club . I was one of those journalists, although I never really understood why Angleton chose to wine and dine me on three occasions .
 "I did not disguise the fact I was looking into a probable conspiracy in the death of President Kennedy," he says . "And I did not hide the fact that I was ... looking into ... a possible conspiracy," he adds .
 The first time we met, late on a mid-December afternoon in 1975 in the plush club lounge, I gave him one of my Voice articles to leaf through . Indeed, the first time I met him, he gave him a piece of his own articles to read .
 After the assassination, Angleton’s counterintelligence branch had been assigned as CIA liaison to the Warren Commission . Former CIA director Allen Dulles was a member of the commission .
 "Pretty obviously, he was trying to steer my thoughts toward possible foreign involvement," he said . "He tried to steer his thoughts toward possibly foreign involvement"
 In April 1976, we met for the second time, and one of the first things I asked him about was the Enquirer’s piece about Mary Meyer and her diary .
 He said he was acting in a private capacity for the family, and in no way for the CIA, which he hastened to add had nothing to do with her death . Then he replied that he had been acting in private .
 Angleton and his wife had planned to go out to dinner and a show with Mary Meyer that October evening in 1964 . Angleton's wife had been invited to a dinner with Meyer that evening in October .
 Cicely Angleton had a premonition that someone had been killed in a park not far from where she lived . Mary was killed in the park near to where she was born .
 So that night, they drove over to her house, but found it completely dark . They drove over there to find her house completely dark, but she was not home .
 Angleton said he’d called Meyer’s answering service, which at first simply said that she wasn’t in . Angleton: “I’m not sure what happened, but I’ve called the answering service .” Angleton says
 Angleton's wife was hysterical in the car when he was told of Meyer’s death . Angleton explained they had a date with her, and that his wife had been hysterical . But when Angleton said he was going to see her, he was informed of Meyer's death
 The entire time Angleton was relating this, I noticed that he was digging his fingers deeper and deeper into the wooden arm of the comfortable chair in the Army and Navy Club .
 Timothy Leary’s memoir only added to the mystery of Mary Meyer, author says . "Over the course of time, I read Timothy Leary's memoir, which added to my mystery," she says .
 They clearly implied that JFK had been assassinated by elements within our own government . JFK's assassination was implied that elements within the government had assassinated him .
 Peter Janney's remarkable book Mary’s Mosaic answers questions . Mary's Mosaic, by Mary Janney, is published by Janney on Sunday at 8.30 p.m. ET .
 Mary Meyer was killed in Kennedy's assassination, which all but certainly involved the same element of individuals . Mary Meyer's death is the focus of the investigation into who killed Kennedy .
 Janney had long haunted Janney as well, and in a deeply personal way, as well . Janney: "I'm not sure what I really want to do with my life"
 As a child growing up in close proximity to the Meyer family home in McLean, Virginia, one of the Meyer boys had been his best friend . The Meyer boys were best friends .
 The son set out on his many-year quest to ascertain who was behind the death of his best friend’s mother . The journey was one with many surprising, and heart-wrenching, twists and turns .
 In painstaking detail, he sets down the sequence of events around Meyer’s death . Meyer was an innocent black man charged with the crime . Meyer's death was the result of a botched murder investigation .
 Mary's Mosaic is also a story about intertwined destinies, about human strength and weakness, and finally about forces of good and evil . Mary’s Mosaic also is also about the forces of evil and human strength .
 "The book makes a reader consider those possibilities within each of us, even as what unfolds is on a Shakespearean stage"
 Those were, indeed, momentous times, and times that reverberate to this day across our national landscape . For those were moments that reverberated across the country .
 Peter Janney gets at the root of the origins, the “primary causes” of dysfunctionality and disunion that we need to understand . Janney: As we live in one of the most polarized junctures in American history, get at the roots .
 The author has given us a penetrating insight into the still-hidden history of an era that few other books have achieved . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a former journalist .
 In Mary’s Mosaic, you will learn not only how covert actions are orchestrated, but the many-layered duplicity it takes to conceal the truth about them . In Mary's Mosaic Mary will learn how covert .
 You will see how, to use a cliche, ‘love conquers all’—when a woman of integrity is able to help bring a transcendent vision to the most powerful man in the world . You will be able to see how the world can be transformed when a
 You will observe her courage in seeking to bring out the truth of what happened to him, even knowing full well well the powers-that-be she was up against .
 You will contemplate the courage of author Janney Janney in pursuing what became an agonizing truth about the role of his own father .
 I wish I could anticipate that Mary’s Mosaic will be widely reviewed by the major media . I wish it would be widely published by major media, but I can't anticipate that .
 "After finishing this book, you will know why this cannot be the case," says author . "I'm not going to give it away, but after finishing it, I'm sure you'll be able to enjoy it"
 The CIA set out to manipulate the free flow of information long ago, a blow to our democracy . The CIA now sees near-total control by fewer and fewer large corporate owners, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Rupert Murdochs of today would not have been possible without the Ben Bradlees of yesterday, no matter their ideological differences . The Bradlees were both men and women, and the Murdochs were not the same .
 JFK and Mary Meyer were killed almost fifty years ago . That is another sad legacy of what happened almost 50 years ago to JFK and Meyer .
 Be prepared to be surprised, even astonished, and ultimately outraged by what is set forth in these pages . So be prepared for what you're going to see here .
 If we do not fight for what we believe in, then America is doomed to the fate that befalls all imperial powers . Not all answers to what bedevils our nation are here, but enough to make you take a deep breath .
 Denial will be our downfall, the illusion that things like this do not happen here . Denial is our downfall. Denial of events like this are our downfall . We need to find a way to deal with the tragedy of the day .
 "I’ve been so very fortunate in my life, when they who were born more deserving, have not," she said . "You see, I’m so very lucky," she added .
 Vintage International Edition, 1989, originally published by Random House, 1935 . Vintage International edition, 1989 .
 At 17, I was full of both testosterone and a lust for freedom that didn’t find much outlet at a New England prep school . At seventeen, I’m full of . testosterone . At . seventeen, he was full . testosterone and the lust for . freedom that
 Just a year and half more of this, I kept telling myself, and I’d be out of what seemed like jail, I thought . Just a few more years and half, I told myself, I was out of jail. Just a little more, I said, and
 Adolescence, with all the possibilities, sometimes felt like prison . "Adolescence" felt like "prison" for teens .
 As the plane began its final approach into Washington’s National Airport, I picked out a number of familiar places below . The sight of Georgetown Day School stirred a flood of memories from my childhood, including my old alma mater .
 Something had been lost while I was a student at the University of Cambridge . Nearly a decade later, emotional scar tissue still lingered. Something had to be lost .
 Michael Pinchot Meyer was killed when he was just nine years old . His best friend and classmate, Michael, had been killed when we were both just nine .
 It had been my first experience with death—losing someone I had been deeply fond of, I said . It was the first time I had experienced death, and it was my first time since then .
 "I consoled myself instead with the promise of freedom that lay before me," says the author of the novel .
 My father would still be at work when I got home, but my mother and my younger brother would likely be around . My mother and younger brother were likely to be around when I went home .
 I would have most of the afternoon to cruise about town with old friends— certainly enough time to sneak a beer or two and a few cigarettes . It would have been a great time to snooze around town .
 A long, split-level structure, spacious and light-filled, with large picture windows in most rooms, the house was nestled in one of the last enclaves of Washington’s woods . The house was sheltered from the noise of distant traffic .
 At dinner that evening, I looked out from the split-level dining room through the living room’s floor-toceiling windows . At dinner, he looked out through the split level dining room's floor toceiling .
 Beyond the verdant lawn was the concrete swimming pool, half-drained and dotted with logs to prevent winter ice from cracking its walls . The pool is dotted with log logs to keep it dry .
 I took my usual place at the table facing my brother, Christopher, with my mother to the left and my father to the right . My mother to my left and father to my right. My brother Christopher, Christopher .
 On the wall behind my mother, an original black-and-white Morris Rosenfeld photograph, Spinnakers Flying, announced the family passion—sailing . The family passion was sailing .
 My parents met during summers spent on Cape Cod, and they had imparted their love of navigating the open sea to my brother and me . My parents had met during their summers spent in Cape Cod .
 By the age of 17, I had already spent long stretches offshore in the Atlantic racing to Bermuda, and from Annapolis to Newport, Rhode Island . By the time he was 17, he had already raced to Bermuda and Newport .
 "It's not too early to think about racing our sailboat from Annapolis to Newport again in the coming year," says father . "I'm not sure if it's too early for us to race again," he says .
 Sailing was a rite of passage for me, and I looked forward to continuing to master its intricacies under my father’s guidance . Sailing is a "rite of passage"
 The previous summer had already extended his knowledge and experience with a small group trip down the Dalmatian coast from Venice to Athens on a seventy-seven-foot Rhodes ketch .
 Horace Fuller, a distinguished former World War II Marine combat captain, was a delightful legend to sail with . Fuller was a gallant, distinguished ex-World War II combat captain . Fuller died at the age of 92 at the time .
 An accomplished sailor, he sometimes kindly took me aside for tutorials on some of the idiosyncrasies of sailing in the Adriatic Sea . He also took me to give me a lesson on the idiosyncraticities of sailing .
 "There were, however, a couple of instances during the trip that disturbed me," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Late one night, Hod Fuller had what sounded like combat nightmares from his World War II experiences . Fuller was having combat nightmares, according to Fuller's memory .
 A bit stunned, I curiously inquired as to how he went about his assignments . "I was a bit stunned," he said .
 In at least one instance, my father said, Hod had taken his victim out in a rowboat and shot him in the back of the head and then dumped him overboard . Hod had also shot his victim in the head, according to his father .
 The Italian chef was happy to return to the ocean for the first time in his career . He says he was dreaming about being back on the ocean again .
 It was comforting to be home, to have a reprieve from academic pressures and boarding-school life, and to be with my family, she said . She said: "It was comforting . to be . home"
 Amid the challenges and turbulence of adolescence, hearth and home was still a place I could count on . "Hattattah and home" was still "a place I can count on," she says .
 I asked, trying to orient myself over the eruption of pounding in my chest. "I don't know what I really want to do," I said .
 My father and another man had gone to the airport to meet Cord Meyer, who had been away on the day of his ex-wife’s murder, he says . Cord Meyer was away at the time of Mary's murder, but was away from the airport that day .
 After a while, I excused myself from the table, saying that I had plans to go out for the evening . After a few minutes, I said that I was going to go to a party .
 Seeing Georgetown Day School from the plane earlier in the day had already stirred something in me, and now there was no escape . The school is located in Washington, D.C.
 Mary Draper and Mary Pinchot had been classmates in Vassar College’s class of 1942 . Draper's mother, Mary Draper, had been a classmate in the same class . Draper: "Mary's mother and Mary's mother were classmates in the class of 1941 .
 Our families were socially entwined —we went camping together, played touch football, visited each other's homes frequently . Our families went camping, we went to touch football and went to each other’s homes .
 Michael and Quentin were born less than one month apart, and Quentin was a year and a half older . Quentin and Michael had a baby brother, Michael, who was born a year older .
 Mark and his brother, Christopher, were the same age, about two years younger than Michael and I . By the time Michael and Christopher were seven, we were best friends, and often inseparable . Mark and Christopher's brother, Mark, are about two .
 We had been in the same class at Georgetown Day School for three years, our desks side by side for two of them . Our desks were placed side-by-side for two years .
 The shock of Mary Meyer’s murder brought back a flood of memories of being at her house in McLean, Virginia, just a few miles from her home .
 One sunny spring day, we had been hunting for copperheads in the backyard forest behind the Meyer house . The Meyer family had been camping in its backyard forest .
 Michael pulled a long stick out of a hole we’d been investigating . Michael pulled the knife out of the hole he had been in . Michael: "Michael pulled it from a hole in a hole"
 A snapping snake came out right behind it, narrowly missing his face . The snapping snake narrowly missed his face. Suddenly, a snapping snake appeared behind it .
 We finally stopped, both of us shaking with adrenaline rush and laughing uncontrollably . "We were shaking with an adrenaline rush," she says of the adrenaline rush .
 Both of us urinated in our pants, out of fear and excitement, we realized that both of us had urinated . Regaining a bit of composure, both of them realized that .
 Humiliated, a bit defeated, but still giddy from the adventure, we returned to the house . Humiliated and humiliated, we went back to the home .
 Michael’s mother, Mary, was painting in a small studio just off the patio . Michael's mother was also painting in the small studio .
 Even then, I distinctly remember feeling that there was something unique about Michael’s mother, beyond her glistening, radiant beauty . Michael's mother was a "unique" person, she said .
 She had a presence and demeanor that struck me . Calm and still, still, at peace with herself, she had a demeanor that was striking .
 Less than a year ago, Michael and Michael and I had been playing baseball in front of their house . Michael sent one of my pitches zooming off his bat and over the house. Michael sent a pitch over to the house .
 I ran around to the back in search of the ball and came upon Mary reading on a blanket . She was reading a blanket when she found the ball .
 She hadn’t heard me coming, and I stood there for what seemed to be a very long time, gawking . She hadn't heard me come, and she hadn't seen me coming .
 "At the time, I had no words for the vision that I beheld, but I knew that beauty such as hers was something I longed to know better," she writes .
 When Mary finally looked up and saw me, she wasn’t embarrassed or upset, or even startled, she said . "She wasn't embarrassed," she said, "but she was happy to see me"
 She just smiled, letting me know that it was okay; no sin had been committed . She smiled, telling me that it had been okay .
 "I found the ball, ran back to play with Mikey, and felt somehow irrevocably altered, even blessed," she says . "Mikey's life has been changed, changed, and blessed," the author says of her life .
 Mary's outer beauty seemed to be a manifestation of her inner freedom and peace . Mary’s outer beauty was a . manifestation of . her inner beauty .
 "Mary responded by being tender. Here we were dirty, sweaty, and soaked in piss, to boot," she says .
 She had guessed what must have happened and, laughing, directed us to the laundry room . She had been there for a few minutes .
 We slipped out of our soiled clothes, put them in the washing machine, and put on the clean underwear that Mary had given us, along with a pile of clean clothes to wear . We put on clean underwear and put them on our clean underwear .
 Mary made intricate designs that we took to be tribal symbols on our faces and arms while we began emitting loud Indian war cries . Mary made the intricate designs .
 While Mary was painting her face, Michael went to search for two Indian headdresses . Michael went on a mission to find the headdress .
 Flapping our hands over our mouths like trumpeters with plunger mutes, we shrieked louder and louder, jerking our bodies in wild leaps across the room . Flapping their hands over their mouths was like trumpets with . mutes. Flapping hands over mouths like
 We strapped our knife sheaths onto makeshift belts, donned headdresses, and descended into a kind of primal expression of childhood glee and human joy, running barefoot in circles .
 It was as if Mary’s brushstrokes of “war paint” had transported us into a primal place of wildness that demanded a surrender to the life force itself . The show was as much as a performance of "war paint"
 "In a sudden, simultaneous move that was pure, unbridled innocence, we stepped out of our underwear," said the couple . "We stepped out in our underwear. In a sudden and simultaneous move," they said .
 We ran through the woods toward a small barn, chased each other around a riding circle, and back to the patio . We waved knives in flagrant violation of every childhood safety rule known to man . We ran around the barn, chasing each other .
 As our excitement subsided, we dropped to the floor, laughing and exhausted from the thrill of what we had just experienced . We were exhausted from what had just happened .
 A bit disoriented, I was calm, yet exhilarated by the sense of the unknown powerful life force that had just moved through me . I was exhilarated, yet also exhilarated .
 "It was as if she had extended her freedom to me, giving me permission that day to explore and experience my own boyhood wildness," she writes .
 Mary’s persona contrasted sharply with that of her father, Cord Meyer . Cord Meyer is the father of Michael Meyer's son, Michael Meyer . Mary's persona contrasts sharply with Cord Meyer's of the Meyer family .
 Insensitive and dismissive, Cord was arrogantly patronizing and never fun to be around . Cord was arrogant and condescending, and was never fun around .
 Michael Meyer was godfather to the three Meyer boys . Cord Meyer and Michael Meyer went fishing on the Potomac River with Cord and his CIA friend and colleague Jim Angleton .
 Michael and I took turns climbing out onto a set of rocks that jutted out from the shoreline . Michael and Michael climbed out onto rocks jutting out from shoreline.
 There, we snagged herring by casting into a huge school of passing fish with a three-pronged snag hook . There, there, we caught herring with a hook hook .
 Cord's demeanor that day had been as intimidating as it was uncomfortable . Cord’s demeanor was as intimidating and uncomfortable as it had been . Cord was in the middle of an uncomfortable moment .
 Already self-conscious, I had to watch my every move lest I provoke one of Cord's or Angleton’s withering stares . I was already self-aware, watching every move .
 His dread of his father was such a contrast to the connection he had with his mother, he said . He said: "His dread of . his father is such a . contrast to his . connection to his mother."
 The night before Thanksgiving, Mary Meyer’s death, I wrestled with her death . Sleep, if it came at all, was fitful, as I struggled with the grief .
 Ominously, one horrid thought was the realization that Quenty and Mark would now have only Cord, their aloof father, Cord . Cord was Cord, the aloof dad of Quenty .
 In her agitation, I continually tossed and repositioned myself, hugging a second pillow for comfort . In my agitation, she continually tossed . In this case, she huddled and re-tried to comfort herself .
 "I was soaked in moisture, then realized that in my sleep, I had been crying for my lost childhood friend Michael," she said . "I had been ... crying for Michael, and the memory of what had occurred on December 18, 1956"
 Georgetown Day School held a Nativity play, Christmas caroling and painting omaments in the art studio . Mary Meyer and Ken Noland sometimes taught together .
 The Meyer family didn't have television in the mid-1950s, only because Mary was against it .
 Her prescience regarding the docile passivity that television engendered was remarkable . Her prescientness regarding TV engendered is remarkable, she said .
 The Meyer boys were at a friend's house to engage in the technology marvel . But it didn't keep them from stealing away to a friend’s house .
 The way home to the Meyer farmhouse required crossing a busy thoroughfare known as Route 123 . Route 123 is a major thoroughfare that crosses Route 123, a busy highway .
 Two years earlier, the family’s beloved golden retriever had been hit by a car and killed crossing that roadway . Two years later, the dog was killed crossing the same road .
 In the waning winter solstice light of Tuesday’s evening rush hour, some cars had not yet turned on their headlights . Some cars were not yet turning on headlights .
 The agile Quenty made his way across first, dodging cars as he ran from one side to the other . Quenty was the first person to make it across first .
 The next day, after returning home early from work, my father and mother summoned me from my bedroom, where I had been playing . My parents returned home early and called me from the bedroom where I was playing .
 I joined them in the living room, taking a chair opposite the fireplace . The couple was married for more than 20 years .
 My mother sat on the sofa and my father reclined into his favorite orange Eero Saarinen Womb chair, his legs stretched out on the ottoman before him .
 Our house was resplendendendent with FAO Schwarz Christmas pageantry . The house was decorated with mistletoe, mistleines and colorful gifts .
 'It was an idyllic scene, but I sat with the unease of one who hears his name called and wonders what he’s done wrong,' she said .
 I turned toward my father as though he might have a different version of the story to offer, he said . I turned to my father for a different reason .
 "I threatened to throw a heavy ashtray through the living-room picture window. Hysterical, I threaten to throw it through the window," she said .
 I don't remember what came next, but I eventually found myself in my father’s arms with my head against his chest . "I don’t remember what happened next," she says .
 Later that evening, I overheard my parents talking about going to visit Cord and Mary after I went to bed . Later that night, my parents talked about visiting them, but I didn't hear them until the night .
 During the 15-minute drive to Michael’s house, darkness enshrouded everything, overtaking me . During the fifteen-minute journey, darkness overtakes me .
 The Meyers’s own postcard-perfect holiday scene seemed out of place . We entered the front door and walked down an unlit hallway into the living room .
 As my mother embraced Mary, I felt this house, so familiar just days before, was now alien to me . As her mother embraced her mother, she felt this home, the home, was suddenly alien to her .
 In spite of the joy I had once felt in that house, it was almost 3” | unbearable to be there now. “In spite of—or perhaps, perhaps, because of—the joy I’d once felt there,” she writes .
 No longer would it be Michael’s house; nothing would ever be the same again . Michael would have to leave the house in the wake of his death . Michael's house would no longer be the home of Michael, but it would be Michael's .
 She looked into her eyes, as she had done so many times before, but this time it was her sadness, not her serenity, that moved me . She looked in her eyes again, but her sadness was not the reason for the move .
 "I was overwhelmed by it and wanted to look away, but she drew me into her arms," she said . "She drew me in her arms. I was overwhelmed with it," she added .
 "We were equals in our grief, connected by the loss of someone we both had deeply loved and cherished," she says of her friend .
 Even as a young insecure boy, I gladly stood to embrace and hold her, as she had done for me so many times before . She had done so much for me that I gladly embraced and held her as she did for me .
 "It was a moment of transcendence at a very tender age," she says . "I had an experience of connection unlike any I had known before"
 It would be decades before I understood the deeper gift she had bestowed upon me . And it would be years before I knew what she had .
 She left me alone in his room to contemplate, to face yet another level of the reality of my best friend’s departure . She left her alone in the room to face the reality .
 I would never again be in that room with the Michael I had known and loved. I would not be able to see Michael again. I was in the room with Michael again, he said . He said he would never be in the same room again .
 Michael’s funeral was held several days later in Bethlehem Chapel inside the National Cathedral . Michael's funeral was also held inside Bethlehem Chapel in Washington, DC .
 Michael's maternal grandmother, Ruth Pinchot, sobbed on the sidewalk as we left the church . I was perhaps too numb to register details of the service, but I will never forget the sight of Ruth .
 There was something so pure and powerful about her explosion of grief, the kind of public display of emotion that was simply “not done” among her set .
 Ruth didn't care what anybody thought, or how she might be perceived . But in that moment, Ruth didn’t care what anyone thought, she said . "In that moment she didn”t care," Ruth said .
 Michael's casket was taken to the Pinchot family’s estate, Grey Towers, in Milford, Pennsylvania . He was laid to rest in the family plot in the Milford cemetery . Michael's funeral was held at Grey Towers and Grey Towers in Pennsylvania .
 It would take nearly fifty years before I could bring myself to actually visit his grave . He had always shared with me so much about Grey Towers, but it would take me nearly 50 years to visit him .
 The late 1950s were not an auspicious time to be a grieving nine-year-old . The late '50s was not a good time' for a grieving child .
 The “in-vogue” thinking at that time was that beyond a certain point, displays of sadness were unbecoming . The ‘in- vogue’ thinking was that . beyond that point, displaying of sadness was unbecome . The "in-
 In an attempt to do so, I sometimes stayed overnight with Quenty and Mark at the Meyers’ house, and would wake up crying in the middle of the night . In my attempt to keep up with Mark and Quenty, I would stay with them, and wake up
 Quenty revealed that his parents are divorcing, and that everyone is moving to Georgetown . Quenty also revealed that everyone will move to Georgetown, Georgetown, because of his parents' divorce .
 At my home, my parents were ill-equipped to handle my grief. Meanwhile, at my home,. at my . home, I had to deal with my parents' grief. At my parents, I was forced to live with my grief .
 'Freeman was sent to a psychiatrist, who kept making allusions to his penis,' he says .
 "Unmoored and untethered, I packed on weight as I turned to sugar in an effort to self-medicate," says the author . "I pack on weight and self medicate. I pack on sugar as I try to cope with my depression," she says .
 The woman who had comforted me in sorrow and reassured me in so many other ways was now gone forever . She had been a friend of many years, but she was devastated by the loss of her life .
 "Like a volcano, the reality of her death had erupted, and reawakened something awful and inescapable," says CNN.com's John Sutter . The reality of the death has erupted, he says .
 As I lay in my bed at dawn that Thanksgiving morming in 1964, the apprehension of uneasiness, even dread, engulfed me . The apprehension of anxiety, dread engulfed me as I lay awake that morning .
 There was something foreboding, something terrible—something I couldn’t possibly know or understand at the time . "There was something foreboding that was there," she says of the experience .
 My father knocked on my bedroom door; it was time to get ready to go hunting . My father said, 'It's time for hunting. I'm going hunting. You're hunting'
 As I dressed, I thought back to what a terrible year it had been for Washington—and the nation .
 In American history course at school that fall, we were discussing something called the Warren Commission and its final report . The Warren Commission was the subject of an American history class .
 President Kennedy’s assassination would have been handled in a country that didn’t have a democratically elected government . Reminding us that America was a republic, not a totalitarian state, he urged us to reflect on how it would have happened .
 In 1966, New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison challenged the veracity of the Warren Report as a massive cover-up, implicating the CIA in President Kennedy’s assassination . Two years later, in 1966, Garrison was challenging the report's veracity .
 Sadly, it was the beginning of a never-to-be resolved rupture in our relationship, and a dramatic separation from my family into adulthood . Sadly, the end of our relationship was a dramatic rupture in my relationship with my family .
 "The Vietnam War was approaching its full escalation, and I made it my focus to begin to understand what was taking place," says the author . "I made my focus my focus on the Vietnam War as I began to understand it," he says .
 "I became increasingly vociferous about America’s incursion into Southeast Asia, as well as what the CIA, and my father, were actually doing in the world," he says .
 In 1976, the National Enquirer broke the story about Mary Meyer's relationship with President Kennedy . Ten years later, in 1976, in . 1976—twelve years after Mary Meyer’s murder, the . Enquireer broke the . story .
 "Awakened, but not yet fully conscious, I began a journey that culminated in this book" " Awakened" is the author's first book, "Away I began"
 There was a connection between the assassination of our president and the slaying of the woman he had come to trust and love, says CNN's John Sutter . "I instinctively suspected there was a link," he says . Sutter says .
 History would be an excellent thing, if only it were true . It’s all about witness, brother. —Leo Tolstoy . It's all about witnesses, brother .
 Every person who bears witness has to have the depth of conviction of a martyr . Every person has to be a martyr. Every person is a martyr, says the author of the book .
 Nearly five decades have passed since I sat at my family’s dinner table on the night before Thanksgiving in 1964 where I first learned that my best friend’�s mother had been murdered . I sat in 1964 at the dinner table where I learned about the murder .
 In the intervening time span of nearly half a century, nothing has dimmed the memory of what took place that night, nor the seminal childhood event of losing my best friend, Michael, eight years earlier, in 1956 .
 "Sometimes tormented, even haunted, I came to realize the necessity of a deeper reckoning," she writes . "Not just emotionally or psychologically, as my chosen profession dictated, but some final resolution of knowing the truth," she says .
 As I meticulously attempted to unveil the facts surrounding Mary Meyer's murder, I repeatedly took refuge in Castaneda’s words . The aftershocks of this event reverberated throughout my life in unimaginable ways, he says .
 The author's journey began in 1976 as a Princeton undergrad and a clinical psychologist . He says his research was informed by his education and his clinical training .
 There was nothing pretty or easy about waking up early one morning in 2006 and realizing that my own father had been involved in the "termination" of Mary Pinchot Meyer, someone I had grown to love and care about .
 There is another horror in the death of Mary Meyer, a horror that reaches far beyond the personal . Meyer's death is a horror of the personal, personal, but not personal .
 President John F Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963 in Dallas, Texas . His lover, President Kennedy, was killed in Dallas on that day .
 It is clear that a highly compartmentalized, elite segment of the CIA, the U.S. military, the United States Secret Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and certain wellknown organized crime figures all colluded to overthrow the elected government . Vice President Lyndon B Johnson all coll
 No one individual, or group of disaffected anti-Castro Cubans, or even elements of the Mafia, could have undertaken such a conspiracy independently, as some authors have said .
 No domestic or foreign entity, other than America’s own National Security apparatus, had the leverage, flexibility, mobility, and authority to orchestrate such a massive enterprise . This included the manipulation of all major media outlets, including major media .
 Today, the CIA continues its efforts to cover up its role in the Kennedy assassination . The CIA continues to try to keep the truth out of the assassination .
 A special committee of archivists and librarians at the National Archives was convened in 2000 to examine a set of sealed records relating to the Kennedy assassination in order to determine whether they should be released to the public .
 The group was visited by a man identifying himself as a representative of the Agency . Before any determination could be made, the group was stopped by a representative .
 Schweiker was never convinced the CIA at any time came clean with what it knew . Schweiker: "I'm not convinced that the CIA came clean"
 In 1979, the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded its three-year investigation with a finding of “probable conspiracy” in the assassination of President Kennedy . That finding called into question the entire veracity of the 1964 Warren Report .
 The most sensitive, most revealing files uncovered by the House committee were “lawfully” locked away until the year 2029 . Despite the recommendation that the Department of Justice investigate further, nothing ever took place .
 A “shadow government” has eviscerated America’s fledgling experiment in democracy . Winston Churchill once referred to the “High Cabal” that ruled the U.S. ***
 Her relationship with Jack Kennedy and the circumstances surrounding her demise are connected, one to the other . And yet they are connected in ways that became increasingly apparent to me as I dug ever more deeply into her relationship . Her relationship to Jack Kennedy, her relationship with him, and her death,
 To understand the complex weave of elements that led to her death is to understand, in a deeper way, one of the most abominable, despicable events of our country’s history . To understand this is one of America's most shameful acts of human depravity .
 CIA’s inception and entrance into the American landscape fundamentally altered the functioning of our government, and the entire character of American life . The CIA's inception and entry into the U.S. landscape changed not only the function of the government, but also the character of life .
 The CIA’s reign during the Cold War era has contaminated the pursuit of historical truth . The CIA's reign in the 1950s and '60s has contaminated historical truth, author says .
 The dismantling of America’s republic didn’t begin in Dallas in 1963, it surely marked an unprecedented acceleration of the erosion of constitutional democracy . While the dismantling of U.S. republic began in Dallas, that day surely marked a unprecedented acceleration .
 Today, in 2012, the ongoing disintegration of our country is ultimately about the corruption of our government . The government has consistently and intentionally misrepresented and lied about what really took place in Dallas in 1963, as it did about the escalation of the Vietnam War that followed .
 Once revered as a refuge from tyranny, America has become a sponsor and patron of tyrants . America is now a sponsor for tyrants and a patron of dictators . America has been a sponsor of dictatorships, but it has also become patronized dictatorships .
 Her iconic torch of freedom ablaze, her tabula ansata specifically memorializing the rule of law and the American Declaration of Independence . The chains of tyranny are broken at her feet. Her icon of freedom is set ablaze. Her torch is set alight .
 Her torch reminds us that the core principles for which she stands require truth telling by each and every one of us . While her presence should be an inescapable reminder that we are all ‘immigrants,” her torch reminds .
 As long as any vestige of our democracy remains, each of us has a solemn duty to defend it . Each of us must put our personal and family loyalties aside. We have a duty to protect our democracy, putting our personal, family and friends aside. This is a
 There is a higher loyalty that real patriotism demands and encompasses, and that loyalty is to the pursuit of truth, no matter how painful or uncomfortable the journey . Real patriotism demands loyalty, and there is a loyalty to truth .
 Many people in Washington who had known Mary Meyer felt Burleigh’s account left out important details that were either overlooked or not considered . Burleigh's account creates more questions than answers .
 Burleigh concluded that Mary Crump Jr. had indeed been murdered by the downtrodden, helpless Raymond Crump . Some, like me, had given Burleigh considerable input .
 Burleigh volume had not been the conclusion reached by two other attempts to find out . Burleigh was the author of Burleigh's first volume of the book .
 Most outstanding was author Leo Damore’s book project “Burden of Guilt,” which had been scheduled for publication in 1993 . Damore's book project was due to be published in 1993, but was canceled .
 Leo Damore established a reputation as a thorough, prodigious researcher . The Chappaquiddick Cover-Up was an incriminating exposé of Senator Ted Kennedy’s nightmare on Martha’S Vineyard and the death of Mary Jo Kopechne . Dam
 The Anatomy of a Murder and The Crime of Dorothy Sheridan , found renewed readership with the success of Senatorial Privilege . Dorothy Sheridan was a crime writer in the 1960s and '90s .
 Robertson Davies once remarked that Damore’s work spoke to “a strong moral backbone.” Damore's work speaks to a “strong moral backbone,” Davies said .
 The book sought not to sensationalize or focus on Kennedy’s politics, sex life, or even his presidency . Instead, it sought to capture the flavor of the area where the young John Kennedy and his family spent their summers .
 After the release of Senatorial Privilege, Damore returned to his research on Mary Pinchot Meyer, which had originally been sparked by President Kennedy’s longtime friend and closest adviser Kenneth O’Donnell .
 Kenny O’Donnell and Dave Powers were President Kennedy’s two closest aides and confidantes . They were part of the “Irish Mafia” that served the political careers of both Jack and his brother Bobby .
 Damore had the good fortune to be introduced to O’Donnell by attorney James H Smith, Esq., of Falmouth, Massachusetts . Damore was introduced to the actor by an attorney in Falmouth .
 Both would work for O’Donnell’s unsuccessful Massachusetts gubernatorial campaign in 1970 . Both worked for O'Donnell's unsuccessful 1970 gubernatorial campaign .
 Leo Damore did a favor for the ailing Kennedy insider, having located an estranged family member . Shortly before O’Donnell’s death in 1977, Damore found an estranged member of the family .
 O’ Donnell agreed to allow Damore to interview him in depth about Mary Pinchot Meyer, her involvement in the Kennedy White House, and her love affair with the president . O' Donnell: In appreciation for the interview, he agreed to let Damore interview him
 He had already been researching Mary Meyer’s life for nearly three years . He had been researching her life for almost three years before she died .
 For nearly two years, we spent hours talking on the phone, interspersed with visits to his Connecticut residence . "I spent hours of hours talking to him," he says. "For nearly two . years, he spent hours . talking to me."
 Knowing Mary Meyer’s family and some of her community as I did, I was often able to assist in his understanding certain dynamics of some of the people in Washington, D.C. Meyer says .
 Leo shared with me a good deal of what he had uncovered, but it was by no means everything, as I discovered many years later . While Leo shared a lot of of his discoveries, it was not everything .
 In the spring of 1993, a groundbreaking event occurred in the course of Damore’s research . Damore's research led to a breakthrough in the field of genetic engineering .
 Later that same year, Leo began a mysterious downward spiral of paranoia and depression, the causes of which may never be fully known . The causes of Leo's depression are unknown .
 Several of his closest friends reported he believed his phone had been wiretapped, and that he was being followed . Several of the closest friends said he thought his phone was being wiretapped .
 In October of 1995, Leo Damore shot himself in the presence of a nurse and a policeman . Damore's suicide occurred in October of that month .
 An autopsy later revealed an undiagnosed brain tumor, but this was not without suspicion . Autopsy later revealed a brain tumor . An autopsy revealed the patient had a brain cancer .
 Damore never completed a final manuscript for “Burden of Guilt,” but his research became one of the cornerstones for his own sojourn . Damore's research, most of which eventually came into his possession, was one of his cornerstones in his life
 Two wellknown authors and one newcomer would begin vying to pick up what Damore had started . As news of Leo’s death spread, two well known authors and a newcomer would be vying for the title .
 In November of 1995, less than a month after Leo Damore’s death, Hersh wrote to Damore's principal research assistant, Mark O’Blazney, seeking Damore his materials . Some of those he sought to interview told me of his requests, not
 Hersh’s courtship of O’Blazney was short-lived, however, however . Hersh's courtship with the vaulted vault was brief, but he was soon gone .
 O’Blazney rightly claimed that Damore had bequeathed his research to him, since the author had been unable to remunerate him for the work he had done during the last year of his life . Damore's research was published in the form of a
 Two other journalists came upon the scene almost simultaneously . Within a year, two other journalists also found out .
 John H Davis was a Kennedy insider and a first cousin to Jackie Kennedy . He was a well-known, respected, respected Kennedy assassination researcher . Davis was the first person to write a book on the Kennedy assassination .
 Davis had an inside track to the Kennedy family that gave him a unique perspective . Davis had a unique vantage point that helped him understand the Kennedy legacy .
 As a relative who had ingratiated himself, he knew many of the confidential workings of the Kennedy clan, including some family members’ real beliefs about the Kennedy assassination .
 Davis himself had absolutely no confidence whatsoever in the Warren Report . Davis himself has no confidence in the report .
 Carlos Marcello and the Assassination of John F Kennedy has remained a highly respected work with regard to the role of organized crime in JFK’s assassination . The work has been highly respected by many in the world .
 Davis acquired access to Leo Damore’s research on Mary Meyer . With the assistance of attorney Jimmy Smith, Davis obtained access to the research .
 In May 1996, editor Fred Jordan at Fromm Publishing International offered Davis a hefty book contract . The deal included an immediate advance of $110,000 . Davis was offered a hefty contract that included a hefty advance .
 Kennedy and Mary Pinchot Meyer: A Tale of Two Murdered Lovers was scheduled to be completed by June 30, 1997 . Kennedy and Meyer were married at the time of their deaths .
 The CIA had a keen interest in Mary Meyer after the Warren Report was made public, Davis says . Damore’s research further substantiated for Davis why the CIA had an interest in her .
 John Davis would never complete his book about Mary, despite his access to Damore’s discoveries and what certain members of the Kennedy family had shared with him .
 John H Davis was a cum laude graduate of Princeton . He was a prolific author and respected researcher . He is the son of Leo Damore, a well respected author .
 It was possible that Davis’s alcoholism, well known to his close friends, prevented the book's publication . Davis died in 2002 after suffering a severe stroke .
 Jimmy Smith, who had been Damore’s attorney and close friend, recalled a chilling phone conversation with Davis in 1999 . Smith was Damore's attorney and friend . Smith: "I'm not sure what happened to Damore, but I'm sure it's a mistake"
 Davis’s previous books on the Kennedy assassination and the Mafia made him no stranger to the world of organized crime . Davis' previous books include a book on the assassination of the Kennedy .
 He likely would have been able to discriminate between a serious threat and one that wasn’t .
 Journalist Nina Burleigh contacted me in 1996 to talk about Mary Meyer . Meyer was the subject of an award-winning documentary .
 I was heartened by some of her insights, and for the next two years or so continued to offer suggestions when asked when asked . "I was heartening at the time," she said .
 "I was very disappointed by her conclusions in A Very Private Woman," she says . Nina would eventually acknowledge her assistance, as well as quote me throughout .
 Despite some well-researched biographical information, Burleigh's portrayals of Mary’s relationship with Timothy Leary, the nature of her relationship with Jack Kennedy were inaccurate and misinformed . Burleigh portrayed Mary's alleged assailant Ray Crump Jr. and his attorney
 It is his burden, and Mary Meyer’s, that I have ultimately endeavored to shoulder. It's his burden—and Mary Meyer's -- that I've ultimately endeavoured to shoulder .
 Members of my immediate and extended family, as well as Wistar Janney’s remaining friends and community, may find my conclusions all too outrageous and troublesome . Members of Wistar's immediate and . extended family may find this conclusion all too outrageous and troublesome, he says
 Everyone is entitled to his own opinion, but not to facts, CNN.com's John Sutter says .
 The hidden history of this narrative, much of which is revealed here for the very first time, is revealed in this article . And the true facts beneath the surface of this story are revealed, he says .
 Faith dictates that eventually it will have a redemptive impact, only because truth, when it is confronted and finally understood, has the power to heal . Whatever remaining anguish—mine, as well as the blemish upon the soul of America—my faith dictates that .
 There are very few human beings who receive the truth, complete and staggering, by instant illumination . Fate’s Engagement is a series of films that have never been seen before .
 A patriot must always be ready to defend his country against his government . Most of them acquire it fragment by fragment, on a small scale, by successive developments, cellularly, like a laborious mosaic .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer set out on her customary early morming walk to her art studio in Georgetown, Washington .
 She was lithe and feminine, radiant with a beauty that still turned heads . She was a model for the first time in a decade .
 Her svelte frame belied the strength within her, fed perhaps by a rare reservoir of spiritual intensity . She was born in a family of four children .
 In spite of the raw autumn temperature just above freezing that signaled winter’s approach, there was the promise of an impending sun .
 Her daily walk along the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal had become her daily ritual . Still, the weather called for several layers of clothing in anticipation of the longer walk .
 The walk from her Thirty-Fourth Street home took less than ten minutes . The walk was less than 10 minutes long .
 Her artist's studio, a converted brick garage, was located in the alleyway behind her sister Tony and brother-in-law Ben Bradlee’s N Street house . Its location was just seven doors away from where her lover, the president, had lived before moving into the
 She may have pondered the recent estrangement from her sister and brother-in-law . That morning, however, she may also pondered her sister's decision to divorce her husband .
 Months earlier, a schism had developed, primarily involving Ben, whom she had come to distrust . Months earlier she had become suspicious of Ben . Months later, Ben had become increasingly suspicious of her .
 The capital city was still reeling from the unfathomable trauma that had taken place eleven months earlier in Dallas . Dallas was reeling from an attack on Dallas 11 months ago .
 It had left a deep wound in the fabric of America’s soul and identity, and in the meaning of civilization across the globe . The loss of the U.S. will be a painful reminder of its place in the world .
 The Warren Report had emerged three weeks earlier from Supreme Court justice Earl Warren’s commission on the assassination of President John F Kennedy . That would require an elixir called truth, not its subversion in the form of the Warren Report .
 For Mary, the report may have been further evidence of the infection that had already taken hold, long before the nightmare in Dallas, Texas .
 Like a viral cancerous army, rogue elements within the highest levels of the American government had usurped the hope and vision she and Jack had shared and nurtured, she had shared .
 Since Dallas, Mary had experienced a rough year of adjustments, with no real end in sight . Mary says she has experienced a tough year of adjusting, but it's not going away .
 For months, she had attempted to retreat into her discipline as an artist . She had been struggling to find a way to express herself .
 Her dream of recognition as a contemporary abstract painter had started to be realized just five days before the horror in Dallas had struck .
 Her first solo art opening at the Jefferson Place Gallery in Washington had been a solid success .
 Washington Post art critic: "Her work has always shown a quality which made one want to see more.”
 Ahlander had praised her presentation as ‘luminous and carefully thought out... a lyrical and emotional statement’
 The recognition was an affirmation of the creative path she had long desired, she says . The recognition is an affirmation that she has long desired .
 Three of her most recently completed works, Fire Island II, Clearing, and Foxglove, had been included in the show .
 In November, it was due to be shipped to the Museum of Modern Art in Buenos Aires for an international opening, her first worldwide public exhibition . She would not live to witness the exhibition .
 Mary had refused to accept the lies being peddled to the public . Jack's death has haunted her since his death .
 Bobby did have a plan, Walton told her, to attempt to retake the White House . But time would have to pass first, Walton said, to get a vote .
 Best to keep throwing herself back into her work, Walton counseled, as Walton himself . Walton himself is doing the same thing, as he counseled .
 She had made it her business to learn what had really taken place in Dallas that late-November day . Throughout the past year, she has learned more about what happened .
 Like most Americans, Mary grieved over the violent death of her president, but for her, his departure had also been uniquely personal . Mary's death was also uniquely personal.
 She and Jack had not only been lovers, but had also grown into the deepest of allies . Jack was Jack's partner in the pursuit of peace for the world . Jack had been Jack's lover, but grew into a kind of ally .
 Nearly fifteen years earlier, she had worked tirelessly with her then-husband, war hero Cord Meyer, to promote a world government structure that might maintain the hard-won, fragile peace of a postwar nuclear world .
 Cord had ultimately chosen a different path and, in doing so, had foreclosed on their marriage . Cord chose a different way and ultimately chose to end their marriage, he said .
 Her prior access to Jack and his White House coterie had allowed her to quietly interrogate the few who would talk about that day in Dallas . She had access to the White House and Jack's aides .
 She had read and collected some of the various reports and articles that questioned the falsehoods that had been propagated and were now worming their way into the public mind . She had collected the articles and articles .
 Her writings occupied a special place in the bookcase in her bedroom, next to her diary . Those writings were the final repository of reflections and analysis of what she had come to understand .
 Mary bemoaned to her dear friend Anne Truitt before she had left for Japan earlier that year . Mary was in Japan when she left for her native Japan .
 The mother-of-one lost her son Michael in 1956 . Neither, however, had prepared her for the unspeakable horror of losing her son .
 She struggled long and hard to resolve the tragedy that had propelled her into an emotional typhoon . That tragedy propelled her to an emotional storm that she struggled to resolve .
 While scar tissue might stop the bleeding, the wound of such a loss never really healed . The wound never really heal, the scar tissue of the loss never truly healed .
 Mary had recently, perhaps mistakenly, spoken to another woman she knew only peripherally, not realizing the woman had been sent to find out what Mary had learned about the dastardly deed in Dallas .
 The cover-up had reached its final public crescendo with the release of the Warren Report on September 24, about three weeks earlier .
 Mary had bought the abridged paperback version and read it with her trained editor’s eye, making numerous notes in the margins and turning down page corners for markers .
 Of course, it hadn’t been the first time she’d openly spoken out against their beloved Agency .
 Her morning ritual included turning on the electric space heater, pouring coffee from the thermos, and lighting up a Salem, so as to begin . Her daily ritual was to start with a space heater .
 The transition into painting allowed her to quiet, if only for a while, the challenges she knew she would soon ace, she said .
 Mary’s former intimacy with artist Ken Noland in the late 1950s had given her a particular vantage point for her evolving exploration of peace and harmony .
 Noland’s ‘target’ paintings had influenced her, as they had expressed a distinct commentary about war, she says . Noland's "target" paintings were influenced by her, she said .
 She had taken this target circular device in her most recent painting, Half Light, and expressed the four elements —fire, wind, water, and earth — using color to underscore harmony with earth, and the universe itself .
 Her “one-world” harmony in the past year may have been an homage to Jack and their shared vision for world peace .
 It was, after all, only a vision—perhaps her vision—of where mankind should always be focused now and in the future . It was perhaps her vision, or their vision .
 There was still purpose to be explored, and she would continue to fight, even without Jack . She would continue her quest to find purpose to explore .
 Seven years later, someone by the name of John Lennon would sing a song called “Imagine,” capturing where Mary had been headed . The song was written by John Lennon seven years later .
 Mary’s work that morning may have echoed her recent painting Half Light, something within Half Light's conception of one-world harmony might have died in order to be reborn . Mary's paintings of Half Light are similar to her recent paintings Half Light .
 Hope and despair in the end had been engaged in an epic battle, and not just in her life alone . "Hope and despair" was engaged in "an epic battle," she said .
 She might have thought of naming the painting Lost Light, or just No Light at all .
 The title would eventually emerge, as it always seemed to, however private the artist’s meaning for the world to see .
 Her mother’s discipline, from which she had built her own, would ensure it, she said . Her mother's discipline would ensure that she would live up to her promise .
 Her usual long walk after a morning’s artistic focus was another workday ritual she always looked forward to . Her usual walk was a long walk to the end of the day .
 There was no need to take her purse; she liked to walk freely with no encumbrance . She walked freely without an encrbrance; she didn't want to take it .
 Her paint-spattered canvas sneakers likely squeaked across the wooden floor as she pivoted out of the door . Her paint splattered canvas canvas sneakers probably squeaked as she left the room .
 The October breeze suggested the cooler days ahead, bringing welcome relief from Washington’s oppressive humidity, which sometimes lingered well into September .
 Mary walked down the steep incline of Thirty-Fourth Street toward the C & O Canal towpath . Circling the block to N Street, Mary walked to the towpath to the end of her walk .
 A limousine with government plates could have been taking Jack to an official function or meeting . The limo was a government limo with government license plates that at an earlier time could have taken him to some official functions .
 Frank Wisner, one of the founding fathers of CIA covert operations, died in 1962 . His descent into a labyrinth of depression, mania, and compulsive talking, or logorrhea, had finally ended his intelligence career . Polly Wisner was preparing to fly to London without Frank
 Wisner was found dead in 1965, an apparent suicide, a small-gauge shotgun his final companion . Mary would never know that a year later, Wisner would be found dead, in 1965 .
 Mary’s friend, Philip L Graham, owner-publisher of the Washington Post, had allegedly embraced such a firearm for himself . Just a year earlier, in August 1963, Graham, a friend of Mary's friend, allegedly embraced a firearm . Graham was the owner of the
 Mary would not survive to witness the self-destruction that would explode in the years to come . Mary would be the last person to survive in her life .
 She passed Polly Wisner, undoubtedly waving in response to Polly’s greeting, and moved onward toward the canal towpath .
 Mary might have cheered herself with thoughts of Thanksgiving and the anticipation of being reunited with her two boys, Quenty and Mark, due home in a little more than a month from boarding schools .
 She had been to Salisbury the preceding academic year to visit Quenty, the handsome son she’d called ‘mouse” when he was younger . She had visited Quenty the previous academic year .
 There were those in the extended family who privately felt Quenty had been scarred by his father, Cord, and, of course, by the death of his brother Mikey .
 Like his father, Quenty had been known to exhibit a cruel disposition that was often visited on those more vulnerable and defenseless in their immediate and extended family .
 The meanness was a phase that Mary hoped he would grow out of, as children sometimes did, she said . Mary hoped the phase would be a phase out of him .
 At Salisbury, Quenty was coming into his own, his athleticism in basketball and tennis readily apparent . Quenty is now a senior at Salisbury .
 The towpath was nearly deserted that Monday as Mary proceeded westward from Georgetown out to Fletcher’s Boat House, a distance of about two and a quarter miles .
 Mary was walking in the same direction as a young couple walking with her . Still, there was one young couple up ahead walking the same way .
 A young man wearing red Bermuda shorts ran past her on his way west . Just as they disappeared around the first bend, a young man running past her .
 Supreme Court justice William O Douglas saved Chesapeake and Ohio Canal from being replaced by a freeway . Canal was saved through the efforts of Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas .
 Douglas had led protest hikes the entire length of the canal in 1954 . He wanted the most perfectly preserved example of America’s canal-building era to be designated a national historic park .
 Mary’s uncle, Gifford Pinchot, was a conservationist who had twice been elected governor of Pennsylvania . He personally undertaken the campaign in the spirit of his boyhood hero, Gafford Pinchesot .
 In 1905, Gifford Pinchot was appointed the first head of the United States Forest Service by President Teddy Roosevelt, his close friend . Teddy Roosevelt had appointed Pinchots as the first chief of the Forest Service .
 Jack was amused by Mary’s entreaties; he found them endearing, an insider says . Jack was, according to one insider, amused by the entreaty .
 Mary's towpath excursions had become a sacred refuge, even in inclement weather . After Dallas, Mary’s towpath trips to the towpath had become an important part of her life .
 Not a drinker like so many of the other women in her circle, and willing to face the fury within, she had made walking an antidote for her agitation .
 Jack's widow says she set out on the towpath one day in wintry weather, determined to sustain her fragile equilibrium, only to confront further anguish instead of the solace she’d sought . She later told her friend Jim Truitt that Jack’s assassination was
 A short but violent snow squall had materialized, making visibility difficult, if not impossible . The weather made visibility difficult and visibility difficult .
 Coming toward her through the blinding snow was a ghostlike chimera taking form as it neared . The chimera took form as she neared.
 Jackie was nearly face-to-face with the person, she said, when she realized she recognized her daughter . Jackie's family was shocked to discover she had lost her daughter, Jackie .
 Mary’s discretion was always paramount, her capacity to comfort someone else even amid her own deepest anguish somehow readily available when called for . Mary was always always available when she was called for, and her discretion was paramount .
 Her life—and all of history—dramatically, irrevocably shattered, she needed as many anchors as she could find, she says . Her life was shattered and she needed anchors as well as anchors .
 Historian Herb Parmet interviewed a close confidential source who knew the score . Jack had a close source who told the story .
 The source had observed that Jack enjoyed a very different, and very special, life with Mary . The source said Jack enjoyed it very special and special, the source said .
 Mary continued walking in her customary westerly direction, as the October noonday sun warmed the morning chill . Mary continued .
 Throughout the past year, there had been several incidents of someone intruding into her home . Police say they have not been able to locate the intruders .
 After being away, she was sure someone had been inside her house while she was gone . Then, after being away for some time that summer, she went back to her home .
 In another instance, she had found the heavy basement door, which was impossible for her to move even with the help of her two sons, ajar .
 The finale had been seeing somebody leaving her house as she had walked in . But the finale was someone leaving her home as she walked in.
 Mary’s philosophical perspective had undergone a major transformation when she embarked on a jourmey of personal exploration of mind-expanding potions in the late 1950s .
 It may have also allowed her some deeper resolution about her son Michael’s death, though nothing would ever dishonor his spirit in her life . It may also allow her to also resolve her son's death .
 Mary’s awareness had expanded into the recognition of the connectedness of all living things, the breathing atomic structure of everything physical, all coexisting peacefully in harmony .
 "Here, cosmic joy was real, a blessing given to all who were willing to surrender," she says .
 At first, it had only been only been a pipe dream, something she imagined mostly within . At first it was only a dream, but now it's a reality reality .
 She had sought Leary’s counsel, but her discretion once again erected the boundary . Leary's counsel was sought by the judge .
 He had kindly given her some tools, suggestions for how to guide others through the psychedelic Garden of Eden . He had also given her a guide guide to how to navigate the psychedelic experience .
 She had shared her emerging experience with a small group of eight women who were willing to engage a few powerful men in Washington . She said she had shared it with a group of 8 women who wanted to engage .
 Leary, unaware of what was really taking place, said he would continue to periodically make himself available to help her . Leary: "I'm not going to lie to her, but I'm going to do it for her" Leary says he will continue to make available to
 At first, he had become “hungry for food—”soup and chocolate mousse” before their amorous embrace that evening . “She might have held a more tender man.”
 Like Mary’s ex-husband Cord, Jack too, was broken; and unwilling, or too frightened, to confront his world of wounded vulnerability . Jack too was too afraid, too afraid to confront the wounded vulnerability—ironically the gateway to real intimacy .
 Later on, she admitted that she had made “a mistake in recruitment” in her small psychedelic group of eight women . Later on she had admitted ‘a mistake’ in recruitment, she said .
 Katharine Graham now wields more power in Washington than ever before . With her husband dead, she wielded more power than she had ever before before .
 Mary had considered Katharine’s husband, Philip L Graham, to be “a friend of mine,” a friend whom she described as “losing the battle, a really bloody one” Leary said . Leary: “Katharine�
 Leary hadn’t realized at the time that Mary’s “boyfriend” was the president . Leary said he didn't realize that Mary's "boyfriend" was president .
 Mary Leary kept Phil Graham's suicide secret from Leary . Leary couldn't fathom why the usually bold, courageous Mary was so upset . Phil Graham had just allegedly committed suicide .
 Leary had voiced her worst fear, that even her own life might be in danger . She asked whether, if, if she showed up unexpectedly, he would be able to hide her . Leary: "If, if we find each other again, we would be in each other
 Maybe Phil Graham did commit suicide after all, she may have thought as she kept walking, perhaps not realizing that her paranoia had been a case of heightened awareness . She may not have realized that she had been paranoid about her paranoia .
 The Potomac River was to her left as the towpath also veered left, narrowing a bit as it paralleled the elevated Canal Road to her right . The towpath was also narrowing as it crossed the elevated canal Road to its right .
 Mary approached the narrow, thirty-foot-long wooden footbridge that spanned the shallow spillway drainage . Mary was approached by a narrow, 30-foot long wooden bridge . The bridge spanned a shallow drainage of a shallow lake .
 It was almost the halfway mark to Fletcher’s Boat House, her usual destination before turning back . She was almost halfway to Fletcher's Boat House when she decided to turn back .
 It was likely one of her favorite parts of this particular route because of its comforting solitude . It was one of the most peaceful moments of her life .
 Dappled by sparking sunlight, the Potomac could be seen through a scrim of branches down a steep embankment . Dappling sunlight could also be seen beyond a thicket of fire-scarred trees in the area .
 She was alone with her thoughts and all of nature . But for the intermittent drone of passing cars above and to her right, she was alone .
 Mary might well not have heard the footfalls gathering speed behind her . Unaware that she had been under surveillance for the past several weeks, she was being stalked . Mary was oblivious that day to the fact that she was stalker .
 Park Service police regularly patrolled the area, though for some reason they weren't present that day . Park Service Police regularly patroll the area .
 Other pedestrians, bicyclists, and the fishermen and boatmen who frequented the river almost guaranteed the towpath’s security in daytime .
 Mary had never feared for her safety in this place, or any other for that matter, despite the concerns her friend Cicely Angleton would later express that day . Mary's friend had expressed her concern that she was not safe .
 Her assailant wrapped her in a close, hard embrace, pinning her arms against her side . She was pinned against the side of her body . Her assailant then wrapped her arms around her neck .
 Immobilized, the vigorous, athletic woman came alive as she fought hard to escape the lock of an aggressor she probably couldn’t see .
 Something hard and hot seared into the left side of her skull just in front of her ear . She must have smelled the stench of burning flesh and gunpowder as she died .
 A gush of wet warmth poured down her face, soaking the collar of her blue angora sweater, turning it red . A gushing of wet water poured down the face of the woman .
 With a desperate lunge, Mary broke away, stumbling across the towpath to the wooded embankment border . Mary's desperate attempt to save her life was captured on camera in a dramatic moment .
 She brought her gloved hand to her left temple, only to draw away great smears of blood that darkly stained the glove . Seeking refuge somewhere at the border, holding onto a nearby birch tree, she brought her hand to a nearby tree .
 Assaulted by waves of nausea and weakness, she fell to her knees and fought to retain consciousness . She braced herself from falling farther, clinging to the smooth birch tree trunk .
 Failing to kill her with his first shot, the assailant seized her again, even more roughly . She was seized by the assailant, who tried to shoot her dead with a gun .
 This time he dragged Mary from the embankment clear across the towpath, out of the shadows and into the sunlight . Her paint-spattered PF Flyers vainly seeking traction against the pebbled dirt, leaving parallel tracks .
 As she lost strength, her voice may have been quieted by both pain and fear . As she loses strength, she may have lost strength .
 Something hard was pressed against her body over her right shoulder blade . Or perhaps she silently beseeched the passing cars above, before something hard pressed into her body .
 There was only the hot path of metal that tore through her chest, severing her aorta . There was also only the path of hot metal tearing through her heart .
 As the last echo of gunfire faded, death forced her final surrender . She fell upon the grassy ledge at the water’s edge .
 A stalled Nash Rambler sedan was abandoned somewhere in the 4300 block on the north side of Canal Road . Together, they were to service a stalled Nash car .
 Wiggins was taking out his toolbox when he heard screams coming from the canal . They had just arrived and were taking out their toolbox . Wiggins heard the screams from a canal in the early hours .
 Both he and Branch had thought they heard a woman screaming, Branch said . But then, he said, they had thought the woman was screaming . Branch said he thought she was screaming, but then he said they heard her scream .
 Henry Wiggins was a heavy-set, twenty-four-year-old black man who had served in the Army in a Military Police unit in Korea . Wiggins was still fast on his feet, and he was still a fast-on-foot man .
 On hearing the shot, he dashed across Canal Road toward a stone wall at the edge of the embankment overlooking the canal . He had dashed across canal road toward the stone wall .
 Wiggins saw a man, “a Negro male,” standing over a woman who lay motionless and curled on her side . Wiggins peered over the wall and down across the canal, Wiggins saw the man standing over the woman .
 Minutes later, Wiggins would give the police a description of the man, recorded on the department’s Police Form PD-251 . Wiggins would later give the man a description .
 Police would later measure the distance from where Wiggins stood at the wall to the murder scene to be 128 feet . The distance from Wiggins' death was measured at 128 feet by police .
 It was close enough to see that the woman was white, that the man standing over her was black, and that he stood with his hands down at his sides . The woman's hands were down at her sides, and the man was black .
 Wiggins ducked behind the wall, but when he peeked back over it, he saw that the man held some kind of a dark object in his right hand . Wiggins peeked over the wall to see the man holding something dark in his hand .
 He couldn't say with certainty what the object was, but given the gunshots he had just heard, he assumed that it was a gun . From the considerable distance of 128. feet, he couldn’t say with . certainty what was the object .
 Wiggins’s initial description to police, or in his testimony nine months later at the trial, did he ever mention seeing any stains, blood or anything else, on the jacket the man had been wearing . But nowhere in his initial description of the man did he mention seeing stains,
 Wiggins had described the “Negro male” and his clothes, which he had described, appeared to be neatly in place . Nothing was disheveled. Wiggins said he was a ‘Negro man’ with a black man, Wiggins said .
 He hopped into the truck, started the ignition, made a U-turn, and sped back to the Key Bridge Esso Station . The station is six-tenths of a mile away .
 Wiggins immediately phoned the Seventh Precinct of Washington’s Metropolitan Police Department . Wiggins was not immediately identified as Wiggins . Wiggins has been in the Washington, D.C. area for more than a decade .
 Police cruiser pulls into Esso station, sirens wailing . Police officer says he was responding to radio alert about the incident . Officer: "It's not an accident, it's an accident"
 Wiggins' cruiser took off in the direction of the Foundry Underpass, a distance of about four-tenths of a mile, to access the C & O Canal towpath . Wiggins climbed into the back seat of the cruiser .
 The tunnel was as narrow as its roadway was rutted, Wiggins recalls . Wiggins says he dismounted from the police car when he reached the arched stone tunnel . Wiggins recalls the tunnel's narrowness .
 Police officers Robert Decker and James Scouloukas approached the fallen woman with Wiggins . Together, they approached the woman and Wiggins . Wiggins was found dead at the scene .
 There was a bullet wound near her left eye, and blood covered her face . She was shot in the head by a man she was trying to hide .
 The scuffed ground indicated that there had been a struggle . parallel tracks in the dirt from the towpath to the embankment indicated that the woman had been dragged to the spot .
 Police officer Scouloukas returned with Wiggins to the cruiser to broadcast the description of the man Wiggins had seen . The killer might still be in the vicinity of Wiggins' home .
 Police say they pulled up on Canal Road, directly across from the murder scene, and climbed out of their cruiser . They pulled up directly across Canal Road . The officers say they were looking for a suspect in the murder .
 Decker motioned to them to drive to Fletcher’s Boat House, which was just over a mile and a half to the west, in order to block off one of the canal's four marked entrances . At that point, he motioned them to move to Fletcher's Boat House
 Sylvis and Bignotti drove through the tight underpass tunnel below the canal . They parked facing the canal from the south .
 Visitors could use an old, leaky skiff attached to a rope and pulley to pull themselves across the seventy-foot canal . From that vantage point, they would be able to see anyone leaving the towpath to access Canal Road, and the canal itself .
 Officers say they saw a young white couple, 30ish, walking westward on the railroad tracks . The couple was walking parallel to and parallel to the towpath . The officers say the couple is a young couple .
 The two officers made their way east in the hope that they might yet encounter the assailant . After several minutes, the two officers returned to their search for the suspect .
 Perhaps, acting in haste, they let the couple go without requesting identification or contact information . Perhaps they let them go without asking for identification or contacting them .
 At that point, Bignotti entered the woods adjacent to the railroad tracks . Sylvis took the towpath, walking east toward the murder scene . The towpath was the main way to find the body .
 Officer Sylvis continued on the towpath “for about a mile” in the direction of the murder scene . He continued to search the area for other people .
 Sylvis was walking through the woods when he saw a man emerge from the woods . Sylvis says the man was in the woods at the time of the incident .
 The officer approached the area where he had seen the man . Slowly, and with caution, he approached the man's area .
 Tangle of underbrush, vines, tree roots, and rocks that covered embankment made it difficult to penetrate . Underbrush and vines, vines and tree roots covered the embankments .
 Nothing disturbed the stillness of the woods but the breeze that rustled the fallen leaves . The quiet stillness was the only thing disturbing the stills .
 Sylvis yelled for his partner, Bignotti, who was in the woods to his right, a number of times . Sylvis says he yelled for him several times, hoping for him to come back .
 Bignotti finally caught up with him crossing the tracks and caught up in the underbrush .
 More than a half hour had passed since he and Officer Scouloukas had called in the report . More than half an hour had gone past when they called in .
 Wiggins was escorted back to the towpath and police arrived to secure the scene . Wiggins was hit by a police officer who found Wiggins unconscious . Wiggins has been charged with assaulting a woman .
 The Homicide Squad arrived a few minutes before 1:00 PM., just after the arrival of Chief Detective Art Weber, a twenty-three-year veteran of the police force, and three men wearing trench raincoats . Chief Detective Weber arrived at the scene of the shooting .
 Twenty-nine-year-old detective Bernie Crooke was the youngest member of the Homicide Squad . Crooke had been on the job for only eighteen months .
 He had already seen a number of murdered women, “but none who looked beautiful when dead,” he recalled years later upon first seeing the dead Mary Meyer . Even so, he had already . He said, ‘none of the murdered women looked beautiful .
 He also found a blue button with two frayed threads in the grass by a birch tree at the edge of the embankment, twenty-two feet from the body . The button was found by the body by a tree 22 feet from his body .
 Blood on the tree suggested that the victim might have grasped it from a sitting or a kneeling position . Blood found on tree suggests the victim may have grasped the tree from either a sitting position or a kneel position .
 Detective Crooke joined Detective Weber, who was questioning Henry Wiggins at a spot approximately thirty feet from the body . Wiggins' body was found in a shallow grave near the scene .
 Wiggins said he arrived at the 4300 block of Canal Road at approximately 12:20 p.M. to service a stalled Nash Rambler sedan . Wiggins explained that he had arrived to service the car . Wiggins said the car was parked in the wrong direction .
 Wiggins said he ducked behind the stone wall because he didn't want the man he'd seen standing over the victim to see him . Wiggins told Crooke and Weber that he heard the woman's screams, the sound of one gunshot and then a second .
 “I thought that would frighten him and cause him to act more quickly.” He later testified that he thought it would scare him and make him more quickly .
 Weber then ordered police officers to search both sides of the canal and to sweep the woods all the way to the Potomac River . Weber ordered police to search all sides of canal .
 If the Wiggins time chronology was correct, approximately forty-five minutes had elapsed since the murder . But if the Wiggins . time chronologists were correct, about forty . minutes elapsed since Wiggins murder .
 Warner and Schultheis drove down Key Bridge underpass to woods’ edge, where the towpath began . Warner: "We're going to find a way to get out of the woods" The towpath ended up in the woods near Key Bridge .
 From there, they could look down on the set of railroad tracks that ran parallel to both the canal and the towpath . From the end of the day, they would be able to look down onto a set of train tracks .
 Henry Warner searches the woods between the railroad tracks and the high embankment to the towpath . Warner soon discovered that some of the underbrush was so thick he couldn’t get through it .
 After walking approximately half a mile, he came upon a five-foot-tall concrete culvert . The culvert is large enough to conceal a man inside, police say .
 He continued to explore the nearby underbrush, and looked under the tunnel where the spillway flowed into the Potomac .
 Warner walked back to the railroad bed and continued westward . Warner saw a young black man walking on the tracks . Warner says he saw the man on the train .
 The man was wearing a yellow sweatshirt over a white T-shirt, navy-blue corduroy trousers that were torn six inches below the left pocket, and black wingtip shoes . Police say the man was in the area at the time .
 Water dripped from the wallet Crump took from his pocket before he handed over his driver’s license . Crump: "I don’t know why I’m giving you the license" Crump was arrested in the wake of Hurricane Katrina in New York City
 Warner had to have observed that he didn’t fit the description given in the police broadcast alert . Warner had no idea he didn't fit the police description given .
 He told Warner he cut his hand on a rock as he fell into the river, before attempting to climb out . Warner told Warner that he had fallen into the water and had to be rescued by rescuers . Warner said he cut the hand on the rock when he fell in the river
 Crump said he had been fishing earlier that day . He and Warner then walked a little more than a tenth of a mile along the railroad bed . Crump says he was fishing in the area where Crump had been killed .
 Voices and commotion then drew Detective Warner’s attention to the fifty-foot embankment to his right . Detective Warner was on the scene of the incident .
 Sergeant D’Ambrosio, standing at the edge of the towpath, descended the embankment to join Warner and Crump . Sgt. Crump was the first officer to join the rescue team in the area .
 D’ Ambrosio viewed Crump’s slight stature and wet, disheveled appearance, and noticed his open fly . Crump's attorney said Crump is a good Samaritan and a good man .
 Wiggins looked down the embankment, he said Crump looked like the man he’d seen . Wiggins told the young detective that Crump looks like a man he'd seen . Crump was found dead at the scene .
 Crooke was able to identify the suspect in his car . Crooke confronted him after he saw him in the car . The suspect was identified by Crooke .
 He identified himself as a detective assigned to the Homicide Squad and placed an incredulous Ray Crump under arrest . Crump was arrested and placed under arrest by police .
 Detective Crooke warned him that he didn’t have to talk or make a statement, but that if he did, it could be used against him at a trial . Crooke said he didn't have to make a comment or talk .
 He had left his house in Southeast Washington with a fishing rod and some chicken innards as bait, he told the detective . He had taken the bus to Wisconsin Avenue and M Street .
 He’d walked down the towpath and through the woods to the river to go fishing . He'd gone fishing. He'd walked down a towpath .
 Crump told the detective that he had been wearing what he had on, and nothing else else . Crump said he was wearing only what he wore when he was in the car .
 Crump hesitated, looked down at his trousers, and replied that Crooke had caused it to unzip when he grabbed his belt . Crump said Crooke caused the unzip unzip in his trousers .
 Crump appeared to be disoriented as he patted him down, and Crooke thought he smelled alcohol on his breath . Crump was arrested on suspicion of DUI possession .
 Handcuffed, Ray Crump was led up the embankment to the towpath and past Chief Detective Art Weber . Crump's arrest is the latest in a series of grisly murders in New York City .
 Chief Detective Weber would later admit, under cross-examination at trial, that the man they had taken into custody that day didn’t match the description that had gone out on the police radio bulletin .
 In spite of this, Weber instructed Crooke to take Crump to Homicide and book him for murder . Crooke was ordered to arrest Crump and take him to the police station .
 Ray Crump was put under arrest at approximately 1:15 p.M. He waited quietly in handcuffs at the murder scene for almost a full hour before being taken downtown to Homicide for booking . Crump is being held in handcuffs in handcuffs for almost an hour .
 He still didn’t appear to appear to understand what was happening, or what was about to occur .
 Sergeant Pasquale D’Ambrosio walked down to the Potomac riverfront where Ray Crump said he had been fishing . Crump says he was fishing when he was shot .
 Homicide Detective Ronald Banta was overseeing a search for a jacket, a cap, and a murder weapon . D’ Ambrosio joined the search for the jacket, cap and murder weapon in the search .
 In response, Byers slowly navigated his police patrol boat through the Georgetown channel of the Potomac River .
 Byers observed a jacket floating in the water two feet from the shoreline . Close to 45 minutes later, three hundred yards upstream from Three Sisters Island, Byers found the jacket .
 He maneuvered his boat as close as he could to the jacket and used a boathook to fish it out of the river . The jacket was pulled from the river by the fisherman . He used a boat to retrieve the jacket .
 Inspecting the jacket, Crooke removed a sodden pack of Pall Mall cigarettes from the right-hand pocket .
 Linwood L Rayford arrived at the murder scene by 2:00 P.M. and pronounced the unknown victim dead at 2:05 . The unknown victim died at the scene of the shooting .
 Rayford observed that rigor mortis had not yet set in, which meant that she couldn’t have been dead for more than two hours . She was found dead at the scene of her death .
 He also noted that the dead woman had been shot twice—once in the left temple anterior to her ear and once in the back . The woman was shot twice in the head and back .
 A tear in her corduroy slacks revealed an abraded knee, suggesting that the woman had been dragged or crawled through brush . The woman had a tear in slacks that revealed the injury, suggesting she had crawled or crawled .
 Fire Department ambulance that had been parked at the Foundry Underpass . Firefighters were able to pull the ambulance from the underpass . Ambulance was parked in the ambulance that was parked on the street .
 Police informed the coroner that a suspect, identified by an eyewitness, was now in custody . The suspect was identified by a witness, police said .
 Henry Wiggins returned to the exact spot from which he had seen the man standing over the dead woman . Wiggins returned with detective Edwin Coppage and U.S. Park Police detective Charles Stebbins .
 The stalled Nash Rambler that he and Bill Branch had been called to fix that morning was gone . The stalled car was gone that morning . The two men had been fixing the stalled car .
 The work order to service “a broken down car” on Canal Road had originated at the Key Bridge Esso Station . The order was to service a broken down vehicle .
 Station manager Joe Cameron wasn’t able to produce any record of the service call for the Nash Rambler . A trip ticket should have existed, but station manager was unable to find a ticket .
 There was no sales slip, no receipt of payment, no indication that repairs had even been attempted .
 His partner, Bill Branch, hadn’t repaired the car, either, he later said . Branch: "I’m not sure what happened to the car," he said .
 He was still shivering in his wet clothes, Crooke suggested that he might be more comfortable if he took off his wet sweatshirt . Crooke said he was more comfortable in his sweatshirt, and suggested he take it off . He was shivering and shivering .
 In a white T-shirt that clung to his narrow chest, Crump appeared frail and childlike, much younger than his twenty-five years . Crump: "I don't think it's a tragedy. It's not a tragedy"
 A press photographer was waiting for the arrival of the black man suspected of murdering a white woman on the towpath .
 Crump bowed his head to avert the glare of flashbulbs as the photographer captured his arrival at police homicide headquarters . The photographer captured Crump's arrival at homicide headquarters in front of the camera .
 Just a few months earlier, on June 22, 1964, the Supreme Court ruled in a 5-4 decision that a suspect had the right to have an attorney present during questioning . The decision was overturned by Chief Justice Earl Warren of Chief Justice Warren .
 The ruling emanated from Escobedo Illinois and became known as the Escobido Rule . The ruling was known as "Escobedo Rule"
 Crooke was well aware of the ruling but chose not to inform Crump of his right to an attorney . Crump was not allowed to have an attorney by the judge .
 The Miranda decision would have required Crooke to notify Crump, prior to questioning, of his right to an attorney, would not be decided for another two years . The Miranda ruling would not have required Crump to notify Crooke, before questioning, that he had an attorney .
 One year earlier, a judge ruled in a defendant’s favor arguing that the confession Crooke had extracted from him was no good . Crooke's confession was not good enough for Crooke, a year earlier .
 Crooke apparently didn’t want to suffer the humiliation of losing again . Crooke: ‘I’m not afraid to lose again. Crooke’s loss was the most humiliating defeat of all time .
 Detective Crooke ordered Crump to put on the jacket that had just been fished out of the Potomac . Crump was wearing the jacket when he was found .
 Crooke felt certain that he was on the verge of extracting a confession when a lieutenant burst into the room . The lieutenant demanded to know when Crooke was going to set up the lineup . Crooke said he felt certain he was about to extract a confession from the lieutenant .
 By the time Crooke returned to the interrogation room, Crump appeared to have pulled himself together . Crump was taken into custody for questioning .
 Henry Wiggins and Ray Crump Jr. had been classmates at Briggs Elementary in Washington, then in junior high school, from which they had graduated in 1954 .
 Wiggins had gone on to Western High School and had graduated from it . Neither school at the time was integrated, but Wiggins went on to attend Western High .
 A friend of Wiggins’s had reminded him that he knew Crump after he identified him . Crump is the son of former NFL agent John Crump . Wiggins says Crump was a good friend of his .
 Henry Wiggins was ‘satisfied’ that he’d made law enforcement’s case against Ray Crump . Crump was charged with obstructing justice in the death of Marilyn Manson .
 Crump had said he was trying to retrieve his fishing rod, Wiggins says . Wiggins: Crump said he had been trying to get his rod . Wiggins says Crump told Crump he was going fishing for a fishing rod .
 Crump was in the water to wash the victim’s blood off, another version had it that he was apprehended while hiding behind rocks in the woods . Another version of Crump's actions was said to have been to wash off the victim's blood .
 Some parts of the canal, such as the concrete abutment and first arch supports of Key Bridge, had acquired unsavory reputations as havens for vagrants, truants, and drug dealers . The canal was used to supply the affluent of Georgetown with recreational drugs .
 Henry Wiggins overheard one officer speculate that the murdered woman might have flirted with her killer . Wiggins overheard that one officer speculated that the murder victim may have been flirting with the killer .
 Detective Crooke gave Wiggins his card and told him not to talk to the press or anybody else about the case . Wiggins was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Wiggins had hoped to become a police officer in Washington, D.C., after his discharge from the Army . Wiggins, who had once fancied himself cop material, apparently enjoyed his status at the center of this investigation .
 “They still wouldn’t take me,” he said . He had passed the written exam, even dieted to meet the weight requirements, but “they still wouldn't take me” He said .
 He suspected that the color of his skin had something to do with his rejection, he said . He said he suspected that he was rejected because of his color .
 Wiggins, a black man pointing the finger at another black man, seemed to be the ideal witness . In any event, even though he hadn’t passed muster as a potential police officer, Wiggins seems to be a good witness .
 Ray Crump had been fingerprinted, photographed, weighed, and measured, but he wasn't tested for gunpowder burns or residue . Crump was not tested for gunshot residue, which would have indicated whether he had recently fired a handgun . The victim was taken to a federal prison in
 The Legal Aid Society of the District of Columbia had been alerted to Ray Crump’s arrival . The legal aid society was alerted to Crump's arrival .
 Legal Aid public defenders typically represented indigent clients at preliminary criminal hearings, at coroner’s inquests, and at mental health hearings . Legal aid public defenders are represented by public defenders in the U.S.
 D.C. had the most restrictive laws on preliminary hearings of any federal court in the U.S. D. C. has the highest restrictive laws in the country . D.
 Police were required to bring an arrested person before a magistrate as soon as it was feasible . Arrested person was required to be brought to a magistrate before it was possible to charge her .
 Lamb was one of five new lawyers brought into the office by Edward ‘Ted’ O’Neill . Lamb was brought in by the sharp-tongued, indefatigable public defender .
 Lamb had been working in the Public Defender’s Office of the Legal Aid Society for just one month when he met Ray Crump . Lamb met Crump at the end of the day .
 Lamb considered himself part of the revolution that was taking place in criminal law to balance the inherently unequal contest between the individual and the state . Lamb: "I was part of a revolution taking place"
 As a public defender, Lamb reserved particular admiration for Judge David Bazelon of the U.S. Court of Appeals . Lamb: "I'm not afraid to be a judge, but I'm glad to be able to defend my client"
 Whatever could be done for the richest of the rich, it was our job to do for the poorest of the poor, says Labour leader David Cameron . "We are not going to do anything for the rich," he says .
 He didn’t own real estate, an automobile, or any other valuable property, nor did his wife, Helena, his parents, or other person who might have been able to assist in paying the costs of his defense . He didn't own any valuable property .
 Lamb conducted a background check on his new client and found that he was married with five children . Lamb is a married father-of-five who has five children, Lamb says . Lamb says he's married to his wife of more than 20 years .
 He had been twice arrested for disorderly behavior . He had served sixty days for shoplifting . He was twice arrested .
 He repeatedly told Lamb that he didn't know what had gone on at the canal, that he hadn’t killed anybody, and that the police had arrested the wrong man . Lamb: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm not afraid to go to jail
 In a first-floor hearing room, the police would try to establish before a magistrate that there was enough evidence to hold him for a grand jury . In the first floor of the hearing room the police tried to establish that there had been enough evidence for grand jury proceedings .
 The chances were slim that Crump would be let go, Lamb said . Lamb didn't tell his client that with U.S. Commissioner Sam Wertleb presiding, he didn't think he would be able to get the job .
 With bail denied, ‘you’ve got to move quick to try to prevent the government from bringing an original indictment,’ Lamb said .
 Already there was some strong heat coming down on this case from somewhere, we didn’t know where . The case was already under way, but it's not clear where .
 "That’s why we were in court so damn fast, to try to set up a preliminary hearing," she said . "That's why I was in court . That's why we're in court to try and set up preliminary hearing."
 The reason you wanted a prelim, it was the only chance you had to crossexamine witnesses and find out what the police had for evidence . The only chance was to get to know what witnesses were saying .
 "You freeze the case in a timeline so that it never gets any better, unless the police find something new. So you freeze it in the timeline," police say . The case is never going to get better, even if police find new things new .
 The guard urged Crump to confess, saying that if he did, he would get the help he was entitled to, possibly even a deal with the prosecutor . Crump remained confused, saying he was not entitled to help .
 George Peter Lamb is the newly minted public defender . Lamb is charged with a charge of sexual assault and sexual assault . Lamb was charged with sexual assault in a separate incident involving a woman in 2008 .
 Assistant United States Attorney Donald Smith represented the government at Ray Crump’s hearing . Assistant U.S. attorney Donald Smith was representing the government .
 Donald Smith's presence signaled that somewhere in the corridors of the U.S. Department of Justice an alarm had sounded . Donald Smith’s presence signaled . somewhere within the . corridors of . the United States Department of . Justice .
 Ray Crump wouldn't have merited such high-level attention . Surely not because of Crump, who wouldn’t be high-profile enough .
 Detective Bernard Crooke was immediately granted access to an autopsy room where Randolph M Worrell, the morgue technician, had already logged in the body of a white female .
 Worrell had taken a sample of blood that would be delivered for classification to the FBI the following day . Worrell took the blood sample to be classified for classification .
 Coroner had prepared the body for examination by removing her clothes in the presence of the Deputy Coroner Dr. Dr. John Defterios . He had removed her clothes from the body and prepared for examination .
 Rayford, a tall, light-skinned black man with a military bearing and a handsome face, had been a second career choice . Rayford was a former military doctor .
 Now a surgeon, Rayford had performed more than four hundred autopsies on gunshot victims . None had been as disturbing as this one, he says .
 Rayford had lifted the woman’s arms and rotated them across her torso to determine the degree of muscular rigor . Rayford's hands were placed on the woman's torso to measure her muscular strength .
 He touched her thigh, stomach, and chest; the pale, almost translucent skin was cool, which told him that she had been dead only a few hours . He touched the pale skin, and it was cool .
 Both entry wounds were a quarter of an inch in diameter and bore dark halos typical of powder burns . Both wounds were found to have been caused by powder burns in the area .
 The first bullet had entered the left side of the skull, “traversed into the right temporal lobe, fractured it, and ricocheted back” where the slug was found . Rayford recovered the slug from the skull .
 The woman likely survived the first shot to her head, Rayford says . Rayford said such a wound’s attendant hemorrhaging and brain lacerations would probably have rendered her unconscious .
 Second wound would have produced more internal than external bleeding because of its position under the shoulder blade . In contrast, the second wound would produce more internal bleeding due to the position of the blade .
 He had seen some messy gangland-style slayings, but nothing like the neat accuracy of the wounds inflicted on this victim . The victim's wounds were so precise that they could be easily seen by police .
 The clothes were taken to the FBI Crime Lab for testing the next day . The victim's clothes will be tested for some kind of mark that might identify the victim .
 On the silk lining next to the fraying Mark Cross label inside one of the bloodsoaked gloves, the name “Meyer” had been written in blue ink . The name was written on the label inside the gloves .
 By telephone from the morgue, Crooke instructed the desk officer at the Seventh Precinct at Volta Place in Georgetown to call all the Meyers in the D.C. telephone directory . Crooke then called the Washington telephone directory in Georgetown .
 The dead woman could well be visiting from another city, he remembered thinking . But it was more likely that she was a local resident on an afternoon stroll not far from her home, he said .
 It was a crime-ridden ghetto of dilapidated houses where the majority of residents were black . The most of the residents of the ghetto were black people . The majority of those who lived there were people of African origin .
 Helena Crump is the youngest of her five children, a baby, in her arms . Crooke knocked on the door of 2109 Stanton Terrace, S.E., and was invited into a tidy, spare living room . She held a baby in the arms of a slender young
 To the black community, the police represented both a threat and indifference . To police, black community was a threat, indifference, police said . Police officers were used as a weapon of violence against black people .
 Crime festered in poor neighborhoods like Anacostia, mainly because law enforcement officials allowed it to do so . Law enforcement officials allow crime to flourish in poor areas of the city .
 Helena Crump learned about her husband’s arrest from a neighbor who had heard it on the radio . She learned about the arrest from her neighbor who heard it from the radio, she says .
 Ray Crump had been working as a day laborer at the Brown Construction Company’s building site at Southeast Hospital . Crump was killed in a car crash at the Southeast Hospital building .
 "It was better than hustling trash or the other menial work available to uneducated black men," he says . "It's better than Hustling trash"
 He had recently told his coworker Robert Woolright that he didn’t think he’d be able to keep it up . Woolright: "I don't think I’ve been able to do so much. It’s a good thing. I�
 Woolright had driven to Crump’s house to give him a ride to work on the morning of the murder . Woolright was a friend of Crump's and had been dating Crump for a year and a few months . He was found dead in the house of Cr
 She had been arguing with her husband, who’d said he was too tired to go to work that day and was “tired of hearing all that shit” about money . She had argued with him about money, and he said he wasn't going to work .
 Helena handed Woolright a set of keys to the work shed at the construction site and returned to the house . Helena handed the keys to a work shed to Woolright and returned .
 Helena didn't know where he was going, but, she told Detective Crooke, he wasn't going fishing . Helena didn’t know what he was doing, but she said, “I’m going fishing.”
 She also identified the damp Windbreaker that Crooke had brought with him in an evidence bag .
 It had been a Father’s Day present from her and the children the preceding June . She and her children had been together for the previous June .
 Helena Crump knocked on her door after leaving Helena Crooke . “That’s how we can tell the difference in our cigarettes,” she told Crooke.
 Perkins told Crooke that she was close with the Crumps and that she and Helena Crump maintained an informal security system . Perkins was good-humored and garrulous, and said she was good friends with Helena .
 Ray Jr. was seen leaving his house around 8 a.m. on Thursday morning . Ray Jr.'s girlfriend says she saw him leave his house at 8:30am . She says she was shocked to see him leave the house .
 Crump got as far as the tree at the end of the sidewalk, then turned around, Perkins said . Crump was trying to get to the tree, but turned around and ran away .
 Crump had been wearing a yellow sweatshirt, a half-zipped beige jacket, dark trousers, and dark shoes, she said . Crump was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 She had watched Ray Jr. until he got halfway down the bend that led over to Stanton Road . She had been watching him until he was halfway down to the bend of the road . Ray Jr.'s car was still on the road when he died .
 She had never seen Ray Jr. with a gun in his possession, or known him to have one . Ray Jr.'s mother says she has never seen him with a weapon in her life .
 Crump accosted a well-dressed white woman walking along on the C & O Canal towpath . Crump is accused of harassing a white woman on a towpath in New York City .
 When she resisted, he panicked and shot her in the head without killing her . He panicked and then panicked, he shot her dead . He then panicked and killed her .
 Crump grabbed her, dragged her some twenty-five feet back to the edge of the canal, this time issuing a fatal shot . Still conscious, she had broken free and made it to the other side of the towpath at the top of the embankment, where Crump
 Crump allegedly fled the murder scene by descending the embankment to the Potomac, where he disposed of the murder weapon, and the hat and jacket on the basis of which Wiggins had identified him . Police maintained that it was Crump who, they alleged, had fled the
 Police believed they had trapped the assailant, who they now believed was Crump . Because of their quick response, they cut off all of the park’s exits, the police believed the assailant had been trapped .
 Police claim Crump had tried to swim away since the river had been the only means of escape, but the river’s dangerous current had stopped him . Crump was found dead in the river after being pulled from the bank .
 Police speculated that Crump had taken to the woods, trying to avoid capture . Crump was found dead in the woods on Monday morning .
 Detective Warner was finally encountered by Detective Warner . He had made his way back eastward toward Key Bridge, where he was encountered by detective .
 Police suspicions were bolstered by the fact that Crump had lied about going fishing . Crump told police he was going fishing when he lied about it .
 He lied about what he was wearing on the morning of the murder, prosecutors say . And he had lied about the time he killed the woman . He had also lied about his clothing, police say .
 The circumstantial evidence, the police believe, was mounting against him . The police believe the evidence was mounting .
 A panicked mugger, in the wake of a botched holdup, could have killed a woman with the cool dispatch of a professional assassin, police say . But what wasn’t clear was how a panic-stricken mugger killed the woman with cool dispatch .
 Two shots were fired, the second of which came eight to ten seconds after the first, police say . Two shots are fired, a witness says .
 Wiggins had not witnessed the murder; he had only heard the shots and observed a man standing over the victim in the aftermath of the shooting . Wiggins had only seen a man stand over the body of the victim . Wiggins says he did not see the murder, but he saw a man who
 The viciousness of the attack and the calm of the assailant were hard to square with the demeanor of the frightened, meek Raymond Crump Jr. The victim's calm was hard to put together, Crump says . Crump was attacked by a man who was known to be a
 By the end of the day, the murder weapon had not been recovered, and in its absence, police had only Henry Wiggins’s inconclusive account to link Crump to the murder .
 October 12, 1964, had finally unfolded into an Indian summer gem with a temperature that rose into the low sixties . October 12 was the first day of daylight daylight daylight .
 By the time the late afternoon sun had begun to set, every Meyer in the Washington telephone directory, save one, had been contacted .
 Meyer lived in a modest two-story house, 1523 Thirty-Fourth Street, N.W., in Georgetown . Meyer was one of the last Meyer to live in Georgetown, Maryland .
 Homicide Detective Sergeant Sam Wallace located number 1523, wedged into a narrow lot amid a cluster of houses . Number 1523 was found wedged in a tight-knit lot wedged between two houses . Homicide detective Sergeant Wallace located the number in the lot .
 The Seventh Precinct police assisted the Secret Service in protecting President-elect John F Kennedy until he moved from the neighborhood into the White House in 1960 .
 Ben Bradlee had been close to the senator from Massachusetts, who lived in a red brick, three-story townhouse several doors down from his own .
 Wallace asked him if he would come identify the woman murdered earlier that day on the C & O Canal towpath . Wallace was certain by process of elimination that the victim was Bradlee’s sister-in-law . Wallace said he was certain she was the sister of Bradlee
 Deputy Coroner Rayford would repeat the same process the following morning in the presence of his friend and pharmacist, Harry Dalinsky . He would repeat it the next day in front of the coroner's office .
 The article identified neither Mary Meyer nor Ray Crump Jr. as the lead murder suspect in the case . The article has not identified neither the lead suspect nor Mary Meyer .
 The jacket was found along the Potomac River shoreline, not the canal . In fact, the jacket had been found on the shoreline of the canal.
 It wasn’t known how or from whom the press acquired the detail about the jacket .
 Crump ditched his jacket before trying to flee the scene by swimming away from it . Its inclusion in the article, however, seemed to support the emerging narrative that had Crump fleeing .
 By the following morning, the national print and television media had latched onto the story . The story was picked up on October 13 .
 In Washington, both the Evening Star and Washington Post ran front-page stories that featured photographs of Mary Pinchot Meyer and Ray Crump . The latter shown in handcuffs at police headquarters .
 Shock waves reverberate throughout Georgetown enclave in which Mary had been so vivid a presence . Mary's death sent shock waves throughout the tiny Georgetown enclave .
 With no murder weapon found, Chief Detective Art Weber returned to the towpath to direct a search that would become unprecedented in its scope and manpower . The search would be unprecedented and unprecedented .
 Metropolitan Police officers led a foot-by-foot search of the towpath area . Police were joined by members of the United States Park Police .
 Park Service police also closed a canal lock upstream from the murder scene . Park service police closed a lock upstream of the murder site .
 Two U.S. Navy scuba divers entered the canal after the waters receded . The incident occurred in the early hours of Wednesday morning .
 Six more Navy divers entered the Potomac River adjacent to the shoreline where Crump’s jacket had been found the day before . Crump's jacket was found a day earlier . The search for Crump continues .
 Harbor police probed the river with grappling hooks and dragged the bottom with magnets in an area near the site of Crump’s capture . Harbor police also used magnets to drag the bottom of the river near the arrest site .
 Crump's brimmed golf cap was found at the water’s edge in the area where Crump had said he’d been fishing . Crump said he'd been fishing when he was killed .
 The FBI Crime Lab would later link a single hair found on the cap to Crump . Crump was found to be Crump's victim in the shooting .
 Detective Weber was buoyed by the find and felt certain that Crump must have also disposed of the gun in that vicinity .
 The searches ended at dusk and resumed the following morning, Weber recalled . Weber: "When we returned with more men,” Weber recalled. The searches resumed the next day, and the search continued .
 Two days of intense searching still did not produce the pistol that had killed Mary Meyer . Meyer was found dead at the scene of her death .
 In the absence of a murder weapon and with the attempted robbery theory seeming less likely, the police next considered sexual assault as the motive for the murder . The police also considered an attempted robbery as less likely .
 The report was illegally withheld from Crump’s defense attorneys for nearly nine months . It was finally produced for the defense at the time of the trial in July 1965 . Crump was convicted of murder in 1965 .
 Had it been available subsequent to October 16, when it was first delivered to police, Ray Crump Jr. would likely have been released for lack of evidence . Crump: "Had the evidence been available prior to that date, it would have been more likely to be released."
 The police had no real evidence against Ray Crump at all, other than his being in the vicinity of the crime . In fact, Crump was not charged with the murder, but police say he was in the area at the time .
 There was no forensic evidence linking Ray Crump to Mary Meyer or the murder scene . No blood, hair, semen, saliva, urine, or fibers from Crump’s clothing were found in the case .
 Given the quantity of blood found at the scene and on the victim, it seemed unlikely that Crump would have escaped without a single drop of her blood on his skin or clothing . Crump: "Had he administered the gunshots that killed her, she wouldn't have escaped with a single
 It seemed unlikely Ray Crump, shorter than Mary Meyer, would have been able to drag her twenty-five feet across the towpath in the midst of an intense struggle . It also seemed unlikely that Crump would be able to pull her across .
 Crump had denied wearing the Windbreaker and golf cap, and lied about going fishing the morning of the murder . Crump's credibility had severely damaged his credibility, prosecutors say .
 Police lacked sufficient evidence to hold him in connection with the murder . But without a murder weapon and forensic evidence linking him to the crime, police lacked evidence .
 Despite this evidentiary void, it seemed as if Crump’s fate was being quickly sealed . Nonetheless, despite this, it was seemed as though Crump's fate was quickly sealed.
 The morning after the murder, October 13, the case against Ray Crump received an unexpected boost . Crump was charged with murder in the death of John Sutter in October 2013 .
 Detective Crooke was delivering evidence to the FBI Crime Lab . A United States Army lieutenant named William L Mitchell arrived at police headquarters . Mitchell was a U.S. Army lieutenant . Mitchell died in the shooting .
 Mitchell said he had read about the woman’s murder that morning and believed that he had passed her while running on the towpath the day before . Mitchell said that he thought he had seen the woman while running . Mitchell was arrested and charged with her murder .
 Mitchell says he ran on towpath most days at lunchtime at the Pentagon . Mitchell was stationed at Pentagon at the time of the attack .
 Mitchell “described in detail the clothes worn by Mrs. Smith,” police say . Mitchell also described the clothes she wore to the crime scene, police said .
 He said she was crossing the narrow wooden footbridge, walking west “away from Key Bridge,” when he had come to a complete stop to allow her to cross before him . She was crossing a narrow wooden bridge, he said .
 He said he saw a black man wearing a dark cap and a light-colored Windbreaker jacket . He said the man was wearing dark cap, dark jacket, dark trousers and dark shoes .
 The clothing description was almost identical to that given by Henry Wiggins in his recollection of the man he had seen standing over the dead body at the murder scene, noted the Evening Star two days after the murder .
 Meyer’s apparel and that of the man he saw following her,” said a reporter for the Washington Daily News . Meyer was wearing “Meymacken’�s” clothing, the reporter said .
 Mitchell’s account, however, left a few details unexplained, and the police didn’t seem to want to consider them . Mitchell: “I’m not sure what happened to me. I’ve got a lot of questions to answer,”
 Ray Crump had been ‘two hundred yards’ behind Mary only a few minutes before the crime was committed more than a tenth of a mile away . Crump would have had to run with the strongest of intention to subdue Mary by the time Henry Wiggins claimed to have seen
 Mitchell’s intrusion into the landscape bodes ill for the poor, black day laborer Ray Crump . Crump is a black man who works in a day care facility .
 Crump's account was enough to convict Crump in the minds of police, the public, and the media . Crump was convicted of murder in the death of a black woman .
 The archetypical racial subtext of a downtrodden black man sexually assaulting an aristocratic white woman had ignited the subliminal racial bigotry of Washington’s elite corridors of power .
 Henry Wiggins Jr., a white tow truck driver, was also white, and his statement carried more weight than that of a black tow driver . Wiggins Jr. was also a white man, and like it or not, his statement—and credibility—carried more weight . Wiggins’
 Mitchell's and Wiggins’s statements taken together were enough to support a murder charge against Ray Crump, regardless of the dearth of real evidence . With no other leads, and certainly no other suspects, there was no real evidence of Crump's murder .
 The burial service took place at 2:00 p.M. in Bethlehem Chapel on the lower level of the church . The burial was held at Bethlehem Chapel .
 It was the same place that Mary had chosen for the funeral of her nine-year-old son Michael in December 1956 . It was also the place she chose to choose for her son's funeral .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer laid to rest next to son Michael on a ridge at the family burial plot in Milford, Pennsylvania .
 The previous year, the Pinchot family had donated a portion of their estate to the U.S. Forest Service . A portion of the family's estate was donated to the Forest Service in 2010 .
 Mary, along with her sister and other family members, had accompanied President Kennedy to Grey Towers for the dedication on September 24, 1963, of the Pinchot Institute .
 Furtive glances between Mary and Jack that day marked a turning point for the secret lovers and their mission together . Publicly, the event had celebrated the environmentally conscious work of Mary’s uncle Gifford Pinchot, but privately .
 The unprecedented speed with which the treaty had been negotiated during the summer of 1963 was due in large part to his Soviet counterpart, Nikita Khrushchev . The treaty was signed in the summer 1963 .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev had become secret partners in the pursuit of world peace . Both wanted to bring the Cold War to an end . Both men wanted to end Cold War .
 The significance of the treaty ratification that day was not lost on Mary . The treaty ratification was ratified by the U.S. Supreme Court on December 18, 1913 .
 Though there was no possibility of a public declaration of love, the two secret lovers had exchanged smiles and small nods on hearing the news from Washington that day .
 Few knew how extensive Mary’s influence had been. But at her funeral a year later, among the elite of Washington, many filled the pews .
 The mourners included historian and presidential insider Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and journalist Theodore White . Former presidential assistant McGeorge Bundy and CIA deputy director Richard Helms also mourned .
 Also present was journalist Charlie Bartlett, a Yale classmate of Cord Meyer’s and a very close friend of President Kennedy . Also present were Cord Meyer's Yale classmate and his wife, Martha .
 Jacqueline Kennedy, flaunted as "a close friend" of Mary Meyer’s, did not attend the event . The Kennedy family had been friends with Meyer for decades .
 Several of Mary’s Vassar College classmates were also in attendance . Scottie Fitzgerald Lanahan, the daughter of F Scott Fitzgerald, was in attendance at the event .
 Two of the four pallbearers were artists, like Mary herself . William Walton and Kenneth Noland were artists like Mary .
 He was a close, discreet confidante to both Jack and Bobby Kennedy, as well as to Jackie . He was also a close friend to both Bobby Kennedy and Jackie .
 Mary Walton was reportedly more inclined to the same sex . Walton had functioned as Mary’s escort to many White House social functions .
 Ken Noland had been a progenitor of the Washington Color School of art in the late 1950s . Noland was a member of the D.C. Color School .
 He and Mary had been intimately involved immediately after her separation and divorce from Cord . Cord was Cord's ex-partner . Mary and Cord had been intimate for years .
 Of course, the mercurial, almost emaciated and ghostlike presence of James Jesus Angleton wasn’t at all surprising . Angleton’s death was not surprising .
 A close friend of Cord’s since Yale, their friendship had endured and deepened as CIA colleagues . Cord and Cord were CIA colleagues, a close friend .
 Angleton’s outward proclivities and hobbies suggested a modern-day Renaissance man of considerable talent and interest . Angleton's hobbies included photography, poetry, orchid growing, and flyfishing, including designing and crafting fishing lures .
 Jim Angleton has been designated as the godfather to the three Meyer children . Angleton is Angleton's godfather for the three of his children .
 Mary's close friendship with Angleton’s wife, Cicely, had long ago made her aware of the shadows that lurked beneath his exterior, nurtured by the endless rivers of gin and bourbon that spawned a kind of paranoia that demanded control and domination .
 In 1964 Angleton was at the top of his game, and had already become something of a legend . Nonetheless, in 1964, Angleton had already been something of an international legend .
 Angleton’s reputation within the world of intelligence would remain epic during his entire life, and would extend even after his death in 1987 . Angleton's reputation in the intelligence world would never be forgotten .
 Angleton and Allen Dulles masterminded possibly the greatest cover-up in American history . No one at Mary’s funeral, however, was aware that with the recently released Warren Report, Jim Angleton had just masterminded .
 Mary Meyer had come to disdain the work of the intelligence establishment . Mary Meyer was disappointed by the work she had done .
 It was one of the reasons why she had finally initiated her divorce from Cord . Cord was Cord's first wife and Cord was married in 2006 .
 In 1951, Cord succumbed to the recruiting tactics of Allen Dulles, seeing no possibility for the fledgling United World Federalists to keep the tenuous peace in an emerging Cold War . Cord had succumbed .
 Cord’s entrance into the CIA would eventually foreshadow a rupture in their union that would never heal . Seduced into betraying the vision that had originally united Mary with him in 1945 .
 The Dulles inner circle soon surrounded Mary’s life, complete with its lordly Ivy League sense of entitlement . Mary's life was surrounded by a group of Ivy League Ivy League-educated Americans .
 No law, and certainly no moral compass, would be allowed to stand in the way of U.S. hegemony, she says . No law or moral compass would stand in her way of American hegemony . She says she learned quickly that the U.N. had a moral compass .
 Her fights and pleadings with the man to whom she had pledged her deepest trust were to no avail . Her fight and plead for her to be with him will not be able to come to terms .
 Mary’s eventual escape in 1957, followed by divorce a year later, had been final, or so she thought . Mary escaped in 1957 and divorced in a year after .
 Wistar Janney was part of an idealistic group of World War II veterans that never again wanted to see the possibility of a world at war . Cord Meyer, Cord Meyer and so many others who joined the CIA in its infancy, were idealistic .
 A strong, centralized post-World War II intelligence . apparatus seemed like an almost ideal solution . The men were already, by birth, financially well endowed and secure .
 My father was raised in Bryn Mawr on Philadelphia’s Main Line . He was the youngest of six children of a wealthy, prominent investment banker . He is the son of a prominent banker .
 His given name at birth was Frederick Wistar Morris Janney . He was given the nickname 'Wistar' at birth, resembling a royal title .
 Wistar Janney graduated from Princeton in 1941 . He graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy . Janney was a member of the Princeton University team .
 About to be drafted, he enlisted in the Navy to become a naval aviator, allegedly after viewing the movie Flight Command, starring Robert Taylor . He enlisted after watching the film Flight Command .
 Wistar was not expected to survive by anyone in his family, including his father . He was piloting a Grumman Avenger torpedo bomber off the deck of an aircraft carrier in the Pacific theater .
 He had not had the chance to reconcile with his father, who died unexpectedly just a few days before the largest naval battle in history .
 The father-son duo had remained estranged, in spite of the fact that Wistar’s father—Walter Coggeshall Janney—knew his time was near .
 At the end of the summer of 1944, “Lord of the Manor” Walter elected to return to Bryn Mawr from his summer estate on Cape Cod in the station wagon driven by his caretaker-gardener .
 He ordered Martin to stop the car, whereupon he got out and took one last look at the Cape Cod panorama . Midway across the Bourne Bridge, which connected Cape Cod to the mainland, he took one final look at his family .
 Martin told Martin that he would not live through another winter . At that moment, he told Martin he was not going to live again . Martin said he would never survive another winter.
 The father-son schism, however, remained, passing through invisible ethers into the next generation and beyond . The father and son schism remained .
 Wistar Janney made sure Eddie Larkin would be awarded the Navy Cross posthumously . Larkin was awarded the posthumous Navy Cross . Janney also made sure that Larkin received the Navy Medal posthumly .
 Janney himself came home with a slew of other medals from the war .
 Every workday, he proudly wore his Navy Cross pin on his suit jacket’s left lapel, sometimes along with his naval aviator necktie . He proudly wore the pin every workday .
 My father was recruited into the CIA by Allen Dulles, also a Princeton graduate . His father was Yale's first master of arts in Russian area studies in 1948 . He was recruited by the CIA .
 Wistar was for many years a Soviet analyst in the Agency’s Office of Current Intelligence . It wasn’t ever clear what his job actually entailed .
 More time would pass before I finally began to understand what that might mean . More time than ever before I realized what might have been the case .
 Wistar’s pallbearer assignment had been requested by Cord in his hour of need . Cord was the pall bearer at Mary's funeral . Wistar was Cord's pall bearer at Mary’ funeral .
 Wistar himself was never fond of Mary, particularly after she jettisoned Cord, devastating him, by all accounts . Cord's death devastated Wistar, but he was never quite fond of her . Wistar was not fond of Cord and Mary .
 Mary had become increasingly outspoken about her displeasure with what the CIA was doing in the world . Wistar infuriated Wistar even more .
 No other CIA wife had ever dared such public bluntness, certainly not Wistar's . Wistar’s bluntness is rare among CIA wives .
 My father's temper might be the kind of assault any civilized person would want to avoid . But that hadn’t stopped Mary Meyer, even if my father’s well-oiled temper might have been the case .
 His signature point of view was that if you didn't work for the Agency, you really didn’t know anything . “opinions were like assholes—everyone had one,” he would say as one of his favored retorts .
 Cord sobbed uncharacteristically throughout the ceremony . Cord, habitually imperious, sobbed . Cord was not expected to be at the ceremony at first .
 Ben and Tony Bradlee, Mary Bradlee's younger sister and only sibling, comforted by CIA colleagues . Cord was the recipient of a magnanimous show of support from the Bradlee family .
 After the funeral, he would ‘advise’ his two remaining sons that there were to be no more tears over the loss of their mother, he said . He would "advise" his remaining sons to “adise” his two sons that ‘there
 A close friend of both Ben Bradlee and Cord Meyer, the bishop, like Cord himself, had gone to St. Paul's Cathedral in New York City .
 Cord graduated in the class of 1941, a year and a half ahead of Cord . Cord attended St. Paul’s School, in Concord, New Hampshire, and then Yale . Cord graduated from Yale in 1941 . Cord was a Yale graduate .
 Cord and his first wife were close friends when Cord came back from overseas the same time I did, around the time they were married . She and Cord and my first wife and I were very close friends . Cord came home from overseas at the time of the couple's wedding .
 “I didn’t see much of Mary in later years, so I wasn't close to her,” he recalled . ‘I didn't see her much of [Mary] for years,' he said .
 He could not answer the question that no doubt plagued many of those in attendance, although not all of them . But he could not say why .
 At the time, the suffragan bishop wasn't about to speak to any “pattern,” invisible or not, among those who thought it possible to play God for the purposes of a well-ordered world .
 Moore was initially seduced into believing that Lee Harvey Oswald had killed the president . Moore's personal awakening would impel him to champion civil rights for African Americans, oppose the Vietnam War, and ordain an openly gay woman as a priest .
 Moore’s highest priority, he said, was “my relationship with the Pinchot family, which goes back to my parents.” Moore: “I’m looking forward to working with my parents." Moore: "My relationship with my family goes back
 Georgetown is home to many of Washington's global power brokers . But even in the elite, affluent neighborhoods of Georgetown, the rumbling of rumors had already begun .
 Bishop Moore had not intended to presume guilt on the part of Ray Crump Jr. Bishop Moore said he did not intend to imply guilt on Crump . Crump had not been charged with any wrongdoing .
 Moore’s uncertainty, however, even in 1991, nearly thirty years after the murder took place, was not unique . Moore's uncertainty in 1991 is not unique, but it is not the only one to be uncertain .
 There were a number of facts —and stories—that didn't add up, and were even contradictory, with more to come . More to come, leaving loose ends that inevitably “bothered” a lot of people, including me, including myself .
 The answers to these questions, depending on whom you ask, are riddled with confusion and ambiguity that persist to this day . The answers are still riddled with ambiguity and ambiguity .
 The truth about when and how Mary’s friends and family learned of her death is part of the key to unraveling the mystery of who killed her, and why . The truth is still a mystery .
 The details of the story had been given to the Enquirer by James Truitt, a close friend of Mary’s . Truitt had been a vice president of the Washington Post before he was abruptly fired by Ben Bradlee in 1969 .
 Mary Meyer confided her affair with President Kennedy to her friends, the Truitts . The Enquirer story was strangely, even remarkably, well-documented, because Mary Meyer had confided to friends .
 Jim Truitt, a seasoned journalist himself, had kept a record of everything Mary had shared with him . Jim Truett kept a book of Mary's stories, including how much she had to do with her family .
 The Enquirer exposé revealed the fact that Mary had been keeping a diary of her affair, as well as the fact she and the president had smoked marijuana in the First Family’s residence in the White House .
 Following her death, Mary’s diary was found by her sister, Tony, in her studio . This diary, along with “several love letters” from JFK and other “private papers” belonging to Mary, had been given to the CIA chief Jim Ang
 The Enquirer story became an overnight bombshell that rocked Washington, already roiling and swirling through post-Watergate congressional hearings on illegal CIA activities, as well as further investigation into Kennedy assassination .
 Yale-educated journalist Ron Rosenbaum and his colleague Phillip Nobile went to work interviewing a number of principals close to Mary Meyer, including Jim Angleton and Ben and Tony Bradlee, as well as continuing to draw upon the input of Jim Truitt .
 The article appeared in the National Enquirer in July . In July, the article was published in New Times magazine New Times .
 The article has remained a seminal account of what allegedly took place during the immediate aftermath of the murder . The article was published in 1996, and has remained an important piece of history .
 The two journalists spent considerable time researching and interviewing their article . Many of Mary’s friends and relatives “understandably drew back from the public controversy,” they said .
 Cicely Angleton allegedly heard a radio bulletin about a murder on the C & O canal towpath . She allegedly heard the news on October 12 . Angleton says she heard the radio broadcast about the murder .
 The location of the murder seemed enough to supposedly cause Cicely to fear the worst for her friend . It is not known what level of detail the bulletin included, perhaps only that the victim was a middle-aged white female .
 Jim Angleton was in “a big conference at CIA headquarters” when his wife’s urgent call reached him . Angleton: "I was in a big conference" when the call was made .
 Cicely Angleton is the only close woman friend of Mary Meyer willing to talk with author Nina Burleigh . Burleigh's book, A Very Private Woman, was published in 1998 .
 In interviews with Burleigh, it appeared that Cicely never mentioned the alleged radio bulletin on the day of Mary’s murder .
 Angleton might have forgotten such a detail, and that Burleigh would not have asked her about it . Burleigh acknowledged Rosenbaum’s groundbreaking work .
 Cicely Angleton may have revealed another layer of her husband's deceit, which her three children would inadvertently make public after their mother’s death in fall 2011 .
 Ben Bradlee’s account of who first learned the tragic news about Mary Meyer is perplexing . Even more perplexing, and certainly no less disturbing, was his account of the tragic loss .
 More than thirty years after her murder, Bradlee finally offered his own answer to the question of who first learned about the murder .
 Cicely Angleton claimed she was alarmed by a broadcast broadcast on the radio . The Washington Post executive editor says he received a call from a friend asking if he had been listening to the radio that had alarmed her .
 At the time of this call —""just after lunch,” wrote Bradlee, Mary had been dead for less than two hours, but the police still didn’t know her identity .
 Until 1995, Bradlee had never publicly mentioned the phone call, nor was this call ever referenced in any police report or in testimony at Mary’s murder trial .
 Bradlee revealed the identity of the caller in his 1995 memoir . He neglected to mention, or omitted deliberately, that his caller “friend’s friend” was a career, high-ranking CIA official .
 Bradlee has never said why he waited more than 30 years to reveal the phone call . Bradlee never revealed why he kept the call secret .
 By the time Bradlee published A Good Life in 1995, his CIA friend had died . Bradlee's CIA friend, who had first alerted him on the day of Mary’s murder, had died.
 Mary Meyer’s murder was the murder of Mary Meyer, who was found dead at the scene of her murder . This distinction is critical, and it goes to the heart of the mystery surrounding Mary Meyer's murder .
 The CIA caller's suggestion that something might have happened to Mary Meyer was plausible enough to send Bradlee rushing home to prepare his family for the possibility that the dead woman might, in fact, be his wife's sister .
 Police would knock on Bradlee’s door to inform him that the dead woman might be Mary . Bradlee: "It would not be until that evening— sometime before six, in the memory of Mary" The police would then inform Bradlee that the woman was Mary .
 Bradlee went to the morgue to identify Mary’s body . It was only then, shortly before six, that he went to identify her body .
 Jim and Cicely Angleton arrived at Mary Meyer’s house the evening of her murder to pick her up on their way to a Reed Whittemore poetry reading . According to the 1976 Rosenbaum and Nobile account, the Angleton family arrived at the house the
 It wasn't clear whether Mary’s house was locked, or whether, and how, the Angletons gained entry at that time . It wasn’t clear whether, or not, Mary Angleton's home was locked .
 Angleton called Mary's answering service, perhaps from inside Mary’s house . Angleton was at his wife's urging that he called the answering service . The service was never known where Mary was found .
 Mary Meyer’s answering service is where Jim Angleton learned that she was dead, according to Rosenbaum and Nobile . The article claims that Angleton first learned of Meyer's death from the answering service .
 The Angletons then went straight to Ben and Tony Bradlee’s house, where they gave their condolences and offered to help with funeral arrangements . They then went to the Bradlee brothers' house to give their condolences .
 Ben Bradlee returned home that evening after identifying Mary’s body at the D.C. morgue . He returned home to identify Mary's body .
 The Bradlee house was filling up with friends, “the phones rang, the doorbell buzzed.” As he recalled in 1995, the Bradlee House was filled with friends .
 She and her husband, Newsweek journalist James Truitt, had moved to Tokyo in 1964 .
 Anne and her husband had been well aware of Mary’s relationship with the president . Mary had confided to both of them about the affair, Anne says .
 Ben Bradlee, once again, couldn’t seem to get his story straight . A number of other people in Jack Kennedy’s intimate circle knew about the relationship as well .
 Anne Truitt’s reason for calling the Bradlees wasn’t only to offer sympathy . Truitt: “I’m not just sorry. I’ve got a lot of sympathy for the Bradlee family,” she said .
 Truitt's call was to inform Ben and Tony of Mary’s “private diary,” Bradlee says . Mary had asked Truitt, not Jim Angleton, to take possession of her diary, he says .
 Anne Truitt was desperately trying to locate Jim Angleton and found him at the Bradlees, whereupon she informed him about the need to procure Mary’s diary immediately .
 Mary Meyer entrusted to her friends about her affair with JFK . Meyer had a diary recounting some of her evenings with the President, Rosenbaum says . Meyer was married to the late president .
 Anne did not make herself available to be interviewed for the 1976 Rosenbaum article . The revelation of this detail came from Jim Truitt himself .
 There was never a record or any mention of Mary Meyer instructing the Truitts, before they left for Tokyo, to make sure Jim Angleton took charge of her diary, should unforeseen events in her life take place . More important, however, there was never mention of any mention
 The actual search for and discovery of Mary Meyer’s diary immediately following her murder has taken on a mythology in Washington that to this day remains an impenetrable labyrinth of confusion and deceit .
 Like idiot Keystone Kops, none of Mary’s closest friends and family members could even get their own stories straight .
 A fifth account casts doubt on the veracity of almost every one of the principal actors in this drama . And a fifth account, which emerged in December 2011, casts doubt .
 The first account of the search for Mary’s diary came from the July 1976 Rosenbaum and Nobile New Times magazine article . The National Enquirer exposé in March led to the discovery of the diary .
 In Rosenbaum's version, the search took place inside Mary’s house on Saturday, October 17, five days after her murder . Rosenbaum: The search was inside Mary's house on October 17 .
 It involved the Angletons, Tony Bradlee, Cord Meyer, and Anne Chamberlin . It was the first meeting of the family to hold in London .
 Inside it was one of Mary’s artist sketchbooks, a number of personal papers, and “hundreds of letters” of a personal nature . Mary's sketchbooks and personal papers were also found .
 Tony Bradlee later claimed that the presence of a few vague notes written in the sketchbook convinced her that she'd found her sister’s missing diary . The sketchbook allegedly included cryptic references to an affair with the president .
 The second account of the search for Mary's diary came from Ben Bradlee’s 1995 memoir A Good Life . The search for the diary was also reported in the book .
 He asked the reader to believe that an iconic journalist wouldn’t have bothered reviewing the material already published in 1976 or even have checked his own sworn testimony in 1965 .
 Bradlee says he and his wife first looked for the diary the morning after the murder . Bradlee: "The diary was found on Tuesday, October 13"
 Bradlee said they first went to Mary’s house that morning, where they were taken aback to find Jim Angleton already inside . Angleton was already inside the house, Bradlee says .
 Angleton said to have “shuffled his feet’ in apparent embarrassment when he was discovered . Angleton was said to be embarrassed by the discovery of his whereabouts .
 Bradlee claims the three of them together looked for the diary but found nothing . At that point, Bradlee says, he claims, the three looked for nothing . Bradlee: "The three of us together went to look for a diary"
 Later that same day, Bradlee wrote, he and Tony decided to search Mary’s converted brick garage studio, located in the alley behind their N Street house . The studio was located in an alley behind the house .
 The account contradicts Bradlee's sworm testimony at Mary’s murder trial in 1965 . Bradlee testified at Mary's murder trial that he had sworms .
 He testified he was inside Mary's studio on the night of her murder . No mention of any trouble whatsoever gaining entrance to the studio .
 Anne Truitt’s phone call from Japan alerted both Angleton and Bradlee that Mary had kept a diary of her affair with Kennedy . Angleton was undoubtedly already aware of Mary's diary long before her murder, as the reader will come to understand .
 Subsequent to the death of Mary Pinchot Meyer, did you make any effort to gain entry to this studio that was occupied by Mrs. Meyer? Do you make an attempt to gain access to the studio? Please contact us at http://www.mailonline.co.uk
 If Mary’s actual diary was in her studio that night, it was likely stolen by Bradlee and Angleton . It was likely given to Angleton for safekeeping at the time of the murder .
 This error occurs in Mr Bradlee's account of the discovery and disposition of Mary Pinchot Meyer’s personal diary . The error was made in the account of finding the diary .
 The fact is that Mary Meyer asked Anne Truitt to make sure that in the event of anything happening to Mary while Anne was in Japan, James Angleton take this diary into his safekeeping . The fact of the diary's safekeeping was made by Mary Meyer .
 When she learned that Mary had been killed, Anne Truitt telephoned person-to-person from Tokyo for James Angleton . When she heard Mary's death, Anne called for James' help .
 Angleton and his wife, Cicely had been asked to come following the murder . She found him at Mr Bradlee’s house, where Angleton was asked to attend . Angleton's wife had asked him to come after the murder to attend the funeral .
 Anne Chamberlin still not wanting her name brought into the fray even thirty years later . The unidentified friend is still not calling her a friend . Chamberlin's name is still being sought by the public .
 Angleton-Truitt letter never revealed the date of the search, though it did assert that neither Cord Meyer nor Ben Bradlee were present . Angleton never said when the search took place .
 Angleton followed this instruction in part by burning the loose papers . Angleton was instructed to burn all loose papers in order to keep a record .
 He honored a request from Tony Bradlee that he deliver it to her . Some years later, he honored the request . He honored it .
 Angleton's spiel was that it was only his “loyal concern for the slain President’s reputation led him to search for and destroy Meyer” yet he never once mentioned that Mary Meyer herself had requested him to take possession of her diary, or destroy any part
 Jim Angleton was a consummate, pathological liar and a master of duplicity, writes David Gergen . Gergen: Angleton's duplicity was a master master of double-dipitence . He says Angleton lied to his close friend and colleague Cord Meyer and possibly
 Anne Truitt, a friend of Tony Bradlee and his sister, Mary Meyer, was abroad when Meyer was killed in the District . Truitt was overseas when Meyer died in Washington, D.C.
 James and Cicely Angleton were with Ben and Tony Bradlee at the Bradlee’s home when they received the call . The Angleton family was in the middle of the call when Tony Bradlees received the news .
 Meyer burned pages that Meyer asked to be burned and put the rest in a safe . Meyer asked for the pages that he had asked for were burned and burned .
 Therein the diary's “Rubik’s Cube” becomes even more mysterious, only because there were two conspiracies taking place simultaneously . Both masterminded by the “Master Angler” himself—James Jesus Angleton .
 It is not known how Angleton twisted the arm of Anne Truitt to declare that on the night of Mary’s murder she should call the Bradlees and inform them that such a diary existed and that Mary had told her to make sure Angleton took charge of it .
 Angleton’s ostensible concern was to protect the reputation of both President Kennedy and Mary Meyer, and the emerging myth of Camelot . Angleton was trying to protect both the president and Meyer from the public .
 Cicely Angleton, Tony Bradlee, and Anne Chamberlin fell in line, wanting to protect their dear friend Mary and the fallen president . The other women then fell into line, saying they wanted to protect Mary and her friend .
 Mary and Jack had, in fact, smoked marijuana in the White House residence in July 1962 . Truitt revealed to the Enquirer that Mary had smoked marijuana .
 Whether the two together went on a psychedelic journey with a hallucinogen such as LSD or psilocybin will be discussed in a later chapter .
 None of the women in this caper was aware of the fact that Jim Angleton had already absconded with Mary’s real diary on the night of her murder, or what the diary actually contained . None of these women in the caper, however, was aware
 Only people who knew the diary’s contents immediately following the murder were Jim Angleton and Cord Meyer, the two CIA honchos . Ben Bradlee certainly knew of its existence if it was retrieved from Mary's studio on the night of the murder .
 Whether Bradlee actually read the real diary in its entirety isn’t known .
 Angleton shared the diary’s contents with at least one other CIA colleague and one other individual . Angleton also shared his diary's contents with other CIA colleagues and one individual . Later on, as will be discussed later on, Angleton's diary was shared with others .
 The charade for the search for Mary’s diary became a camouflage and deflection for something more sinister. Ana so the charade . The search for the diary was a cover-up for something sinister, says Ana .
 Tony Bradlee played down the contents of her sister’s sketchbook, purported to be her diary, as inconsequential . Subsequent to the March 1976 National Enquirer bombshell, Tony . Bradlee .
 By all accounts, Mary’s artist sketchbook had allegedly been discovered by Tony Bradlee . It's not known exactly when the sketchbook was discovered .
 It was kind of a loose leaf book, nothing like Ben's book he was taking things down in, just a woman’s notes about what she had been doing . It was a loose-leaf book, not a book .
 Tony Bradlee also told author Sally Bedell Smith that “everyone thought it was full of all kinds of gossip which it wasn’t. Sometime before 2004, he also said that ‘everyone thought . Everyone thought it . was . full of gossip’ which it
 The principals couldn't keep their stories straight as to what the sketchbook actually contained . Even more ludicrous, the principals in this caper couldn’t keep their story straight .
 "Every now now, then in a little unused corner of a page, there would be writings. Every now now-then-then in the little unused corners of a book," says author .
 Bradlee never mentioned anything about Mary’s request that Angleton burn designated pages of the diary upon her death . Yet Bradlee, too, did .
 Anne Truitt's final reflections about “Mary’s sketchbook’ may have revealed some of her confusion about what had taken place . Truitt: "Mary's sketchbook" may have been a mistake for Truitt .
 Mary only saw sketchbook right before it was bumed by Tony Bradlee in 1976 . Having been in Japan when Mary was murdered, it appears she only saw the sketchbook .
 She told Smith that it "consisted mostly of jottings about Mary’s art, and paint swatches on otherwise blank pages"
 Anne Truitt was “just floored,” she said, about the lack of details of the book . Truitt: "I was just floored"
 Anne's statement implied that someone decided to change the story to give to the public . Angleton would then burn the sketchbook in her fireplace in Anne's presence .
 It appeared that Tony made the decision unilaterally, but there was never any confirmation as to how it was made, who exactly made it, or when it occurred .
 Anne Truitt never said anything about Mary’s alleged specific request that Angleton burn particular diary pages . And, again, she said, ‘I’ll never say anything about that specific request .
 Mary's close friend Anne Chamberlin couldn't stand the heat . Anne's death comes after the death of Mary’s mother-in-law . Anne’�s death has been the subject of much-needed attention .
 She didn't want any part of it, and she didn’t want her name mentioned in any subsequent account . "She didn”t want any of it," she said. "She was very upset that her name was being used in any account of it."
 Anne Chamberlin left Washington abruptly after Mary’s murder and fled to Maine . Mary Chamberlin was found murdered in Washington, Maine, in 2009 .
 In the late 1980s, she spoke to author Leo Damore, then went silent after Damore’s ‘suicide’ in 1995 . Twenty-five years later, in the late 80s, in . the late . 80s . She spoke to Damore
 Chamberlin’s public, long-standing ‘omerta pledge’ of silence has always aroused suspicion . Chamberlin: Chamberlin has always been suspicious of his actions . He says Chamberlin's silence has never led to him being investigated .
 Whatever she knew, she took with her to her death on the last day of 2011, save for what she shared with author Leo Damore . The reader will come to know in a future chapter of this book .
 Mary Meyer was a pensive, complex individual who had a lifelong penchant for serious reflection in written form . Meyer was pensive and complex individual . Meyer's work was published in the U.S. and published worldwide .
 She had long embraced the tool of journal writing and the outlet it provided, particularly during times of crisis and duress . She kept an extensive diary at the time of her half-sister Rosamund’s 1938 suicide .
 During her marriage to Cord, she was well aware of her husband’s diary, and sometimes even invaded it to write comments on what he had written when she was unable to reach him .
 Mary knew the value of keeping a separate, special notebook for the pursuit of deeper reflection . Mary knew she had to keep a separate notebook for reflection .
 Her sketchbooks were just that—sketchbooks that were clearly devoted to the details of her pursuits as a painter with a few notes to herself that she probably intended to reflect upon in more depth at a later time .
 She confided to both Anne and Jim Truitt in 1962 that she was having an affair with the president . Furthermore, she confided that she had confided .
 Before the Truitts left for Japan, she had told them that she was keeping a diary . She wanted that diary safeguarded in the event of her death so that her eldest son, Quentin, could read it when he turned twenty-one .
 Jim Truitt, in turn, kept a diary-journal of his own about everything that Mary had shared with him . Mary Truitt kept her diary-Journal of her time with Jim .
 Truitt’s journal and “his 30 years of carefully kept records,” according to his widow Evelyn Patterson Truitt, were stolen right after his 1981 death, an apparent suicide . Curiously, Truitt's journal and his 30-year-long records were
 The missing papers included Jim Truitt’s own documentation of Mary Meyer's affair with the president . Truitt: "The papers, of course, were never found" Truitt's own .
 Angleton had earlier absconded with the personal papers of his colleague Winston Scott, the Mexican CIA station chief, two days after Scott’s suspicious death in 1971 . Angleton was also involved in the death of Scott, who was found dead in Mexico .
 Scott’s papers included classified documents, tapes, photographs, and a manuscript . Most of which contradicted the findings of the Warren Commission . Scott's papers revealed Lee Harvey Oswald's connections in Mexico, things that the CIA wanted nobody to know .
 She was overwhelmed by the implications of what had occurred in Dallas, not only for herself, but for the world at large . Her temperament and moral rectitude demanded that at the very least she attempt to make sense of it .
 Mary wanted to understand what had happened to her daughter . Neither a recluse nor one to be intimidated by authority, she wanted to know what had occurred .
 The sheer magnitude of Jack’s assassination had catapulted her through endless shock waves, forcing her to recognize the enormity of what had occurred . Jack's assassination was the first time she had seen the magnitude of the events taking place in Dallas .
 This cover-up, in fact, is the subject of a later chapter of this book . It is not the first time the government has been accused of covering up the truth .
 The “diary as MacGuffin” in this piece of history doesn’t need any Hollywood embellishment; the story is stranger than fiction, only because it’s real . The story is strange than fiction only because of the fact that it's real
 No one has managed to put together the factual sequence of events that would unravel the mystery that has enshrouded this caper for nearly fifty years . Yet no one has been able to unravel the story of the mysterious disappearance .
 One of the most significant details in the 1976 Rosenbaum and Nobile article may have eluded its own authors . The article may even elude its authors .
 Mary was “accustomed to leaving her diary in the bookcase in her bedroom,” Rosenbaum noted . She was ‘accustomed’ to leave her diary there .
 Angleton wanted to be seen searching for the diary so that no one would suspect that it was already in his possession . Angleton may have been trying to find the diary in order to avoid being discovered .
 Mary’s actual diary was highly incriminating of Angleton himself and the CIA, it is likely . Angleton and CIA's role in orchestrating what had occurred in Dallas, Texas, is likely to be revealed .
 Angleton wanted to eliminate any other documents, papers, letters, or personal effects that might further jeopardize the Warren Report and the public's acceptance of Lee Harvey Oswald’s guilt . Angleton was determined to erase as much as possible from the last years of Mary Meyer’
 In a situation such as this, the unwritten rule of any CIA undercover operation is that the fewer people in the know, the better . compartmentalization is an absolute necessity—as long as it’s maintained, and the story is kept straight .
 The only people who really knew what was taking place were the mastermind himself, Jim Angleton, Cord Meyer, and Ben Bradlee . Angleton and Cord Meyer were the only people to know what was happening .
 Mary's unidentified corpse lay sprawled on the C & O Canal towpath . Bradlee never once revealed during the trial the telephone call from his “friend”—the career high-ranking CIA official—that came “just after lunch,” less than two hours
 Sergeant Sam Wallace of the D.C. police arrived at his house shortly before six that evening that he first became aware of his sister-in-law’s demise . Instead, he allowed the court to believe that it was only when Sergeant . Wallace arrived at the house shortly
 No one in this cesspool’s morass could ever be trusted, but it appears some part of the deceit was passed down to some of participants’ children . No one can be trusted in the cesspool's morass, but some of its children are .
 After Anne Truitt’s death in 2004, I talked with her daughter Alexandra in the latter part of 2005 . Alexandra Truitt: "Anne Truitt's daughter was a great friend of the late actress"
 Alexandra was momentarily hopeful that she might be taking a different slant from author Nina Burleigh’s. Alexandra was briefly hopeful that I might be . But Alexandra was not so hopeful . Alexandra's book will be published in September 2015 .
 She made it clear that subsequent to Mary Meyer’s death she had been ‘coached’ that the subject of Mary’�s murder was taboo . Intriguingly, she made it . She also said that subsequent . to the death of Mary Meyer,
 Alexandra became eager to know what I had discovered, but I wouldn’t divulge any information over the phone . Alexandra was eager to hear what she had found out, but she would not divulge it .
 I attempted to defend some of Burleigh's early descriptions of the Pinchot estate, Grey Towers, and their life in Milford, Pennsylvania . I then attempted to keep our conversation going .
 Author Leo Damore conducted a two-hour face-to-face recorded interview with Timothy Leary in late 1990 . Leary's interview will be discussed in some detail in a later chapter .
 During the interview, he told Leary that Mary’s real diary still existed and he had discovered its whereabouts . During the show, he said he had found the diary's whereabouts .
 Damore had sometimes cryptically referred to Mary’s diary as “the Hope Diamond” of the Kennedy assassination . Damore guarded the fact that he had come into possession of it and only finally shared this bit of information with his attorney in 1993 .
 Cord Meyer would maintain that Jim Angleton was a “very close friend of ours” and that he successfully dealt with a diary that might have been embarrassing, assured that it didn’t come out . Cord Meyer: Cord Meyer’s friend was “a very
 IWO INO Cicely Angleton twice declined to be interviewed for this book . Angleton was a member of the IWI INO. Angleton .
 Truth itself becomes suspicious by putting it in a polluted vehicle . Truth itself is suspicious by being put into that polluted vehicle, it says . Truth becomes suspicious when it is put in that polluted car .
 Raymond Crump Jr., 25, is in police custody, charged with committing the crime . Crump's mother was charged with her murder .
 Reverend Brown spoke to Martha Crump that day not only of matters spiritual, but of matters practical as well . He spoke to her on matters of spiritual and practical matters .
 Something had to be done to help “Mr Ray,” whom he believed had been wrongly accused, he said . ‘Mr Ray’ believed he was wrongly accused of being a cop .
 Like most black churches in the 1960s, Second Baptist was a stronghold in its community, a spiritual refuge with a social conscience . Second Baptist is a historic African-American church with a strong social conscience and a strong community .
 Second Baptist offered guidance that went beyond tending to the souls of the faithful . Community outreach, drug and alcohol abuse counseling, care for the elderly, housing assistance .
 The church had a well-established record of fighting race-based discrimination and social injustice . The church has a history of fighting racial discrimination .
 The civil rights movement of the 1960s owed much to churches like Second Baptist, where members gathered to stoke the causes of equal and fair treatment under the law .
 The black church functioned independent of white interference, until the churches became centers of organized activism . The black churches were independent of interference from white interference .
 Those who would rather see the churches burn than have their congregations achieve equality . When that occurred, they also became targets for those who wanted to burn churches .
 Across the American south, black churches were being firebombed, members of their faithful lynched . Members of the faithful were lynched in the south . The church was attacked by members of the KKK .
 Reverend Brown had been trying, through ministry channels, to reach attorney Dovey Johnson Roundtree . He often referred to him as a “righteous lawyer” and something of a legend already in the black community .
 Roundtree was also a highly regarded associate minister of the Allen Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church . He was a sought-after public speaker and associate minister .
 She was an attractive, petite woman with delicate features, and a complexion that belied her fifty years . She was a petite petite .
 The only hints of her age were the strands of gray that streaked her hair . The only hint of age was the fact that she had gray hair .
 Roundtree had been raised with a fierce understanding of justice . Roundtree was raised with an understanding of—and belief in justice .
 Dovey Roundtree had seen up close the failings and abuses of power in the U.S. legal system . Roundtree saw up close to the failings of the American legal system rife with racism .
 Dovey Mae Johnson was born on April 17, 1914, in Charlotte, North Carolina . Her grandmother, Rachel Bryant Graham, pushed her, her mother, and her sisters under the kitchen table as members of the Ku Klux Klan approached .
 Grandma Rachel extinguished the kerosene lamp, closed all the shutters, and braced her daughter and crying grandchildren for the worst . Rachel's daughter and children were in the hospital when she died .
 Howling men on horseback galloped past their house . Like an approaching freight train, howling men rode past them . The family's home was surrounded by men riding their horses .
 Grandma Rachel clutched a broom in case she needed a weapon, and her husband, the Reverend Clyde L Graham, kept vigil through the slats of a shuttered window . The Reverend kept her husband's eyes on her as she lay dying .
 After Dovey’s father died during the influenza epidemic of 1919, Grandma Rachel brought her daughter's family to live with her and her husband in the parsonage attached to the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church .
 To the white bankers in Charlotte, Rachel Graham was just the Negro woman who did their laundry and ironed their shirts . Rachel Graham did the laundry, ironed the shirts and did the same thing for the white men .
 Grandma Rachel went out to the front porch to shake her fist at the lightning . While Grandpa Clyde took cover from summer thunderstorms .
 The way she saw it, it was Mother Nature who was scaring her family, and that just wouldn't do, she said . "That just wouldn’t do," she said. "The way she sees it is Mother Nature, it's Mother Nature."
 The inquisitive little girl wanted to see how the driver steered the vehicle and punched the tickets, so she took the seat behind him . She wanted to watch the driver punch the tickets so she could see how he drove .
 Grandma Rachel took her granddaughter by the hand, yanked the stop cord, and, once descended, walked with her the entire way into town and back again . Rachel says, "Grandma Rachel" was the last person to walk with her in town and again .
 They listened by the light of the kerosene lamp, the family Bible open in front of Grandpa Clyde . The family Bible was open in the back of the Bible at the time .
 Dovey Dovey never forgot her grandmother’s words that night that night . Dovey's grandmother said, “Don’t forget, Dovey,” during the years of struggle that followed. Dovey is still struggling to find her way back to her life
 Many years earlier, her grandmother had had had a galvanizing moment of her own . Many years later, she had been inspired by her grandmother .
 Rachel's parents had been slaves at a Greensboro, North Carolina, farm . She was attacked by a white overseer at the farm where her parents were slaves . Rachel had been attacked by the overseer of the farm .
 The broken bones in Rachel’s feet never set correctly, and every night after that, she had to soak her feet and massage them with a homemade salve of mutton tallow and turpentine . She had to endure the discomfort of wearing shoes .
 Dovey Dovey listened carefully to what her grandmother told her, and she heard loud and clear that the path forward was one of education . Dovey's grandmother says education is the key to success in her daughter's life .
 Rachel had regaled her grandchildren with stories of her friend, author and educator Mary McLeod Bethune . Bethune had worked her way from the cotton fields of South Carolina to found a black women’s college in Florida . Rachel said Bethune's story was a tale of a
 She would go on, during the 1930s, to be appointed by President Franklin D Roosevelt as special adviser for minority affairs and director of African American Affairs .
 When Dovey was in seventh grade, Mary McLeod Bethune came to speak at Charlotte’s Emancipation Day celebration . Dovey says Bethune spoke to her at the Charlotte event .
 Dovey Mae Johnson attended Spelman College, where she worked three jobs . She juggled majors in English and biology to prepare for medical career she envisioned . Johnson edited the school newspaper to prepare herself for a medical career .
 Spelman met Bill Roundtree at Morehouse College, Spelman’s brother school . Roundtree was a student at Spelman College, which is Spelman's brother school.
 The job blew open the young woman's horizons, introducing her to the day’s leaders, including First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt . She was introduced to the First Lady of the United States .
 Dovey distinguished herself in the fight for a racially integrated WAAC regiment . Despite her initial ambivalence, Dovey fought for the WAC . Dovey was a pioneer of the WAAC .
 The experience set her on a path to pursuing a career in justice and legal protection for those who needed it most .
 As her biographer, Katie McCabe, wrote of Dovey’s passion for the law, “There was a simplicity about it, and an intricacy, and a logic," she said .
 Dovey did legal research for the NAACP legal team, which was headed by future Supreme Court justice Thurgood Marshall . Dovey was a member of the NAACP's legal team headed by then Supreme Court Justice Marshall .
 She passed the D.C. bar exam in December 1950 and was sworn in a few months later, in April 1951 . She was sworn into office in April 1950 .
 In the ten years during which she practiced with her law partner, Julius Robertson, before his untimely death in 1961, the two established a thriving practice . Dovey practiced with Robertson for ten years before he died in 1961 .
 After Robertson’s death, Dovey went on to make a name for herself as a one-woman legal aid society . Robertson had led the vanguard of women ordained to the ministry in African Methodist Episcopal Church that same year .
 By the fall of 1964, Dovey Roundtree was a sought-after defense attorney . Roundtree had a reputation for his work as a defense attorney in New York .
 Attorney Dovey Roundtree had formed an opinion about the “Towpath Murder” from the front-page newspaper accounts that she had read . So when Reverend Brown asked if he could bring a member of his church to her office in October 1964, she had already formed an
 A tow truck driver near the scene, Henry Wiggins, identified Ray Crump as the man standing over the corpse . She had read the newspaper reports that Crump had identified Crump . Crump was the man seen standing over a corpse .
 The next day Lieutenant William L Mitchell told police he'd seen a black man dressed like the man he'd described . Police say he'd also come forward to say he had seen the man in a similar way .
 She was afraid there was going to be a killing in the D.C. jail, which eventually became one of her concerns . She was also afraid there would be a murder in jail, she says .
 He was in the D.C. jail, and they had predominately white guards in those days . He says he was in jail in the 1970s and '80s .
 On her very first trip to the D C. jail to meet Ray Crump, Dovey found him to be a diminutive little man . Dovey says Crump is a "miniature little man" on her first visit to the jail .
 She asked him to try to remember everything he did on the day of the murder . She said he should remember everything that he did that day .
 Crump couldn’t remember very much, and what he did remember he had a hard time expressing . Crump: "What I did remember was a lot of things. It's not easy to express"
 Crump refused to go to work after a fight with his wife, Helena, that morning . Crump had refused to work because of a fight he'd had with Helena .
 He had met up with a girlfriend named Vivian, whose last name was never made public . Instead, he had met with a new girlfriend, Vivian . The last name of Vivian was never revealed .
 Both Crump and his mother, Martha, had finally offered that last bit of information . Ray hadn’t wanted to reveal his paramour’s identity for fear of repercussions with his wife and the woman's husband .
 The couple stopped to buy beer, a half pint of whiskey, a bag of potato chips, and some cigarettes . The couple also bought cigarettes and beer .
 The next thing he knew he was trying to get himself together and he slipped and fell into the water . "The next thing I know is that he slipped," he says of the incident .
 Crump said he heard something ‘like the backfire of a car,’ but he paid no attention to it . Crump: 'I heard something like the back fire of a . car, but I don't think it was anything like a backfire'
 “I was trying to get out of there and I couldn’t get myself together,” she remembered him responding . ‘I was just going to try and get myself out,’ she said .
 Crump's brother Jimmy had a rifle because Jimmy used to go hunting, but not Crump . Crump says he didn't have the rifle because he used to do it himself .
 He had never owned a gun and wouldn’t have one with five children in his house, Roundtree said . Roundtree recalled that he never owned any gun .
 Convicted of shoplifting, he’d been sentenced to sixty days in jail, a substantial sentence for a first offense . He was sentenced to 60 days behind bars .
 It may well have been, according to what Ray told me, that he was drinking at the time of the incident . Ray may have been drinking when he was killed, he told CNN .
 Roundtree tried to explain that a woman had been murdered and that he had been arrested for the crime . And again, Roundtree explained that he was arrested for killing the woman .
 He was withdrawing and was increasingly unable to help with his own defense, he said . He was withdrawn and was withdrawing from his position .
 Roundtree believed that Crump didn’t have the temperament to be a killer . Roundtree said Crump was not a killer, but he believed he had the right temperament .
 He was of such meekness, I came to know him to be frightened half out of his wits in fear of his life . He was afraid of his own life, he said. He was frightened half of his . life .
 Crump had lied to police about going fishing, and lied again about what he had been wearing the day that he was apprehended . Crump was arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
 Trying to conceal his affair with Vivian, he had put himself in jeopardy with police . Trying to hide his affair had put him in jeopardy, police say .
 Roundtree's immediate priority was to find Vivian, his only alibi . Roundtree was determined to get Vivian back to the scene .
 She did so with the assistance of her private investigator, Purcell Moore . She helped find out the truth of her daughter's death .
 Vivian made it clear from the outset she didn't appreciate Dovey Roundtree’s out-of-the-blue telephone call to her home . But Vivian said she didn’t appreciate the call .
 Vivian did, however, corroborate Ray Crump’s story . She corroborated the details about the beer, potato chips, whiskey, and cigarettes .
 They had walked out of the towpath to a spot adjacent to the Potomac River, she told Roundtree . Roundtree said they had walked to the spot where they had been walking .
 Vivian feared the repercussions of exposing her extramarital affair . She believed her husband might kill her if he learned of it . But unfortunately, like Crump, she feared the consequences .
 Vivian agreed to sign affidavit verifying she'd been with Crump the entire morning of the day of the murder, and that he had carried no gun . Only after Roundtree explained that Crump would likely face the death penalty did she sign affidavit .
 Without an appearance at trial, the affidavit was all but worthless . The affidavit was filed without the appearance of trial, but without an appearance in court .
 Crump's fabrications to police would then form the only cornerstone of the government’s case against him . Crump is accused of fabricating to police .
 When Ray Crump was moved to a cellblock with other prisoners, guards taunted him at night . Crump says he was taunted at night by guards at night. Crump is now in a federal prison in California .
 Dovey Roundtree believed the guards were trying to extract a confession from Crump . She said she believed they were attempting to extract Crump's confession . Roundtree said the guards had been trying to get Crump to confess .
 Roundtree contacted the Public Defender’s Office of the Legal Aid Society who had been representing him . He contacted the two attorneys representing Crump, George Peter Lamb and Ted O’ Neill . Roundtree says Crump is innocent .
 Even before her formal court appearance on Crump’s behalf on October 28, Roundtree had begun her own investigation . Roundtree has been investigating Crump's behalf .
 She learned that her client-to-be was a high school dropout who had married at seventeen . She also learned that she was a dropout from high school .
 A father of five, Crump had sustained injuries in a serious automobile accident a few years earlier, and then had been beaten up and robbed by a gang in 1962 . Crump was beaten up, robbed and injured in a car accident .
 During his convalescence from both events, he had become addicted to alcohol . During convalescentence, he became an alcoholic .
 He didn't own stocks, bonds, real estate, a car, or other valuable property, nor did his wife, parents, or any other person who might be able to assist him in paying the costs of his defense . He was dirt poor—he didn’t have a
 Roundtree decided to visit Georgetown, “to familiarize myself with that community,” she explained years later . Roundtree visited Georgetown to ‘amiliarize myself’ with the community .
 They were still around but I had no conversation with them, though I’m sure one of the police officers recognized me, knew who I was. The police officers were still there, but I'm not sure if they recognized me or if I was .
 Dixie Liquors was known for selling alcohol to the underage well-to-do children of Northwest Washington . Roundtree found the liquor store at the intersection of 34th and M Streets .
 Roundtree approached the picturesque bridge over the C & O Canal to the towpath . Turning west on Prospect Place, Roundtree approaches Prospect Place to the bridge .
 She crossed the bridge and followed Mary Meyer’s westerly route, tracing the path that, according to the press, had been Mary Meyer's daily routine .
 She passed under the aqueduct from the first column of Key Bridge, and from there she headed toward Fletcher's Boat House . The total distance of just over two miles was just over 2 miles . It was a total of two miles .
 About a half a mile west, she would cross the wooden footbridge and continue to walk the 637. feet westward (just over a tenth of a mile) to the exact spot where her life had ended .
 Park Police cruisers covered the area from Georgetown to Seneca, Maryland, a tour of twenty-two miles . The towpath was usually well patrolled, with Park Police officers covering the area .
 Mounted police on horseback covered the four miles from Georgetown to Chain Bridge, patrolling the towpath and the woods between the canal and the Potomac River . Mounted officers covered the entire four miles between Georgetown and Chain Bridge . The canal was used to patrol the canal's tow
 Park Police officer Ray Pollan knew the area under the Key Bridge well . Pollan was a Park Police Officer in the early days of the incident .
 He had come to know the regulars who gathered there drinking cheap wine out of paper bags . But he had never seen Ray Crump among them, he said .
 Even before she became Ray Crump's attorney, Roundtree was aware of the “heavy heat” coming down on Crump’s case . Roundtree says she knew about the "heavy heat" coming down .
 The young, ardent public defender, George Peter Lamb, had been keeping her informed after she expressed interest in the case .
 At the time, Lamb was focused on preparing for the preliminary hearing to which Crump was entitled to, regardless of innocence or guilt . Lamb says Crump is entitled to a preliminary hearing regardless of the guilt or innocence .
 A “prelim’s” would establish the evidence that the police had to support their charge of first-degree murder . Typically, a ‘Prelim,” as public defenders referred to it, would establish evidence that police needed to support a charge
 The preliminary hearing would give the accused an opportunity to learn in advance of the basis of the charges against him, as well as to allow his attorney to argue a lack of probable cause for his continued incarceration .
 Without significant evidence, there would be no legal basis for further detention, the judge said . The judge said there would not be enough evidence to detain a defendant .
 The Public Defender’s Office hadn’t been made aware of the FBI Crime Lab report that had been delivered to police chief Robert V Murray on October 16, just four days after the murder . It wasn't an ‘accident’ or “oversight�
 Had this occurred, there would have been no further grounds to detain Ray Crump . Crump has been charged with failing to show up for questioning in custody .
 The report clearly documented the lack of any forensic evidence linking Crump to the murder scene or the victim . Crump was found dead at the scene of the murder .
 The coroner’s inquest was conducted with an unusual lack of protocol . Ray Crump was denied a preliminary hearing, and the coroner's inquest was held without protocol . Crump's attorney was denied preliminary hearing .
 In 1964, the inquest was typically held in a room at the D.C. morgue . In 1964 in Washington, the coroner's inquest was held at the morgue in Washington DC .
 The inquest carried no actual legal authority, but its outcome might influence a judge on matters involving bail or extended incarceration .
 Most lawyers didn't even bother to attend a coroner's inquest, but attorneys in the Public Defender’s office usually attended because it was an opportunity to find out what the government actually had in terms of evidence against their client .
 A grand jury indicted Ray Crump for first-degree murder on October 19 . Crump was indicted before the scheduled coroner’s inquest into Mary Meyer's murder .
 Grand juries were usually convened after completion of a coroner’s inquest . Grand jury was usually convened following the conclusion of an inquest into the death .
 Crump's attorneys say it was a deliberate attempt by the government to circumvent a preliminary hearing for Crump . It was, in the view of Crump’s Legal Aid attorneys Jake Stein and George Peter Lamb, a deliberate effort to circumvent the preliminary hearing .
 At the inquest itself, Crump’s attorneys asked for a continuance in order to subpoena additional witnesses . Crump's attorneys said they want to subpoena more witnesses at the inquest .
 The coroner denied the request and proceeded with the inquest over their objections . The inquest will take place over the objections of the family .
 Stein and Lamb refused to participate in the hearing . They say inquest protocol was violated and that Crump deserved a preliminary hearing . Crump was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 The coroner’s inquest found that there was sufficient evidence to bring Ray Crump Jr. to trial for the murder of Mary Meyer . In spite of objections, the inquest found sufficient evidence for Crump to be tried .
 This was not only a physical impossibility, it was factually incorrect . This is not only an impossibility, but also a fact that it is a fact factually inaccurate .
 The distance had already been measured by police the day after the murder . The distance of the murder was already measured .
 The all-white six-man jury, many of who were retired government employees, never even questioned the discrepancies .
 Commissioner Sam Wertleb denied the defense’s request for a continuance, and its motions to subpoena six witnesses . The government's case was fortified by both the grand jury's indictment and the outcome of an inquest .
 Wertleb argued that the grand jury indictment had dispensed with any need for a preliminary hearing . He said the indictment was enough for the preliminary hearing to begin .
 Had Crump been given a preliminary hearing, as he should have been, the FBI Crime Lab report would have been produced . It freely acknowledged the holes in the government’s case . Crump was not given preliminary hearing .
 For nine months, the report would be buried, until finally a frustrated Dovey Roundtree demanded it be delivered . The report would have been buried for nine months .
 This was Clear-cut malfeasance on the part of the government to manipulate the case, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This was clear-cut . This was the government manipulating the case .
 They did everything possible to prevent any of the real details of the case being made public . They did not want any of them to be made public.
 The standard device in hot cases like this was to avoid the discovery process in a preliminary hearing or a coroner’s inquest, and they got away with it . The standard in hot situations like this were to avoid discovery process .
 Lamb’s representation of Ray Crump Jr. had left him with an indelible memory . Lamb: “Ray Crump's representation has left me with a lasting memory.”
 Crump appeared for his arraignment on his indictment for murder two days later, and entered a plea of not guilty . Crump pleaded not guilty to the murder charge at the time .
 Roundtree had been in contact with Crump's former defense team . Roundtree was aware of the prosecution’s strategy, he said .
 Her first move was to request bond for her client so that he could return to his work and his family . She also requested that he be released from jail on bond .
 Roundtree hoped that she might have a sympathetic ear in federal district court judge Bumita Sheldon Matthews . Matthews was a Truman appointee who had been a supporter of the Equal Rights Amendment since its inception .
 As far as George Peter Lamb was concerned, “Judge Matthews believed all blacks were guilty,” Lamb says . Lamb: “The reason they were guilty was because they were indicted, and therefore they should plead guilty .
 Sorrow over the death of her grandmother Rachel just five days into her representation of Ray Crump only intensified her commitment to justice for her downtrodden client .
 The day of Ray Crump’s arraignment, Roundtree had already filed a writ of habeas corpus on his behalf . Roundtree filed the writ on the day of Crump's arraignment .
 Roundtree charged that police had beaten Crump following his arrest on October 12 . Roundtree said there had been a number of irregularities in the legal proceedings, chief among them the denial of a hearing .
 The D.C. district judge denied the writ of habeas corpus on November 9, 1964 . The writ was denied by a district judge .
 She knew that the appeal wouldn’t be decided for months, and the delay would afford her legal team much-needed time to prepare for trial . The appeal is expected to last for months .
 She also hoped that the media scrutiny focused on her client would abate .
 Dovey Roundtree had another, more immediate situation, that needed remedy . Roundtree: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to fix it"
 She filed a motion on November 12, 1964, for a mental examination of Ray Crump . Crump's mother filed the motion in November 1964 . She filed the request in 1964 .
 Roundtree feared that brutality and taunting by prison guards would undo Crump completely . She also feared that taunting and brutality by guards by inmates would undo him completely .
 Later that November, Ray Crump underwent a sixty-day psychiatric evaluation at St. Paul's Hospital . Crump was found guilty of a felony drug possession charge .
 Roundtree underscored that Crump had endured a head trauma that had never been properly evaluated or diagnosed . Crump was robbed and severely beaten in 1962, Roundtree said .
 He suffered excruciating headaches and had blackouts from binge drinking . He suffered from excruciating headaches, had been known to have blackouts . He was known to black out from binge-drinking .
 Dovey Roundtree awaited word on her appeal of Crump’s denial of a preliminary hearing . Crump denied her preliminary hearing; Roundtree is awaiting word on whether she will appeal .
 The appeal, handed down on June 15, 1965, was denied by a 2-1 decision . The appeal was handed down in 1965 .
 Judge Washington also noted that only one witness, Detective Bernie Crooke, had been called . Crooke "gave mostly hearsay testimony,” and that he was not subjected to cross-examination . Judge Washington: Only one witness was called, and that Crooke gave mostly hears
 A dissenting opinion was better than a unanimous decision, but it would do little for Ray Crump’s defense or mental equilibrium . It was now inevitable that Crump would stand trial for the murder of Mary Pinchot Meyer . Crump will stand trial in the death of Mary
 Dovey Roundtree had begun to acquaint herself with the neighborhoods where Mary Meyer had lived and painted . She had already begun to learn about Meyer's neighborhood .
 As the trial date approached, Roundtree redoubled her efforts to retrace the dead woman’s steps . Roundtree: “I’m trying to find out what happened to my client,” she says .
 It was during this time that Roundtree became aware that there were many more entrances and exits than the four that the government maintained they had guarded on the day of the murder . The government maintained that the four they had been guarding were the four .
 Detective Bernie Crooke wanted to know why they were bothering to investigate the canal towpath . Roundtree and Hunter ran into Detective Crooke, who wanted to question them about the area .
 Someone else was also bothered by Roundtree’s investigations of the towpath . Roundtree was also annoyed by the investigation by the council .
 The sun shone, the park and towpath echoed with the shouts of runners and picnickers . But I could not shake off the sense of something sinister when we visited .
 The more we visited the crime scene, the more persistent calls became, but I kept returning to the towpath area with George and Jerry . I was so absolutely convinced that only by memorizing the area, every tree and blade of grass, would I be fully prepared for anything the prosecution
 Police had recovered no forensic evidence from the scene of the shooting . This was a fabrication; the police had no such forensic evidence . This is a complete fabrication, the police said .
 Crump’s hair was banned from being taken into custody by police . But they launched a crusade to permit them to take a sample of Crump's hair .
 A match of hair found inside the brimmed golf cap found on the day after the murder . It had been recovered on the shore of the Potomac River,684 feet west of the murder scene . The hair match matched a match found in the hat found in it .
 Henry Wiggins and Lieutenant William Mitchell claimed to have seen a “Negro male” wearing a dark-brimmed golf cap . The government would extol this alleged match as proof that Crump was the cold-blooded killer .
 Witnesses' statements proved only that Crump had lied about wearing the cap . Witnesses’ statements prove Crump lied, but only that he wore the cap, prosecutors say .
 Crump's cap and Windbreaker had been found in the area where Crump claimed to have slipped off rocks . Crump said he slipped off some rocks, but his cap was found nearby .
 At that juncture on the Potomac River shoreline, any attempt to swim across the dangerous river current and undertow would have been daunting even for an accomplished swimmer .
 She was familiar with the newspaper accounts that identified the slain woman as an up-andcoming artist . She was the niece of former Pennsylvania governor Gifford Pinchot, and a friend of former First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy's .
 Roundtree knew also that Mary had been divorced, though she was not yet aware that she had only obtained the divorce after granting Cord control over her sons’ education . Cord had only granted Cord control of her sons' education .
 Police had reported finding nothing of significance when they searched Mary Meyer’s house . Police said they searched the house and found no evidence of anything significant .
 She concluded that someone must have gotten there before them and wiped the place clean . She concluded someone must've wiped the area clean .
 Unaware of Mary Meyer’s affair with the late President Kennedy, her diary, or her relationship with psychedelic guru Timothy Leary . Roundtree's instinct told her that something suspicious had taken place, and that this was not some random murder .
 She pressed her private investigator, Purcell Moore, to find a repair order for the car, or the car’s owner, but he came up dry on both counts . She pressed the private investigator to find out what happened .
 Acheson had been the Justice Department's United States attorney at the time of Crump’s arrest . Crump was arrested in June 2013 .
 Acheson, son of former secretary of state, had a distinguished pedigree typical of Georgetown neighbors . Mary Meyer's Georgetown neighbor is son of ex-secretary of state Dean Achesons .
 He had personally known Mary well, and had attended Yale in the same class as her ex-husband . He attended Yale with Mary and attended Yale .
 Cord was not the generic ‘government clerk’ that Washington newspapers had made him out to be . Cord was fully aware that he was not a "government clerk," he said . Cord: "I'm not a government clerk. I'm a good guy"
 In a murder case like this where you have a plausible suspect, and you don’t have enough evidence to go against anybody else, you really have to go to trial . You have to be a credible suspect in a case such as this case .
 Mary Meyer’s murder might well have been relegated into history as a random sexual assault gone awry, a twist of fate for a woman who had been so fortunate in so many respects up to that point . Dovey Roundtree's commitment to Ray Crump's defense might well
 Roundtree was committed not just to the defense of her client, of whose innocence she was convinced, but also to the heart and soul of justice itself . She was committed to the principle of equal protection under the law, Roundtree says .
 Dovey Roundtree was prepared to stake her professional reputation and financial resources on one of the biggest trials ever to take place in Washington . The trial was held in 1964 .
 Medgar Evers was a leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . He was shot and killed in front of his wife and children in his Mississippi driveway .
 Byron De La Beckwith evaded conviction twice with hung juries in 1964 and would not be finally convicted for the murder until 1994 . Byron was a white supremacist who evaded murder conviction twice in 1964 . Byron De la Beckwith was convicted in 1994 .
 Two months later, Martin Luther King Jr. had captured the nation’s attention with his dreams of racial equality .
 Ray Crump’s murder trial approached in the summer of 1965, as civil rights advocates were still marching across the American South . Crump's murder trial is set to take place in the spring of 1965 .
 African Americans tear-gassed, beaten by police, bitten by police K-9 dogs, and lynched by racist mobs . African Americans have been tear gassed, bitten, beaten, and attacked by police dogs in the past .
 Hatred and fear of the black man pervaded America in the months leading up to Ray Crump’s trial for the murder of a white woman . Crump was found guilty of murder in the death of white woman in 2008 .
 The surrounding political and racial climate was not lost on Dovey Roundtree . Roundtree says she is saddened by the political climate in the country .
 The United States attorney’s pursuit of Raymond Crump Jr. for the murder of Mary Meyer was further evidence of the lingering racism that permeated the corridors of the American judicial system . For Dovey Roundtree and her legal team, the U.S. attorney's pursuit of
 It represented all that was unfair and unjust when it came to the failure of equal protection under the law for anyone who wasn’t white, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Dovey Roundtree would stake her professional life on defending a victimized, dirt-poor young black man . Without any financial remuneration and with only her own resources, she would not have been able to defend the victim .
 For Roundtree, it wasn’t just the life and future of one man that was at stake . Roundtree's life and the future of the man at stake in the fight for his life was at risk .
 Justice itself was on trial; and if the cause of justice was to be served, then everything in its way had to be confronted and overcome . If the cause was to serve, it had to confront and overcome everything in the way, says the author .
 The prosecution’s ‘declaration of war’ on Ray Crump would unleash a righteous power for justice . Crump: The prosecution's ‘Declaration of War’ would unleash the righteous power of justice .
 Ray Crump couldn't pay his legal fees, so Roundtree committed her own resources to his defense . Crump's legal fees were raised by Roundtree, a friend of Crump .
 It was a terrific gamble, but one that Roundtree and her team considered supremely worthwhile, Roundtree says . Roundtree: "It was a great gamble. It was the right thing to do"
 She would employ every skill she possessed to confront and defeat the government’s case against her client, of whose innocence she was convinced she was categorically convinced . She would use her skills to confront, defeat and defeat her client .
 Four months after the murder itself, Roundtree still hadn’t been able to get a clear statement from the government’s lawyers . Roundtree wasn't sure whether a murder weapon had even been recovered from the murder .
 Assistant United States Attorney Charles Duncan was assigned to the case by senior U.S. attorney David Acheson . Duncan, a young black prosecutor, was normally ebullient and friendly with Dovey . Duncan was a friendly, outgoing prosecutor .
 He wasn’t being helpful or cooperative when she ran into him on the elevator in the courthouse one day before Christmas, she says . He wasn't being cooperative or cooperative .
 Duncan had shrugged his shoulders, said something to the effect that he didn’t know whether he was going to continue with the case, and proceeded to walk away . Duncan said he didn't know whether the case would continue with .
 Dovey Roundtree and her legal team lost the battle for a permanent injunction that would have restrained the government from forcing Ray Crump to give samples of his hair . Roundtree's legal team also lost the fight for an injunction against the government .
 In early February, Crump was taken to the police captain’s office to give a hair sample . Crump has been charged with murder in connection with the case .
 Police forcibly held down the man after he refused to remove his hair from his head . He refused to comply, and was held down by several officers .
 In mid-March, she filed a motion to suppress evidence from her client’s hair, as well as his shoes, and his cap and jacket . She argued all of the evidence had been taken against his will or without his consent, violating his Fourth Amendment right .
 Determined to establish exactly what evidence the prosecution had in its possession, she filed a motion for a complete bill of particulars . She filed the motion to establish the prosecution's evidence .
 The motion would compel the prosecution to list everything or be held in contempt . It would compel them to do the same or hold them in contempt.
 All evidence collected in connection with the murder, including eyewitness accounts, the murder weapon, the FBI Crime Lab report, items taken from Crump’s home, and everything that Crump had used or worn on the day of the crime .
 Five months after the murder itself, the prosecution was forced to cough up what it had . Finally, in early March, in March, they were finally forced to pay .
 No murder weapon had been found, but two-caliber lead bullets taken from Mary Meyer’s corpse would be entered into evidence . Crump’ hair, clothing he had been wearing that day will be entered in evidence, as well as Crump's hair .
 A complete list of all persons at the scene, interviewed, or connected with the crime would also be produced . The crime scene would also include a list of those who were interviewed, interviewed or connected .
 Roundtree says the signature on the statement of evidence is ominous . Roundtree: "What struck me as ominous, however, was the signature of evidence"
 With Hantman on the case, she knew they were bringing in the heavy artillery . She knew they would bring in heavy artillery, she said .
 As Assistant Chief of the Criminal Division in the Justice Department, Hantman would have a full staff, as well as a small army of ancillary personnel . He would be assistant chief of the criminal division .
 He was counted among the top three attorneys in the criminal division of the Justice Department . His career would span twenty-three years .
 Hantman had already tried a range of felonies, including murders . Observers describe him as “a screamer and a bully” in the courtroom .
 Tall, prepossessing, an imposing figure with bristling eyebrows and an extraordinary legal mind . Defense attorneys were known to work into the wee hours of the morning preparing to face him in a courtroom .
 Dovey Roundtree was well aware of Hantman’s reputation, and she was troubled by this turn of events . Roundtree said she was worried by the turn-of-events, and was saddened .
 In the District of Columbia, first-degree murder carried the death penalty . In the D.C. capital, the murder of a first degree murder is considered a homicide . The death penalty is the highest in the nation's history .
 He would attempt every possible maneuver to gain advantage in the months leading up to trial, including dueling with the defense over pretrial motions, evidentiary hearings and the admissibility of various pieces of evidence .
 The rulings were almost always in Hantman’s favor, he maximized, and sometimes embellished, he said . The rulings almost always were in Hantsman‘s favor .
 In one pretrial conference, Hantman went so far as to allege that Ray Crump had cleaned Mary Meyer’s house—a complete fabrication that nonetheless introduced the possibility of the defendant's prior association with the victim . In another pretrial hearing, Crump alleged that Cr
 Dovey Roundtree produced every payroll receipt Crump received from Brown Construction Company . Roundtree said Crump had received payroll receipts from the construction company . The Brown Construction Co. produced the payroll receipts .
 In doing so, she made it clear that she would countenance no further deceptions of that sort . She said she would not countenance any more deceptions .
 The Honorable Howard F Corcoran had just been appointed by President Johnson to be a United States District Court Judge for the District of Columbia . He was the first person to be appointed to a federal district court judge .
 In spite of the embarrassed silence, his nomination was approved . "In spite of his silence, he was approved by the White House," he said .
 Judge Howard Corcoran was the brother of the legendary Tommy “the Cork” CorCoran, an influential lawyer and D.C. power broker . Tommy drafted much of the New Deal legislation for Franklin D. Roosevelt .
 Judge Corcoran’s pedigree and education placed him in the social class of Mary and Cord Meyer, as well as that of United States Attorney David Acheson, signaling an easy access to power . The judge's education and social class placed him with a social class, signaling
 Many felt that Judge Corcoran was not ready for a case like this . Pedigree aside, many felt that many felt he wasn't ready for such a case .
 Some speculate that because of his lack of experience, he would rule according to the letter of the law to avoid being overturned on appeal . Some even speculated that due to his inexperience, the judge would rule in accordance with the law .
 For Roundtree and her team, it was another bad break, something that might work against her . Roundtree: "It's a bad break. It's not a good break"
 Judge Corcoran's law clerk for the trial was a young, agile attorney fresh out of Harvard Law School’s prestigious Master of Laws program . The trial is set for trial in New Haven, Massachusetts .
 Robert Stephen Bennett graduated from Georgetown Law in 1964 . Bennett was 25 years old when he died .
 He salivated at the prospect of being part of the action, and no place would be hotter than Washington in 1965 .
 The lawyer is now representing President Bill Clinton in a sexual harassment lawsuit . Thirty years later, he would find himself standing in the U.S. Supreme Court representing President Clinton .
 In response to Roundtree’s wish to enter into evidence, Corcoran refused . Roundtree's request to enter evidence of Meyer's divorce and two surviving sons .
 It seemed an odd response to the request, since “lack of relevance” might have kept it out just as well . The request was made by the White House .
 The judge sustained Hantman’s objection, however, when Roundtree tried to establish for the jury that Ray Crump was the father of five children . Roundtree also tried to prove that Ray was the dad of 5 children .
 Judge Corcoran also barred any testimony that referred to the Central Intelligence Agency . The judge barred testimony referring to the CIA .
 Corcoran is a first-timer on the bench, but it appeared likely he sought to avoid controversy . In that regard, any mention of the CIA would seem especially off-limits .
 Warren Report’s lone gunman assertion was already beginning to be challenged . The Warren Report's lone gunman was already being challenged .
 Corcoran likely sought to steer clear of any mention of the CIA . There were rumblings swirling all over Washington and elsewhere about CIA involvement in President Kennedy's assassination .
 Prosecutor Hantman knew he was involved in a high-profile case, but at the time of the trial, he was unaware how high profile the case might become . Prosecutor: "I'm not surprised that the case has become very high profile"
 He didn't know that Mary Meyer had kept a diary and that in it, she had written about her lover, the slain president . He didn’t know that she had kept the diary .
 Mary’s diary was now in the hands of CIA counterintelligence chief Jim Angleton . Angleton's wife would be in court every day, observing the trial . Mary's diary now in hands of Angleton, and his wife is in court observing trial .
 On July 19, 1965, a three-hundred-person jury pool convened in Courtroom 8, where the laborious process of jury selection would take all day . Jury selection took place in the same room as jury selection .
 Dovey Roundtree and her defense team scored a partial victory with a jury of eight blacks and four whites . Seven of the twelve jurors were women, seven of them were women . Roundtree's defense team had eight black and four white jurors .
 Edward O Savwoir, a forty-four-year-old African American program specialist at the Job Corps in the Office of Economic Opportunity in Washington, D.C. He is a program specialist .
 Martha Crump, Ray Crump’s mother, was always accompanied by members of her church community . Also present every day was Martha's mother, who was accompanied by church members . The Crump family was in attendance every day .
 The courtroom’s racial mix and class disparities reflected the divide between the murdered woman and the accused defendant, all interspersed with a noticeable number of unsmiling white men in suits .
 Sam Donaldson, a young broadcast news reporter for WTOP-TV, sat directly behind the defense team . Two nuns and two nuns also sat in the stands at the defense .
 Hantman: Crump had tried to take her by surprise from behind, but she struggled so powerfully that he had to resort to brutality . Crump dragged her twenty-five feet while she continued to struggle, he said, before fatally shooting her again .
 Hantman delivery was intended to be as brutal as it was damaging . The delivery was designed for high-impact courtroom drama upon the jury . The jury was expected to be shown a graphic graphic .
 Prosecutor extolled the professionalism and alacrity of the police response to the murder . Police closed off all of the exits in the towpath area “within four minutes” of the broadcast bulletin, prosecutor says .
 Crump had tried to escape by swimming across the Potomac but realized he wouldn’t be able to do so, Hantman says . Crump was found dead at the scene of the crash .
 Detective John Warner finally apprehended Crump, who then lied about having been fishing that morning, as well as about the clothes he had been wearing . Crump was finally apprehended by Warner and Warner .
 Hantman says Crump acted out of a premeditated intent to commit a sexual assault . He says Meyer's murder was result of an attempted rape that had been derailed by a particularly feisty victim . Crump says Meyer was killed in cold blood, a killing in cold
 Hantman made certain the jury knew Crump had blood on his right hand, which was cut, and that he had a small cut or abrasion over one eye . Crump was wet, wet, had a cut, torn pocket torn and wet, he was soaking wet
 All this could have only happened, Hantman maintained, from his struggle with Mary Meyer . All this happened, he said, from the struggle with Meyer .
 Hantman concluded his presentation with Lieutenant William L Mitchell’s statement to police the day after the murder of Mary Meyer .
 Mitchell had jogged past Mary Meyer at approximately 12:20 p.M., he said, about four minutes before the first shot was fired . He said Mitchell had run past Meyer four minutes earlier than the first gunshot .
 The prosecutor’s opening statement left Dovey Roundtree in a kind of legal and emotional quicksand . Roundtree is charged with sexual assault and sexual assault .
 Hantman had promised the jury that his witnesses would dispel any doubt as to the defendant’s innocence, in spite of the fact that no murder weapon had been recovered . No murder weapon was recovered, and no weapon was found .
 The prosecution’s case was built entirely on circumstantial evidence . It would take a grueling, formidable effort on Dovey Roundtree's part to rescue her client .
 Dovey Roundtree had not been staggered by Hantman’s performance . If she had been staggered, she had not shown it. Roundtree was not at fault .
 Judge Corcoran says Hantman's statement was so prejudicial that it was grounds for a mistrial . She decided to reserve her own opening statement, then implored the judge to let the record show that the statement had been so inflammatory, prejudicial, that it had been
 Roundtree insisted on seeing “the bloodstained tree” that Hantman said he would be bringing into the courtroom . Roundtree then insisted that he would bring the tree in court to see .
 The judge agreed, saying he wanted to see it, too; but already the proceedings were spiraling out of control . The judge said he wanted it to be shown, but already, it was spiraling .
 In an effort to maintain decorum, Judge Corcoran ordered an immediate fifteen-minute recess . The judge ordered the recess .
 The first witness to testify was Benjamin C Bradlee, who was then the Washington, D.C., bureau chief for Newsweek . Bradlee was a Newsweek bureau chief .
 Metropolitan Police Department, where he had identified the body of his sisterin-law, Mary Pinchot Meyer . He had identified her body as his sister in the wake of her death .
 Bradlee's testimony was that it wasn’t until Sergeant Wallace arrived at Bradlee’s home that evening, just before 6:00M., that Bradlee had any knowledge of the murder .
 Hantman never directly asked Bradlee when he first learned of the event . Strangely, he said he had never asked him when he learned of it .
 He asked whether Bradlee had made an effort to gain entry to the studio where Mary Meyer died . Meyer's death was the result of her death .
 At no time was Hantman aware that Mary Meyer had kept a diary, or that she had been romantically involved with President Kennedy . Meyer was married to President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Ben Bradlee was well aware of both, but he wasn’t about to reveal anything further . Bradlee: ‘I’m not going to say anything further. It’s a good thing to say. I’ll be happy to say yes.
 Dovey Roundtree began her first crossexamination on Saturday night . She appeared to tread lightly as she began her journey to the heights .
 Ben Bradlee withheld fact that a group of Mary Meyer’s intimates had conspired to commandeer her diary, letters, and personal papers . The entire collection was given to CIA counterintelligence chief James Jesus Angleton .
 Deputy Coroner Linwood L Rayford testified that he had pronounced the then-unknown victim dead at the murder scene at approximately 2:05m. During the first morning of the trial, he testified that the then unknown victim was pronounced dead at about 2.05m .
 The first shot to the head, just anterior to the left ear and surrounded by a dark halo, traversed the skull across the floor of the brain, angling slightly from the back to the front . The first hit to the skull was anterior to left ear .
 The second bullet wound, also surrounded by a dark halo, had been fired over the victim’s right shoulder blade, traversed it and the chest cavity, perforating the right lung and severing the aorta . The other bullet wound had been shot over the
 Hantman questioned the significance of the “two darkened halos’s” that surrounded each gunshot wound . The ‘darkness’ of the halos is said to be the reason for each wound to be seen .
 Hantman wanted the jury to know that there had been a violent struggle before and after the first shot had been fired . Meyer was dragged “clear across the path,” after she clung to a tree, leaving traces of her blood, he said .
 The coroner’s description of the precise angles of each shot implied that the assassin was likely ambidextrous and had expertise in the surgical use of a handgun . Coroner's description implied that he was likely an expert in surgical surgical use .
 There had been no evidence that Ray Crump had traces of nitrates on his hands . Crump was arrested on suspicion of having nitrates in his hands, police say .
 The lack of powder burns didn’t prove Ray Crump’s innocence, however, it only proved police negligence . Crump was charged with murder in the death of a black woman .
 The police hadn't bothered to test Crump's hands for traces of nitrates . Crump was found guilty of murder, but police say he was the man they were looking for . He was found dead at the scene of the murder of his girlfriend .
 No one in Crump’s family or community had ever seen him in possession of any firearm, much less use one with any skill or precision . Crump's family and community had never seen him use a firearm .
 Crump, however, had been weighed and measured at police headquarters on the day of the murder after his arrest . Crump had been weighing and measured in the days of the killing at police HQ .
 The bloodstained tree limb that Mary Meyer clung to moments before she died was just one of fifty exhibits at trial . Hantman would present at trial, including the bloodstained limb that she had clung on moments before death .
 Such flamboyant displays by Hantman would eventually backfire, as the prosecution increasingly failed to fill the void of any real forensic evidence . The prosecution would eventually fail to find any real evidence .
 Hantman then called the map’s creator, Joseph Ronsisvalle, of the National Park Service, to the witness stand . Ronsesvalle was the map's creator .
 Hantman asked about the distances between exits, and made a point of telling the court that within four minutes the police were guarding and closing off all four exits . Police were able to close off the four exits in four minutes .
 The many hours that Roundtree had spent combing and familiarizing herself with the towpath area were about to pay off . Roundtree's many hours had paid off with the success of the search .
 Roundtree raised doubts about Ronsisvalle’s knowledge of the towpath area . Roundtree had openly challenged his expertise .
 Judge Corcoran: Roundtree was “asking about his knowledge of the area’s history” Roundtree said he wanted to know more about the area . Roundtree is charged with trespassing on the grounds of a landfill .
 Ronsisvalle's unfamiliarity with many of the area’s hidden exits, but also the fact that he had never himself walked along the towpath, or explored the areas .
 Ronsisvalle's credibility undermined the prosecution’s case, as well as his credibility as an expert witness . It was a stunning revelation that undermined prosecution's case .
 Roundtree objected to Hantman adding that detail, but Judge Corcoran allowed it . Roundtree said it was too late for the judge to add that detail .
 On the witness stand, Henry Wiggins recounted having been sent by his manager, Joe Cameron, to pick up Bill Branch at the Key Bridge Esso Station . Wiggins said he proceeded to the north side of the 4300 block of Canal Road to service a stalled Nash Rambler sedan .
 Wiggins estimated that it was approximately 12:20m. when he and Branch reached the stalled vehicle and got out of their truck . Wiggins estimates that the two men were in the vehicle when they reached the vehicle's stalled vehicle . Wiggins and Branch were able to reach the vehicle at approximately 12
 Branch, said Wiggins, went to the Rambler’s passenger side to unlock it . Wiggins himself started to remove tools from the truck in preparation for diagnosing and fixing the stalled vehicle . Branch said Wiggins was going to the passenger side of the vehicle .
 Wiggins testified he heard a shot coming from the direction of the canal . Wiggins testified that the screaming stopped, but then a shot was heard again . Wiggins says he heard the shooting in the canal's direction .
 In response, he “ran diagonally across the road” toward the three-foot wall overlooking both the canal and the towpath . The wall is on the southern side of the canal .
 Wiggins testified that he saw a man standing over a woman lying on the towpath . Wiggins testified over the wall that he witnessed a man stand over the woman . Wiggins said he saw the man lying over the body of a woman on a towpath.
 Hantman wanted to know how much time had elapsed between Wiggins hearing the second shot and his seeing the man . Wiggins heard the first shot and saw the man in the man's direction .
 "I came back up from behind the wall to see him turning around and shoving something in his pocket," he says . "I ducked down behind a wall at that time, not too long," he adds .
 'Just turned around and walked over straight away from the body, down over the hill. Just turned around, walked over and walked down the hill,' she said .
 Wiggins recalled that the man wore a cap “that buttons onto the brim,” with a lightcolored jacket, dark trousers, and dark shoes, all of which he was wearing that day .
 Ray Crump had been seen leaving his home the morning of the murder . Crump was seen wearing the clothes he was seen leaving the house . The clothes belonged to Crump, Crump's lawyer says .
 The following morning, the prosecution’s star witness would squander his credibility in less than an hour . The prosecution's star witness later squandered his credibility .
 Hantman needed Wiggins to identify the clothes Ray Crump was wearing on the day of the murder, and confirm the exhibited items . Wiggins identified Crump's clothes as those of Crump . Wiggins also identified the clothes he was wearing that day as the murder suspect .
 His one concession to the prosecution was to “allow lookalike testimony’s only . He said he would allow lookalikes to testify only .
 Hantman engaged in loud gumchewing did not endear him to the judge . The judge said he was not happy with the judge's decision . The man was sentenced to life behind bars on Monday .
 Judge Corcoran had admonished his young clerk, Robert Bennett, “never to chew gum” when presenting in a courtroom . Judge had taken his clerk into his chambers during one earlier recess .
 I first saw these articles when they were being worn by the defendant when he was standing over the victim at the scene . The defendant's clothing was worn by him at the time of the attack .
 Roundtree used this opportunity to highlight the discrepancy between what Wiggins had reported to the police and the actual size of the defendant . Roundtree said that Wiggins reported the defendant's size to police .
 I was looking across the canal down on the subject there, would not be very accurate but as close as I can give. Well, this information which I gave them at that time which I . gave them . It would be not very accurate .
 His star eyewitness, and his case, were crumbling on the second day of the trial . The star eyewitness was a witness to the murder trial, but his case was not strong enough .
 Hantman asked Wiggins again whether his view of the murder scene had been obstructed in any way . Wiggins said his view was not obstructed by the crime scene . Wiggins was cleared of any wrongdoing .
 Hantman had attempted to bolster Wiggins' credibility regarding Crump’s clothing . Wiggins' description of the suspect's height and weight —both of which in no way matched Crump's — was not accurate .
 Inadvertently, Hantman had damaged the credibility of his star eyewitness so badly that his case would never recover . Inadvertentially, the case was never able to recover from his mistake .
 This was the description, they all testified, of the man they were told to look for, and it didn’t come close to describing the defendant . This is the description of the defendant, the jury said .
 By midmorning of day two, the defense strategy of reasonable doubt had started a crusade . The defense strategy has started to a crusade in Washington .
 If there was a weakness or discrepancy to be exploited, she would find it and expose it to the jury . She would expose the jury to the potential to exploit it, she said .
 Bu Branch, Henry Wiggins’s tow truck assistant on the day of the murder, took the stand right after Wiggins . Bu Branch was the assistant of Wiggins' tow truck . Wiggins was found guilty of shooting Wiggins to death .
 Branch told police he was too afraid to keep watch over the wall that overlooked the canal towpath . Branch had told police that after Wiggins left the murder scene to call police, Branch was afraid to watch .
 On the witness stand, he testified that he had remained at the wall overlooking the murder scene until Wiggins returned with police . Yet, he said he had stayed there until Wiggins came back with police.
 Hantman, who had painstakingly rehearsed and written out the testimony of each of his twenty-seven witnesses,“ had coached Branch to alter his statement to police.“ It now appeared that Hant man, who was in charge of the case at the time,
 Hantman was aware of Branch’s written police statement that he had stayed in the car, and not remained at the wall overlooking the towpath . Branch was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Wiggins had left and returned with the police, no one had been monitoring the murder scene . Wiggins was shot dead by police officers at the scene of the murder .
 The trial continues with testimony of two police officers, Roderick Sylvis and Detective John Warner . After the day two lunch recess, the trial proceeded with the testimony of the officers .
 The testimony of Roderick Sylvis and John Warner would reveal one of the most important facts never before understood: Someone else was eluding capture by police . Together, the testimony would reveal that someone else eluded capture .
 Sylvis told Hantman they arrived at the scene at 12:30 p.M. or 12:29 p.m. They had driven their patrol car through a narrow underpass beneath the canal itself .
 Anyone attempting to leave the entire C & O Canal towpath area would have to walk through the narrow underpass or cross the canal in an old leaky rowboat that was attached to a rope and pulley on each side of canal .
 Fletcher’s Landing has two exits at Fletcher's Landing that offer immediate access to Canal Road and beyond . Two exits at the area offer different ways to exit the area that offer access to the rest of Canal Road .
 Sylvis would walk along the towpath toward the murder scene, while Bignotti would walk through the woods adjacent to the railroad tracks parallel to the rail tracks . Both were heading east toward the death scene .
 Left the entire Fletcher’s Boat House area unattended, they risked allowing the killer to walk out unnoticed . The killer was believed to have walked out unnoticed by police .
 Sylvis and Bignotti exited their patrol car and spent about five minutes positioning themselves for their eastward trek toward the murder scene . Sylvis: "We are here to investigate the murder"
 Sylvis testified that they spotted a young white couple walking westward on the railroad tracks . Sylvis said they were about 50 feet from Fletcher’s Boat House .
 Sylvis tried to “wave down someone on Canal Road” to assist him . He yelled to his partner Bignotti for assistance, but he didn’t respond . Sylvis was hit by a speeding car in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The "Negro male" peeked out from the woods in search of a man in the woods . It took him even longer to arrive at the spot where the man had peeked into the woods.
 Sylvis and Bignotti spent even more time searching the area together . Sylvis spent more time looking for the missing person .
 The problem was that he had blown the answer he had rehearsed with Hantman . The problem is that he blew the answer, and he knew it . The next day, he had to find a way to explain it .
 At this very moment, the government’s case against Ray Crump was in peril, and about to be pushed off the edge of a cliff . The government's case against Crump is in peril .
 Crump had been in the company of Detective John Warner at a location of one-tenth of a mile east of the murder scene for at least ten to fifteen minutes . Crump was arrested at 1:15 pm. Monday .
 The “head” of the “Negro male” seen by patrolman Roderick Sylvis could not have been Ray Crump’s. The significance of this detail was that the ‘head’ was not that of Crump. The head of
 If Sylvis and Bignotti arrived at Fletcher’s Boat House at approximately 12:30m. and they returned to their patrol car by 1:15, they came back just in time to hear the police radio broadcast that a suspect had been arrested .
 There were no police radios at the crime scene or adjacent to the site of Crump’s arrest . No police radios were at the scene of the arrest .
 Someone would have had to walk back to a police vehicle at the Foundry Underpass to make the call, but no such a call was ever mentioned in the trial transcript or any police report .
 Dovey Roundtree missed a significant opportunity during the trial . This may have been one of the few moments of the trial where the trial took place . Roundtree is accused of failing to make the right decision in the case .
 It was accurate that about an hour later, “about 1:45 or 1:50 ,”—Sylvis’s initial response to Hantman—that he spotted the head of the mystery “Negro male,” who could not have possibly
 Sylvis told the court that it was 1:45 pm. when he saw the “Negro male” when it happened . Roundtree confronted Sylvis with the discrepancy, he had to have realized that .
 Hantman: "About 1:45 or 1:50 " was the correct answer, and he confirmed that with me in 2008 . But his initial answer was "about 1:40," he said in 2008, he said .
 A cornerstone of the prosecution’s case was that the man Sylvis had spotted was, in fact, the fleeing Ray Crump . Indeed, the prosecution argued that Sylvis spotted Crump was the fleeing Crump, the prosecutor said .
 Prosecutor Hantman hammered that point home repeatedly throughout the trial . Prosecution argued that the jury should not have been allowed to hear the evidence .
 The case against Crump would crumble if that assertion is successfully challenged .
 The trial transcript has been hidden in the trial transcript until now . That was about to happen, although it would again elude the scrutiny of the defense .
 Detective John Warner, scheduled to testify after Sylvis, had not been in the courtroom during Sylvis’s testimony . Warner was not in court at the time of the testimony .
 It was customary to keep witnesses from hearing other testimony in order to reduce the possibility of collusion and fabrication . Witnesses were not allowed to hear other testimony from other witnesses .
 Warner was unaware of the conflicting time stamps that had jeopardized the prosecution’s case . Warner was therefore unaware that the time stamps had been put on the evidence . Warner's trial has been adjourned for three weeks .
 Warner testified that he arrived at the Key Bridge entrance of the canal towpath at 12:29 p.M. with his partner, Henry Schultheis . Warner testified he had arrived at 12.30 p.m. with Henry Schultsheis. Warner testified .
 Warner found Ray Crump more than one-tenth of a mile east of the murder scene itself . Warner proceeded to walk westward through the woods for “forty-five minutes” before discovering Crump . Crump was found in the woods near the railroad tracks .
 Warner said it was 1:15 p.M. when he first saw Crump at a location one-tenth of mile east of the murder scene . Under direct examination by Hantman, Warner proceeded to alter his testimony, saying that it had been 1.15 pM
 The government’s case was slowly spiraling out of control, yet the Roundtree defense team appeared to be missing another critical moment . Roundtree's defense team missed a critical moment in the trial .
 Detective John Warner's testimony undermined the prosecution’s case . Warner’ testimony was undermining the prosecution's case. Warner was a detective in the case of John D. Warner .
 Warner told Hantman that he stopped Crump on the railroad tracks and identified himself as a police officer . Crump took out his sodden wallet and handed over his D.C. driver’s license, Warner said . Warner said Crump was pulled over on the
 Water dripped out of D.C. man's wallet as he handed him his driver's license . He took his wallet out of his wallet, and water dripped from his wallet .
 I asked him then if he would point out the spot as to where he was fishing from, I would help him, see if I could retrieve his fishing gear for him . I then asked him to point out where he had been fishing from .
 Dovey Roundtree says Warner's conflicting testimony is further evidence of prosecutorial shenanigans . Roundtree: Warner’s conflicting testimony further evidence that prosecutors are playing a big part in this case .
 Ray Crump was not the only black man in the towpath area on the day of the murder . Crump says he was in towpaths at the time of the killing . Ray Crumps was not only the black man on towpath .
 Detective Warner had clearly first come upon the defendant well before 1:15 P.M. and at a distance of more than a tenth of a mile east of the murder scene . Detective Warner was clearly first seen by the defendant early before 1.15 p.m. and a tenth
 Detective Warner’s testimony had, therefore, inadvertently corroborated the fact that a second, unidentified “Negro male” had eluded police capture . Detective Warner's testimony had been a clue to the whereabouts of a second ‘Negro man’
 The testimony offered nothing in the way of incriminating evidence against Crump, but expanded the grounds for reasonable doubt . Collectively, the testimony offered little evidence against him .
 A neighbor of Crump’s testified that she saw Ray leaving his house the morning of the murder wearing his lightcolored beige jacket and golf cap . A neighbor said she saw him leave his house wearing the same jacket and cap . Crump's attorney said Ray Ray was a
 A facsimile of a light-beige Windbreaker jacket was the most conspicuous evidence that identified the killer, the prosecution says . The jacket was seen by eyewitnesses Henry Wiggins and allegedly by Lieutenant William L Mitchell .
 For Henry Wiggins in particular, it had been the distinguishing piece of clothing . It was a jacket very similar to the prosecution’s exhibit that lay before the court .
 So important was the jacket as evidence, its very existence — including its location and whereabouts — seemed to have a life of its own .
 Before the end of day three of the trial, a fascinating element never realized during the trial or afterward was revealed . The real significance of the case was never realized, or afterward, before the trial .
 Neither the defense nor the prosecution questioned the time—”about one o’clock”—that Byers received the call, nor why he had been asked only to search for a jacket, and not a golf cap .
 Henry Wiggins identified Crump, subsequent to his arrest, as the man he had seen standing over the victim wearing a jacket and cap . That was very possibly before Crump had even been spotted by any police officer, much less apprehended . Crump was arrested at 1:15 p.
 Sergeant Pasquale D’Ambrosio spotted him with Crump right before 1:15 pm. Crump had no means of communication with any other police officer until he was spotted . Detective Warner was the first police officer to encounter Crump .
 Henry Wiggins and patrolman James Scouloukas called in a radio broadcast description of the killer . Wiggins and his patrolman had not had to return to the police cruiser parked at the Foundry Underpass .
 Someone, other than police, was monitoring the murder scene and the events unfolding around it . Someone else was also monitoring the events surrounding the murder .
 Police radioed Byers and gave him instructions to start looking for the jacket, and told him where to look for it . Someone, other than police, had access to police band radio frequencies, radioed him to find it .
 Dovey Roundtree was still holding her own when the trial recessed for a three-day weekend on Thursday, July 22 . Roundtree's strategy of establishing reasonable doubt at almost every juncture was bearing fruit .
 Weber: "We were looking for—to the best of my recollection—a Negro who had on a lightcolored jacket and a dark cap" Weber: We were looking to find a Negro who wore a light colored jacket and dark cap .
 "From my recollection that I remember from the lookout, I had—one of my ways of doing this—I had a picture in my mind of a stocky individual," he says . "I had— one of my . ways of . doing this," he adds .
 Most senior ranking police officer at the murder scene, the man in charge of the entire investigation, would not be lost on the jury . That this came from the most senior ranking policeman at the . murder scene . The jury is expected to hear evidence of the murder .
 There was still one eyewitness left to testify, and that individual was potentially lethal to the defense . But that individual is still a potential lethal weapon to the prosecution .
 The lean, trim William L Mitchell took the witness stand the afternoon of Monday, July 26 . Mitchell was in court on Monday afternoon for the second time in a week .
 Mitchell claimed to have been out for lunchtime run on towpath the day of murder . Mitchell was Army lieutenant stationed at Pentagon in the fall of 1964 .
 Henry Wiggins came forward because he recognized the victim from newspaper accounts . He said he believed she was being followed by a “Negro male,” who was wearing clothes identical to those he had seen . Wiggins had come forward to police because he knew the victim's name from newspaper
 The presence of Lieutenant William L Mitchell had troubled Dovey Roundtree from the very beginning . Mr Roundtree had been troubled by the presence of the Lieutenant Mitchell .
 Mitchell had refused to return her phone calls in the months before the trial; she had little to go on . Mitchell's trial is set to begin in New York .
 The innuendo of an attempted sexual assault by a black man upon a white woman had captivated the attention of an entire city . William L Mitchell indeed presented a formidable threat at the trial .
 Crump’s girlfriend, Vivian, testified in the trial . Roundtree feared the possibility of ruination for her client .
 Mitchell made certain to say only that they were “similar to the clothes worn by the individual,” not the exact clothes he had seen that day . When asked by Hantman to identify the exhibits of Crump's and Mary Meyer’s clothing, Mitchell said only
 Mitchell was careful to stop short short of saying that Ray Crump was the man he had seen . Mitchell said he was not sure Crump is Crump, but he was sure he saw Crump .
 Mitchell would not have faced a fierce cross-examination from Roundtree . Roundtree might have aroused suspicion and damaged Mitchell’s testimony .
 Mitchell slyly and repeatedly implied that the man he'd seen was indeed Crump . Mitchell said that Crump was Crump, but not Crump. Instead, Mitchell said Crump had seen him .
 Hantman asked Mitchell if he had seen anyone else on the towpath the day . Mitchell said no one else had been seen on towpath that day . The towpath is now a national park .
 The runner in Bermuda shorts was never identified, and he never came forward . He was never found .
 Patrolman had already testified about seeing the man . Mitchell had obtained no identification, but never came forward to police .
 No one ever substantiated Mitchell's claim that he was on the towpath that day or any other day .
 Mitchell reported with military precision his time on the towpath, and approximately when and where he was located at each of several critical points on the line of the murder . Roundtree probed for weak spots in his testimony .
 Mitchell was forced to concede that he hadn’t given the exact times he gave . Mitchell admitted that he had given the times accurately . Mitchell said he couldn't be entirely certain that the times were exact .
 Mitchell’s account is now in doubt, again establishing a degree of reasonable doubt . It was a small but significant detail, it was again establishing doubt about Mitchell's account .
 Mitchell says man he saw was “about my height, about five-feet eight ,” clearly taller than Ray Crump . It was too close for comfort, in spite of Mitchell’s claim that the man he had seen was ‘about his height’
 The weight match wouldn’t be lost on Hantman, who would exploit it for all it was worth, along with one other detail in his summation . “The weight match’s not a weight match,” he would say .
 William Mitchell’s sheen was still untarnished; he remained a model citizen, and he had delivered precise eyewitness testimony that corroborated the less-than-stellar witness Henry Wiggins . Mitchell indirectly and ironically resuscitated the Wiggins testimony .
 At that point in the proceedings, in the eyes of the jury, it may have still been anyone’s case to win . The jury could have still found anyone to win in the case .
 FBI firearms expert says there were no powder burns or nitrates on Crump's hands or clothing because he had been in the water that day . Agent Warren Johnson, a firearms expert, told Hantman that Crump’s hands and clothing weren’t affected .
 Police had never tested Ray Crump or his clothing for the presence of nitrates . Roundtree, however, had already established that the police never tested Crump for nitrate .
 She confronted Johnson with the fact that the standard paraffin test for nitrates in gunpowder typically involves the suspect being asked to wash his hands repeatedly throughout the testing procedure .
 If a suspect had fired a gun recently, the presence of nitrates would still show up . If suspect fired recently, nitrate would still be found in the suspect's gun, police say .
 No nitrates were found on Crump’s clothing or on any part of his body, she argued . There wasn’t any evidence he had fired a firearm that day, she said .
 Agent Johnson’s testimony did confirm—and underscore—that whoever killed Mary Meyer had shot her from close range and was likely highly skilled, possibly ambidextrous, in the handling of a revolver .
 In describing the shots, Johnson corroborated Deputy Coroner Rayford’s testimony about which hand had fired which shot . Johnson had corroborated deputy coroner Rayford's testimony about the hand .
 Forensic analysis, he maintained, linked both the jacket and cap to the defendant . He maintained that forensic analysis linked both of the jacket, cap, and the defendant to each other .
 The cap and jacket on exhibit did belong to Ray Crump, but the hair match wasn’t evidence that he was guilty of murder . The hair match was not evidence that Crump was guilty . Crump has been charged with murder .
 Roundtree calls into question the entire field of hair and fiber analysis . Roundtree called into question Stombaugh's hair analysis .
 In preparation for the cross-examination, she had read a number of textbooks, a dozen of which were stacked on the defense table . She had also read a dozen textbooks, which she had stacked on defense table.
 Stombaugh wasn't able to answer questions about the latest literature in the field, because he hadn’t read it . He was able to read the latest science fiction, but he wasn”t able to say anything about it .
 She forced Stombaugh to admit that he had never published anything in the field and that he was not, in fact, an expert . She then compelled him to admit he was never an expert in the study .
 FBI laboratory relied heavily upon neutron activation in analyzing hair and fiber samples . neutron activation is used to activate neutron activation to analyze hair and fibers . FBI laboratory relies on neutron activation for analysis of fibers and hair fibers .
 The admission inadvertently succeeded in making Roundtree’s case for her . Roundtree admitted that she was a victim of sexual assault in the past .
 In the end, Stombaugh’s testimony dealt more than one blow to the prosecution . In the trial, he testified that he was not guilty of murder .
 The FBI's state-of-the-art forensic laboratory in Washington, D.C., failed to find any forensic evidence linking Ray Crump to either the murder scene or the body and clothing of Mary Meyer .
 There had been no traces of Mary Meyer’s blood, hair, fibers, or saliva found on Ray Crump . There had also been no trace of blood or hair on Crump's body .
 Even if the killer had jumped into the Potomac River in an attempt to flee, it was unlikely that all traces of the victim’s hair, blood, saliva, or clothing fibers would have been completely washed out of his clothes or body . Even if he had jumped in
 Nothing had been found on Ray Crump's body, or clothes, of Crump . Crump was found dead at the scene of his murder . Police say nothing was found on his body or clothes .
 In his description of the man he saw standing over the dead woman's body, Henry Wiggins had made no mention of any stains, blood or anything else, on the man’s lightcolored jacket .
 The assailant would probably have been covered with bloodstains easily visible on a lightcolored, zipped-up beige jacket, even from a distance of 128 feet . Given the intensity of the skirmish and the fight that Mary Meyer had put up, as well as the amount of
 The man's golf cap was in place, not askew, only seconds after the fatal second shot . Furthermore, the man’s golf cap had been in place only seconds before the fatal shot .
 In the immediate aftermath, Wiggins saw no signs of having been in a violent struggle . The man Wiggins saw exhibited no signs he was involved in a struggle, police say .
 The prosecution rested its case at the end of the day on Tuesday, July 27 . A\tter calling twenty-seven witnesses and introducing more than fifty exhibits .
 The next morning, Dovey Roundtree delivered her opening statement on behalf of her client . The next day, she delivered her own opening statement to the jury .
 In five full days of testimony, she said, the government hadn’t produced a shred of forensic evidence linking Ray Crump to either the murder scene or the body of Mary Meyer .
 There was no proof that Crump had handled or fired a gun the day of the murder, and no firearm had been produced . Crump was found guilty of murder in a federal court on Monday .
 Three character witnesses testified for the defendant, the last of whom was Crump’s pastor at the Second Baptist Church in Southwest Washington . Crump's pastor testified for Crump in the trial .
 Each witness stated that he or she had known Ray in his church and community for more than 15 years, and testified to his good character . Ray's good character was described by each witness as a good man .
 Dovey had discussed with her defense colleagues, George Knox and Alan Robeson, the possibility of putting Ray Crump on the stand . Over the preceding weekend, Dovey and Robeson had discussed the possibility . Crump is charged with murder in the death of Shrevelyn Wright .
 She thought that doing so would persuade the jury, once and for all, that the shy, meek, harmless man was incapable of such a crime, she said . She said: 'She thought that . She thought . doing that would persuade that . once, once, for all
 The prospect of her helpless defendant being metaphorically lynched in open court was too big a risk, she said . She said she was too scared to try and defend her client in court .
 As Crump’s last character witness left the stand, Roundtree stunned the prosecution by announcing that the defense would rest its case . Crump's attorney says the defense will rest their case .
 She told Judge Corcoran that she wished to renew a number of motions, including an immediate judgment of acquittal . She then told the judge that she wanted to renew the motions .
 Judge Corcoran denied each of Roundtree’s motions, but he and the prosecution had been taken by surprise . Roundtree was sentenced to life in prison without a parole date .
 For days, he had eagerly awaited the opportunity to interrogate Ray Crump on the stand . He believed he could lead Crump to obliterate any chance of an acquittal . Crump was charged with murder in the death of Shauna Wright .
 In his summation rebuttal, he held up the shoes that Ray Crump had worn when he was arrested . Crump held up his shoes that he had worn at the time of arrest .
 Hantman drew the jury’s attention to the two-inch heels in an attempt to make the case that Crump would have been taller than the 5 feet 5% inches that had been recorded at the time of his arrest .
 His closing ploy, along with everything else he had presented, still amounted to little; his case was, at best, circumstantial, if he had any case at all . The jury is expected to hear the verdict in a matter of minutes on Friday .
 Dovey Roundtree delivered her arguments for reasonable doubt regarding Crump’s guilt . Roundtree said Crump should not have been convicted of murder in the case .
 Officers Sylvis and Bignotti had left the rowboat and the exit at the Fletcher’s Boat House underpass unattended . Anyone could have left the area undetected during the time they went on their search .
 F fibers from Mary Meyer’s blue angora sweater would have been found on the defendant, Roundtree said . Roundtree also explained that had there been a struggle between the victim and the assailant, such as the prosecution had underscored throughout, fibers from the victim's blue ang
 Crump's cut finger would have been found on victim's clothing, but had not been . Similarly, blood from Crump’s cut finger wouldn’t have been on victim’ clothing, police say .
 Mapmaker Joseph Ronsisvalle didn’t know about a number of exits out of the towpath area, jurors told . Roundtree also reminded the jury that mapmaker had not known about exits from towpath areas .
 She argued that the real killer had escaped from the towpath area with the gun . Because, she argued, she said, she had escaped with the weapon . She said: "Because of the gun, it was not the killer."
 Raymond Crump Jr. was found not guilty of the murder of Mary Pinchot Meyer in 1965 . Crump was found guilty of killing her in 1964 . The jury acquitted Crump Sr. of murder .
 Dazed and nearly catatonic, Ray had been standing behind the table along with his defense team . Ray's defense team was standing with him at the time of the shooting . Ray was standing in the room at the scene .
 His mother, Martha, began singing praises to the Lord and other church members shouted hallelujahs throughout the courtroom .
 Mary Meyer’s longtime friend Cicely Angleton was reportedly sitting in the back of the courtroom and showed little emotion . Angleton's longtime friend Mary Meyer was reportedly in court for the hearing .
 As Dovey led the now-wobbly Ray Crump out of the courtroom, her adversary, Alfred Hantman, cast one final, embittered look toward her . The judge's decision to dismiss Crump was the result of a federal lawsuit against Crump .
 He had just lost the most important case of his career, and he would never congratulate Roundtree or even acknowledge her victory .
 Justice Department maintains that Crump had been guilty . His view was upheld by the Justice Department, which would always maintain he was guilty .
 U.S. Attorney David Acheson complained that Henry Wiggins had been a huge disappointment . Wiggins was a huge success for the United States .
 Dovey Roundtree put Ray Crump on a bus for North Carolina, but only after his belongings were released to him . Roundtree was still very concerned for Crump’s safety, still concerned for his safety .
 Crump handed his defense attorney, the woman who had saved his life, the dollar bill . Crump thanked her in the only way he could, from the $1.50 that he had in his possession at the time of his arrest .
 In the wake of the trial, jury foreman Edward Savwoir resented the insinuation that the jury’s decision had been racially motivated and that Crump had gotten away with murder . Many of Mary Meyer's friends, many of whom she was friends with, said Cr
 They never proved he was at the murder scene, they never proved that he had anything to do with it . The case was never solved, but he was convicted of murder .
 The case catapulted Dovey Roundtree, awash in accolades in the wake of her victory, to citywide and national prominence . Roundtree's victory catapulted her to national prominence in the aftermath of the case .
 Dovey’s soul was rooted in the law and the fair application of justice for everyone, white or black, he said . Dovey: “Dovey” was a man of honor and integrity, not a person of color. Dovey was a hero of
 Former U.S. assistant attorney Charles Duncan was first assigned by the Justice Department to prosecute the case . He is now general counsel for the EEOC, the prosecutor who was assigned to prosecute it .
 She reminded him of how many times she had tried to reach him in the beginning of the relationship . She had been trying to talk to him many times before .
 Dovey Roundtree believed that Crump’s nine months in jail had transformed him from a gentle man to a violent one . Dovey said Crump had transformed himself into a violent man . Crump was sentenced to nine years in prison for his crimes .
 Roundtree claims he was taunted, beaten, abused, and possibly raped during his incarceration . Roundtree was heartbroken that he had been taunted and abused .
 Within the next few years, he would be charged with arson, assault with a deadly weapon, and violently threatening two girlfriends . He would also face charges of violently threatening and arson .
 In one fit of rage, Crump reportedly set his home on fire with his wife and children inside . Crump was reportedly in a rage and reportedly set the house on fire .
 Ray was given a stiff prison sentence in North Carolina . His family escaped unhurt, and Ray was sentenced to prison . Ray and his family were unhurt .
 Upon his release, he maintained his downward trajectory, committing arson once again and serving more jail time . He was convicted of arson and arson in 2009 .
 The condition known as Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder wasn’t formally recognized until 1980 . Working models dealing with its cluster of symptoms were engendered in the early 1970s .
 Ray Crump had been psychologically and physically maimed by the violence and brutality he was subjected to during his nine-month incarceration . Like the innocent, ill-prepared young men sent into harrowing and prolonged traumatic combat conditions in places like Vietnam, Iraq, Afghanistan, and elsewhere,
 'What little ego strength he possessed disintegrated over time. Continually threatened, terrified, and increasingly unable to cope, he was constantly threatened' 'I was constantly terrified, terrified and unable' 'The man's ego strength disintegrated'
 Like many returning combat soldiers, he became a broken, shattered man . He became capable of violence to others and to himself, he says . He says .
 Ray Crump's subsequent path of violence and crime merely served to bolster their belief that Mary Meyer’s true killer had gotten away with murder . For many of Mary Meyer's community and family in Washington, as well as people in the Justice Department, including Alfred Hantman,
 Crump's post-trial criminal career also impressed high-profile criminal defense attorney Robert S Bennett, who had closely observed the trial as Judge Corcoran’s law clerk .
 In his view, Hantman failed to get “into the heart and soul of jurors,” because he had overtried the case, most notably with Henry Wiggins, he says . In his opinion, he said he had over-examined the case .
 "Dovey Roundtree the advocate would always contend in public that Crump was innocent," says Burleigh . Burleigh insinuated that she might believe otherwise in private in private .
 For twelve years, those who knew about Mary Meyer’s diary and her relationship with President Kennedy chose to remain silent . The National Enquirer finally broke the story in 1976 .
 Dovey Roundtree never abandoned her belief that Ray had been a scapegoat, a “patsy,” who had been set up to take the fall .
 In the nearly fifty years of research and reporting on the murder, nothing of the sort has ever been suggested . "In the nearly 50 years of . research and . reporting on this murder, no of the . sort of . sort has never been suggested. In the . nearly fifty .
 Mary had always been highly regarded and respected in her community of friends and acquaintances .
 His pristine, unstained clothes appeared to closely match the clothes worn by Ray Crump that morning . Crump appeared to be wearing the clothes he wore that morning.
 A screeching overhead is then heard, as the approaching group of children that includes Claudius and his sister Livilla grow louder with the awareness of eagles fighting above them . The children are then approached by a group of approaching children that include Claudius .
 A small animal drops from the claws of one of the fighting eagles and lands in Claudius’s lap . The small animal lands in the lap of Claudius as he watches the fight .
 "Our dream was our fate. And yet, at the end, from a rare height, we also see that our dream is our fate," the author says .
 "It’s just that providence had other ideas as to how we would get there," says President Obama .
 There is no such thing as chance, and what seems to us merest accident springs from the deepest source of destiny . Destiny plans a different route, or turns the dream around, and fulfills the dream in ways we couldn't have expected .
 Far from indiscriminate, her murder was deliberate; and, as the reader will eventually come to understand, precisely motivated . Her murder was deliberately motivated; and as well as being indiscriminate .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer was in no way ordinary—nor easily intimidated . Meyer was murdered in the fall of 1964 in New York .
 Mary Meyer’s murder was orchestrated, but certain details of her extraordinary life warrant deeper exploration . In order to arrive at some understanding of why, and how, she was murdered, Mary Meyer's murder was arranged .
 President Kennedy’s assassination in 1963 was a defining moment of which was the assassination of Mary Meyer . Meyer survived the Cold War's hidden history . Meyer's life's mosaic only begins to reveal the complexity and uniqueness of a woman who ultimately came to thrive .
 Achieving a new level of understanding requires one to look a number of heretofore unseen details . Events, experiences, and people formed the tesserae of a rich, complex mosaic that would finally illuminate Mary’s life and death .
 How and why Mary Meyer and Jack Kennedy became intimately involved during the last few years of their lives is only part of the focus of Mary's mosaic .
 Both seem to have been deeply affected by their union, sometimes taking enormous risks, in part for the sake of a better, hopefully more peaceful world .
 Mary’s French great-grandfather, Cyrille Constantine Désiré Pinchot, as a 19-year-old captain in the French army, had set out to rescue his hero, Napoléon, from the island of St. Louis . According to
 He and his father, Constantine, and his mother, Maria, made their way to the United States in 1816 . They hoped that the New World would be a safe haven for them .
 Constantine and Cyrille, the father-son team, embarked on a series of entrepreneurial projects that over time brought them considerable wealth and standing . The pair used the crossroads of Milford as their hub .
 Mary’s great-grandfather Cyrille Pinchot married and had five children . Cyrille had five more children .
 James Pinchot created no slums, fouled no rivers, and accepted no deals with corrupt politicians . He created no . slums and fouled rivers, but accepted no . deals with politicians .
 "He never wasted any valuable resources, nor did he enslave any workers," he said . He said .
 Retiring at the age of forty-four, James began concentrating his wealth on philanthropy . James retired from politics at the end of his career .
 The manor’s panorama captured the entire village of Milford and the Delaware River valley . The panorama was captured by the residents of the village and the river valley .
 Referred to as a “summer castle,” it “drew all eyes —tourist and local alike alike alike —upward.” The castle is located in the heart of the city’s summer .
 Gifford and Amos Pinchot were Yale educated and members of the secret society Skull and Bones . Amos and Amos were both Yale educated . The sons were both sons of James Pinchots .
 President Theodore Roosevelt named Gifford Pinchot the first chief of the newly created United States Forest Service in 1905 . He served for five years in the post .
 Gifford would lose the senate race against Boies Penrose, but would subsequently become the governor of Pennsylvania in 1922 and again in 1930 . He would go on to become the president of Pennsylvania .
 In between campaigns, he managed to marry Cornelia Bryce, the daughter of a wealthy and prominent family from Newport, Rhode Island .
 Cornelia, affectionately known within her family and friends as “Lelia,” was an outspoken woman who greatly influenced her niece Mary Pinchot as she grew up . Cornelia's niece Mary grew up with her aunt and uncle .
 Comelia had addressed hundreds of housewives, urging them to demand the right to vote . During Gifford’s campaigns, Comelia urged them to vote for the first time . Comelia was a member of the House of Representatives .
 She marched in picket lines and supported factory workers and miners seeking safety, decent wages, and job protection in their work .
 Cornelia was yet another female role model for Mary and her sister, Tony . Mary and Tony were also a role models for Mary .
 An ardent, self-styled feminist, she wrote for the Masses, the New Republic, and the Nation . She became the associate editor of Arts and Decoration .
 Ruth's commitment to feminism entailed a rejection of the traditional female culture of the day . Ruth’s commitment to feministism entailed rejection of traditional women culture . Ruth was a pioneer of feminism in the 1930s .
 She was the kind of rare woman who dared to define herself, resisting the prescribed roles that most women found themselves playing . She was one of the rare women who defied the roles most women find themselves in .
 She became very active in the women's suffrage movement . She shared a house with political socialist activist Max Eastman and his sister Crystal Eastman . She later moved in with Eugen Boissevain, who later married poet Edna St. St. Mary .
 Amos was by then a wealthy lawyer who supported a number of liberal left-wing causes . Amos was a prominent figure in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Amos was apparently willing to bear it in order to be with Ruth . Whatever the cost to him socially, Amos was willing to . bear it, he said .
 Amos exerted considerable influence in reformist circles and did much to keep Progressive ideas alive in the 1920s . Amos was an ardent pacifist .
 He believed that World War I had been caused by American and European imperialists, many of whom were bankers, many were bankers . The author believed that the war was caused by imperialists .
 He would become one of the founders of the American Civil Liberties Union in 1920 . Norman Thomas and Roger Baldwin, of the ACLU, founded the organization .
 Always outspoken, Amos was a champion of causes, no matter what it might cost him politically or socially . Amos was an outspoken advocate for social justice . Amos' death comes as a result of his activism .
 The 1920s were a heightened, progressive era for feminism and a wide spectrum of progressive causes . The 1920’s was a heightened period for feminism, with a wide range of causes .
 With the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution in August 1920, women were granted the right to vote in all U.S. elections . Women were granted voting rights in all United States elections .
 Ruth Pickering and Cornelia Bryce Pinchot were grand dames of their family . They married into the family they had married into, shaping their values and mores .
 In 1926, the Nation invited Ruth, Cornelia, and fifteen other women to explore and comment on the nature of their personal feminism . The Nation invited the women to discuss their feminism .
 Cornelia considered herself a “public feminist,” committed to women’s issues from a political and civic perspective . Cornelia considers herself a "public feminist," committed to issues of women's issues .
 Ruth called herself a ‘new-style’ feminist of the 1920s, though she spoke out when she felt that it was watranted . Ruth was a “new style’s feminist’ of the '20s .
 The Heterodoxy Club's biweekly lunch meetings became a model for the Women’s Liberation Movement of the late 1960s . The club was a model of the Women's Liberation Movement .
 At early meetings of Heterodoxy, members would openly risk revealing their deepest feelings about their experiences growing up . Members of the group would openly talk about their childhood experiences .
 Mary’s parents were therefore the kind of role models who would encourage her to become as politically and culturally engaged as they themselves were . Mary's parents were also role models for her as well as she herself were .
 The Pinchot home environment fostered personal exploration of all kinds . The home environment was filled with personal exploration and exploration .
 Mary enjoyed more opportunities to engage her developing self than she might have under more straitened circumstances . Mary had no worries about dayto-day survival, and there were more opportunities .
 There was something innate in Mary that made her extraordinary . But privilege didn’t deserve all the credit; there was something in her extraordinary, she says .
 When Mary was just a toddler playing on a Long Island beach, her mother noted the confidence and sense of self-worth that her daughter possessed . Mary's mother: "When Mary was a toddler, her confidence and self-esteem was high"
 Ruth wrote to Amos that their self-possessed child “is a perfect little bully.” She joked that their daughter is a ‘perfect little bully’
 She knows she knows she can make Elizabeth cry easily and teases her all the time . She knows that she knows that Elizabeth is a good person, and loves her .
 Mary was shaped and molded by all of these influences, as well as by her suffragist aunt Cornelia and her mother . She was also influenced by her aunt and mother, who were both women .
 Brearley boasted rigorous academics for the daughters and granddaughters of many well-known figures, including Margaret Mead, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Eugene O’Neill, and eventually John F Kennedy . Margaret Mead .
 Self-expression and exploration were given top priority, complementing and supporting Mary’s family life . Self-expressing and exploration was given top .
 Mary was a blonde nymph from an ethereal dimension, strong and beautifully proportioned, at once athletic and graceful, yet uncompromisingly feminine .
 At the Ritz-Carlton or the Waldorf-Astoria, Mary was the belle of the ball . She was the "belle of ball"
 Weekends were filled with parties at New England’s elite prep schools—St. Francis, St. Francis and St. James .
 Bill Attwood would one day become President Kennedy’s ambassador to Guinea . Attwood was President Kennedy's ambassador to the West African nation .
 Attwood was the guy with the prettiest date at Choate in the winter of 1936 . Attwood attended Choate with the prettyest date ever .
 Geoffrey and Bill Attwood, both fifth-formers at Choate, had competed for her attention all evening . There had been dozens of Choaties and ex-Choaties there, and dozens of them had been there .
 Young Attwood’s ardor, however, was impressive, as was his disposition . Attwood: “Young Attwood's ardor is impressive, but his disposition is not surprising .
 Geoffrey, it appeared, was too much bluster and peacock strut for Mary’s taste . Geoffrey, however, appeared to be too much of a peacock for Mary .
 Bill Attwood, on the other hand, was respectful, though not sycophantic . Attwood was respectful and not syphophantic, but was respectful .
 They realized they both lived on Park Avenue only several blocks apart . They were surprised to discover they lived on the same street .
 Boldness then inspired young Attwood on the telephone that day, for he wasted no time, and no opportunity . Boldness was then inspired by Attwood's boldness, he said .
 He asked Mary if she’d like to go dancing at the Persian Room that afternoon . He asked her to dance with him . Mary says he asked her if she'd like to dance .
 "She recognized that afternoon with Bill as an invitation for exploration," she said . She said, "It was a chance to explore the world"
 Mary didn't mention the fact that Bill’s nemesis, Geoffrey Monroe Bruére, had already requested her favor, but she hadn’t accepted . Mary didn’ve mentioned that he had already asked her favor .
 By February of 1936, young Jack Kennedy was increasingly worried about the state of his health . Jack Kennedy, a 1935 graduate of Choate, was increasingly concerned about the health of his father .
 He was undergoing tests for colitis and being kept for observation at the Peter Bent Brigham Brigham Hospital in Boston .
 Jack was already facing the possibility of an early demise . Having already confronted death during his battle with scarlet fever as a child, Jack faced many other challenges .
 Biographers believed Kennedy became obsessed with giving himself as much sexual pleasure as possible during his adult life . Several of Kennedy’s biographers believed this was one reason he became so obsessed, even manic, about giving himself sex .
 Kennedy’s letters to his former Choate roommate Lem Billings bragged of how he was “catting about” with nurses, as well as the teenage girls he was dating . Kennedy's letters to Billings show he was, even in precarious health, “
 Jack already had a role model in his father, who was a model for women .
 The Kennedy males were such a libidinous wolf pack on the prowl that the young wolf cubs, at father’s behest, would deliver female “companions” to the patriarch himself .
 The Kennedy boys would inherit their father's penchant for philandering . Along with their wealth and fine Irish good looks, the boys inherited their father’s penchant for duplicity and chauvinism .
 Jack would leave the hospital on weekends to socialize . Despite Jack’s health concerns, he would leave his hospital room to play with friends . Jack is now in a stable condition .
 The girls might stay in Choate’s Memorial House or even in their boyfriends’ rooms . While their dates would sleep on cots in the gym, the girls might sleep in the boys' rooms .
 Often, boys left secretive, lascivious notes in their beds, hoping their girls would find and read them . Boys left secretive notes in beds hoping girls would read them, hoping they would find them and find them .
 The social weekend was filled with athletic events, sit-down formal dinners, and afternoon teas . It culminated in a formal Saturday night dance at the University of Cambridge .
 Former Princeton student was forced to take a medical leave from his studies at Princeton, still in the Class of 1939 . Perhaps he thought the homecoming on familiar territory would be good for his selfconfidence, which had lagged .
 During the gala Winter Festivities Dance of 1936, he would encounter Mary Pinchot for the very first time, etching into an unforgettable moment .
 Anyone could see that Mary Pinchot’s beauty was alluring, and it certainly wasn’t lost on young Bill Attwood .
 Attwood unfortunately discovered he had a rival for Mary’s attention . As the dancing progressed, Attwood found a rival .
 It wasn’t the only cut-in he had to contend with that night, but it had to have been one of the more daunting—and it happened repeatedly .
 Mary’s descendents have opted not to disclose the diary, although admitting it still exists . The diary that she kept during that period might offer some clues . Mary's descendents say it is still exists, but admit that it may still exist .
 In his memoir, Bill Attwood recalled the 1936 Choate dance and the rival he had in the future president of the United States . Attwood's memoir, "Bill Attwood," was published in 1967 .
 I remember that we sat in the garden talking about the Profumo case and reminiscing about our school days . I remember how I sat there with my friends and reminisced about my school days. We were talking about Profumo's case, and we were reminiscing .
 Mary Meyer, a Washington artist who’d been my date at a prom twentyeight years before, was between us . Kennedy happily recalled having cut in on her on the dance floor, and she said Kennedy cut in .
 It was hard, at times like that, to realize he was President of the United States. "It was hard to realize that, it was hard," he said .
 Attwood's relationship with Attwood lasted well into their undergraduate years, his at Princeton and hers at Vassar . It appeared that the younger Mary had not been immediately smitten with Jack, evidenced by the fact that she and Attwood had not immediately met .
 All through Attwood’s diary from late 1935 to 1939, he made entries about ‘Pinchy’�s” impact . Attwood: “All through the years, I’ve been amazed by the impact of Pinchy .
 His father had recently fallen ill, and his mother was afraid and upset . His father was recently diagnosed with a rare form of cancer .
 He seemed to find Mary more attainable as a result of her family’s kindness toward his mother, he said .
 During his visit, he didn’t write about any intimate connection with Mary . He didn't write about his visit .
 When activity coalesced around the tennis court, Bill noted that his girlfriend had a particularly aggressive game .
 The man who had passed that game down to his daughter was also at the court that day . The game was also passed down to her daughter .
 Attwood's insecurity about his sweetheart reared itself in his private musings that day . Attwood’s insecurity about the sweetheart, however, reared himself in his own musings .
 He finally allowed himself to let go romantically, recognizing that it was ever meant to be . The couple's relationship has been rocky, but it's always been good friends .
 Amos Pinchot was so undone by his daughter’s death that he lapsed into a temporary bout of hysterical blindness . Amos was undone by the death of his daughter and lapsed in a temporary state of insanity .
 It would be the start of a downward spiral into depression from which he would never recover . He would never be able to recover from the depression he suffered from .
 Rosamund was a model of glamour and sophistication, endowed with an uncommon grace . Sixteen years older than Mary, she was an elegant model of sophistication and sophistication .
 Rosamund was a prolific diary keeper, and by the time of her death she had filled some fifteen hundred pages with private thoughts and recollections . Her granddaughter, Bibi Gaston Gaston, edited and published her diary in 2008, edited it .
 The Loveliest Woman in America took its title from a compliment given to Rosamund in 1927 by British actress and poet Iris Tree . The book was published in 1927 and is now published in New York .
 Rosamund had also been an actress, but her fledgling acting career was largely a flop after only a few films . The Pinchot girls didn't take well to failure, and the Pinchots didn’t take well .
 A failed marriage, followed by a stormy affair with Broadway theater producer and Hollywood director Jed Harris .
 When she took her life in January 1938, she was thirty-four years old and had two young sons . She took her own life in 1938 .
 Amos' family was devastated by the death of Amos, Amos' father . Amos' wife, Mary, says Amos' death left a scarring impression on the family . Amos was the only son to be killed by a car crash . Amos is the son of Amos and his wife,
 In fact, he feared for the future of his family, often dulling his anxiety with copious amounts of alcohol . He often dulled his anxiety by ducking his anxiety out of fear for his family .
 The effects of his drinking became known to Mary one evening when she was about to graduate from Brearley . Mary became aware of the effects of her father's drinking one evening .
 Amos, drunk, became combative and criticized his daughter’s social life . Amos was drunk when he became angry at his daughter's social life, according to police reports . Amos, who was drunk, was arrested and charged with assaulting Amos .
 Amos slapped her across the face . Mary retorted in her own defense . Amos slapped Mary in the face.
 Her companion that evening must have been shocked and embarrassed by the spectacle, yet already Mary was not one to back down .
 Mary became a committed diarist after Rosamund’s death . Perhaps inspired by her example, Mary became an avid diarist .
 Starting when she was 17, she would use the act of writing as a tool for self-realization and reflection, especially in times of emotional crisis, she says .
 As noted previously, most of her earlier diary is still in existence, but its contents are unknown outside the family . The contents of the diary are unknown .
 According to Bibi Gaston, ‘Requiem’ had first been written in Mary’s diary . Gaston: “Requiem was first written in the diary of Mary, who died in a car crash .
 Requiem I saw her lying there so calm and still, With one camellia placed beside her head. Requiem . Requiem.
 Being gone she did not seem dead. She looked the same, and yet, her soul and will were still alive .
 "I thought if one so loved and beautiful Should wish to leave, perhaps there was a voice That called her back—and she was dutiful"
 "In some far place, where all the lovely things Of earth are born, the gods no longer weep," says the author .
 Mary’s initial path led to journalism, she had arrived at Vassar considering a career in medicine . Mary's initial path was journalism .
 She was drawn to the idea of helping people, but she ultimately preferred the arts and the literary life . She was also drawn to helping people but ultimately preferred to the arts .
 Unlike many of her classmates, she frequently chose solitude over the clamor of endless parties, gossip, and Ivy League college weekends .
 While her beauty ensured she never lacked for attention, she wasn’t attention seeking . She wasn't attention seeking. Her beauty ensured her never lacked attention .
 Ego gratification wasn’t her objective; her affirmation seemed to come from within . The affirmation came from within, she said . She said, "Ego gratification isn't her objective"
 Mary’s independence was already a well-established hallmark of her character by the time she entered college . Mary was already an independent woman by her age .
 At one point during her undergraduate years, Vassar’s administration abruptly forbade the student body to patronize the drugstore adjacent to campus . The drugstore is now owned by the university .
 Mary, in flagrant violation of the new edict, recruited a reluctant classmate and went to the pharmacy—to learn its side of the story . Mary, a reluctant student, recruited the reluctant classmate .
 A classmate says someone at the store might have made an unwanted advance toward a Vassar student . According to the classmate, it appeared that someone in the store may have made a sexual advance .
 Mary’s former classmate had lost the details, but her memory of the event remained clear many years later . Mary's former classmate lost the specific details of the incident .
 In addition to maintaining a relationship with Bill Attwood at Princeton, she traveled to Yale and Williams for weekend visits with other male friends . None of them flames .
 It appears that Mary met her future husband, Cord Meyer, during one of her visits to Yale, even though they didn’t date at the time . Mary met Cord Meyer during her visit to Yale .
 Cord himself wrote that he only knew Mary “slightly before the war” when he was a year behind her in college . Cord graduated in December 1942 due to an accelerated wartime academic schedule . Cord was one year behind Mary in college, but graduated due to a wartime schedule .
 During that period, Mary also crossed paths again with Jack Kennedy, but no relationship ensued . No relationship ensued between the two men .
 Jack was decidedly a wealthy playboy and always on the make . Jack was always charming, but was always always a playboy . He is now a successful businessman .
 She thirsted for something deeper, a man with purpose, a partnership of allies, she says . She thirsts for something deep, she thirsted . She said .
 In one of his impromptu campus visits to Vassar, Jack in fact introduced himself to a gullible classmate of Mary’s .
 Jack, eager to carve another notch, concocted a story that he had recently been stricken with leukemia and had only weeks to live . The two went on a date, during which Jack concocted the story . Jack was eager to make the story another notch .
 His gullible date felt so sorry for him, she took pity, and slept with him that night, unaware of the duplicity young Kennedy employed in taking her for a ride .
 Mary wrote a short story for the Vassar Review and Little Magazine in the spring of 1941 . Mary's short story is one of the most revealing glimpses into Mary’s psyche at the school .
 The magazine was published six times during the college year . It enjoyed independent circulation beyond the college community .
 Bored by idle chitchat, Ruth stands away from the crowd, casting a gaze around Beatrice’s recently redecorated living room . Ruth says she was bored by the social media chatter .
 The orchids have been replaced by a variety of other flowers . The display includes two framed paintings by Van Gogh, one of which features sunflowers by the artist .
 The sight of baby’s breath elicits the sound of a calm sea washing up on a beach at night . The sound of the calm sea can be heard on the beach in the middle of the night .
 One dimension of Mary’s story describes what is commonly known as synesthesia . Mary's synesthesia is a form of synesthesia that causes her to experience a variety of sensations .
 It is, to some degree, a medical condition whereby in certain people and animals, a stimulus in one sense modality involuntarily elicits a literal sensation/experience in another sensemodality . The condition is known as a condition where the stimulus is involuntarily triggered by a stimulus
 The elicited synesthetic experience doesn’t replace the normal experience, it just enhances it, says author . "The elicited . experience doesn't replace the . normal experience," she says. "It just enhances . it."
 One irony of ‘Futility’ foreshadowed a significant event in Mary’s later life . ‘Ironic’ was that it foreshadow’ed a major event in later life.
 The fictional character Ruth Selwyn was having a classic hallucinogenic experience after her operation . Ruth had a hallucination experience after having an operation .
 As an emerging artist in the late 1950s, Mary would embark on her own exploration of psychedelics, including LSD and psilocybin . Mary would explore her own explorations of psychedelic drugs .
 This wasn’t superficial thrill seeking on her part; it was more the result of being in the vanguard of a group of people, many of whom were already established artists in quest of greater selfexpression . This was more than a matter of principle, she said .
 How ironic that someone would later appear in her life who was obsessed and surrounded by orchids, someone who had presented himself as a friend, before his betrayal .
 The ‘chicly cadaverous’ women who had succumbed to a life of wanting for nothing were horrified by Mary . Yet all around Mary and her contemporaries, social influence dictated the grooming for such a life .
 By 1940 all of Europe would be struggling against the warlord march of Germany and Adolf Hitler . By 1940, Europe would struggle against the Nazis and Hitler .
 Mary Pinchot had been selected as one of the twenty-four most beautiful women in the sophomore class to carry the chain of daisies and laurel at commencement . The chain is Vassar’s most famous tradition .
 In September, Germany began the devastating bombing of London . It was part of a series of air strikes known as the London Blitz . The Blitz was the result of more than 70 consecutive nights of bombing .
 While Glen Miller and Tommy Dorsey pumped out music with time to dance, young men, many of Mary’s contemporaries, were disappearing late at night to enlist . Many of Mary's contemporaries were going to war .
 The sophomoric college days of endless parties and gaiety had abruptly come to a halt . "The sophomorororic college days" were abruptly brought to an end .
 With the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, an era—almost overnight, had ended . With the 1941 attack on the U.S. it was almost overnight, a new era had begun .
 Academic calendars were curtailed; graduation ceremonies took place in December instead of June, if they took place at all . Academic calendar was curtailed and graduation ceremonies were delayed .
 The preparations and demands of a world at war were becoming all consuming . Everywhere, the preparations and . demands of . a world . at war became all consuming. Everywhere, preparations . were becoming more consuming .
 She found a job as a feature writer for United Press International . She established her own column, and enjoyed rapid success . She found success in the United States .
 Robert L Schwartz was a young Naval officer and a journalist for Yank magazine . He was also a young naval officer and journalist . He is now retired from the Navy .
 Schwartz was tall, lean, and intellectually articulate by any standard . Hailing from a Midwestern Jewish background in Salem, Ohio, he was tall and lean . Schwartz is a proud member of the National Suicide Prevention Council .
 That night, he noticed a woman so alluring, he felt impelled to meet her . That night he noticed her so much that he felt compelled to get together .
 Tim Costello, bar owner, operated as a kind of “guardian at the gate,” particularly if the men became obnoxious . Mary's mother, Mary, was particularly protective of her daughter, Tim said .
 From the bar, they went out for dinner and stayed up into the early hours of the morning, talking about almost everything . They stayed up late into the night, talking to almost everything, even though it was late .
 From the start, Schwartz recalled, Mary defined herself in terms of her pacifism and hatred of all wars, including the one before them in 1942 . She said: "From the start of her life, she defined herself as a pacifist"
 Wars and violence were anathema to her, and she wanted Bob to know that at the outset . She wanted to know she was opposed to war and violence, she said . Bob's death was the result of a long battle with the government .
 Never had he laid eyes on such an astoundingly beautiful, complex woman . Never had seen such a beautiful, beautiful woman .
 Schwartz recalled with great fondness how he walked Mary home that night, how she talked about the nature of the humorous in life . Schwartz: "She was very funny. She was a very funny person"
 Her sophistication impressed and excited him, and he wanted to share his own sense of humor with her, he said . He wanted to show her a sense of humour .
 As they walked past a bookstore window, Bob pointed out a book by an author that he considered very funny . Bob said he liked the book, but it wasn't funny .
 A look came over Mary’s face, Schwartz remembered, and he read from it her aversion to his taste . Schwartz remembered the look of Mary's face as he read it .
 He began to feel that Mary was thinking she had made a colossal mistake by choosing to spend the evening with him . He might have been projecting, but he felt that she was thinking it was a mistake .
 After they said good-bye that Friday evening, Bob chastised himself for pointing out the book to such an extraordinary woman . After they left, Bob chatted about the book .
 Schwartz’s connection deepened Schwartz's sensitivity and prompted them to explore life's biggest questions . Schwartz: "Their connection deepens and prompts them both to explore their biggest questions"
 In addition to revealing more about her pacifism, Mary allowed her spiritual sensibility and the seriousness with which she approached it to be known . Mary's pacifism was revealed in a new interview .
 During the war, it was easy to charter big sailboats—yawls and ketches—for sailing on Long Island Sound . During the WWII, sailing was easier for sailors to sail in the area .
 They found idyllic peace during wartime on those trips . Often taking weeklong cruises, both alone and with friends, sometimes exploring the Connecticut River .
 The pair swam naked in the waterfalls amid the property’s verdant idyllic acres . Pair swam nude in waterfalls .
 If you’re true royalty, you don’t have to flaunt it, and she never did . She never did. She never flaunted it. She was true royalty. If you're true royalty .
 Some Fridays, the two would ride the Wabash Railroad from Newark to Pennsylvania and Grey Towers . They would ride from Newark, Pennsylvania, to Grey Towers, Pennsylvania .
 They played with childlike spontaneity, always enjoying a fast repartee . Excited to be together for the weekend, they enjoyed a fast-breakthrough .
 On one trip, they started a raucous pillow fight . They chased each other up and down the aisles .
 They managed to draw other passengers into the fray . Laughing, feathers flying everywhere, they managed to attract other passengers to the scene .
 Even as a young woman, Mary would challenge the status quo of their relationship if she perceived some inequality, she says .
 Schwartz remembered one weekend at ‘the country place” when Mary challenged Bob on what he recalled as “a certain failure of citizenship” that bothered her . Schwartz: "A certain failure to citizenship" was a problem that bothered Mary .
 Mary was left in the kitchen to do the dishes after dinner, while Bob would retire to read the newspaper . Bob would habitually retire to the living room to read while Mary did the dishes . Bob and Mary were married at Grey Towers .
 At first, the issue completely eluded Schwartz, oblivious to any problem at all . Schwartz was oblivious to the problem at first . Schwartz is now the star of the show .
 Mary’s mother, Ruth, seemed to approve of Bob, though he often wondered whether Ruth felt that he was worthy of her daughter . Bob wondered if Ruth felt she was worthy to marry Mary .
 In fact, Bob might have underestimated the esteem in which Ruth held him . Ruth held Bob's esteem in Ruth's esteem .
 Pinchot confided to Bob that her daughter’s friendship with a young woman named Liz Wheeler worried her . She confided that she was worried about her daughter's friendship with Wheeler .
 Jack Wheeler’s stable of writers included Ernest Hemingway, Sheilah Graham, and F Scott Fitzgerald . At the time, Wheeler's stable of writing was impressive; it included Hemingways, Fitzgerald, Graham and Hemingwy .
 Liz, along with several other women boarders, had lived for a time with the Pinchots on Park Avenue . Liz and several others had lived on Park Ave.
 He let it be known that he and Mary had a “vigorous” and “fulfilling’s attraction to one another .
 As her life progressed, people often flocked toward her, desiring the possibility of connection she offered . People often sought the chance to connect with her, she says .
 As Bob Schwartz recalled, “Mary never did anything that didn’t have a sense of totality about it”
 Bob and Mary stopped in Salem, Ohio, to visit Bob’s mother during a train trip to California . Mary and Bob both had journalism assignments in California, where they had assignments .
 Bob asked his mother what she thought about Mary, who he said was Mary . Bob asked her what she said about his mother .
 She made it clear to her favorite son that it was obvious Mary wanted to marry him . She told him that she wanted him to marry her .
 "I didn't feel comfortable with everyone always looking at her on the street, but not really noticing me," she says . She says she didn't want to be constantly looking at herself, but noticed by others .
 Schwartz didn't believe that he would ever really get Ruth’s ‘benediction’ to marry her daughter . Schwartz didn’t believe he would really get the ‘Benediction to marry’
 All the while, however, Mary had been making it clear to Bob how much he meant to her . All the time, Mary made it clear that Bob was a good guy .
 Tony had maintained a friendship with Bob throughout the time he had a relationship with her sister . Tony was aware of the impending breakup .
 Tony confided to Bob that for years she and the rest of the family had ‘wearily’ watched the endless parade of men that Mary kept dragging home for her parents and family to meet . Bob and Tony had been watching for years, Tony said . Bob said he and
 Tony said he was the only one she and her mother ever wanted in their family . Tony then emphatically told Bob that it was he who was the true standout .
 Schwartz's time with Mary had run its course, in spite of the fact that Mary had been so clear about wanting to be with him . Even with that benediction, Schwartz believed he “needed to be out of his sailor’s suit and a full-fledged adult
 Many years later, Schwartz found himself conferring with a psychoanalyst with regard to his relationship with one of his children . Schwartz: "It's a good thing that you can talk about your relationship with your child"
 His relationship with Mary, and the memory he had forged of her leaving him, kept coming up . He kept talking about his relationship with her .
 After a bit of work, the analyst confronted him, not believing that it was Mary who ended it, but him . He confronted him and said that he had ended the relationship .
 "When he did, we both accepted it, but not before we shaped each other's future," she said . "We both accepted that when he did," she added. "He did, he did." She said: "He shaped us together. We shaped us."
 She never could be with anyone who didn't have some of the things I had, and I could never be with another woman after Mary who couldn’t understand what Mary had been for me . "I could not be with someone who couldn't understand what she was for me,"
 Even in 2008, he remained unsure what to make of it, though he didn’t want to entertain any conspiracy theories .
 Bob Schwartz compared Mary Meyer to what he called a prima ballerina assoluta . Now in his eighties, Bob Schwartz is a connoisseur and lover of ballet .
 The term was originally inspired by the Italian masters of the early Romantic ballet and was only bestowed on a ballerina who was considered exceptional, and above all others .
 The first recorded use of the title was by the renowned French ballet master Marius Petipa . He bestowed it on the Italian ballerina Pierina Legnani in 1894 .
 In the Soviet Union, Galina Ulanova and Maya Plisetskaya were eventually honored as such . Galina was Galina's partner in Soviet Union . Maya was later honored as one of the two women .
 Alicia Alonso from Cuba, Margot Fonteyn from England and Alicia Alonso of Cuba were also awarded the distinction .
 To date, no American ballerina has ever held the rank . Rudolf Nureyev considered Cynthia Gregory to be deserving of such a title .
 Husbands, go back to your young wives, who cry in the night and count the anxious days . Husband: "Husband, go . Husbands." Husband should return to his young wives .
 Farmers, return to your fields, where the grain rots and the house slides into ruin . Farmers return to their fields, which is the grain that rots . Farmers should return to the fields .
 The only certain fruit of this insanity will be the rotting bodies upon which the sun will impartially shine tomorrow . The sun will also shine tomorrow, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 With the morning we shall go together and in charity and hope build a new life and a new world . —Cord Meyer Jr. "With the morning, we shall . go together" with the morning .
 Patriotism at the expense of another nation is as wicked as racism, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Patriotism is not patriotism, it's racism, he says .
 That evening, the thirty surviving Marines dug in for the night in their foxholes . That night, the Marines were able to survive the attack .
 One had sideswiped Cord and literally cut the tip off a cigar that had been in the breast pocket of his jacket . Cord's cigar was in his jacket when he was hit by a car . Cord says he's not surprised by the incident .
 He lit the cigar later that day and “pretended a courage” he didn’t feel, he said . “I’m not scared. I’d like to be a hero again,’ he said. ‘I don’
 Cord Meyer lay alongside his sergeant in a foxhole that was barely a foot deep deep . Cord Meyer was killed in the Battle of Gettysburg . Meyer was one of the first Americans to die in the war .
 To combat his fear as the night sky darkened with rain clouds, Cord tried to conjure lust by conjuring pornographic images in his mind . Cord was haunted by his fear of the rain .
 With each attack, the lieutenant and his sergeant fought back and endured the deafening silences between rounds . The lieutenant and sergeant endured each attack on each other .
 "In a state of mental detachment, he was able to see the entire spectacle of war that confronted him," he said . "In the state of state of mind, he could see the whole spectacle," he added .
 After all, “adult human beings of the civilized world did not slaughter one another.” “Adult human beings ... did not kill one another," he said .
 The fact that guns have been placed in our hands and some of us wear one uniform and some another is no excuse for the mass murder we are about to commit, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The fact that . guns have placed . guns in our
 "There are differences between us, I know, but none of them worth the death of one man," she said . She added: "There is no difference between us but differences are not worth one man's death"
 "We were taken from our peaceful lives and told to fight for reasons we cannot understand," says one of the protesters . "We have been told we will not be able to understand why we are forced to fight," she says .
 Surely we have more in common than that which temporarily separates us? Surely there are more commonities than that that which separates us .
 At 0300 hours, a Japanese grenade rolled into his foxhole, exploding in his face and killing his sergeant . He was killed by a grenade that exploded into his face, killing him .
 Cord lay mortally wounded, contemplating death, bleeding everywhere, pieces of his teeth like half-eaten peanuts awash in his mouth of blood . Cord lay wounded and contemplating death . Cord was bleeding everywhere . Cord's teeth were scattered in the mouth of his blood .
 Blast had shattered one eye completely and left the other so badly damaged it was swollen shut shut . The blast had shattered the eye completely, leaving it swollen shut .
 Still conscious, he searched with one hand for his .caliber pistol to end his misery . Still conscious he searched for his.caliber pistol .
 Why had he not followed his conscience and refused military service, he bemoaned as he lay there dying, cursing nation-state savagery and war . He cursed nation-states savages and war.
 Meyer senior had reportedly looked his four boys over, having had his own combat experience in World War I . Cord Jr. was able to take it least of all, writes Croswell Bowen in 1948 .
 Cord was listed dead on the battalion roster, causing his parents terrible distress . Cord was found the next morning, and was transported to a nearby hospital ship .
 Cord would, in fact, live and thrive; but his mistaken death notice foreshadowed his twin brother Quentin’s loss a year later . Cord would not die; Quentin died a year after Cord's death notice .
 His twin brother Quentin was named for his father’s best friend, Quentin Roosevelt, son of President Theodore Roosevelt . Quentin is named for President Roosevelt's son .
 Wealthy and socially prominent with strong political ties, Meyer family was influential one . Meyer family is one of the wealthiest and most influential in the world .
 Like their father, Cord and Quentin were educated at the elite St. Paul's School of the Art in New York . Like their parents, the twins were educated in the elite private school .
 The school was a breeding ground for those who would one day assume positions of power in business and politics . The school is known for its success in business, politics and education .
 Quentin often stood out athletically, Cord was the academic star who also had intense feelings of social responsibility . Cord was also a star of the film, "Cord" and "Quadadio"
 Cord was "fundamental a poet, but had a fixed habit of going off the deep end," says St. Paul's poet laureate .
 He may sometimes have been a little absurd in those days, but when he cooled down as he sometimes did, he amused himself as much as he did the rest of us . He was often absurd in his early days but he was also a good guy .
 In point of fact, Cord’s emotional intensity was a double-edged sword, and would remain so for the rest of his life . Cord would remain an emotional intensity, but his emotional intensity would remain his life, he says .
 Channeled constructively, it might have compelled an entire country to seek out something yet unimagined . It might have led to an entire nation seeking out something new, unimagined .
 Cord entered Yale in 1939, just after war had been declared in Europe . Cord attended St. Paul’s, Yale, in 1939 . Cord was a member of the Yale University fraternity .
 Despite the distant thunder of marching German armies, Cord immersed himself in the academic cornucopia that lay before him . Cord was immersed into the academic field of study at the time .
 During late-night dormitory arguments at Yale’s Davenport College, the war in Europe inevitably took center stage . The war was the focus of the argument at the time .
 His was the heart of a conscientious objector when it came to all things war . His heart of the heart was to be conscientious objectors to war .
 The contradiction caused Cord to view war as nothing less than internationally sanctioned anarchy, and it would later become the chief organizing principle of his work for world peace .
 Cord became bound by the conventions of his time, but was a conscientious objector . Cord was a poet, but not a philosopher or poet, he was bound by his time .
 With Japan’s attack at Pearl Harbor in December 1941, “the only question left for debate was which branch of the service to join,” Cord recalled in 1980 . Cord joined the Navy in 1941, and joined the Army in 1945 .
 Cord completed his Yale graduation requirements early . Enlisting in the Marine Corps Officer Candidate School at Quantico, Virginia . Cord is a graduate of Yale .
 By the time he graduated in December 1942, he had been elected to Phi Beta Kappa, played goalie for the Yale hockey team, and had been publishing editor of Yale Literary Magazine .
 Yale president Charles Seymour bestowed the honor on Cord, his voice quivering with emotion . Cord was awarded the honor at Yale University . Cord is the son of Charles Cord, a Yale University professor .
 Merle Miller would recall that moment when Cord, in full Marine regalia, received the honor . Years later, Miller would remember that moment .
 Like many soldiers, Cord wrote letters home, chronicling his experiences and their effect on him . Cord wrote about his experiences in his letters home .
 So eloquent and forthright were Cord’s letters that Edward Weeks, editor of the Atlantic Monthly, decided to publish them even before Cord returned from the Pacific .
 He emerged as a hero from his convalescence, having earned the Bronze Star and Purple Heart . He was awarded the Purple Heart and a Bronze Star .
 "I owe it to those who fell beside me, and to those many others who will die before it’s done," he says . "I will do all that is in my small power to make the future for which they died an improvement upon the past"
 Their connection this time, however, fueled a passion that was as intellectual and spiritual as it was physical .
 For Cord, Mary was a “roman candle” who supported his vision of a world without war . Cord also shared an emerging focus on how to convince the masses of its rightness . Cord was a "roman candle" who not only demanded and supported Mary's vision .
 It was to be a partnership of equals as their crusade began to take place on the world stage . The pair were to be partners of equals in the fight for women's rights in Africa .
 Mary and Cord deepened their union while forging and exploring the possibilities for action . Throughout the fall and into the winter of 1945, Cord and Mary explored the possibilities of action . Cord was married to Mary in 1945 .
 Not interested in entering his family’s well-established, highly profitable real estate business, he considered a legal career to be a sound stepping-stone to public life . He considered legal career a sound step-stone for public life.
 He longed to continue writing, but was bored by the drudgery of the law curriculum . He wanted to continue to write, but he was tired of it .
 Cord received word that former Minnesota governor Harold Stassen would be a U.S. delegate to the San Francisco Conference that would establish the United Nations . Cord was one of his aides for the conference . Cord received news in 1945 that he was soon to be a United States delegate to
 Cord leaped at the chance and immediately went to Washington to meet with Stassen . Cord is the son of former Vice President Dan Dan O'Connell .
 Stassen had chosen Cord based on recommendations from a number of American colleges . Cord was chosen by Cord on recommendations made by American colleges in the U.S.
 Cord was critical of the first UN conference in San Francisco . Increasingly persuasive and articulate about his emerging vision for the prospect of a world without war, Cord is critical of first conference . Cord's vision is that a world of war is without war .
 Despite the extravagant press claims that the conference had been a major step forward in ensuring a peaceful future for the world, Cord already knew differently . Cord said the conference was just a step forward for the future of the world .
 The proposed UN Security Council veto power made it virtually impossible for the new organization to protect against armed aggression . The proposed veto power, as well as certain other provisions, would have been virtually impossible .
 I don’t see how it can prevent war unless it grows into something more than seems to be contemplated here . I’m not sure how it’s possible to prevent war if it grows to something more .
 It was May 2, 1945, barely a week after the UN charter conference in San Francisco had begun . It was barely a day after the U.N. charter conference .
 The mission he and Mary would share for the next three years was coming into focus, and his presence at the conference wasn't going unnoticed .
 Jack Kennedy was covering the event as a newspaper correspondent for the Hearst newspaper Chicago Herald-American . As it happened, or perhaps as fate would have it, he was covering it as a reporter .
 His stories always included his picture, byline, and a short bio—”PT-boat hero of the South Pacific and son of former Ambassador, Joseph P Kennedy”—as well as authorship of the bestselling Why England Slept .
 Jack’s astute grasp of the unfolding post-World War II power grab was steadily drawing attention . Yet Jack was still drawing attention in the post-WWII world .
 Like Cord, he was being courted by the Atlantic Monthly’s editor, Edward Weeks . Cord was also courting by Weeks, like Cord .
 Still dazzled by Mary’s allure, Jack was willing to try almost anything to stay connected with her . Jack is willing to do almost anything, including try to keep her alive .
 Testosterone sparks of territorial infringement quickly flared amid whatever social discourse was taking place . The incident occurred in the early hours of the morning .
 Jack wanted to interview Cord for one of his press filings, but he snubbed him . Cord was a principal liaison to U.S. delegate Harold Stassen .
 Jack never forgot the dismissal; years later, when Cord wanted out of the CIA and solicited Kennedy for the ambassadorship to Guatemala, the president ignored him . The president ignored Cord Kennedy's request .
 A close Kennedy White House aide who talked and walked with President Kennedy daily noted in 1975 that the president never forgave anyone who crossed him . Joseph W Shimon, a close Kennedy aide, said that Kennedy would never forgive anyone .
 Jack was a strong, deep, silent guy, really more so than people realize . Jack was strong and silent, more than anyone else would have thought he was .
 Despite efforts to find some unifying supranational authority against ‘the death agony of nationalism” that forever propelled one nation against another, the U.N. was neutered even before its inception .
 The press had made extravagant claims about the conference as a major step toward ensuring peace throughout the world, but Cord felt differently . Cord felt that the conference was necessary to ensure peace in America .
 The proposed United Nations Security Council veto power would be virtually impossible for the new organization to protect against armed aggression . The proposed U.N. veto power, however, would be almost impossible .
 The Soviets opposed all attempts to give the UN real power . The Soviets, keen to protect their independence, had opposed the UN power .
 The U.S. Senate has prohibited the American delegation from proposing anything that would limit America’s hegemony . So had the United States Senate, which prohibited the proposal .
 Cord’s frustration with bureaucratic roadblocks, however, pales next to the wrenching horror he experienced . Cord received an early morning phone call from his mother on May 31 . Cord's frustration with the bureaucracy paled next to his mother's call .
 His fraternal twin brother, Quentin, had been killed in action during an entrenched battle with the Japanese on Okinawa .
 Quentin had rushed to help him and was killed by fragments from a Japanese grenade . Quentin was killed when fragments from the Japanese grenade hit him . Quentin died after being hit by fragments of the grenade .
 Though comforted by Mary, Cord was shattered by the death of his brother, yet there was little show of grief . The war between nations had just become even more personal, taking from Cord someone he had loved deeply .
 Without expression, “absolute fury” and the emotional pain that drove it would eventually extract the kind of toll that forever torments a soul . Without expression . “Absolute fury’s” must be expressed, ‘without expression,’ says the author
 Those closest to Cord would repeatedly remark how big a blow the death of his twin brother had been . Cord's twin brother, Cord, passed away at the age of 53 .
 The letter Cord wrote to his parents after brother Quentin’s death was disciplined, stoic, and philosophical . Cord was disciplined and stoic in the letter he sent to parents .
 He spoke of his brother’s bravery, of his lack of guile, and his belief that Quentin would go on living in the hearts and minds of those who loved him .
 If I could only understand clearly what it said, then it should be done no matter what the obstacles or the dangers, I would like to see it done . I'm not sure what it says, but I'm sure it will be done regardless of the obstacles .
 Jack Kennedy’s close friend Chuck Spaulding had known Cord Cord well enough to be “fascinated by the difference between Meyer and Jack,” perhaps sensing that either one of them might rise to the greatest of political heights .
 Both men had looked up ‘the asshole of death’ and survived war’s slaughter . Such became the hardened character of these men, both of whom had looked . up “the ass**suckers of death,” they wrote .
 Cord was imbued with the sensibility of a poet, but the province of genuine human intimacy often challenged and eluded him . Cord was a great writer, but his poetry often struggled to reach the heights of intimacy . Cord's work was published by the Pulitzer Prize-winning Pulitzer Prize
 His deepest emotional expression seemed confined to his journal writing, he said . He demonstrated an unusually complex understanding and vulnerability that he was rarely able to express in life .
 Jack Kennedy appeared content to avoid any intimacy in human relationships entirely . Jack Kennedy was not interested in any human intimacy .
 After leaving the UN San Francisco Conference, Cord and Mary traveled by train to Montana to take a month-long honeymoon . Mary and Cord were married at the end of their honeymoon there .
 Cross-country train trip provided many hours for the husband-and-wife team . Husband-wife: "Cross-country trip provides essential discussion and reflection"
 Mary’s editing attempts only provoked his ire, eventually exasperating her to tears . Mary was exasperated by his anger at her editing attempts .
 Cord sternly warned that “for those of us who have fought not for power but because we believe in the possibility of peace, the Charter is nothing more than a series of harmless platitudes. Pulling no punches, Cord said . Cord: “For those of those of
 The article was due for publication in September 1945, and Cord submitted it at the very beginning of August . Cord submitted the article at the beginning of the month .
 Edward Weeks, the editor of the Atlantic Monthly, was so impressed with Cord’s latest essay that he advised his acolyte to give up law and go to graduate school at Harvard . Cord's latest essay was published by The Atlantic Monthly magazine .
 Weeks considered Cord to be the brightest intellectual star, Weeks said . Weeks wanted him to be surrounded by the best minds . Weeks said he wanted Cord surrounded by "the best minds"
 Cord and Mary moved to Cambridge by giving Mary a job on the Atlantic’s editorial staff . He facilitated the transition by giving her a job as an editor on the magazine's editorial team . Cord was the first couple to move to Cambridge .
 In less than one month, Harvard would prove to be Harvard's launching pad to the world stage .
 In October 1945, Cord was invited to the Dublin Conference on World Peace in New Hampshire . Cord attended the conference in Dublin, New Hampshire, in 1945 .
 Reves's book articulated the world federalist belief that the nation-state system was no longer viable . Reves’s book articulated a belief that federalism was not viable .
 Given economic interdependence and capitalism’s need for a borderless world, the nation-state could no longer assure prosperity or stability, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The nation state no longer assures prosperity now that civilization had to contend with nuclear weapons .
 Only a supranational world government would create the possibility of protecting peace and promoting prosperity . Only a world government can protect peace and promote prosperity throughout the world, while hopefully promoting democracy .
 Cord agreed with this assessment, and he was able to articulate the vision in a way that no one else could . Cord agreed to this assessment and agreed with it .
 Norman Cousins, then editor of the Saturday Review, recalled walking into a bedroom and finding Cord sitting quietly on the edge of the bed, “... holding at bay some of the best minds in the country.”
 Cord spoke quietly and with great intellectual force,’ Cousins recalled in 1947 . ‘Cord’ was ‘quieter and intellectual force’
 Ideas for a new platform for world peace initiatives were gaining acceptance . Ideas for new platforms for peace initiatives are gaining acceptance. Ideas for the world peace initiative were getting acceptance .
 He was asked by the Nation to write a series of articles that would bring into sharper focus a new policy for shaping and keeping the peace in the nuclear age .
 Cord published “Waves of Darkness” in the January 1946 Atlantic Monthly . Cord published the book in 1946 .
 It would prove to be one of the most insightful, penetrating war stories ever produced . It would be the best writing and one of his best war stories .
 The O Henry Prize story gave a lightly fictionalized account of Cord’s foxhole trauma, and the force of will it took for him to go on living . Cord was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for the best soldier in the field .
 Cord is a Lowell Fellow, one of Harvard's highest honors . Cord was named Lowell Fellow by Harvard in the fall of that year . Cord is now a Harvard professor .
 In February 1947, all of the United States organizations committed to the possibility of achieving world government convened in Asheville, North Carolina . All of the U.S. organizations were committed to achieving world power .
 His clarity of focus, entwined with his acumen for understanding, impressed the leaders of the various organizations represented at the conference . He impressed them with his ability to focus and focus .
 In spite of his youth, Cord was put forward as the person with the potential to lead the new movement for world government . Cord was only twenty-six at the time of his rise in the world government movement .
 Within two years, the UWF’s paid membership of 17 thousand supporters swelled to forty thousand members . The UWF's membership swelled from 17,000 supporters to 40,000 members .
 The UWF had fifteen state branches, several hundred local chapters, and a galvanized student movement . UWF was a galvanizing student movement that galvanized students .
 Cord’s new book, Peace or Anarchy, sold more than fifty thousand copies . In addition, Cord's new book sold over 50,000 copies . Cord's latest book, "Peace or Anarchy," was published in October 2013 .
 World Federalism became part of the American political landscape . It attracted wide interest by such notables as atomic scientists Albert Einstein and Edward Teller . President Truman himself became involved .
 In 1949, Cord delivered an impassioned statement before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs . Cord delivered the speech before the committee in 1949 . Cord was a member of the House of Representatives .
 The July 1947 issue of Glamour featured an article entitled “Wise American Leadership Is the Hope of World,” by Vera Michaels Dean .
 Written and published in three languages, it outlined six basic requirements for the preservation of world peace . Written and . published in . three languages .
 A portrait gallery of ten men, entitled “Young Men Who Care,” ranked in order of importance . Immediately following the article, the portrait gallery included ten men . The gallery includes ten men who care .
 The first two, ironically pictured side by side, were none other than Cord Meyer Jr. and John F Kennedy . Cord Meyer and John Kennedy were the first two to be photographed together .
 Ex-Yale and ex-Marine Corps, he gives back for the eye he lost in combat . He gives back to the eye that killed him in Iraq War .
 In a democracy which needs the best of its young men, here’s one son of an influential father who didn’t settle for a soft life .
 Cord's heroic effort to bring world government to the national political stage would be stymied by international events, as well as by his organization’s inability to connect with the average American . In the end, Cord would be disappointed by the failure of his efforts to connect the average
 Soviet Russia tested its first successful atomic bomb in 1949 . Soviet Russia entered the nuclear world stage in 1949 with the first atomic bomb .
 Relations with the Russians were already rapidly deteriorating in the aftermath of the Czechoslovakian coup, the Berlin crisis, a Communist victory in China, and, most dramatically, the Korean War . Relations between the two countries were already deteriorating .
 Such fear-laden slogans as “one world or none” lost their appeal as the Federalist cause became enmeshed in its own complexity, internal politics, and inability to be more easily understood by the general public .
 The growing paranoia over “Communism,” coupled with Russia’s elevation to superpower status, engendered a new mindset . The era known as the Cold War was dominated by paranoia over "Communism" and the rise of superpower Russia .
 The World Federalist movement receded. No longer persuasive concerning the darkening storms from every direction, the World Federalists receded .
 Cord was devoted to finding a solution for world peace . During the years he tirelessly devoted himself to finding peace, Cord had a companion other than Mary .
 A dark melancholy had descended upon the World Federalist hero, intermingled with bouts of nervous exhaustion . The Federalist had been plagued by bouts of depression .
 Cord turned inward, despairing that the new world order was headed for nuclear Armageddon . Whether driven by his “absolute fury,” or his unresolved grief over the loss of his brother Quentin, Cord turned himself inward .
 Increasingly despondent, Cord took refuge in alcohol and chain-smoking, often finishing the first of several daily packs by midmorning . Cord was addicted to alcohol .
 Cord was morose and morose, unable to envision his next move . The strain was taking a huge toll, and not just on Cord, but on Cord himself .
 Mary had been the stalwart figure behind Cord’s career . She had exhausted her own reserves in the process . Mary was the mother of his children .
 Incessantly preoccupied, Cord wanted only to know what the future might hold for him as his fellowship came to an end . Cord wanted to know if he could find the future of his fellowship in the future .
 She carried all the family burdens and daily chores . Saddled with mothering two young boys and a third son born in February 1950 .
 Cord wrote of how tired he was of his own career dilemma, “wrestling with terms of personal decision and action” as to where he should focus . Cord wrote in his journal that he was tired of his career dilemma . Cord: “I’m tired of
 Mary pursued Cord in his journal, leaving comments for him to ponder . Unable to reach him directly, Mary pursued him in the journal .
 The verse appeared as a thinly disguised expression of his feelings about Mary . He surely meant her to take it as such when she discovered it when she found it .
 Proper Tribute Beauty, she wears carelessly like a bright gown, Lent for a night by some indulgent guest . And is dismissed to find that no man loves Only herself in that brief garment .
 In genuine surprise She smiles at praise that would-be lovers bring As proper tribute to her transient eyes .
 She never earned With work or special talent her tall grace, Her full breasts or her abundant hair . Her full breast and abundant hair never earned her special talent, she says .
 She must its burden bear and growing learn What damage in poor hearts her passing wrecks. But now that beauty's hers by nature's gift, She must . She must learn what damage .
 She bites her fingernails, Fails to shave under her arms, Has no sense of humor, And is a totally mundane soul . She bites fingernail, Bends fingernailed, Backs her fingers nails, Bides her nails and Bends her arms .
 Cora Cora’s decision in 1951 to work for the CIA was not about following a calling or answering destiny, she says . Cora: “I’m not going to follow a calling, but I was going to do what I wanted to do.�
 He had hoped that his tenure as a Lowell Fellow at Harvard might lead to an academic post . He had wanted to continue writing, and he had hoped to continue .
 Post-war economics being what they were, academia was not recruiting . Academics were not recruiting. But postwar economics was what it was. Academic life was not going to be easy .
 He consulted Secretary of State Dean Acheson for a job in the State Department, but there was none for him . He consulted the secretary of state for a State Department job, but no job was offered .
 It is not known exactly when Cord’s first contact with Allen Dulles took place .
 Dulles had already been apprised of Cord’s ‘splendid qualifications’ as early as February 1951 . Dulles may have been contacted by Cord, possibly by his father .
 By March of that year, the two had met in Washington, and Cord obviously went away intrigued by what Dulles had offered him . The offer remained top secret and classified .
 He met with another Dulles protééé already at the CIA, Gerald E Miller . Miller is a former CIA director who met with Dulles at the time .
 It isn’t clear from Cord’s personal papers and letters what the ‘other possibility’ was, though it may have been an academic appointment . Cord's personal letters and personal papers show he was a member of the faculty at the time .
 The O Henry Prize winner and best-selling author was so brilliant and talented he could have excelled at anything he attempted . He was so talented that he was able to succeed at almost anything he tried to do .
 With a leap of faith, he might have become a major literary figure during his lifetime . He might have been a major writer during his life .
 Allen Dulles was bent on filling the Agency’s ranks with East Coast, patrician Ivy Leaguers, whose arrogance would become evident in their disdain for anything in their way, including the rule of law . Cord Meyer allowed himself to be seduced by Dulles,
 In making this decision, Cord turned away from his soul call, and also from Mary, he abandoned the prospect of world peace for the waging of a new kind of war .
 He joined what would later be called the Directorate of Plans, the CIA’s most secretive division dedicated to the manipulation of world order . He joined the CIA's most secretive Division dedicated to manipulating the world order.
 Cord easily established himself as a rising star whose acuity often surpassed that of his peers, his well-born peers . Richard Bissell, Tracy Barnes, Desmond FitzGerald, Richard Helms, even Jim Angleton . Many had come out of the Office of Strategic Services after the
 It was a cozy arrangement of socially connected men from prominent families . It was an arrangement of social connected men and women . The arrangement was known as a cozy affair .
 Cord, Cord Cord, is a former CIA director . He has worked for the CIA in Washington, D.C., since 2001 .
 There would be no more ‘quiet work’ -- ‘the labor of the mind and the heart, pure in the sense that it is done for its own sake and not for some ulterior end of wealth or power” as he once wrote .
 The Cold War was, in fact, not cold, but hot, and it promised anything but world peace . "The Cold War" promised world peace, but the Cold War promised anything less than peace .
 Cord Meyer transformed all his poetic, insightful visionary wisdom into perfecting schemes and strategies for America’s greater power and control . Meyer transformed his poetic wisdom into plans for world domination, no matter what the cost .
 Cold Warrior by day, increasingly frustrated and intoxicated at night, like many of his colleagues . One journalist had once believed was destined to be ‘the first president of the parliament of man” was now weathering in corrosion .
 He achieved success quickly and often, often, but struggled to follow suit . He was brilliant and talented, yet still brilliant and often talented, he achieved success .
 Nicknamed “Cyclops” by his colleagues, his ubiquitous cigarette dangling from the right side of his mouth, its smoke forever wafting up through the corridor of his glass eye . Cord became known for arrogantly chiding anyone who had overlooked some important detail .
 He believed we should be spying, not the crazy things Cord had concocted, he said . He believed that we should not be spying. He said, "I'm not sure what I'm doing here."
 Cord was running Radio Free Europe and Operation Mockingbird and having great success . While the FI [Foreign Intelligence] section—the spies—couldn’t do diddly squat against prime targets like the Soviets and Communist China, Cord ran these crazy things .
 The boys were still very young when Quentin was five, Michael was four, and Mark was almost two . The boys are still young, with Quentin being five and Michael being four .
 The couple bought a grand old southernstyle house on nearly three acres of land . It is just a few miles from Chain Bridge on the Potomac River . The house is on three acres and sits on nearly 3 acres .
 It had a spacious, window-lined living room, library, and a dining room with French doors that opened onto a landscaped terrace . It also had a library, dining room and dining room .
 Upstairs, there are six well-spaced bedrooms and two renovated full bathrooms . Upstairs there are two renovated bathrooms and six bedrooms . The home has been renovated and renovated .
 Outside, there were large oak trees, rolling hills, and gardens, as well as a white-fenced riding stable, complete with a small barn . Outside, the estate was surrounded by rolling hills and rolling hills .
 Mary, for her part, would be reunited with her sister, Tony, now married to Washington attorney Steuart Pittman . Mary's sister Tony is now married and living in Washington, D.C.
 Many of Mary’s former Vassar classmates were also raising families in the area . Many of the former classmates were raising families .
 D.C. social life took command as Cold Warriors and the rest of the ‘Greatest Generation’ ascended in their careers . The gaiety of the Washington social scene now takes command as the Cold Warriors ascended .
 Mary wasn’t content to sit still where the life and future of her children were concerned . Mary's silence sometimes “fired the imagination of the spiritually timid,” Mary said .
 The fact that she was no longer crusading for world peace didn’t mean that the future peace and happiness of her progeny could be neglected . She said: “The fact that . she was . no longer . crusading . for world . peace didn't mean that
 She wanted something different from what she had experienced as a young girl . She wanted to do something different, she said .
 A new era of progressive education was unfolding in the early 1950s as Mary embarked on the search for a school in which to enroll her children . Mary embarked upon the search to find a school for her children to attend .
 She came upon an educational experiment that embodied something she thought important . The experiment was an attempt to find out what she wanted to do .
 It was the first private, coeducational, multicultural, and racially integrated school in Washington, D.C. It was co-educational and multicultural . The school was still mostly segregated in the city .
 The school had been founded by seven families who wanted to create a learning environment committed to academic excellence and educational innovation . The school emphasized children of all races learning together .
 The school’s educational philosophy grew out of such bold educational experiments as Black Mountain College in North Carolina, Goddard College in Vermont, and the work of German philosopher Rudolf Steiner, father of Waldorf education .
 Many of the teachers in the first racially mixed schools of the 1950s had been educated at Goddard and Black Mountain . The schools were racially mixed in the early 1950s, with many of their teachers having been educated there .
 Many students took public transportation when their parents had little means of transporting them . Parents often had to rely on public transportation to get their children to school .
 Pupils grouped together mostly by age, ability, and social development, not necessarily by grade level . The pupils were grouped together by age and ability, rather than grade level, for example .
 A great emphasis was placed on each child’s unique learning style . ‘Slower learners’ often tutored by more advanced students under supervision .
 The school required its students to participate in artistic endeavors such as class plays, ceramics, and painting . With a solid emphasis on both the performing and fine arts, students were required to take part in art classes .
 Mary thought the school was attempting something unique and highly necessary . Mary thought it was an attempt to create a new school . Mary said she was impressed with the school's innovative approach .
 Both Quentin and Michael would be placed in different groups . Cord and Michael were placed in separate groups .
 How would this kind of environment prepare his progeny for St. Louis? How would it prepare him for his offspring? "I don't know," he asks .
 The children’s academic journey with its emphasis on the arts paralleled her own five-year artistic turning inward . For Mary, however, the children's academic journey coincided with her own turning inward.
 She transformed a former garden shed into a studio adjacent to the bricked terrace of the McLean house . She found herself teaching part-time in the GDS art studio .
 In the 1950s, the wives of upper-echelon CIA men were appendages to their husbands, like virtually all wives in America during that era . The wives of the CIA men are now seen as appendages .
 CIA operatives, however, were not allowed to discuss their work with their spouses . CIA operatives were allowed to speak to their spouses about their work .
 For Mary, this meant that the days of being Cord’s partner, his chief sounding board and literary editor, were behind them . Mary had, in times gone by, thrived in a partnership of equals . Mary: This was a dispiriting shift and a demoralizing
 She confronted and argued with Cord over the CIA’s mission, and, in particular, his work for the Agency . She confronted him over the mission of the CIA .
 Her disdain manifested itself at parties and social gatherings, where she was alone among CIA wives in her critical views . Her disdain for the CIA wives was evident at social gatherings .
 Mary was, in the recollection of one of them, “always making wisecracks” about what the Agency was really up to . Mary was "always making jokes about the Agency," says one of her friends .
 Others suspected that her joking was a sign she knew more than she would admit . Others suspected she was lying about something else .
 Mary was well acquainted with the CIA’s drug program, MKULTRA, an insider says . Cord, Cord, in trying to appease his wife, had told her much more than he should have about many CIA undertakings, the insider said .
 “Mary absolutely detested Allen Dulles and everything he stood for. That source added, ‘Mary detested Dulles’ Source: ‘She detested everything Dulles stands for. Mary detested the former CIA director .
 Just a few years earlier, she had been his most steadfast, trusted partner in their mission for world peace . She had been their most steadfast partner in the mission for peace .
 "I haven’t seen the ocean in a long time, and though I love it, it often brings with it for me a vague sadness," she says . "Though I love the ocean, it brings with with it a vague sad," she writes .
 Unlike the sea, I’m changing, not necessarily for the better. Perhaps because it’s so old and unchanging, it makes me think that I'm not young anymore and that unlike the sea,. I'm changing . Perhaps because of the old, unchanging sea
 I stood there with the wind blowing keenly enough for me to turn up my jacket collar . I was aware then, perhaps more clearly than anyone else, of all my faults and past mistakes, he said . He was aware of all his faults and mistakes .
 I counted the more than ten years since the war and could think of very few acts of spontaneous generosity toward individuals, of many once bright talents rusting in disuse . I counted more than 10 years since I counted a few spontaneous generosity .
 Cord’s reflections in moments of solitude demonstrated the kind of awareness that could have been a precursor to change . Cord's reflections could have led to change, had he the will and commitment to act on his insights, he says .
 Six months later, another event soon took place that might have helped Cord right his course, had he again been willing to take the first step .
 During the 1950s, the public feared that “Communist subversives” had infiltrated various arenas of the U.S. government . McCarthy hearings in the early 1950s fueled the public’s fear that ‘Communists’ had infiltrated government arenas . The
 McCarthy’s attacks on the patriotism and integrity of anyone he deemed suspect destroyed many reputations and lives . Over the course of three years, McCarthy's attacks on patriotism and the integrity of any suspect destroyed reputations .
 He was accused of collaborating with Communists during his dealings with the American Veterans Committee in 1946 . He learned that his loyalty had been called into question after he was accused .
 Cass Canfield, Theodore White, and James Aldridge, along with poet Richard Wilbur, were also implicated in the case . The case was brought to light in the 1980s .
 It might have been his chance to leave the CIA for good, but he wouldn’t seize the opportunity, he says . He says he would have left the CIA if he had been allowed to do so .
 He sent it to playwright Robert Anderson, who he hoped might assist him with the rewriting of certain scenes . He sent the playwright to help him rewrite scenes .
 Allen Dulles personally let Cord know that the charges had been dropped, that he had been cleared of any wrongdoing . Nearly three months later, on Thanksgiving Day, on Thursday, he told Cord he was cleared .
 Cord is back in the saddle for the first time since taking a break from his job . He says he's looking forward to a new reality show . The show is set to return to the U.S.
 Clearly, Cord wanted out of the CIA and all government service, but was too insecure to cut his ties and strike out on his own . Cord was too secure to cut ties with the CIA, but not to strike out for himself .
 McCarthy left the White House after McCarthy's "witchhunt" was revealed . McCarthy has been accused of being racist and sexist in the past . McCarthy was the subject of a series of lawsuits against McCarthy .
 When Cord returned to work, Allen Dulles sensed his discontent and promoted him to chief of the International Organizations Division . Dulles reassigned Cord Cord to the International Organization Division .
 The CIA's Directorate of Plans would merge with the Covert Action Staff in 1962 .
 Mary's hope was that Cord might choose another path, but he hadn't, she says . Mary says she hopes that Cord will choose a different path, and that he didn't .
 His unwillingness or inability to disentangle himself from the CIA, which Mary openly despised, caused her to move further away toward independence, she says .
 "The stakes became higher" as the stakes of her family, her soul, her family and her soul were higher . The stakes of the family's stability and integrity are higher .
 Mary still identified with something deeper within and longed to experience a fulfillment more profound, she says . Mary was a CIA wife, CIA wife and homemaker .
 Struck and killed by a car on busy Route 123, which ran adjacent to their house, the dog had been the special favorite of Mary and Cord’s middle son, Michael .
 Two years later, an even bigger horror would occur at almost the exact spot . Two years after the attack, a similar horror would take place at the same spot .
 The year of 1954 would become a defining moment in the Meyer family . Cord’s return and promotion within the Agency would be the year of the year .
 Mary’s mother, Ruth Pinchot, worried that both her daughters were being stifled in their married lives . Mary's mother said she was worried that she and Mary were being suppressed in their lives .
 She gave them each a round-trip ticket to Europe and a thousand dollars spending money . She also gave them a round trip to Europe with a thousand dollar ticket .
 That summer, Mary and Tony went on what the two later referred to as “a husband dumping trip” to Europe . The two later called it a "husband dumping trip" to Europe.
 The two ended up “exploring hungers that weren’t there just days ago and satisfying them with gentle passion, new to me,” Bradlee would recall years later .
 Mary met ‘an Italian noble,” as Jim Truitt described him in 1979, when she and Tony were in Positano . For her part, Mary met an Italian noble in 1979 when they were in Italy .
 Mary and Jean Pierre reportedly sailed the Mediterranean for a few days, before she rejoined Tony in Paris . Mary reportedly sailed in the Mediterranean before returning to France .
 The following summer of 1955, after attending Tony and Ben’s Paris wedding, she and Cord traveled, of all places, to Positano, Italy .
 Jean Pierre was seen on his sailboat with a young American woman college student . Jean Pierre and the young American college student were on the boat together .
 Mary introduced Cord to Jean Pierre and suggested that the four of them go cruising on Jean Pierre’s boat . Cord and Jean Pierre were cruising together on the boat .
 Mary stayed on in Paris, allegedly to assist Tony in her new life . He returned to work in Washington, while Mary stayed in Paris to help him .
 Both Tony and Ben Bradlee knew exactly what Mary Bradlee was really up to . The Bradlee brothers knew, however, exactly what she was doing .
 She secretly returned to Italy and to Jean Pierre, where the pair went on an extended cruise and made plans for a life together . The pair made plans to live together in Italy .
 Upon her return from Europe the second time around, Mary told Cord the truth . Mary returned to Cord's side of the truth when she found out .
 I remember also her showing me a short story she had written about a brief affair . She showed me a story she'd written about an affair with her husband .
 At dinner parties, Cord’s strident, argumentative disposition tended to dominate, even disrupt, all discourse . Cord's strident and argumentative dispositions tend to dominate dinner parties .
 Cord's poetic sensibility had given way to bullying when alcohol took over . Sadly for Cord, he was bullied by alcohol . Cord had been bullied by his friends and family .
 Once, years after he and Mary had divorced, he reportedly lunged across the dinner table for Ben Bradlee’s throat .
 As a father, Cord had little patience for three exuberant boys and their attendant noise, commotion, and disobedience . Cord had no patience for the boys, and their parents had little .
 We both had witnessed the reckless and explosive alcohol-fueled wrath of our fathers . The shared fear had been one of the things that had cemented our boyhood friendship .
 Looking toward the small riding stable from the Meyer’s terrace, the next house over was the six-acre compound known as Hickory Hill . The Meyer's riding stable was located in the Meyer's six-bedroom compound .
 Years later it would become the legendary ‘Kennedy Compound,” occupied by the family of Robert F. Kennedy .
 Jack and Jackie Kennedy became next-door neighbors of the Meyer family in 1955 . The Meyer family moved into the Kennedy family's home in the spring of that year .
 Jackie suffered a miscarriage while Jack was cavorting about Europe with Senator George Smathers . A year later, she gave birth to a stillborn daughter . Jackie suffered another miscarriage, a year later .
 By the end of 1956, both marriages, the Meyer's and the Kennedy's, had been in turmoil for some time . The Meyer’s marriage was in turmoil at the time .
 It appeared that some force was still at work, keeping Mary and Jack aware of one another . The pair were reunited at the end of the episode .
 Mary would follow them a year later, but not before a trauma of unimaginable proportion . Mary would be followed by a family tragedy that left her with a devastating injury .
 On her thirty-sixth birthday in October, Mary told Cord their marriage was over . Cord and Mary were married in 1956 . Cord was Cord's first wife to Mary .
 Mary embraced the prospect of independence and all that it might promise, including the possibility of rekindling the flame with Jean Pierre . Whatever grief she may have felt, Mary embraced her independence .
 Convention would not enslave her, just as the quiet life of the CIA wife and homemaker had not satisfied her . She had not been satisfied with her life as a homemaker and CIA wife . She was not satisfied with the life she had been living as a CIA wife, but
 Perhaps in time, she might have thought, they would come to recognize and understand the courage it had taken to save her own life . But initially they might blame her for such a cataclysmic disruption to the family, she thought .
 Life's vicissitudes would make an unscheduled appearance early one December evening, a week before Christmas . Life’s vicissitude would make a surprise appearance early on Christmas Eve .
 As the winter solstice light waned fast into dusk, the two older Meyer boys, Quentin and Michael, hurried toward home across the well-trafficked Route 123 . The boys had already been chastised for previous dinnertime tardiness due to their hypnotic television
 Some of the fast-moving cars already had their headlights on; some didn’t . Some cars were already on the road, but others were not .
 The faster, more-agile Quenty raced to the other side without incident . Quenty was faster than Quenty and the faster Quenty won the race .
 Michael couldn't keep up with his older brother, and in the dark of the busy thoroughfare, he likely relied on the headlights of oncoming cars to tell him when it was safe to dash . Michael's older brother was killed in a car crash .
 Michael Pinchot Meyer would not see the car that would take his life . He was nine years old when he was killed by the car .
 His death was nearly instantaneous, and it took place where another auto had claimed the life of his beloved golden retriever just two years earlier . The dog's death took place in the same place two years ago .
 If the dog’s sacrifice had forewarned the danger, it had gone unheeded . The dog's sacrifice had gone unpunished, the dog had died .
 Mary would, for the last time, hold and accompany Michael to the hospital, but not before she paused to comfort the driver who struck her son . Her rare compassion anchored in some deeper dimension .
 The ever-delicate young Mikey would leave those who loved him in an interminable river of grief . Mikey's death would leave his loved ones in a 'river of grief', says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Michael was laid to rest just before Christmas on a hill near his grandfather Amos Pinchot in Milford cemetery . Michael rested just a stone’s throw from Grey Towers, where he had loved to fish and roam .
 Quenty, who would be eleven in January, could not bring himself to attend the burial . It was a decision that would later haunt him . Quenty would be 11 in January .
 A month after their son's death, Cord confided in his journal his hope that shared grief might yield reconciliation with Mary . Cord's son Cord was killed by a car crash in June 2010 . Cord and Mary were married for more than 20 years, Cord said .
 The woman who had once gushed to her friend Anne Truitt that Cord “rose on his toes as he walked”—a characteristic that she considered the hallmark of an interesting man*—now voiced her criticism in direct and devastating language .
 Mary had told him, “Sometimes I’ve known what you were to say but you can’t because of the wine.” He had known what he was to say, but could not because of wine, he said .
 Cord noted that Mary had made it clear she felt that “her children might be a burden that he might come to increasingly resent.” Mary felt that her children might become a burden, Cord noted .
 Mary attacked Cord’s fidelity, calling him “incurably promiscuous” and remarking on his good fortune not to have been a philandering husband at a time when he might have been challenged to a duel . Mary wrote that Cord was ‘incur
 Cord's "Notes" were a kind of last will and testament of what his life and marriage had become . Cord’s “Notes” were a sort of lastWill and testament . Cord was married to his wife of more than 20 years . Cord's notes were a
 No longer able to hide in his journal alone, he’d been offered, in this final confrontation with Mary, a mirror, albeit her mirror, of who he had become and why she was leaving . The final confrontation was a mirror of who she had become .
 Gone was the committed, evolving conscientious objector who, in a moment of illumination as he lay dying on the beach-battlefield of Guam, realized he had betrayed his deepest conviction . He said war was just “the finished product of universal ignorance, avarice, and brutality
 His courage won the duel over the “final ignominious act” of taking his own life in self-pity . His courage in that moment, he had prevailed .
 Cord was director of Operation Mockingbird, head of CIA's secret incursion into the National Student Association . Cord was also the head of the CIA’s secret incursions into the NSA, he says .
 Operation Mockingbird had infiltrated more than twenty-five newspapers and wire agencies . The CIA had successfully manipulated the American media to promote the CIA viewpoint . Operation Mockockbird was successful in manipulating the media .
 Through it, the CIA bought influence at major media outlets by putting reporters on the CIA payroll, and vice versa . The CIA paid reporters to be on the payroll of the government .
 During the 1950s, an estimated three thousand salaried and contract CIA employees were engaged in propaganda efforts . An estimated 3,000 people were employed by the CIA in the United States .
 One of the biggest initial supporters was Philip L Graham, publisher and owner of the Washington Post . The Washington Post was founded by Graham in 1973 .
 Whenever the CIA wanted a news story slanted in a particular direction, it got it . The CIA got it. Whenever a story was slanted down, the CIA would get it .
 Secretly controlling the media had proven to be one the CIA’s most powerful tools . Secretly controlled the media was one of CIA's most effective tools .
 CIA went to work to undermine and destroy the magazine, Ramparts . The magazine was exposed by the CIA in the 1980s .
 CIA operative Edgar Applewhite was ordered to organize a campaign to smear the publication and then render it financially bankrupt . CIA operative Applewhite ordered the campaign to destroy the publication .
 In violation of the CIA charter, Applewhite and his colleagues, including Cord, acted with unabashed impunity . The CIA charter was violated by the U.S. Constitution, but Applewhite acted with impunity .
 In January 1968, the Vietcong’s Tet Offensive revealed just how tenuous (and misguided) U.S. incursion into Southeast Asia had become . Vietnam War raged on amid increasing controversy .
 Throughout the world, student uprisings flared on university campuses as well as in the streets . From the United States to Mexico and France, students have taken to the streets in protest .
 Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in April 1968, Robert F Kennedy in June 1968 . Robert Kennedy died in June 1963, Martin Luther Luther King was assassinated .
 The Black Power salutes of American Olympic medal winners were a provocative nod to the ongoing fight for civil rights . Meanwhile, the Black Power salute salutes were a controversial nod to civil rights issues .
 Apollo 8’s successful orbit of the moon struck the only uplifting chord in an otherwise deeply polarized, traumatic year . The Apollo 8 mission was one of the most successful missions in history .
 Mark Meyer, Cord and Mary Meyer’s youngest son, entered Yale as a member of the class of 1972 . Mark Meyer is Cord Meyer's youngest son .
 That summer, Mark received a form letter from William Sloane Coffin, the chaplain at Yale . The chaplain was a Yale chaplain . Mark says he is proud of his son's achievements .
 Later, he reexamined that outlook and choice, abandoned the CIA, and entered Yale Divinity School . "I'm not a believer in the CIA," he says .
 The United States government had indicted him during the Benjamin Spock conspiracy trial for his role in counseling students to resist the military draft . He had been indicted for his part in the conspiracy trial .
 Coffin’s letter to incoming Yale freshmen introduced the many options of religious faith available at the university . Coffin also made a political case for ending the war in Vietnam . Coffin's letter was sent to incoming freshmen .
 Once a world-renowned peace advocate, the man who had declared all war to be ‘international anarchy” now likened Coffin’s letter to brainwashing . Once a peace advocate he now likened the letter to ‘brainwashing’
 Cord wrote letters to former Yale classmates, including Bishop Paul Moore, Cyrus Vance, Dean Acheson, and William Bundy . Cord wrote to former classmates including Bishop Moore and Cyrus Vance . Cord is a former Yale classmate .
 Bishop Moore found Coffin’s letter somewhat “inappropriate,” he did not think it was grounds for dismissal . Bishop Moore said Coffin's letter was "inappropriate" and should not have been dismissed .
 Acheson thought Coffin’s letter lacked “taste, judgment, knowledge, and maturity,” he told Cord . Coffin's letter was far too moderate . Coffin was the son of a British aristocrat, who died in 1918 .
 Three years into his career at the CIA, Coffin had left the Agency . Coffin was disillusioned by many of the unsuccessful covert activities in which he had taken part . Coffin left the CIA after three years of his CIA career .
 Coffin had forged a calling in the ministry, becoming a passionate advocate for human and civil rights . Coffin was an advocate for civil and human rights in his ministry . Coffin's funeral will be held in Washington, D.C.
 He was a prolific writer and public speaker . He published six highly acclaimed books and many articles .
 Cord Meyer would have seen the apparition of his former self, walking hand in hand with Mary Pinchot Meyer at his side . Cord Meyer's former self would have been walking hand-in-hand with Mary at her side, she says .
 The book relied on McCoy’s harrowing tours through the war zones of Vietnam and Laos, as well as visits to Europe's wellarmed drug lords . McCoy documented accounts of CIA dealings within the drug trade .
 Key figures in the heroin trade told McCoy on the record that American intelligence had collaborated with the drug trade dating back as far as World War II . CIA advisers were financing weapons to support Hmong Highlanders by using CIA helicopters to transport Laotian opium to Vietnam markets .
 McCoy also revealed that, beginning in Guatemala in 1954, the CIA had been involved in widespread terrorism throughout Central America, including the training of death squads . McCoy also said the CIA also trained death squads in Guatemala to carry out the attacks .
 The Agency had needed untraceable money to finance its clandestine operations . The Agency needed to fund its operations in the United States .
 They had found what they desired with narco-traffickers such as Panamanian resident Manuel Noriega, who would eventually be outed as having long been on the CIA payroll .
 Cass Canfield, the head of Harper & Row, found himself caving in to CIA pressure . Canfield: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not going to back down"
 The CIA forced the young author McCoy to acquiesce to the Agency’s demand for prior review, but the book was published largely intact, in part because the major news media had exposed the attempt to influence its content .
 McCoy's research was particularly unwelcome in Washington in 1972 . McCoy’s research was . particularly unwelcome . in Washington . But the fact remained .
 The United States military was still trying to recover from publicity around the massacre at My Lai and other atrocities in Vietnam . The U.S. military was in the midst of publicity surrounding the massacre .
 Revelations about the CIA-led assassination campaign throughout Southeast Asia, Operation Phoenix, made matters worse . Operation Phoenix was also revealed as Operation Operation Phoenix .
 The man whose debut short story “Waves of Darkness” had decried the futility and horror of war was now a complicit architect of secret wars and violations of democracy the world over, as well as within the U.S.
 He had access to those who would further stimulate his vision and position him for national recognition . Poised for a meteoric rise with a stellar political future, he was poised to be a national hero .
 As their marriage unraveled in 1955, so did that of their next-door neighbors at Hickory Hill . Mary’s steadfast love and support would become Faustian, despite her husband's ascent .
 Jack and Jackie Kennedy had moved into the six-acre compound that had once been the headquarters of Civil War Army general George McClellan .
 Meyer terrace drew the eye straight across two small ridges to the new Kennedy compound where “Lord and Lady” Kennedy reigned, but their life together was becoming strained . Meyer's view from the Meyer . terrace .
 Early miscarriages and a stillborn birth, further complicated by Jack's compulsive philandering, would have been overwhelming to any young marriage . Jack's compulsive philandering would have been an overwhelming burden to the couple .
 Jackie would eventually follow her husband's lead where infidelity was concerned . In fact, Jackie eventually followed her husband’s lead when she married him .
 Jackie's stepbrother Gore Vidal says she had affairs with William Holden . Vidal: “She had her share of affairs with the famous, among them the actor William Holden.”
 She told Jack about the fling with Holden, claimed author Peter Evans, just a few days after it happened .
 Her hope was to stimulate his affection, because women who slept with powerful men were a turn-on for Jack, she said . She hoped to stimulate him with a powerful woman .
 Jack became resentful when Jackie discovered she was pregnant, allegedly not believing the child was his . Jack allegedly didn't believe the baby was his when Jackie found out he was pregnant .
 After the convention, Jack dumped Jackie at her family’s estate in Newport, Rhode Island, and flew to Europe with Senator George Smathers of Florida .
 Jackie had delivered a near-full-term stillborn girl who she had already named Arabella . Jack and Jackie's yacht became a floating senatorial bordello .
 Newspapers had picked up the story that he was ‘traveling’ in Europe and was unable to be reached . Newspapers reported he was "traveling" in Europe .
 It reportedly took Smathers another three days to convince the Massachusetts senator to return to Massachusetts .
 After recovering from the stillbirth, she took off for London to play with her sister, Lee Radziwill, who had several affairs with British royalty .
 When Drew Pearson got wind of all the “fun” Jackie was having sans Jack, the patriarch again took matters into his own hands .
 Jackie and Joe Sr. had always gotten along, and so rather than intimidate his daughter-in-law, the elder Kennedy struck a deal . The deal was a deal between the Kennedy and the Kennedy family .
 She wanted out of the Hickory Hill estate in McLean . She didn’t want to have dinner every night with the entire family when she came to Hyannis Port or Palm Beach .
 In exchange, she agreed to keep up appearances for the sake of Jack’s future political career . In exchange for appearances, Jack's wife kept up appearances .
 Without them, Jack’s political future might quickly dead-end; with them, any political height was scalable . With them, the future of Jack's political future was quickly dead, but with them they could be limitless .
 Speaking from personal experience, I can tell you that children are the secret of any marriage . I'm happy to share my story with the world, and I'm not afraid to .
 By 1957, Mary Meyer had also made Georgetown her home, just a few blocks away from the new Kennedy home .
 In spite of his failed bid for the vice presidential nomination, Jack still had his sights set on 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue . Jack still wanted to be president .
 The fact that his marriage was widely understood to be window dressing didn’t deter him . He was married at the end of his life .
 Mary, for her part, was adjusting to life without Cord, and without her son Michael . Mary's son Michael was also missing from Cord .
 While her path and the future president’s surely crossed, her more pressing concerns took precedence . The future president's path and hers crossed, but she was more concerned about her safety .
 One of her priorities was finalizing her divorce as quickly as possible, she said . She said she wanted her divorce to be finalized quickly as soon as possible . She added that it was a priority for her to get her divorce quickly .
 There are many such places in Nevada offering luxury living with fine food and other perks . Some of Nevada's most luxurious places offer luxury living .
 Bundy divorce ranch, however, was far from luxurious and offered only four residential apartments . Bundy's divorce ranch was the first of its kind . Bundy divorced from his wife of more than 20 years .
 For Mary, it would serve her purpose splendidly, allowing her to come and go as she pleased . Mary would be able to go wherever she wanted to go .
 Before Mary left on one of her trips to Nevada in 1958, her neighbor Jack had asked for a favor . Mary's neighbor Jack asked for the favor before she left .
 Pamela Turnure had been a receptionist in Kennedy’s Senate office . The sylphlike, elegant, dark-haired dark-hair Pamela Turnures had been an office receptionist .
 She would eventually join his presidential campaign and become Jackie’s press secretary, all while maintaining an intermittent sexual relationship .
 Pam Kater was renting an apartment in the Georgetown home of Leonard and Florence Kater . Pam had been renting the apartment for more than a year .
 One spring night, the Katers were awakened by the sound of pebbles against their tenant’s window at 1:00m.m. The Katers say they were woken by pebble against the window of the tenant's window .
 Senator Kennedy begged Pam to let him in. They looked out their window and saw Senator Kennedy begging for him to come in . Pam and Pam were shocked to see him begging for help .
 "Good Catholics" would be in such a situation, the Katers set out to expose Jack and destroy his chances for the presidency . Enraged, they decided to expose him and destroy him .
 Two tape recorders were placed in an air vent that led to Pam’s bedroom . They recorded Jack and Pam's conversations and their sexual activity .
 I was very innocent and naive in those days and had no idea of the power I was up against. "I was very naive and naive," she says .
 Mary had to have known that Jack was involved with Pam Turnure, although it is unlikely she knew what the Katers were up to when she allowed Pam to house-sit for several weeks .
 The Katers staked out Mary’s house and caught the senator leaving in the wee hours of the morning . One evening in July 1958, while Mary was in Nevada, the Katers were in Nevada .
 Mary returned from Nevada in September to find her house under the couple’s surveillance . Mary returned home in September from a trip to Las Vegas . Mary says she returned from her trip to Nevada to find the surveillance .
 She thought Jack would be stupid and reckless if he seriously had his sights set on the presidency . She said she thought Jack was reckless .
 Mary's long-term former boyfriend Bob Schwartz had made clear, “Mary wasn’t flamboyant.” As Mary’s ex-boyfriend Bob Schwartz said . Bob Schwartz also said, ‘Mary’d not be ‘flamb
 She took her obsession with Kennedy’s philandering to the streets . She attended political rallies with signs that displayed the image of Jack taken outside Mary’S house .
 She picketed former president Harry Truman’s house in Missouri while Kennedy was visiting, and marched in front of the White House . She also pickedeted Harry Truman's house while he was in Missouri .
 Kater allegedly contacted more than thirty newspapers and magazines with her proof of the presidential aspirant’s wayward habits . Kater said she contacted over 30 newspapers with proof of her proof .
 As late as April 1963, she contacted FBI director J Edgar Hoover, but he refused to meet with her . He likely seized on her revelations to add to Kennedy's already growing file .
 For a time, the Washington Star pursued the Kater story before abruptly dropping it, threatened by a Kennedy family lawsuit . The Star dropped the story after being threatened by the Kennedy family .
 Mary set her sights on the future in spite of the travails of divorcing Cord . Mary's ex-husband is now a successful businessman .
 She longed to move forward in her new life; and brooding would play no part . She was looking forward to a new life, but brooding wouldn't play a part .
 She adjusted gracefully to life without Cord, who saw his sons on weekends and part of school vacations . Cord's wife says she has no regrets about her husband's death .
 As agreed in the divorce settlement, he would assume full charge of the children's education . He would assume responsibility for their education .
 Still mired in grief over Michael’s death, she embarked on a period of deep exploration . She embarked on an exploration of her grief-stricken past .
 Artist Ken Noland became Mary's lover during this time . For the next two years, he was a significant presence in Mary's life .
 Her introspection during this time was as much artistic as personal as personal . Her introspective times were as much art as personal, she said .
 During her time in Nevada, Mary visited with Anne and Jim Truitt at their home in San Francisco, where they had moved for Jim’s Newsweek posting .
 Jim Truitt had a keen interest in psychedelics and Eastern mystical traditions that embraced altered states of consciousness . Mary had her first psychedelic experience during a visit to California .
 Palo Alto Mental Research Institute was exploring the therapeutic potential of hallucinogens such as LSD and the peyote derivative psilocybin . Just south of San Francisco, the research institute was exploring its therapeutic potential .
 Jack Kerouac, Neal Cassidy, Allen Ginsberg were at the vanguard of this mind-altering wonder . The Beat Generation was an emerging cultural phenomenon in California’s Bay Area .
 LSD and other hallucinogens had been in use as psychiatric aids among the fashionable in Hollywood since the mid-to late 1950s . LSD was used as a psychiatric aid in the 1950s and '60s .
 André Previn, Aldous Huxley, Anais Nin, Esther Williams, Betsy Drake and Sidney Lumet explored their regions of consciousness . Many actors, writers, musicians, and directors participated in the process .
 Luce convinced her husband, Time publisher Henry Luce, to experiment with her . Luce and other notables will be discussed later in this week .
 Cary Grant was so convinced of the positive impact of LSD in his life that Look magazine published an article about it in 1959 . Actor Cary Grant is so convinced that the positive effect of the drug was positive that Look published a Look article in 1959.
 Hubbard befriended people like Aldous Huxley long before Timothy Leary came upon the scene . He befriended the psychedelic pioneer long before Leary was on the scene.
 Hubbard first asserted that LSD could be enormously therapeutic, given its propensity for the inducement of transcendental mystical experiences . It was Hubbard's assertion that LSD was enormously therapeutic . Hubbard was the first person to suggest that LSD should be used as a therapeutic tool .
 Hubbard administered the drug to a number of alcoholics, many of whom reportedly emerged from the experience to successfully claim a life of sobriety . On his own, Hubbard administered it to many alcoholics .
 Hubbard's success with LSD’s therapeutic possibilities moved him to set up three treatment centers in Canada in 1958 . One of the centers reportedly attempted to treat Ethel Kennedy, wife of Robert F Kennedy, for incipient alcoholism . Hubbard set up one of the facilities in Canada .
 Hubbard’s vast network of business contacts, as well as his personal wealth, enabled him to procure a huge supply of LSD and to distribute it at his own expense . Hubbard distributed LSD at the expense of his own money .
 Hubbard wanted nothing in return; his motivation appears to have been to give humanity a new point of view . Hubbard wanted to give people a new view of the world .
 Hubbard traveled across Europe and the U.S. dispensing LSD to anyone who wanted to try it . Hubbard traveled around the world dispensing the drug to anyone interested .
 Oscar Janiger conducted psychedelic sessions with prominent literary and artistic avant-garde figures in the mid-1950s . Janiger was a Los Angeles psychiatrist who began conducting psychedelic sessions .
 Dr. Janiger, also a devotee of Captain Hubbard’s, had experienced his own personal transformation with psychedelics . Janiger's professional interest in using them in his clinical practice fueled his professional interest .
 Allen Dulles and his CIA coterie had tried, unsuccessfully, to recruit Captain Al Hubbard in the early 1950s . The CIA tried to recruit the Captain Hubbard .
 The event had caused mass hysteria, affecting close to seven hundred people for several days . That event had been caused by mass hysteria . It was the first time mass hysteria had been reported in the country .
 Hundreds of people gripped by terror in acute psychosis, wildly hallucinating, became a veritable insane asylum . The town was gripped with terror and gripped by acute psychosis .
 He was so disturbed by the project, he blundered further by sharing his consternation with several colleagues .
 Olson soon realized that the Agency had surreptitiously dosed him with LSD as well, ostensibly to see how much greater a security risk he might become . Olson realized that he had been dosed with LSD . Olson was a major security risk to the Agency .
 Captain Al Hubbard was convinced the CIA had used LSD to destabilize Olson in 1953 . According to one source, Captain Hubbard was immediately convinced of the CIA's involvement .
 When the CIA found that they couldn’t recruit Hubbard, they started keeping tabs on him . Hubbard was the subject of an investigation by the CIA .
 Hubbard’s legendary purchases of LSD from Sandoz, a global pharmaceutical company in Switzerland, were being monitored . Hubbard's legendary purchases were being tracked by Sandoz .
 The CIA had “an agreement” whereby Sandoz would keep the Food and Drug Administration apprised of all purchases, the agency says . Sandoz kept the FDA apprid of all its purchases . The agency says the CIA had an agreement with Sandoz to keep the
 Anne Chamberlin, who had been in a position to shed light on Mary’s exploration with psychedelics up until the end of 2011 when she died, vehemently declined to be interviewed . Mary's mother, Anne, was a prominent advocate for the drug treatment .
 Robert Budd, another painter who was part of the Washington Color School to which Mary belonged, recalled seeing her in the company of artist Ken Noland between 1958 and 1959 .
 Budd himself, Mary Meyer, and Ken Noland, had weekly bodywork sessions with Dr. Dr. Noland in the late 1950s . In the 1950s, a group of Budds took weekly train trips to Philadelphia to have bodywork .
 Charles I Oller is a highly respected practitioner of orgonomy . The technique was developed in the 1940s by Viennese psychoanalyst Wilhelm Reich, a former protéé of Sigmund Freud .
 In the 1920s, Reich had been part of Freud's inner circle . Some called him “Freud’s pet’—but he eventually broke with Freud .
 If life’s traumatic events precipitated the development of character armor, there would be, Reich believed, an inadequate release in the orgasm function . Reich believed that this would lead to rigidities in character and muscular tensions in the body, leading to maladaptive character states .
 Orgonomic therapy sought to restore the free flow of orgone energy . It resulted in a more complete, deeply satisfying sexual orgasm . The therapy also yielded a more fully integrated, healthy, and happy individual .
 Orgonomy represented a radical departure from conventional psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic therapy . It was the work of a group of therapists who used the term 'Orgonomy' in their therapy .
 Patients started a session by lying face up on a platform-like bed in their underwear . Patients lay face up face up in a bed in underwear .
 There, they were encouraged to deepen and to slow their breath and allow whatever emotional expression in their awareness to come into their being without talking about it .
 In the safety of the therapist’s office, patients gradually surrendered to the experience of feeling their bodily and emotional awareness .
 Those with traumatic memories might be encouraged to express themselves with fits of kicking and pounding, giving voice to screaming rage and screaming rage .
 The result was often not only catharsis, but also the diminution of the fear of feeling itself . "Over a period of time, over a time, the diminutions of the feeling itself, thereby restoring the capacity for living more deeply"
 Mary Meyer’s foray into orgonomy lasted only a few months, but it demonstrated once again her pioneering spirit and commitment to selfexamination and personal evolution .
 It also evidenced the deep pain she continued to experience at the death of her son . The mother-of-two continued to be deeply affected by her son's death .
 "Even though she was a free spirit already, to have gotten to the depths of her grief could have made a significant change in her," said the author .
 He would have worked on her breathing and softening of the eyes, it would have precipitated the deepest crying and expression of her grief, it said .
 Budd suspected that it was “because Noland was using LSD and recommending others do it as well” Budd suspected it was because Noland had been using LSD . Budd suspected Noland’s use of LSD was because he was encouraging others to do it . Budd said he
 Noland himself initially denied that LSD had been a part of his life at that time . He later mentioned to Nina Burleigh that he had used LSD with Mary . Noland later said he had also used LSD .
 Noland also vaguely recalled something about Mary visiting Timothy Leary at Harvard in the early 1960s . Noland: Mary Mary visited Leary in the 1960s at Harvard .
 Mary Kennedy's post-divorce activities focused on deepening self-exploration and healing . Jack Kennedy’s attention was on getting to the White House, albeit while mired in marital infidelity .
 Before Jack arrived at the White House, Mary had rebuffed all his pleas for her attention, save one . Jack had been trying to get her attention from him .
 Kenneth Noland recalls attending a cocktail party with Mary Bradlee at the Bradlee house in Georgetown . Noland says he and Bradlee attended the party in the spring of 1959 .
 Jack was there, apparently letting it be known that he would formally announce his candidacy for the presidency at the beginning of 1960 . Jack was reportedly telling reporters he would announce his presidential candidacy at the start of 1960.
 That summer, Mary rented a small cabin for two weeks in Provincetown, Massachusetts, before joining Noland and his children on Long Island . Mary rented the cabin for a two-week period before joining her husband and their children .
 Noland always suspected that she and Jack got together during that time, since the Hyannis Kennedy compound was less than an hour away from the Kennedy compound . Noland: "I always suspected" that they got together .
 'He wanted out in the worst way but he knew it would be political suicide,' says Obama . 'He knew it was political suicide. He wanted out of the way, but he didn't think it was suicide,' he says .
 His physical health, medical difficulties were complicating things, too, too . His physical and medical problems were also complicating matters .
 His father once remarked to Jack’s sister Eunice, who confided doubts about Jack's political future, that “it's not what you are that counts.” Jack's father once said to Jack that ‘not what you're that counts .
 He then added that his father considered Jackie to be the best choice “for a lot of reasons” ‘Jackie’s father considered her the best candidate for the job, he said .
 Not long after his visit with Mary in Provincetown, Jack had another revealing exchange with Priscilla McMillan, herself an attractive and articulate woman .
 "Why was he acting like his father, why was he avoiding real relationships? Why was he taking a chance on getting caught in a scandal at the same time he was trying to make his career take off? "I asked him why he was doing it," he said .
 It means that the low esteem in which he held women was once again validated . It meant that he had to hold women more closely .
 Joe Kennedy Sr., himself afflicted, once told J Edgar Hoover that he should have gelded Jack when he was a small boy . In fact, Joe Kennedy Jr. once told him he should gelding Jack .
 Jackie had been warned about what life with Jack would inevitably entail . From the very beginning, soon after she met Jack in the spring of 1951, she met him . Jack died at the age of 92, a year after his death . Jack's death was one of the most tragic moments
 Jackie valiantly tried to bury her head in the sand, but the toll it took undoubtedly aggravated the possibility of further miscarriages . Jackie's miscarriage was the first of its kind, with a miscarriage in 2008 .
 The antecedents of Jack’s long-standing problem of intimacy with women had a more dynamic dimension than just the imprinting of his childhood . Jack's relationship with women has a dynamic dimension, he says .
 Unlike Mary Meyer, he seemed to have had little interest in any sober self-examination, reflection, or understanding, he said .
 Failing any deeper internal investigation, conquering his emptiness required an infusion of one sexual triumph after another, however momentary the relief, however . Failing to find a way to conquer his emptiness, conquering the emptiness required a series of sexual triumphs .
 The power of love beckoned him to romance during the same time that Mary Pinchot was in love with Bob Schwartz . Bob Schwartz was the love of Mary and Bob Schwartz in love .
 During his stint as a Navy ensign in the Foreign Intelligence Branch of the Office of Naval Intelligence in Washington, Jack began a serious affair with a beautiful blonde, blueeyed Danish woman . The Danish woman had become a close friend of his sister Kathleen's .
 Still married but estranged from second husband, Inga Arvad was a Classic stunning bombshell . Still married and estranged from her second husband .
 The two had no illusion that their relationship would be anything but a passing affair . The two were engaged for more than a decade .
 It also had to be kept secret, so that Jack’s parents wouldn’t find out . Jack's parents would not find out, so the story was kept a secret .
 Jack and Inga camouflaged their connection, using Kathleen and her boyfriend, John White, to make it look like just a convenient foursome . Kathleen and John White used Kathleen's boyfriend, making the foursome look like a convenient group of friends .
 Jack's father's spy network was aware of the relationship right after their first date . Little did Jack know, however, that his father’s spy network knew of their relationship .
 During World War I, many dating relationships were imbued with an ethos of ‘living in the present,” given the reality of an unknown, uncertain future during wartime . During the war, dating was an important part of the survival of the war .
 This was probably the deepest emotional, intimate attachment to a woman that Jack had ever made in his life up until that time . Though there are no in-depth accounts of their relationship, this was probably one of the deepest .
 She was not the sort of woman for Jack to take home to mother and father, and he knew it . Yet, she was not a woman for him to take her home .
 Inga's past soon rose to create problems from another direction . Inga’s past also rose to become a problem .
 Inga manipulated her way into being given access to the Nazi elite, including Adolph Hitler . Years before, as an aspiring journalist, Inga had managed to gain access to Hitler .
 The story was so explosive that it had the potential to relieve Jack of his commission in the Navy, given the ONI’s paranoia . The ONI's paranoia led to Jack being forced to leave the Navy . The story is so explosive it had to be removed from Jack's
 Two days after the Winchell column, Jack found himself transferred to the Charleston Naval Shipyard . Jack was transferred from the shipyard .
 Jack and Inga spent several months exchanging love letters and talking on the phone . Inga visited Charleston on weekends, with Jack visiting her on weekends .
 His “fight for love” could not withstand the Kennedy family pressure, nor what would undoubtedly have been a epic confrontation with his father . His ‘fight for the love’ was not strong enough to withstand the pressure .
 "He was still shackled by the expectations of paternal authority, unwilling to assert his full separation and independence," he said .
 The epitaph of Jack and Inga's love, and the love they had shared, was being written . Jack and Iga were being written together in their final moments .
 Joe Sr. knew exactly what a toll his son’s struggles were taking . For his part, patriarch Joe Sr.'s son's struggles are taking a toll on his family .
 FBI wiretaps on Jack’s phone calls with Inga, as well as wiretaps in her hotel room when she came to visit him in Charleston, South Carolina . Jack and Inga were married at the end of the 1990s .
 The cunning father never indicated the slightest disapproval of his son’s relationship with Inga . Not wanting to incur any ill will from a tempestuous Jack, or spur any rebellion, he never indicated any disapproval of the relationship .
 According to several biographers, Winchell’s column was probably engineered by Joe Kennedy himself . Winchell's column may have been engineered by Kennedy himself, according to some biographers .
 Jack and Inga finally ended the relationship several months later, according to biographers . Inga had been paid off by his father to finally leave . Jack, with Inga’s acceptance, had to end the relationship .
 Heartbroken, Jack now tums his attention to preventing his unpredictable health issues from sidelining him to a desk for the duration of the war .
 "More than ever, he wanted to break away from his father and the chains of the Kennedy family that enslaved him. More than ever," he said .
 She was perhaps the only woman contemporary in his early adult life with whom he was able to sustain an ongoing emotional connection, he says . She was the only female contemporary in her early life with him .
 Kick was the eldest daughter in the Kennedy clan, and she forged an important bond with Jack . Rosemary’s mental retardation relegated her to an institution .
 Both were rebellious, having contested the shackles of the Catholic Church and a mother chained to its religious dogma . Both women were rebellious .
 Jack admired his sister’s spunk, her ability to speak her mind and create a life of her own choosing . Jack admired the spunk of his sister's spunk .
 He defended her when she courageously broke with her parents' wishes by marrying non-Catholic Billy Cavendish, the young Marquess of Hartington .
 Joe Jr. Cavendish was killed in the war in 1944, less than a month after their brother, Joe Jr., was killed .
 Kick and Jack were devastated by the deaths of Jack and Kick . The pair bonded even more deeply, understanding the frailty of life .
 As a Massachusetts congressman in the summer of 1947, Jack visited Ireland in Ireland . Jack visited Kick in Ireland as a congressman in 1947 .
 He was overjoyed to find her now in love with wealthy English aristocrat Peter Fitzwilliam . He was delighted to find out she had fallen in love again .
 Fitzwilliam, however, was not only Protestant, but also still married, although the plan was that he would soon be divorced and marry Kick . The plan was to divorce Kick and marry him, although he was Protestant .
 Joe Sr. and mother Rose warned that they would disown her if she went ahead with the plan . Kick was undeterred, despite their warnings that she would be disowned .
 Jack admired and supported his sister’s boldness and independence . Seeing how happy she was, Jack again admired his sister's boldness .
 Moved by and envious of Kathleen’s joy at being in love, he told his friend Lem Billings that in all of his relationships with women, except possibly for a short while with Inga, he had never lost himself, or fallen in love .
 Her death threw Jack into deep despair, provoking a spiritual crisis about the meaning of life itself . Jack's spiritual crisis was triggered by her death .
 Losing his brother Joe to the war effort could be understood and accepted, but Kick’s death utterly confounded Jack in a way nothing in his entire life ever had . Jack's brother Joe's death was accepted but not accepted .
 Jack had no one within his family to turn to for comfort . Unwilling to tolerate his mother's glib explanation that this had been God’s way of saving her daughter Kathleen from a “sacrilegious marriage,” Jack turned to his mother’
 Kick was the only woman at the time who had provided a bridge to his confused and broken emotional life . Not only had Kick been his best friend, she had provided him with a bridge . Kick was Kick's best friend and only woman he had ever seen .
 Kick had been “the one in the family with whom he could confide his deepest thoughts,” says friend Lem Billings . Kick was one of the family’s “deepest thoughts” and was “one of the ones he confided his deepest
 His reckless daring was the kind of obsessive pursuit that was not only dangerous from a national security perspective, but ultimately personally destructive . "He's reckless daring," says the author of the book, "but ultimately destructive"
 Recurrent bouts of venereal disease plagued him during his years in the White House . The disease was originally contracted when he was a student at Harvard from sex with prostitutes .
 He had been introduced to Jack by his close friend Chuck Spaulding during the 1960 presidential campaign . He had a close friend who introduced him to Jack .
 Spaulding himself was a patient of Jacobson’s, whose elixirs by injection contained any number of amphetamine derivatives .
 Feel Good become that he even accompanied the president to Paris and Vienna in 1961 .
 Jack supplied with vials of specially prepared concoctions, as well as hypodermic needles to inject them on his own . He also supplied Jack with specially-prepared concoctions .
 Jack became so dependent on these drugs, he had no intention of stopping them . Jack became dependent on the drugs, and he never thought he would be able to stop them .
 Jack battled infirmities, including a rampant sexual addiction, but something kept driving him toward Mary Meyer . Jack battled to overcome his addiction and a fragmented sexual relationship .
 With all his charm, good looks, wealth, and wealth, Jack could have attracted almost any woman, and often did . Jack often did, but his charm and good looks were often overlooked by women .
 Mary Meyer was one of the few women who became important to Marilyn Monroe . Marilyn Monroe, Helen Chavchavadze, Diana de Vegh, Mimi Beardsley, Judith Exner, and Marilyn Monroe were among them . Meyer died at the age of 92 on December
 Her eroticism, firmly imbedded in her femininity, was known to have brought many a man to his knees . Her allure for Jack wasn’t that of an imagined, superficial sexual escapade .
 Mary’s primary attraction for Jack may have ultimately been trust . Trust is the most powerful aphrodisiac in love .
 "She was independent and self-contained, free of any need for any kind of entrapment or manipulation," she said . She was 'independent and self contained'
 With Mary, the spark of redemption was likely ignited in the wounded darkness of his shadow . Mary's story is likely to be true of her father, who was in a dark place .
 Jack would have required a lifelong ‘workin-progress” commitment to self-examination and recovery . After all, real love was the foundation for the approach of healing, he says .
 In the midst of an uncontrollable, compulsive sexual addiction, the question remained . The question remained. "What do you do when it comes to sexual matters?"
 It is true that my discovery of LSD was a chance discovery, but it was the outcome of planned experiments . These experiments took place in the framework of systematic pharmaceutical, chemical research, says Brown .
 The so-called sixties “drug culture’ was not a campus fad, says Hofmann . Albert Hofmann: 'Drug culture' was not an 'urban fad' and not a 'campus fad .
 Timothy Leary Simtine: It was a worldwide renaissance of the oldest religions . Dr. Leary says it was a 'worldwide renaissance' of the religions .
 Timothy Leary looked up and saw “a woman leaning against the door post, hip tilted provocatively,” studying him intently . Leary said he saw the woman leaning up against the post "hanging provociously" Leary was in the middle of the
 Harvard Psilocybin Project was launched in April 1962 . The project was the brainchild of a Harvard lecturer . He had been immersed in the onslaught of problems and crises his project had been attracting .
 Mounting publicity had resulted in increasing scrutiny, not all of it by any means good . Mounting public interest had led to increasing scrutiny .
 Leary and his colleague, Professor Richard Alpert, were criticized for ethical and empirical violations at a faculty meeting for giving the hallucinogen psilocybin to undergraduates . Leary had been recently criticized for “vigorously criticizing” for ethical violations .
 Ordered to surrender their supply, they were forbidden to continue their research . The scientists were ordered to surrender the supplies they had collected .
 Leary was looking forward to a trip to Zihuatanejo, Mexico, in search of a more isolated retreat for his psychedelic research . Leary: Overwhelmed by literally hundreds of outside inquiries received each week, the affable, bubbly forty-one-year-
 As he was preparing to leave, the curious, unexpected visitor from Washington, D.C. arrived . The curious visitor was preparing for his departure from Washington .
 She was someone he would encounter seven times over the next year and half . He would encounter her seven times in the course of his life .
 Timothy Leary recalls his initial impressions of his first meeting with Leary . Leary and Leary first met in 1983 in New York City, New York, at the age of 20 . Lear's first meeting was in the early days of his career .
 Leary says Meyer introduced herself as “Mary Pinchot” not Mary Meyer . She had offered her hand for a formal greeting and, Leary recalled, introduced herself . Leary: “I'm glad she's been in a good mood, but she's not
 Timothy Leary hadn’t understood at that moment that Mary was alluding to the president of the United States . Leary: “I’m not sure what I’ve done, but I think it’s a good thing for me.”
 Khrushchev should turn on with his wife in the comfort of his Kremlin bedroom . Premier Khrushchevski's wife should be able to watch him turn on in the Kremlin bedroom.
 Leary became aware of Mary’s frowning and recalled the exchange . Hollingshead explained to Mary how to guide people in the throes of panic . Leary then became aware that Mary was frowning .
 "The guys who really run things in Washington" are very interested in psychology, and drugs, he says . The guys who run things, he adds, "are very interested" in psychology and drugs .
 Mary seemed calculating, a bit tough, perhaps as a result of living “in the hard political world,” as he put it . She seemed calculating and tough .
 Leary "loaded her with books and papers" about the Harvard Psilocybin Project . The next day Leary drove Mary to the airport, having “loaded her’s with books, papers” about the project .
 He told Mary he didn't think she was ready to start running sessions yet . He told her he didn’t think she’s ready to run sessions yet.
 By April 1962, when Mary allegedly first appeared at Leary’s office at Harvard, her influence in Jack Kennedy's life was already well established . By that time, Mary had already been well established in her role in the Kennedy administration .
 Mary was a regular visitor to the White House residence when Jackie was away . Mary was seen in the Oval Office regularly .
 Mary’s decision to become involved with Jack wasn’t motivated by a selfish, manipulative desire to turn him on to drugs, she says . Mary's decision to get involved in Jack wasn't motivated by selfish desire to get him on drugs .
 If they did share a psychedelic experience, Jack would have undoubtedly been a willing participant . Jack would've undoubtedly been willing participants .
 Several accounts attest to the fact that Mary and Jack’s love relationship was serious, not a passing fling of intermittent one-night stands . Several accounts tell of the serious nature of the relationship .
 Author Leo Damore had become convinced that by the time Kennedy reached the presidency, “Jack was a broken man.” He says Kennedy was “a broken man”
 Timothy Leary’s account of the mysterious “Mary Pinchot from Washington,” depicted Mary as a kind of missionary for the ascension of world peace through the use of hallucinogens . Leary's account of Mary depicted her as kind of a missionary for
 Leary: Mary’s latent intention was to train a small group of eight women in Washington, all of whom were intimately involved with powerful public figures . Mary's latent intention, Leary finally realized, had not only been to invite her lover the president to take a psychedelic exc
 Her pacifism and abhorrence of all violent armed conflict motivated her curiosity, she thought she thought worthy of exploration .
 In the early 1960s, the world was fighting a war, albeit a Cold War, fraught with tensions that were constantly on the verge of escalating . The Cold War was the Cold War in the early 60s .
 Allen Ginsberg's vision predisposed her to Allen's vision, she says . Perhaps through her own experience, psychedelic exploration had her own psychedelic exploration pre-judged .
 Timothy Leary portrayed Mary as a woman in possession of considerable feminine power, someone who had undergone her own personal transformation . Mary wanted to become an acolyte for world peace, intent on laying the groundwork .
 Leary claimed Mary was working with a "LSD cell group" that she was supposedly working with . Yet no one else has ever gone public to substantiate Leary's claims about Mary’s mission .
 There is, however, one caveat to this dilemma that will be discussed shortly . There is also a caveat that will not be discussed .
 Leary’s critics even doubt that he actually had any contact with Mary Meyer at all . In addition, some of Leary's critics say he had no contact with Meyer .
 Critics believe he shamelessly exploited the story of Mary Pinchot Meyer, and engineered it for publicity for Flashbacks . The majority of these critics believe he exploited her story .
 Two of his major books from mainstream publishers, High Priest and The Politics of Ecstasy, both published in 1968, contain no mention of her .
 Leary made an initial attempt to investigate Mary’s murder in May of 1965 when he returned from his around-the-world honeymoon with his new wife . Leary did make an attempt to find Mary's body in May 1965 .
 He told Leo Damore that he had finally called Vassar College in 1965 to find out Mary’s current whereabouts, only to discover she’d been murdered the previous fall . He told Damore, and stated in Flashbacks, that he .
 Leary learned Mary had been married to Cord Meyer . Leary's wife was Cord Meyer, who is now married to Mary .
 Leary planned to do his own investigation and write a book about it . Enlisted the support of his friends Van Wolfe and Michael Hollingshead, Leary said he wanted to do the book .
 Van Wolfe says police intelligence in Washington told him Mary’s murder was an assassination . Van Wolfe: Someone in ‘police intelligence in D.C. had told him that Mary's murder was assassination .
 Leary told Damore that he did, in fact, know the trial was about to begin that summer, but that he had been blindsided . In an in-depth, nearly two-hour recorded interview in 1990, never before published, Leary said he was blindsided by
 The campaign of police surveillance and interference had started just after Leary’s return, right before Ray Crump was on trial for the murder of Mary Meyer . The campaign started just before Crump's trial for Mary Meyer's murder was set .
 G Gordon Liddy raided Leary's Millbrook compound in March 1966 . Liddy was one of the Watergate break-in artists responsible for the raid . Leary was the subject of nearly a full year of harassment by FBI .
 Leary entertained the possibility that the harassment might well have been timed to coincide with Mary’s murder trial . Leary said the harassment may have been deliberately timed . Mary's murder trial is set to take place in November .
 There had been an uptick in harassment and surveillance activity at Millbrook, says Leary . Leary: "There was an increase in harassment, surveillance activity"
 In spite of doing all he could to publicize and garner support for his trial, he was convicted on March 11, 1966, and sentenced to thirty years in jail and a $20,000 fine .
 Leary and his family were charged after failing to advise Leary of his Miranda rights . The charges were eventually dismissed by the judge . Leary was charged with several counts of battery in the incident .
 Leary was jailed again in 1969 on other drug charges, and then fled the country in 1970 and lived in exile for nearly three years . Leary fled the U.S. in 1969 and spent three years in exile before returning to the country .
 Timothy Leary would be under siege for more than ten years, fighting for his life . For more than 10 years, Leary was under siege . Leary died of his injuries at the age of 50 .
 Leary was released from prison in 1976, having read the National Enquirer exposé about Mary’s affair with Jack . Leary would attempt a second investigation after coming across a copy of Deborah Davis's book Katharine the Great at the home of his friends .
 Leary would eventually oversee a further effort by Rebel magazine in the early 1980s to investigate Mary’s murder . Leary later oversaw a further investigation into Mary's murder .
 Leo Damore produced lengthy letters/reports from a private investigator by the name of William Triplett, whom he and Rebel had hired to do investigative work . Triplett's letters/revelations were produced for Damore by the private investigator .
 Timothy Leary’s biographer, Robert Greenfield, quoted many of the events in his book Flashbacks, to support his portrait of Leary as a narcissistic miscreant . Greenfield: Leary was a narcissist and a narcissistic man .
 Mary was using her maiden name when she began their association . She was using that name at the time of her marriage to Mary .
 If she came to him at Harvard, that’s the period where he was out to tum on the world and the aristocracy . People like Robert Lowell, Barney Rosset, Charles Mingus, Theolonius Monk, and Maynard and Flo Ferguson were influential .
 Robert Greenfield’s 2006 biography of Timothy Leary had been authoritative and well-researched . Greenfield didn’t have access to the important twohour tape-recorded interview of Leary with the late author Leo Damore in 1990 .
 Leary-Damore interview focused almost entirely on Leary’s relationship with Mary and the events surrounding her death . Leary and Damore spoke about what was taking place in Leary's own life at the time .
 Leary offered many fascinating new details about Mary and what he had learned about her activities . Leary also offered many new insights about Mary's activities .
 Leary told Damore that she had wanted to keep a low profile from the very beginning . She clearly understood some of the risks involved in being identified, Leary said . Leary says she wanted to remain anonymous from the beginning .
 Leary reiterated several times that Mary never mentioned names during the interview . Leary said that Mary did not mention names in her interview .
 Ms. Smith was enthralled by the potential of hallucinogenic consciousness expansion . She was so enthalled that she decided to take the experimental drug .
 I helped her when I could, when she called or came up to Boston, but I never gave much thought about it until after I found out she’d been murdered, he says . He says he never gave up helping her when he could .
 Both at Harvard and Millbrook, we were being besieged from people all over the country and the world. We're being besieged by people from all parts of the U.S. and around the world, we said .
 Mary’s close friend Anne Chamberlin might well be able to authoritatively comment on her mission, Damore says . Chamberlin was a member of Mary's LSD cell group in Washington . Damore: Mary's close friend Chamberlin may be the only person still alive today to
 Anne Chamberlin has repeatedly refused to be interviewed for this book . But she did apparently talk with Damore on several occasions, starting in the late 1980s .
 One of the women who was involved with Mary in the LSD group is now living in Maine . One of Mary's friends is now in Maine, Maine .
 Anne Chamberlin is a writer, an essayist, and extremely wealthy, out of San Francisco, Washington . Chamberlin: "I'm not afraid. I'm scared. It's scared. I live in fear," she says .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer held an awful lot of information and a lot of secrets . Anne is more forthcoming because 'enough time has passed' for those in power, she says .
 "I offered her every confidentiality if she would be willing to talk with me about it," she says . She says she offered her 'every confidentiality' if she'd talk about it .
 "I have nothing to say about Mary Meyer, or anything connected with Mary Meyer," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Chamberlin never wanted to make known her relationship with Mary Meyer, nor reveal why she apparently abruptly left Washington shortly after Mary’s murder . Chamberlin left Washington after Mary Meyer's murder .
 Leo Damore was curious about other sources of information regarding Mary’s possible use of psychedelics . Damore wanted to hear from the LSD guru himself where Mary had gone for assistance .
 Heymann quotes from an alleged interview with former CIA counterintelligence chief Jim Angleton . Angleton is alleged to have interviewed Heymann . Heymann says Angleton was the CIA's top counterintelligence officer .
 No record of Heymann’s Angleton interview has ever been produced, nor have records of other alleged interviews with Leary and Bradlee . Heymann told Damore that he had conducted two alleged interviews .
 Angleton's alleged statements might have been the sort of details Mary would have noted in her real diary . Angleton stole the sketchbook that the Bradlees and others designated as the diary, which was only a decoy .
 "There's no question in my mind now that she had proposed to use LSD with Jack. There’s no question now that . There's no doubt in her mind now, she had planned to use it with Jack," she says .
 Leary conceded he thought it was very possible, even likely, but would go no further . Leary: "I think it's very possible" but would not go further. Leary said it was "very likely"
 Despite the subsequent smear campaign, he was an established journalist and a former vice president of the Washington Post . He had amassed a large set of papers and files that included portions of what Mary had confided to him .
 Davis interviewed Truitt for more than ten hours over a three-day period during 1976 . Truitt interviewed Davis for over 10 hours over three days .
 Based on the information Mary shared with Truitt, there was at least one encounter when Mary and Jack smoked marijuana together in the White House residence . Mary told Truitt that she and Jack shared marijuana together .
 She said JFK wanted to smoke pot again a month later, but never got around to it . JFK said he smoked pot again, but didn't get around to smoking again .
 It wasn’t until 8:30 the next morning that she was able to reach him by phone . The next morning she was finally able to get him back in touch .
 Mary was in the White House in Jack’s company shortly after he took office as president in 1961 . According to the account Kenny O’Donnell gave to Leo Damore shortly before his death in 1977 .
 She often came into the White House under the guise of “Dave Powers plus one” entries in the Secret Service logs . O’Donnell says she often came in under the name of ‘Dave Powers Plus One’ entries .
 The “Dave Powers plus one” entries were numerous all through 1961 and beyond . The ‘Dave Powers Plus One’ entries came from 1961 to 1962 .
 Her first documented solo private entrance to the White House residence occurred on October 3, 1961,” followed by some thirteen other documented private visits during the Kennedy presidency .
 Mary also attended all six of the White House dinner dances, as well as any number of luncheons and smaller dinner parties given by Jack and Jackie .
 It appeared that she had established an early ground rule in her relationship with Jack .
 A private person whose solitude was sacred, she didn’t want to be a topic of conversation in scandal-mongering Washington, nor of yesterday’s .
 Jack appeared to have agreed to this condition, but couldn’t always restrain his bravado . Jack said: ‘I’m not sure if I’ll be allowed to play in this game .
 According to Bradlee, it wasn’t the first time Jack had made the comment .
 Look correspondent Laura Bergquist, married to Fletcher Knebel, had had access to Jack ever since his 1952 senatorial campaign . Jack was a Harvard classmate of Jack's .
 Many years later, she insightfully characterized Jack as deeply vulnerable . Jack was a deeply vulnerable man, she said .
 Mary would have demanded Jack’s self-examination, demanded that he open his eyes, his heart, his soul, the core of his being to both the artifice and the reality of his existence, including his sexual promiscuity .
 She would have refused to allow him to hide behind his physical incapacity, his sense of obligation to his father or the Kennedy family, his fear of public ridicule or recrimination, or any indifference to civil rights or the dangers of the Cold War .
 She would have taken him to task in a way that some part of him longed for, knowing the emotional pain he would have to confront, he said . He said she would have been taken to task .
 In order to reclaim himself, Jack would have had to brave a kind of grief and emotional intensity similar to what Mary herself had faced with the loss of her son Michael . Jack's journey to reclaiming himself would be similar to that of Mary herself .
 Mary knew the drill: The crashing surf of unbearable sorrow, and what was required to survive it . Mary knew she had to deal with the pain of her daughter's death .
 The “prima female assoluta” would have been at once tender and firm with him, yet demanding that he show up, engage, and stop running . The ‘prima . assolut’ would have had to be tender, firm and demanding that
 For Jack, Mary may have represented the hope of a lost love, a magnetic, romantic passion . Jack had the same kind of no-bullshit, heartfelt bond he had shared with his departed sister Kathleen . Mary represents hope of lost love .
 Something in Jack had been awakened by Mary’s entrance into his life, something that kept him engaged, and apparently wanting more . Indeed, there were undoubtedly moments .
 Such was the fire and hope not only of love’s redemption, but a more clearly defined reclamation of himself and the kind of president he wanted to become, he said . Such was hope of love's redemption, and the hope of a better president .
 Kenny O’Donnell confided to Leo Damore that Mary had been quite outspoken and confrontational with the president when he was about to resume nuclear testing in April 1962 .
 O’Donnell sometimes feared Mary because of the power she had over Jack, Damore says . Damore: The president would “feverishly” pace around the Oval Office when he wasn’t able to get in touch with her .
 For a period of time the Bradlees, particularly Tony, may well have been kept in the dark about what was taking place . The Bradlees may have been aware of what was happening at the time .
 The Kennedys were close friends with the Bradlees, before and during Jack’s presidency . Mary would have insisted that Jack keep any knowledge of their affair from them, but that presented a problem .
 Jack would give the impression that she, not Mary, was the Pinchot sister who caught his eye . Jack would dote on Tony and give the illusion that she was the sister .
 Tony harbored a quiet jealousy toward her sister, who was always regarded as the more beautiful, more attractive, more enchanting of the two . The two were not overtly competitive, but Tony was jealous of her sister .
 It was a particularly “wild party” on a hot, humid Washington evening, complete with thunderstorms and periods of torrential rain . Teddy Kennedy ripped half his pants off at the crotch during the party .
 Smith says Bradlee's interview with Tony Bradlee was based on Smith’s interview with Bradlee . That observation was based in part on Smith's interview .
 According to Tony, she played up the fact that Jack had been “following her” around that birthday evening . Tony says Jack was following her around that evening .
 Tony's infatuation was as much wishful thinking as Jack’s behavior was a strategic ploy . Given that she was already smitten with Tony, it's not surprising that he was infatuated with Jack .
 It appeared she had been left in the dark right up until Mary’s murder, police say . It appeared that she was left in her own dark about the case .
 Charlie Bartlett was a close friend of Jack’s who, with his wife, Martha, had first introduced him to Jackie . Charlie was not fooled the evening of Jack's forty-sixth birthday in May 1963 .
 Bartlett was a Yale classmate of Cord Meyer’s . Bartlett spearheaded the Washington bureau of the Chattanooga Times . He was also a classmate of Meyer's .
 He was well acquainted with everyone in the Kennedy inner circle, including Jack and Jackie . He and Martha often socialized with Jack and his wife .
 Charlie Bartlett was perhaps one of Kennedy’s primary confidantes . Emotionally closer to Jack than Ben Bradlee would ever become, he was emotionally close to him .
 Jack mostly compartmentalized his close friendships, yet he confided in Bartlett what he rarely shared with anyone else . Bartlett confided to Jack about his close friends and family members . Jack often compartmented his friendships with Bartlett, but he often confided his secrets .
 Bartlett thought it was odd that his Yale classmate Cord Meyer, then a chief operative in the CIA’s covert action directorate, wanted to begin having a more social relationship with him . Bartlett: "When Jack began his presidency, he thought it a bit odd"
 When asked by Nina Burleigh why he never considered investigating the story of Mary Meyer, he reportedly exclaimed nervously, “Oh, I can’t.”
 Jack couldn’t contain his affection during his time with the family . The actor's love for the family didn't go unnoticed, either .
 "I even got a little mad with him on one of the boat parties, because it was more than obvious," she said . "I'm not sure what happened to him, but I'm sure he was right," she added .
 Charlie Bartlett’s observations further dovetailed with Kenny O’Donnell statements to Leo Damore . Kenny O'Donnell said he was not surprised by the comments made by Charlie .
 O'Donnell was as close to Jack as anyone could be on a daily basis during his presidency . O’Donnell knew firsthand Jack’s affection for Mary. He was also close to her .
 Mary was in the White House residence on Monday evening, August 6, 1962, just thirty-six hours after the apparent suicide of famed Hollywood sex symbol Marilyn Monroe . Marilyn Monroe was found dead in a car on August 6 .
 Bobby Kennedy and Peter Lawford were at Marilyn’s house the day she died . Bobby returned a second time that evening that evening, according to two witnesses, immediately prior to her ‘suicide”
 Should she have proceeded with her intention to publicly reveal the affairs, the Kennedy political machine might have been dealt a severe blow . Should she . proceeded with . intention to . reveal the affair, she said .
 Marilyn’s alleged crusade ‘to expose the Kennedys for what they are’ has had enormous reverberations, including the close guarding of fifty-four crates of Robert Kennedy’�s records at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library .
 Mary Meyer had become “almost part of the furniture,” in the words of White House counsel Myer Feldman, according to author Nina Burleigh . Meyer died in 1962 at the age of 92 .
 "Around eight-thirty, when the day was over, often I'd walk over to the residence and she’d be sitting there," she says . "I would walk over there and often see her sitting there. She was sitting there."
 Mary’s evolving position within the Kennedy White House senior staff was never second tier . Mary's evolving position in the White House was never a second tier, she says .
 Mention of her name could even be advantageous for employment, according to historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. Kennedy aide says . Kennedy aide: "Mention of your name would be beneficial for employment"
 Schlesinger wrote a memo in support of fellow historian Trumbull Higgins’s proposal to write the official White House account of the Bay of Pigs debacle . “I know Higgins slightly. I know him slightly,” he wrote .
 A\tlen Dulles was finally granted his wish by President Dwight Eisenhower to be director of the CIA in 1953 . President Eisenhower granted Dulles his wish to be CIA director in 1953.
 Eisenhower regretted the appointment of Dulles, even before leaving office, had regretted it . Eisenhower regretted Dulles appointment, but had no regrets .
 Eisenhower realized the CIA was dangerously out of control in 1954 . The CIA’s 1954 overthrow of President Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala was the reason for Eisenhower's decision to pull the CIA from control .
 CIA engineered the May 1 downing of its own U-2 reconnaissance spy flight over Russian territory as a way to undermine any possibility of rapprochement with the Soviet Union . Several year later, right before Eisenhower’s May 16, 1960, peace summit with Premier Nikita
 Eisenhower had planned to orchestrate a Soviet détente before he left office . He wanted to cut the defense budget and redirect resources toward domestic needs . Eisenhower planned to do so so that he could cut defense budget .
 Tensions between the two emerging superpowers resumed unabated . That dream was quickly vanquished .
 Through fear-mongering, the CIA had achieved its goal, urging upon Congress the strategic necessity for further increases in its budget . The CIA is urging Congress to increase its budget to $1.5 billion .
 President Eisenhower would explode at Dulles as he left office . Dulles would finally explode at Eisenhower . Eisenhower would be assassinated in the fall of his presidency in 1953 .
 By 1964, the Agency’s clandestine service and operations would consume nearly two-thirds of its entire budget . Author Tim Weiner says 90 percent of the director's time was spent on clandestine operations .
 Eisenhower pointed to “an alert and knowledgeable citizenry” as antidote to misplaced power . Eisenhower: “The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist"
 CIA was, from its inception, virtually unaccountable to any authority . Established in 1947, the CIA was virtually unaccounted for by any authority at the time . The CIA was created in 1947 and the CIA is now a secretive organization .
 President Truman and his successor, President Eisenhower, faced little congressional oversight . Truman and Eisenhower faced little oversight in the wake of the World War II .
 Eisenhower was skeptical about the role of civilians in clandestine paramilitary operations . As a career military general, he was skeptical of civilian involvement in clandestine operations .
 He was troubled by the fact that the Agency had a carte blanche “get out of jail free card” for anything it attempted . In addition, he was also concerned that the agency had an “all-clear” card’s ‘get out
 Truman’s 1948 National Security Council had so imbued the Agency with unchecked, absolute power, it threatened the entire foundation of America's constitutional premise . Truman's 1948 NSC was so powerful it threatened to threaten the foundation of the Constitution .
 That year the NSC approved what became known as “Top Secret Directive NSC 10/2,” a virtual bottomless pit of nefarious, illegal quicksand . The NSC approval of the directive was approved in 1996 .
 Dulles calling card was an uncanny expertise in overthrowing foreign governments, many of them democratically elected . During the 1950s, in the interests of promoting American economic growth and hegemony, the emerging Dulles called card was that he had expertise overthrowing governments .
 Eisenhower’s predecessor, President Harry Truman, had had his own confrontations with covert operations run by the Dulles cadre . Harry Truman had a own confrontation with the CIA .
 Iran, in 1951, had decided to nationalize its oil industry, which before had been controlled exclusively by Britain . Iran's oil industry had previously been controlled by Britain until 1951 .
 Winston Churchill implored Truman to order the CIA to join forces in MI6 and arrange a coup against the newly democratically elected Mosaddeq government in Iran in 1952 . Churchill had urged Truman to do so before he left office in 1952 to order a coup .
 A year after the overthrow of Mosaddeq, the CIA (again under Dulles’s tutelage) would take down the government in Guatemala . The CIA would take over the Guatemalan government in a year later .
 The Arbenz government’s “mortal sin” was land reform in its own country . It wanted to put a stop to private corporations like the United Fruit Company taking land away from the Guatemalan peasant population .
 Allen and his brother owned sizable stock in United Fruit . Allen Dulles served as a member of the company’s board of trustees . John Foster Dulles was Secretary of State of State .
 Under Dulles-CIA auspices, similar coups would occur in Hungary, North Vietnam, and Laos before the 1960 election . Similar coups also occurred in Hungary and North Vietnam .
 Allen Dulles wanted to take advantage of the new president’s CIA sympathies as quickly as possible . Dulles: "Allen Dulles was trying to get the CIA ready for the president's approval of the CIA"
 Jack and his brother Bobby agreed to keep Allen Dulles in place during their father's presidency . Jack and Bobby supported the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba run by Dulles protégé Richard Bissell .
 The CIA had been startled by Kennedy’s election; they weren’t prepared for it . The CIA was startled by the election; it was unprepared for it.
 Jack had pushed hard against the CIA and the Joint Chiefs for the goal of a neutral and independent Laos in Southeast Asia . The Bay of Pigs debacle was the result of a failed CIA operation in Vietnam .
 He wanted to end U.S. support of the country’s anti-Communist ruler, General Phoumi Nosavan . Nosavan had been installed by a joint CIA-Pentagon military force during the Eisenhower administration .
 The insistence of the new president wasn’t well received; it also foreshadowed a bigger event to come . The insistence on the president’s insistence was not well received .
 That April, the CIA launched the Cuban Bay of Pigs invasion, hoping to get rid of Fidel Castro and install a government more sympathetic to American business interests . The CIA wanted to regain possession of the lucrative casinos in Havana . The invasion was an attempt to oust Castro, install a more sympathetic
 Kennedy assassination would be a defining event in the Kennedy presidency and in Cold War history . It would become a defining moment in Kennedy's presidency and Cold War .
 A CIA-trained, equipped, and commanded Cuban-exile brigade was used to attempt the overthrow of Castro’s government . The brigade was trained by the CIA and used to try to overthrow the Castro government .
 Fidel Castro, along with the rest of the world’s leaders, including the Russians, knew the invasion was being launched, and who was really behind it . Almost laughably, Fidel Castro knew who was behind the invasion, and why it was launched .
 The invasion was originally conceived during the Eisenhower administration . The invasion had originally been conceived during Eisenhower administration.
 Its success would inevitably depend on American air support, although that detail had not been revealed to the president before the operation began .
 When the moment came, Jack realized he had been tricked by the Dulles inner circle, which had attempted to possibly play upon the president’s fear of appearing politically weak .
 Dulles believed Kennedy would cave in to political pressure, and thereby fall in line to make the operation a success . Dulles thought Kennedy would fall into line with political pressure to make it happen .
 Jack’s rectitude intervened; realizing he had been intentionally deceived, he called the operation to a halt . Jack was willing to suffer whatever political consequences might ensue .
 Years later, Supreme Court justice William O Douglas recalled a discussion he and the president had about the debacle . The president and Supreme Court Justice Douglas recalled the conversation .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco would turn out to be a harbinger of worse things to come . It would be the first time the U.S. government has tried to take control of the world's most powerful institutions .
 The Kennedy administration’s maiden voyage in foreign affairs, its shakedown cruise, was a rude awakening . It would begin to reveal the kind of ruthless treachery at work, says President Kennedy .
 Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell had their own plan of how to bring the U.S. into the conflict . It was that the CIA overlords of the invasion, director Allen Dulls and . deputy Richard . Bissell, director Dulls, had his own plan .
 It appears that they never really expected an uprising against Castro when the liberators landed as described in their memos to the White House . The White House memos were sent in the wake of the Cuban uprising .
 What they did expect was that the invaders would establish and secure a beachhead, announce the creation of a counterrevolutionary government and appeal for aid from the U.S. and the Organization of American States . The invaders did not expect that they would establish a beachfront, secure a
 The assumption was that President Kennedy, who had emphatically banned direct American involvement, would be forced by public opinion to come to the aid of the returning patriots . President Kennedy was strongly opposed to direct involvement .
 Unlike any president before him, President Kennedy took responsibility for what had happened . Unlike any other president, Kennedy was the only president to take responsibility for the tragedy .
 The American public forgave him, upsetting the well-established CIA protocol of manipulating presidents and political leaders . President Obama's decision to withdraw from the White House caused a stir in Washington .
 The entire upper echelon of the Agency, most of which had been recruited by Dulles, were loyal to him and would remain so . Dulles recruited the agency's top agents, including the CIA, to work for him .
 Kennedy replaced Dulles with John McCone, a wealthy Catholic businessman . McCone was largely just a figurehead, intentionally left out of the loop, not aware of the more egregious CIA covert operations .
 Allen Dulles would always be their boss, and they would consult him regularly after his formal departure . Dulles: "Allen Dulles is always the boss" Dulles will always be in charge of his staff .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco was a demarcation in the sand, author says . The event identified and determined the real forces that would work to undermine President Kennedy’s objectives .
 These forces were not the Soviets, or their puppet Fidel Castro, or the so-called falling dominoes of alleged Communist takeovers . Instead, they were the forces behind the fall of the Soviet Union and Castro .
 Global American hegemony was predicated on financial and political control, even if Communism was one way underdeveloped nations sometimes developed themselves . The U.S. was one of the world's most powerful nations .
 Financial and economic control became paramount, once political control had been established . Eventually, financial and economic . control of the world was paramount .
 The memoranda may not have changed anything, other than to incur the further wrath of CIA higher-ups . Ultimately, the memoranda did not change anything, but to incense the CIA .
 L Fletcher Prouty says the move shocked the entire national security apparatus . He says it was so bold that it shocked national security .
 Dulles' statement was just his own psychological projection . Little did Dulles understand his statement was a projection of his psychological state .
 It was Dulles himself who, for nearly twenty years, “thought he was a god,” as he and his CIA imperium pillaged the integrity of U.S. democracy . Dulles thought he was god, as he pillaged American democracy in the 1960s
 On July 20, 1961, during heightened tensions over Berlin, President Kennedy attended a National Security Council meeting . Kennedy attended the meeting at the height of tensions in Berlin .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff presented a plan for a first-strike, preemptive nuclear attack on the Soviet Union that would take place in late 1963 . Allen Dulles, who was still in charge at the CIA, presented the plan . A well-orchestrated series of events
 The scheme for “heightened tensions” was eventually codenamed “Operation Northwoods” It had the written approval of all the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon . Operation Northwoods was codename Northwoods .
 Author James Bamford first reported the plan in his bestselling book Body of Secrets . The plan called for called for shooting innocent people on U.S. streets, sinking refugees fleeing Cuba .
 People would be framed for bombings they did not commit; planes would be hijacked . People would have been framed for bombing they didn't commit, planes hijacked . Plane hijacking would be a major problem for the U.S. government .
 We need only to remember how President George W Bush—under the direction of Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld —took us into a war with Iraq under false pretenses . We need to remember that the Bush administration took us into war under false pretexts .
 How much Jack shared with Mary about what he was up against in the early days of his presidency will probably never be known . Mary’s diary during the last few years of her life becomes available .
 Jack regarded Mary as completely trustworthy; increasingly, he sought out her counsel . Jack regarded her as a trustworthy woman .
 Mary was already well acquainted with CIA skulduggery . Having had had a life with Cord, she was already familiar with the CIA . Mary is now married to Cord .
 Throughout his most critical moments during his presidency, Mary invariably found her way to his side, and always by invitation . "Mary" was always at the center of his presidency .
 October 1962 was a critical month for the U.S. government . The events occurred during the month of October, 1962 .
 Thirteen days would change everything, eventually inviting the highest of hopes, but not before a confrontation that portended nuclear annihilation . The U.S. and North Korea were at odds for 13 days .
 Only a true nautical seafarer understood how quickly conditions at sea could change . Whether it was the fog of economic uncertainty or covert operations, only a true seafarer knew how quickly it could change.
 A ready, unentangled anchor might well save the day, or until it looked as if the fog might be lifting . The appearance of the fog sometimes turned out to be a mirage . A ready anchor might help .
 It is important to do this because it breaks down human self-delusion and isolation, says Dr. Andrew Keen . Keen: "It's important for us to be open to the idea of self-confession and isolation"
 It is important to do this because in so doing we do justice to our own complexity, says the author of the book .
 All wars are civil wars, because all men are brothers, says Adrienne Rich . It is important to do this because we can count on so few people to go that hard way with us, she says .
 Mary Meyer was invited to the White House for a small, impromptu dinner party that had been hastily organized by Jackie . Ram Dass: "You believe in redemption, don’t you?"
 The guest list included Jackie’s sister, Lee Radziwill, friends Benno and Nicole Graziani, and the dress designer, Oleg Cassini .
 Mary’s escort for the evening was to be her friend and fellow artist William Walton . Walton, a longtime friend of both Jack and Bobby Kennedy, had already functioned as Mary's partner at previous White House social gatherings . Walton was a longtime friends of the Kennedy family .
 Jack had wanted Mary to be in close proximity that night . Why Mary had inexplicably canceled the engagement remained a mystery, but the fact that Jack wanted her there was noteworthy .
 Earlier that evening, before the dinner, Jack had addressed the nation on national television . Earlier that night, before that dinner, he had spoken to the nation .
 Six days earlier, he had seen detailed photographs from a clandestine U-2 reconnaissance flight that showed a secret offensive buildup of Soviet missile sites under construction on the island of Cuba .
 With no resolution in sight after six days, the president informed the public of the emerging crisis . The crisis has lasted six days and has not been resolved .
 Behind closed doors, the president and his most senior advisers sought peaceful ways to resolve the impasse . The Joint Chiefs of Staff resisted them, but the president sought peaceful solutions .
 Both wanted to exploit the crisis to invade Cuba to get rid of Fidel Castro . Even went so far as to plan a preemptive nuclear strike on Russia .
 Secretly, against the president’s orders, the U.S. military and the CIA would engage in a number of activities to undermine and sabotage the possibility of a negotiated settlement . The American military and CIA would try to undermine or sabotage a deal .
 President Kennedy ordered a U.S. naval blockade of the entire island of Cuba . President Kennedy and his advisers ordered a United States naval blockade . The blockade was ordered by the President of the Cuban government .
 Its purpose was to deter any further weapons and supplies from reaching the missile sites under construction . The missile sites were under construction in the region .
 The Cold War hard-liners dismissed it as another “appeasement at Munich,” wanting still to ignite a major conflagration . Cold War Hardliners, however, dismissed the move as another attempt to appease the West, saying it was a mistake .
 Masterful diplomatic pressure prevailed after nearly two weeks of diplomatic pressure . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his actions .
 The eventual removal of the Soviet missiles took place without having to bomb or invade Cuba . The Soviet missiles were removed from Cuba without the need to be bombed or invaded .
 It wasn't just another international political turf war between competing superpowers vying for control . It wasn’t just another . It was an international . political . turf war . But it was a war of international political . power .
 The entire future of humanity itself was hanging in the balance for thirteen days . Nuclear holocaust was on the horizon. The entire world was on its own footing .
 It was, as author James Douglass rightly tagged it, “the most dangerous moment in human history,” as well as possibly the most dramatic event of the entire Cold War . The most dramatic moment of the Cold War was likely to be remembered as the most dangerous event in
 Had it not been for some ingenious back-channel communications and negotiations, the entire planet might well have become uninhabitable . The entire planet may well have been uninhabited .
 Jack had wanted Mary in his presence on the evening he alerted the nation to the accelerating calamity . Jack's reliance on Mary's counsel suggests a reliance on her counsel, she says . Jack had been in her presence at the time .
 Mary’s longtime commitment to world peace, coupled with Jack's broadening insight that peace, not armed conflict, was the right path forward, she says . Mary's commitment to peace made her an important asset, Jack's "an important asset," she writes .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev had been engaged in secret correspondence that had begun several months after their June 1961 Vienna summit .
 The letter invited a deeper understanding between the two leaders and their countries . The letter invites the leaders to an understanding between them and each other .
 At Vienna, Khrushchev had sounded a decidedly different note, touting nuclear war as an option to which he would turn if necessary . At Vienna he said he'd turn nuclear war into an option if necessary, but not necessarily a war .
 In reality, the Soviet leader was exploiting Kennedy’s embarrassment and weakened position since the attempted Bay of Pigs failure . Kennedy was humiliated by the failure of the attempt to capture the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev later admitted that in the run-up to the Vienna summit, Soviet hardliners had pushed him to grandstand . Khrushche admitted that he had been pushed by hardliners to stand out .
 The whole world hopefully expected that our meeting would have a soothing effect, would turn relations between our countries into the correct channel and promote the adoption of decisions which could give the peoples confidence that peace on earth will be secured .
 The Soviet premier compared the state of Cold War tensions with “Noah’s Ark where both the ‘clean’ and ‘unclean” found sanctuary . The state of the Cold War was likened to Noah's Ark .
 The 'clean' list does not list who is considered to be ‘unclean’ and who’s not . But regardless of who lists himself with the ‘clean” list, they are all equally interested in continuing the cruise .
 Both leaders were adamant about their commitment to peaceful coexistence . Both leaders are adamant about the commitment to peace .
 Mutual goodwill and hopeful intentions, however, proved no match for the progression of realworld events .
 For his part, Khrushchev felt betrayed when he learned of the U.S. military’s aggressive planning and lobbying throughout the spring of 1962 for a second invasion of Cuba, this time by overwhelming United States forces .
 At the Vienna summit in June 1961, Khrushchev had told the president he was ‘very grieved’ by the attack on Cuba at the Bay of Pigs had taken place . At the same time, he had said he was very grieved by the fact’s
 The Pentagon pushed aggressively during the first days of the crisis for an immediate surprise-bombing campaign against the Soviet missile sites in Cuba . The CIA estimated the medium-range nuclear-tipped missiles were not yet operational .
 Pentagon recommendations that a full-scale U.S. invasion follow the air strikes . This was later followed, within a matter of days, by Pentagon recommendations .
 The Russians had more than forty thousand troops in Cuba who were prepared to fight an American invasion . What their intelligence had not revealed, however, was that the Russians had 40,000 troops .
 Had we attacked Cuba and invaded Cuba at the time, we almost surely would have been involved in nuclear war . Had we ... attacked Cuba, we would have had to go to war with the U.S.
 President Obama: "It would not have been the United States alone. And when I say ‘we,” I mean you,’ It would not be the U.S. alone," he said .
 During the crisis, both the U.S. military and the CIA were secretly operating unilaterally . They were doing whatever they could to intensify tensions that would ignite a war . The CIA was doing whatever it could to keep tensions from escalating .
 On October 28, the Air Force launched an unarmed intercontinental ballistic missile from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California . The missile was destined for the Marshall Islands in the Pacific .
 That the president had not ordered the test further aggravated tensions with his own military . The president's refusal to order the test has further strained relations with the US military .
 This open-threat display was intended to provoke the USR into responses that would justify a preemptive nuclear first strike by the U.S. U.N. forces . This open threat display was meant to provoke USR .
 The CIA was operating independently, in contravention of the president’s order . Also in the midst of this, the CIA was working independently, the president said .
 Three commando teams of sixty men each were sent into Cuba to destabilize the country in preparation for an invasion . Under the command of the CIA’s William K Harvey, three commando squads of 60 men were sent in Cuba .
 The Agency continued these operations in spite of Kennedy’s order that such destabilization efforts immediately cease and desist . Kennedy ordered the Agency to cease these operations immediately .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles from Cuba, and Kennedy agreed that the U.S. would not invade the island . Kennedy agreed to pull missiles from the island, and the United States did not invade it .
 Kennedy promised the removal of United States missiles in Turkey . Secretly, Kennedy also promised to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey .
 The American military establishment was furious with the negotiated compromise, while Kennedy’s opinion of the military establishment hit an all-time low . Kennedy was angered by the compromise, and his opinion of military establishment at an all time low .
 She and Jack may also have spent some time alone, though it's not known whether they would have done so at Joe Alsop's house or Mary's . It's unknown whether the couple would have spent so much time together at Joe and Mary's houses .
 Jack’s health had taken a huge toll on his health . However, “the most dangerous moment in human history” had taken toll on Jack . ‘Most dangerous moment’ had taken ‘a huge toll’ on Jack, Jack .
 With increased infusions of cortisone to combat stress during the crisis, many of his gastrointestinal symptoms reappeared and became more acute, as did his recurrent back pains . He also suffered from back pain and back pain .
 Carrying the weight of the world and future of humanity for 13 days would have easily crushed anyone . Carried the weight for 13 years would have crushed anyone, he says .
 Russian President Nikita Khrushchev and his counterpart, Vladimir Putin, would soon realize that opportunity was on the horizon .
 "Evil was very much alive, stalking not only the republic, but the president," says President Obama . But in the shadows, evil was still alive, says Obama .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff were enraged that Cuba had not been attacked . They were also indignant that Kennedy had made concessions to Khrushchev .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961 had already humiliated the military-intelligence establishment . The military had been humiliated by the debacle .
 Before its end, 1963 would become a defining year for America, and would be forever remembered for one earthshaking moment . 1963 would be the year of the greatest year in American history . 1963 was one of the most defining years in the history of America .
 The year began with an unobtrusive earthquake of sorts, not even noticeable except to a handful of insider journalists who at the time honored a “lemen’s agreement’ not to reveal presidential indiscretions .
 What seemed at first an insignificant event turned out to foreshadow an invisible tsunami, slowly making its way toward destruction . And so, in January of that year, what seemed to be insignificant .
 The augury would involve Washington Post publisher and owner Philip L Graham . D.C. Post would be involved in the decision .
 During World War II, Philip L Graham had trained as an Army intelligence officer . Graham trained as a British intelligence officer during the war . Graham was a member of the British Army Intelligence Service .
 His acumen quickly elevated him to a position close to General Douglas MacArthur in the Pacific theater . He was a close ally to MacArthur in his Pacific war .
 Phil Graham made connections that would assist him for the rest of his life, including those of Allen Dulles, Frank Wisner, Richard Helms, Cord Meyer, and Desmond FitzGerald . Graham also made connections with all of the CIA’s seminal, well-to-
 Philip and his wife, Katharine, were accustomed to mingling with CIA heavyweights in Washington . Philip and Katharine often gather for an extended cocktail hour before a potluck supper salon .
 Eugene Meyer had nursed the floundering newspaper ever since he bought it at auction in 1933 . Eugene Meyer bought the paper in 1933 and bought it for $1.5 million . Meyer bought it in 1933, and it was the first newspaper he bought . Meyer was forced to sell
 In 1946, he made his thirty-year-old son-in-law, Philip, the editor in chief and owner of the magazine . Philip was his son in-law and editor in-chief at the time .
 Phil was certifiably brilliant, but also manic-depressive . Phil had earned some of the highest grades ever given at Harvard .
 During the 1950s, the CIA initiated Operation Mockingbird, a project designed to influence the American media to slant news stories favoring the CIA’s agenda or point of view, particularly those having to do with international events and foreign policy . The project was a project to influence
 Wisner successfully “recruited’s a number of prominent journalists to the CIA, including Phil Graham, who soon helped run Mockingbird within mainstream media outlets . Wisner's friend Phil Graham helped set up the CIA .
 By late 1962, President Kennedy had appointed Phil Graham head of COMSAT, the new organization that operated America’s communication satellites . President Kennedy also appointed Graham to head the organization that controlled America's communication satellites.
 The position allowed Graham to access certain classified operations, including the CIA’s secret satellite surveillance system . The CORONA program provided aerial reconnaissance of the Soviet Union, China, most of Southeast Asia and the Middle East .
 By 1962, Philip and Katharine Graham’s marriage had come apart and was in freefall . The couple's marriage was at an all-time high . Katharine and Philip were married in 1962 .
 Estranged from Katharine, drinking heavily amid manic-depressive episodes, Phil and his new mistress, Newsweek reporter Robin Webb, were living together and hosting dinner parties for Washington’s social elite .
 According to some accounts, they had been known to philander together as a team . Some accounts say they were known to have philandered together .
 Phil and Katharine Graham became aware of President Kennedy’s affair with Mary Meyer . President Kennedy was married to Mary Meyer in 1963 .
 In mid-January 1963, Phil and Robin Webb flew to Phoenix on the Post’s chartered jet . Robin Webb and Phil Webb were the first couple to fly to Phoenix .
 Graham intruded on dinner at the midwinter meeting of the Associated Press board of directors at the Arizona Biltmore Hotel . Graham was intoxicated at the time of the incident .
 Phil proceeded to ask if he could address the audience, which he became unhinged . Phil then became so angry that he asked to address the crowd .
 Deborah Davis claimed in 1979 that Graham had told a crowd that he was going to reveal who was sleeping with whom in Washington, beginning with President Kennedy . But it was author Deborah Davis who, in 1979, first claimed Graham had said that .
 Davis then claimed that someone at the dinner who witnessed Graham’s outburst called President Kennedy at the White House to alert him . Davis claimed that the incident happened at a White House dinner in 1963 .
 James Truitt was at Katharine Graham’s house when a call came in for her, allegedly from President Kennedy himself . This information allegedly came from Truitt, who was at Graham's house when the call was allegedly from Kennedy .
 Katharine at that very moment was meeting with Post executives at her home . Katharine had been meeting with them at her New York home at the time of the meeting .
 They began strategizing how to bring Phil back “forcibly” and commit him to a psychiatric hospital . Phil is being held in psychiatric hospital, officials say . Phil has been in the hospital since 2008 .
 Truitt apparently got on the phone with Kennedy and asked him to send Phil’s doctor, Dr. Dr. Phil, to the hospital . According to Truitt, Truitt asked Kennedy to send the doctor to the doctor .
 There has been some controversy as to whether Phil Graham’s “meltdown” that January had actually included his blurting out the fact of Mary and Jack's affair . Over the years, some have speculated that Graham blurted out the affair .
 Paul Pioneer Press nor Los Angeles Times publisher Otis Chandler remembered any such utterances about Mary Meyer by Graham .
 Shover also remembered Phil had been on a tirade against many members of the press that evening, but could not recall him talking about President Kennedy or Mary Meyer . Shover: "I remember Phil on tirade"
 Ben Bradlee, who was not present at the Phoenix episode, has always maintained he never heard anything about Phil Graham mentioning the affair between Mary and Jack .
 Anne Truitt also went on record, saying, “James would have told me if Phil had mentioned Mary’s name,” Truitt said .
 Katharine Graham’s own secondhand account of the event in her 1998 book Personal History was superficial and misleading . Unfortunately, Katharine . Graham's own . account of events in the 1990s was superficial, misleading and misleading.
 She and her “pit bull entourage” tried to stop the Felsenthal publication . She tried to . stop the . publication .
 Felsenthal recalled “receiving pages of complaints from Kay’s lawyers,” hoping their intimidation might thwart her efforts to publish . She said she received “pages of complaints” from lawyers, hoping they would thwart publication .
 "They knew she was going to fight it, so they eventually just disappeared," she said . "They just disappeared. They knew she would fight it"
 Carol Felsenthal made sure that her book was not only thoroughly and meticulously researched, but completely scrutinized as well . Not wanting to fall into the same pit as Deborah Davis, she made sure she didn't fall into a similar pit as Davis .
 In 1993, the author's book was serialized in Vanity Fair, known for its rigorous fact checking .
 Phil Graham had been forcibly sedated, taken by ambulance to the airport, and flown back to Washington from Phoenix on the day following his outburst . Graham was never disputed, however, the fact that he had been taken back to the U.S. from Phoenix .
 Phil’s mistress, Robin Webb, called the White House at 6:18 pm. The following day, January 18, the following day . Robin Webb called Phil's mistress, the next day, at 6.18pm .
 Phil may have realized he might have been able to leave a university hospital more easily than a private psychiatric hospital . Katharine may have become aware that Katharine had obtained a court order committing him to Chestnut Lodge .
 The Agency needed psychiatric facilities to deal with “indiscreet’s” employees, who possessed or had access to high-level classified information, who were either “cracking up” or otherwise not conforming to established security protocols .
 Phil remained at Chestnut Lodge for approximately two weeks under the care of Dr. Phil . He remained at the lodge for about two weeks before he died .
 Katharine was both devastated and humiliated by the course of events, but determined to prevent the Post from falling into Phil’s control and ownership, even if it meant she had to have Phil declared insane .
 Contemplation of such a diabolical deed as the overthrow of an American president would need the kind of trustworthy tentacles that could stretch deep into the grinding wheels of the media establishments .
 Mary Meyer signed into the White House using her own name 11 days after the Phoenix incident . Meyer was arrested in Phoenix, Arizona, on January 28 . Meyer's arrest came just days after she was charged with trespassing .
 Jackie was away at her rented hideaway, Glen Ora, decorating the family’s new Wexford estate, when she became aware of the affair . She was away from the family's new estate when the affair took place .
 By 1963, Mary had become a fixture in the president’s life . She was as close a confidante as he was capable of having .
 On March 8, 1963, the Kennedys hosted their sixth and last White House dinner dance . It was the last dinner dance to be held at the White House .
 Mary attended on the arm of Blair Clark, an old friend of Jack’s from Harvard, from Harvard . Mary attended the event with Blair Clark .
 She had been upstairs with Jack and then had gone walking out in the snow . She had gone out with him upstairs with her and then went walking out .
 The bottom of Mary’s dress was muddy and wet, indicating that she had been walking outside . Mary's dress was wet and muddy, indicating she had walked outside .
 She later told her friend Anne Truitt that she had become ‘unhappy’ and taken a walk . She later said she was ‘unsatisfied’ with her life and took a break .
 Jackie told her dinner partner, Adlai Stevenson, “I don’t care how many girls as long as I know he knows it’s wrong, and I think he does now,” she said .
 She told him, "I first loved you when I met Stevenson in Illinois shortly after she and Jack were married"
 The couple split from each other that night, but it's not clear whether it was real or not . The couple later split up, but the separation didn't last long .
 On May 29, Mary would attend the president’s forty-sixth birthday party on the presidential yacht Sequoia . Mary would be attending the birthday party .
 President Kennedy’s future trip to Dallas, Texas, was discussed privately between himself, Vice President Johnson, and his chief aide, Kenny O’Donnell, in April 1963 . O'Donnell was Kenny's chief aide .
 On April 23, Johnson announced plans for Kennedy’s trip to Dallas during a luncheon speech to Texas newspaper and radio station executives .
 In 1963, he was assigned officially as a “Washington Police Inspector,” though he was also secretly working for the Justice Department and was a liaison to the CIA . He had risen up through the ranks through the Metropolitan Police Department beginning in the early 1930s .
 Shimon Shimon had established a reputation for discretion in service to various presidents . Shimon's reputation for his service in the U.S. has been described as 'extraordinary'
 He had won the confidence not only of President Franklin Roosevelt, but his successors as well . President Roosevelt, as well as his successors, he said . He said: "He was a hero of the day"
 The two were known to have taken numerous walks together on the White House grounds .
 During the 1963 Easter weekend, Shimon and his daughter Toni were walking near Shimon’s North Stafford Street home in Arlington, Virginia, when he revealed something to his daughter that would come back to haunt her . Shimon said something to Toni would haunt her in the
 Toni began to feel a sense of foreboding, suspecting she would soon be missing her father’s company again .
 There was something ominous in her father’s voice, she remembered feeling . She remembered feeling ominous in father's voice .
 Her father responded, wanting to see if she understood and connected the dots . Her father wanted to see her connect the dots, but she didn't .
 Toni would remember that moment and the darkness that had come over her that day . She would never forget that moment, and she would remember it forever .
 She reportedly alluded to Phil Graham’s outburst in Arizona earlier that year . Without mentioning any names, she reportedly alluded .
 They also discussed the state of world affairs, with Mary telling him, “America doesn’t have to be run by these cold-war guys.” Mary told him that America doesn't have to run by the cold war guys.
 Leary invited Mary to Mexico for further training in leading psychedelic sessions . Mary was invited to Mexico by Leary for further psychedelic training sessions .
 She no longer trusted the phones or the mail, she told him, but said she would find a way to stay in touch with him . She told him she no longer trusts the phone or mail, but that she would keep in touch, he said .
 Leary was fired for failing to show up and teach some of his classes that spring . Leary had been given hallucinogens by students, not for giving them hallucinogenic drugs, but for not showing up for class . Lear was fired in May 1963 .
 "I was never able to commit myself to the game of Harvard or even to rehab," he says . He says he's never committed himself to Harvard or rehabilitation .
 Nothing that doesn’t ring true to my ancient cell wisdom and to that central vibration beam within can hold my attention for very long . ‘I’m not sure what’s true,’ says the author .
 From the date of this session, it was inevitable that we would leave Harvard, that we . would leave American society, and that . we would spend the rest of our lives as mutants, faithfully following the instructions of our internal blueprints, and . disregarding the parochial social
 Mary and Jack had shared a "mild LSD trip" at Joe Alsop’s home in Georgetown in May 1963 . According to author Leo Damore, it was corroborating evidence of a ‘mild trip’ that Mary, Jack and Joe shared at Joe
 Sometime after Damore’s November 1990 interview with Timothy Leary, it appeared that Damore learned of this event . Damore later learned of Leary's interview with Leary .
 Timothy Leary was well known to be an obsessive pack rat who never threw away anything . Leary never threw anything away from his possessions . He was known for his pack rat tendencies .
 Leary’s hoarding of his papers, letters, any kind of communication whatsoever, was legendary . According to his biographer, Robert Greenfield, Leary was legendary. Leary's hoarding was legendary, Greenfield says .
 His newfound political trajectory would eventually distance him from Cold War ideology and move him closer to setting the stage for world peace . He would later distance himself from ideology and set up world peace.
 For years, Kennedy had been quietly nurturing the notion of disarmament . Kennedy had quietly nurtured the idea of a disarmament program .
 Twice burned by both the military and the CIA, Kennedy’s independence became clear . Kennedy was burned twice by both military and CIA, and his independence was clear .
 He was determined to forge a path toward setting the world stage for peace, he said . He said he wanted to set the stage for world peace . He died at the age of 92 .
 President Kennedy seemed pessimistic about the possibility of a nuclear arms treaty . Yet despite ongoing secret negotiations with Prime Minister Harold Macmillan of Great Britain and Khrushchev in the early part of 1963, President Kennedy was pessimistic about a treaty .
 We have tried to get an agreement on all the rest of it and then to the question of the number of inspections, but we were unable to get that . We have also been unable to agree on the issue of inspections and inspections .
 Whatever transpired during the latter half of May remains unknown, but something somewhere seems to have made a significant impact .
 Kennedy wanted the entire world to believe in the possibility of peace . Kennedy wanted to make peace a reality for everyone .
 "If some part of his transformation was catalyzed by a horizon-altering psychedelic excursion with Mary Meyer, then so be it," he says .
 He wouldn’t have been the first iconic figure in human history to partake, nor would he be the last . He’s not the first person to partake in the drink .
 Francis Crick, the Nobel laureate and progenitor of modern genetics, reportedly was under the influence of LSD when he first deciphered the doublehelix structure of DNA sixty years ago .
 Before his death in 2004, he told a colleague that he had often used small doses of LSD to boost his powers of thought .
 Bill Wilson, founder of Alcoholics Anonymous, was first introduced to LSD in 1956 by Aldous Huxley, author of Brave New World and The Doors of Perception . He was introduced to the drug by the psychedelic pioneer in 1956 . Wilson was the first person to introduce LSD to him
 He emerged completely enthusiastic about the experience, believing that the drug was a kind of “miracle substance” that had the potential to facilitate a deeper spiritual connection with life .
 The longawaited resurgence in psychedelic research has finally resumed . No longer regarded as just a passing fad of the 1960s counterculture, psychedelic research is now back on track .
 U.S.-government-sponsored studies with the hallucinogen psilocybin have repeatedly demonstrated that subjects who volunteered for this opportunity came to regard their experience as one of the most meaningful, spiritually significant events in their lives .
 The experience of ordinary people in this kind of research has resembled those recorded in the annals of mystical traditions . The experience has been described as 'miracle' by the author .
 Roland Griffiths at Johns Hopkins now entertains the idea that the human brain may, in fact, be “hardwired” to undergo these kinds of “unitive” experiences .
 In any case, even a minimal dose of a psychedelic like LSD or psilocybin could have chemically catalyzed the opening of Jack’s “hardwired” capacity for a “unitive” state of consciousness .
 It would have further set up the insights already taking hold in the president for an entirely new political trajectory, away from the Cold War . The president would have been able to set up a new national security policy .
 The speech was perhaps the most visionary, spiritual clarion call of awakening ever put forth across the divide of all nation-states, and mankind . This, despite the fact that the speech was . perhaps the . most visionary and spiritual call . of awakening, it was perhaps . the most
 His emerging vision of peace for the planet was no less important than his vision for his country, for in the ‘unitive state of consciousness, we are all one,’ he writes .
 The president challenged the notion that if only the Soviets would “adopt a more enlightened attitude,” there would be peace, he said . Unwilling to let his own countrymen off the hook, the president then challenged the idea that the Soviets should adopt a "more
 It leads to the conclusion that war is inevitable, that mankind is doomed, that we are gripped by forces we cannot control . War is inevitable—that mankind was doomed, says the author of the book .
 Genuine peace must be the product of many nations, the sum of many acts, says President Obama . "Genuine peace" must be made up of "many nations," says Obama .
 This dramatic oration was as much for the Russian people as it was for America . Encouraging all Americans to “reexamine our attitude towards the Soviet Union,” this dramatic speech was as well for the Russians as for America.
 Today, should total war ever break out again, our two countries would become the primary targets . The U.S. and Russia would be primary targets in the fight against each other .
 It is an ironic but accurate fact that the two strongest powers are the two in the most danger of devastation . The two strongest countries are in danger of devastating damage .
 Among the many traits the peoples of our two countries have in common, none is stronger than our mutual abhorrence of war, writes President Obama .
 Almost unique, among the major world powers, we have never been at war with each other . Almost unique is that among the world's major powers, the U.S. has never fought against each other.
 No nation in the history of battle ever suffered more than the Soviet Union suffered in the course of the Second World War .
 Cord Meyer's vision had been, in 1945, in a postwar world struggling for peace . That had been the sanguine vision of Cord Meyer in 1945 . Meyer: "That had been in 1945. It was in 1945."
 Jack Kennedy would finally articulate the inspiration that would echo into eternity . But it would be his archrival Jack Kennedy who would articulate his inspiration .
 The president also announced his intention to establish a telephone hotline between the Soviet premier’s office and the White House . The hotline would be set up between the two countries .
 Such a declaration is no substitute for a formal binding treaty, but I hope it will help us achieve one . The declaration will not be a binding treaty but it will be a good step towards a treaty, he says .
 While we proceed to safeguard our national interests, let us also safeguard human interests . Let's also safeguard our human interests. Let's not only safeguard our interests, but also safeguard those of us .
 Khrushchev immediately ordered that it be rebroadcast throughout every city in the Soviet Union, an unprecedented event . Khrushchevitch ordered that the broadcast of the event was rebroadcasts throughout the country . The Soviet Union was the only country in the world to receive the broadcast
 On the occasion of the national holiday of the United States of America, we send to you and the American people our warm congratulations and best wishes for peace and prosperity .
 In the age of harnessing atomic energy and penetration into the depths of the universe, the preservation of peace has become in truth a vital necessity for all mankind . In our times, harnessing nuclear power and penetration of the world's deepest depths, peace must be preserved .
 The treaty would be drafted and ratified by the end of the first year . Equally groundbreaking was the speed with which the treaty would have been drafted .
 President Kennedy had asked W Averell Harriman to lead the American team, but it was the president himself who prepared them . The president made sure they understood the critical importance of what was about to occur .
 Once Harriman arrived in Moscow on July 14, Kennedy would be in contact with him three and four times a day . Kennedy would stay in touch with him until he was in Moscow .
 He well knew such a treaty would never occur had he worked through the national security channels of the CIA and the Pentagon, he says . He says he well knew it would never happen .
 The achievement of this goal is not a victory for one side, it is for mankind, says President Obama . But the achievement is not an achievement of one side -- it is a triumph for mankind .
 Just before 8:00 PM., “at the next to last minute,” with Jackie away at Camp David, decided to stop by Joe Alsop’s house in Georgetown .
 Jack was “in a gay mood” that early June evening, Joe Alsop said . Mary herself must have been ablaze, and not just because flowers everywhere were coaxing her smile .
 Her mission had become illuminated into her mosaic . A subliminal ‘peace song’ had just premiered for all mankind earlier that day . The emerging, though still faint, melody was just a faint, faint melody . Her mission was illuminated into a mosaic .
 During cocktails in the garden, Mary sat with Jack on one side and Ambassador William Attwood, her former prep school and college beau, on the other .
 In this address, Kennedy revealed the same compassion, warmth, and sensitivity that had been on display a day earlier . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sorry for it."
 He underscored and illuminated that there was a direct link between political equality and freedom and the attainment of world peace . He said that there is a link between freedom and political equality .
 Medgar Evers, a prominent leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, was shot and killed in his driveway in front of his family . Byron De La Beckwith, a white supremacist, killed Evers just after midnight .
 Mary Meyer called Evelyn Lincoln, the president’s personal secretary, at the White House and was transferred to Jack. Lincoln . Mary Meyer died June 12 at the age of 92 .
 Two nights later, with Jackie at Camp David, Mary returned unescorted to the White House residence .
 On June 26, more than a million and a half people in West Berlin’s Rudolph Wilde Platz, adjacent to the Brandenburg Gate, turned out to welcome the American president .
 Kennedy spoke directly to what the people of a divided Germany wanted to hear . Kennedy spoke to what people of divided Germany want to hear. Kennedy said: "I'm not a politician but I'm a humanist."
 Jackie had retreated to Hyannis Port for the summer with her two children . Seven months pregnant, Jackie was seven months pregnant when she arrived .
 Sometime in late June, Mary had reportedly returned to Boston and met Timothy Leary at a seafood restaurant . Mary reportedly met Leary in a downtown seafood restaurant at the time .
 Leary's account: She chided him in a playful manner for having attracted too much publicity in Mexico . Leary: "She chided me for attracting too much attention in Mexico" Leary’s account: ‘She told him that she wanted him to be careful
 Mary wouldn't reveal who these ‘important people’ were; she was always tight-lipped and discreet . Mary wouldn’t reveal who she was with, but she was very secretive .
 Given the timeline, however, it appeared to be another reference to the fact that she and Jack had recently shared a psychedelic experience together .
 There was an allusion to someone else, someone other than Jack, and part of the group of “important people,” which will be discussed shortly .
 Leo Damore and Timothy Leary reached a similar conclusion about the identity of this person . Years later, during their 1990 interview, both Leo Damores and Leary concluded that this person was the person they believed .
 At the end of June, Washington Post owner-editor Philip Graham had finally broken off his affair with Robin Webb . Graham had returned to Chestnut Lodge Sanitarium .
 By all accounts, he had been making solid progress when he left Chestnut Lodge on a weekend pass to visit Katharine at their Glen Welby estate in Virginia .
 Phil Graham was found dead with a small-bore shotgun wound to the head, an apparent suicide . Within hours, Phil Graham had been found dead . Graham was a father-of-three .
 There were conflicting accounts of Graham’s death, just as there had been about his alleged behavior in Phoenix . Graham was found dead at the scene of his death in 2010 .
 Author David Halberstam: Everyone thought Phil was getting better, and that was why he had been permitted to leave on the weekend . Author: Everyone he talked to said Phil had been “getting better; everyone thought he was getting worse .
 Phil and Katharine "spent some time together, and then Katharine took a nap," says Deborah Davis . Deborah Davis: Katharine was a good friend of Phil and his wife .
 Only a few minutes later, there was the ear-splitting noise of a gun going off indoors . The gun went off inside the home of the suspect, a police officer says .
 Suicide would nullify the revisions to his will that he had made throughout 1963, cutting out Katharine . Yet suicide would not nullify his revised will, cutting Katharine out of his will .
 Katharine, after Phil’s death, walked away with complete control of the Washington Post and everything else . Katharine walked away from Phil after Phil's death .
 Deborah Davis’s Katharine the Great, the author never wavered from the view that Phil's death was a suicide . The author of the three editions of the book has maintained that Phil was murdered by suicide .
 A previously undisclosed piece of this puzzle was previously undisclosed . But it coincided with another previously unknown piece of the puzzle . It coincided with the discovery of a previously undisclosed part of the story .
 Barbara Smith was a young black woman attorney by the name of Barbara L Smith in 1963 . Barbara Smith had been working in her office in 1963, says Dovey Roundtree . Katharine Graham was a prominent advocate for women's rights .
 Dovey and her young colleague Barbara had become quite close, she told Damore . Barbara was the granddaughter of William Wadsworth Smith, the caretaker of the Graham’s Glen Welby estate . When her grandfather died, she asked Dovey to speak at his funeral .
 Graham gave Roundtree the gift to him when he was a younger person, Damore said . Roundtree recounted Roundtree's story to Damore .
 Katharine Graham and one of her sons attended William's funeral, and Katharine had also spoken . William's widow Katharine also spoke at his funeral .
 Dovey Roundtree confided to Damore that, according to Barbara, Mrs. Roundtree was not the same thing as Mrs. Barbara . Damore said, "According to Barbara," Mrs. roundtree was the mother of the children .
 Graham called on Barbara’s grandfather “to go upstairs and bring this man downstairs.” Graham had called on his grandfather to bring the man downstairs . Graham called for Barbara's grandfather to “bring this man down”
 There was never a shred of physical evidence that anyone other than Phil had pulled the trigger, questions lingered . Phil was found dead at the scene of his wife's murder .
 Corson was never ‘officially’ employed by the CIA, but he often worked closely with Jim Angleton and Robert Crowley . Corson often worked with Angleton, Crowley and Angleton in the Agency’s covert action directorate .
 By the early 1960s, the Technical Services Staff within the CIA, headed by the infamous Dr. Dr. Martin, was responsible for the CIA's success . The CIA's technical services staff were responsible for some of the most successful CIA operations in the world .
 Sidney Gottlieb had a huge arsenal of drugs and other substances that could be clandestinely administered to unwitting victims to create such states as suicidal depression, brain tumors, cancer, or death from natural causes, leaving no trace of any foreign toxin .
 Under congressional scrutiny in 1975, CIA director William Colby openly exhibited a CIA-manufactured pistol equipped with undetectable poison darts . When silently fired ‘without perception” at its intended human target, the darts would induce a fatal heart attack .
 Colby's sham exhibition was just the tip of the iceberg of the CIA arsenal . Colby’s sham exhibition shows the extent of CIA's CIA efforts to cover the CIA .
 The Agency spent untold millions to find and develop drugs and other methods, both conventional and esoteric, to bring people under various states of control . The agency spent untold . millions of dollars to find drugs and develop other methods .
 The CIA was interested in all the ramifications of “mind control’s” influence . The Agency wanted to alter, erase, or even remade, a subject’�s mind in whatever direction the Agency wanted .
 Mind "erasure" was of paramount importance for CIA personnel who were no longer mentally stable, and at risk of revealing classified information . Mind “erasure” was of utmost importance for . CIA personnel with no mental stability .
 Another long-standing CIA obsession was to create a “Manchurian candidate’s” project involving the use of hypnosis, drugs, deprivation, or other means as a way to tur an individual into a programmable assassin .
 Phil’s overall prognosis and recovery seemed to have improved by the summer of 1963 . However, his long-term stability remained uncertain . Phil's recovery was still uncertain .
 Sometime after the 1961 Bay of Pigs fiasco, Phil had reportedly had an “acute manic-depressive incident” He had talked openly of “the CIA’s manipulation of journalists” and how they were being used to promote whatever slant the Agency wanted
 Katharine reverted to the policies Phil had set up before his 1961 disenchantment . Katharine returned to her husband's policies . Phil's policies remain in place until his death .
 There are some things the general public does not need to know and shouldn't . There are things you don't need to be told about .
 In June, with Katharine’s support, he had voluntarily returned to Chestnut Lodge .
 Those who visited Phil spoke of his increasingly stable disposition, of his coming to terms with his illness and making a recovery . Well into July, those who visited him all spoke of an increasingly stable mood .
 The risk may well have been that wealthy, powerful media mogul Phil Graham was no longer willing to toe the party line, that he could no longer be counted on to turn a blind eye .
 An excruciating, earthshattering moment in American history was about to explode in three months’ time . An excruciatingly, earth-shattering event in U.S. history was due to explode three months ago .
 A well-planned, well-executed conspiracy to take out a sitting U.S. president had to be successful, and immediately, orchestrated in the aftermath of the attack . A cover-up would have to be successfully and immediately orchestrated immediately, the author says .
 All the major sources of news had to be securely on board, willing to turn a blind eye to the government’s contrived, fictitious postassassination narrative, as well as Allen Dulles's appointment to the Warren Commission . That, of course, meant all the major
 Phil Graham, owner and editor of the Washington Post, had become a problem . The Washington Post had been in the midst of a horrific calamity . Graham had been a problem for the Post since he bought the paper in 2008 .
 He had criticized the CIA’s infiltration of the media and its manipulation of news . Increasingly regarded as a loose cannon, he could no longer be trusted, he said .
 On August 9, Jack and Jackie lost their second child at birth, Patrick Bouvier . The couple had named their son Patrick, a boy they had named Patrick . The Bouvier family lost their son at birth .
 Jackie had gone into premature labor two days earlier, and the infant succumbed to complications . The infant died two days later .
 A month later, Jack and Jackie would celebrate their anniversary in Newport, Rhode Island . The couple would be celebrating in Newport .
 She would spend the first two weeks of October cruising the Aegean with Onassis on his yacht Christina . Onassis, his sister Lee, brother-in-law Stas Radziwill and friends Sue and Franklin Roosevelt Jr. in tow .
 The White House would spin the trip as a getaway for Jackie’s convalescence . Bobby Kennedy was furious; he vehemently detested Onassis . Onassis died in a car crash in 1968 .
 Franklin Roosevelt Jr., no stranger to the rogue Onassis, asked Bobby how he should position himself during the trip . Roosevelt Jr. asked Bobby about how to position himself in the plane .
 Peter Evans, author of Ari, the only authorized biography of Aristotle Onassis, later documented in his subsequent book Nemesis that it was on this October cruise that Jackie and Onassis became lovers .
 Timothy Leary says he received a lateafternoon telephone call from Mary Pinchot . Leary said he received the call before September 24 . Lear's death was a suicide attempt .
 We had eight intelligent women turning on the most powerful men in Washington, D.C. women . We had 8 intelligent women turn on powerful men, they say .
 Leary initially thought her state might have been the result of a bad drug experience; he attempted to console her . Leary thought she might have suffered from a bad experience . He thought she may have been suffering from a drug overdose .
 Leary had no idea what other woman in Washington could be causing her such alarm . Leary was shocked to find out that other women in Washington were causing her alarm. Leary: "I don't know what else is causing my alarm"
 Leary and Damore had come to believe that the woman in question was Katharine Graham . Graham was the woman Mary believed had betrayed her . Graham is the woman Leary believed to have betrayed .
 Damore’s theory was that in her desperation to bring her husband under control, Katharine was frantic enough to try anything, including supporting Phil in undertaking a psychedelic exploration . Damore's theory is that Katharine supported Phil in doing what she wanted to do .
 Katharine Graham might have been one of the eight women in Mary’s group, Damore says . Damore: Graham might be among the women in the group .
 His conversation with Anne Chamberlin, a close friend of Katharine Graham’s, may have led him to this conclusion, he says .
 Katharine Graham’s biggest influence in this direction came from her close friends Henry and Clare Booth Luce, who were, like Katharine and Phil Graham, media moguls . The couple's biggest influence is likely to come from their close friends, Clare and Katharine's friends
 Katharine Graham and Clare Booth Luce would become very dear friends . Katharine and Clare became very close friends during their marriage .
 Sidney Cohen, Clare, at loose ends, further continued her exploration during a time of personal turmoil . Sidney Cohen continued to explore the themes of her own life .
 Clare’s psychedelic voyages would turn her into an LSD proselytizer . Like Mary Meyer and Peggy Mellon Hitchcock, Clare would become an LSD evangelist . Clare's psychedelic trips would turn Clare into a socialite .
 Time and Life would publish a number of articles about hallucinogens in the 1950s .
 Katharine Graham first caught sight of Henry and Clare Booth Luce in 1948 . Katharine first caught them in 1948 in their early days .
 Clare became aware of Phil Graham’s deterioration sometime in 1962,"" the same year that Mary Meyer first introduced herself to Timothy Leary and told him she wanted to bring together a group of women involved with politically powerful men in Washington .
 With her husband unraveling, Katharine turned to Clare Booth Luce for guidance and advice, her marriage survived a similar crisis .
 If Clare believed LSD had ‘saved’ her marriage, she might well have counseled Katharine in that direction . Katharine's mother-in-law, Clare, says she's not convinced .
 Given Clare’s endorsement of LSD as a cutting-edge therapeutic tool, Katharine may have sought out Mary Meyer for assistance .
 By 1963, it appeared Katharine was beyond Phil was beyond Katharine’s reach, that he would continue to wrest control of the Post away from her . By 1963 it was clear Katharine would not be able to keep control .
 Katharine was desperate to retain control of her family’s newspaper . According to Deborah Davis, “Katharine had pretty much given up on the marriage,” yet was desperate for control .
 Katharine Graham’s Faustian deal with the devil would give her complete control and ownership of the Washington Post, provided she maintained the same polices and agreements her husband had arranged before his “enlightenment,” post—Bay of Pigs .
 The deal had to have included Katharine not squealing on anything the Agency wanted kept secret, as well as her revealing any matters the CIA wanted to know about, including Mary Meyer's influence on the president .
 Mary was aware of the kind of power the CIA wielded, as well as its treachery . Katharine’s betrayal likely opened up an entirely new can of worms, perhaps allowing Mary the realization that Phil’�s demise might well become a harbinger of hers .
 Only the chosen few knew they were going to go to the source to cut off the head of the snake . Only a few people knew they would be going to cut the head off the snake.
 On September 24, the president traveled with Mary and her sister to their family’s Grey Towers estate in Milford, Pennsylvania, to dedicate a gift from the Pinchot family to the U.S. Forest Service .
 Mary's uncle Gifford Pinchot was the owner of a large parcel of family land . The estate was also the former residence of Mary’s uncle, the former home of her uncle . Mary's estate is now owned by Mary's aunt and uncle, Mary's sister
 After the dedication ceremony, Jack and the two sisters went to their mother’s house to look at old family pictures . Jack and his two sisters were looking at old pictures .
 Ruth Pinchot was once a spirited champion of women’s equality and liberation . She was now supporting Barry Goldwater in his bid to unseat Kennedy in 1964 .
 The United States Senate ratified the president’s Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty with the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom . Unexpectedly, that same day the U.S. Senate also ratified the treaty .
 Much had been done to convince the U.S. public of the treaty’s importance . The treaty was signed in 1953 .
 Under Jack’s supervision, Norman Cousins and the Citizens Committee for a Nuclear Test Ban Treaty had led a successful campaign for public approval of the nuclear test ban treaty .
 Soviet premier considered treaty to be his country's and America’s greatest mutual achievement . The treaty was signed by the Soviet Union and the United States .
 Khrushchev outlined tasks for immediate consideration, including ratification of a nonaggression pact with NATO and member states of the Warsaw Pact . Other tasks included creation of nuclear-free zones in various regions of the world; and a ban on the future spread of all nuclear weapons .
 In his letter, Khrushchev was signaling his readiness to work with Kennedy on a host of projects . The letter was meant to signal a willingness to cooperate with Kennedy .
 That he had learned the good news when he was with Mary, and that she, too, had long nurtured the goal of a world moving toward peace without war, had to have been a profound, defining moment between the two . That he and Mary, who also nurtured a
 An extraordinary accomplishment had unfolded that day, finally taking place at Mary’s family home . Mary's family was finally able to take her to her hometown .
 Kenny O’Donnell: Mary and Jack were furtively smiling at one another . The news of the ratification had reached the presidential entourage . O'Donnell: "Mary and Jack are furtiously smiling at each other"
 Kennedy sent Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and General Maxwell Taylor on a ten-day fact-finding expedition in Vietnam . The goal of the expedition was to determine America’s exit strategy from the war .
 Kennedy reportedly confided to his adviser Kenny O’Donnell, “In 1965, I’Il become one of the most unpopular Presidents in history. [’ll be damned everywhere as a Communist appeaser.” Kennedy took the long view, reportedly confiding to
 If I tried to pull out completely now from Vietnam, we would have another Joe McCarthy ‘red scare’ on our hands, but I can do it after I’m reelected, he says . ‘I can pull out after I'm reelected. If I
 William Attwood was a special adviser on African affairs at the U.N. in September 1963 . Attwood documented in his 1987 book The Twilight Struggle that he was in charge of African affairs .
 He was talking to ABC news reporter Lisa Howard about Africa when she casually brought up the fact that she had recently interviewed Fidel Castro . He then mentioned that he was talking about Africa .
 In an interview for this book, Bill Attwood’s wife, Simone, added something more . Simone: “In an interview, Simone added that in an interview she said, ‘I’m not sure what happened to Bill,” she said. �
 Simone was adamant that both she and Bill knew of “Mary’s affair with Kennedy.” ‘I’m not sure what happened,’ she said. ‘We’ll never forget,” she said .
 President Kennedy had been instructing his staff to “start thinking along more flexible lines” vis-avis the island nation and its leader . Already, as early as March 1963, President Kennedy was instructing staff to think differently .
 A secret Bill Attwood—Lisa Howard alliance with Cuba’s U.N. representative Carlos Lechuga developed . The alliance developed between Attwood and the Cuban government . Attwood-Howard alliance with Lechug developed .
 Attwood-Howard effort with Cuba on Kennedy’s behalf became a target of CIA surveillance . Attwood and Howard's efforts became the subject of surveillance by the CIA .
 Howard was overheard excitedly describing Kennedy’s enthusiasm for rapprochement, Talbot says . Talbot: “In one call to Havana, Howard was excitedly . Howard was heard excitedly talking about Kennedy's enthusiasm .
 Jean Daniel, editor of the French weekly L’Observateur, told Bill Attwood that he was on his way to Havana to see Castro .
 Attwood arranged for Daniel to meet with Kennedy before he left for Cuba . Attwood met with Kennedy just before he went to Cuba .
 On the very day of President Kennedy’s assassination, November 22, Daniel was meeting with Fidel Castro . Daniel was in Cuba on the day of JFK's assassination .
 Both men learned that President Kennedy had been assassinated during a meeting with Fidel Castro . It was during this meeting that both men first learned of President Kennedy's assassination .
 Pentagon and CIA had been working clandestinely against the president’s efforts to change policies towards both Cuba and Vietnam . The Pentagon and the CIA worked clandestinely to prevent the president from changing policies .
 During the fall of 1963, the Vietnam situation markedly deteriorated . U.S. officials split over whether to back a coup in Vietnam to oust the Diem regime .
 If a coup attempt to overthrow the U.S. government, it would come from the C.I.A. and not the Pentagon, he said . He added, “If the United States ever experiences [an attempt at a coup] it will come from [the C
 A month later, the Catholic president of Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem, and his brother were assassinated by a CIA-funded coup . A month after the coup, Diem was assassinated by the CIA-backed government .
 It appears this was Mary’s last documented trip to the White House, though it remains unknown whether it was the last time they saw one another .
 Marys whereabouts when she first heard the news from Dallas are unknown . Mary's whereabouts are also unknown .
 Mary asked Anne Truitt to spend the night with her at her house in Georgetown . Later, Mary asked her to spend a night with Truitt at her home .
 As Jack lay in the Capitol Rotunda over the weekend, Mary visited his casket . Mary visited Jack's casket.
 On Monday, November 25, she attended the funeral and sat with Tony, who would years later recall that her sister “didn’t seem very upset.”
 Mary was seen by one of her former art students at the burial at Arlington Cemetery . Ariel Dougherty had been in Mary’s painting classes at Georgetown Day School in the late 1950s .
 Mary stood adjacent to the gravesite throughout the entire ceremony . She wore a long, gold-colored suede coat that belted around her waist .
 The following March, Johnson penned NSAM 288, initiating the full escalation of the Vietnam War . The following year, he wrote a series of letters to Congress, starting the war .
 Before its end, approximately 3. million people would lose their lives, including more than 58,000 American combat soldiers . The worst and most costly blunder of American foreign policy was undoubtedly the worst, most expensive blunder .
 In October 1963, Cuban UN ambassador Carlos Lechuga delivered an official message to President Kennedy that Fidel Castro desired a lasting peace with the U.S. President Kennedy .
 In addition, he refused to sign the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty with the Soviet Union . The treaty was passed by the United States Senate in September 1963 .
 A little more than a week after Dallas, Timothy Leary received a disturbing phone call from Mary Meyer . Leary says he received a call from a woman who threatened to kill Leary .
 "Show this world that this is still a government of the people, for the people," she said . "Show us that we are still in power," she added .
 There's something so mysterious about an orchid. It's up to you. It’s up to the jury . —Attorney Jim Garrison (during his summation to a jury in JFK)
 They look as though they had been grown in damp underground caves by demons . They look like they had grown in  caves by . demons .
 Mary Pinchot's short story "Futility" was published in 1941 . She wrote about the death of the U.S. president .
 The eye of the storm was centered in Washington, encased within a hurricane of concealed controversy . Washington is the nation's capital, surrounded by controversy .
 Oswald was eventually charged with the assassination of the president several hours later . Tippit had taken place at approximately 1:15 p.M. several blocks away from the president .
 Oswald was fatally shot by a man identified as Jack Ruby . Oswald was one of the most bizarre phantasmagorical events ever witnessed on national television . Two days later, Jack Ruby was identified as Oswald .
 The American media struggled to sustain a semblance of calm and order, still insistent Lee Harvey Oswald had been the lone crackpot assassin and had acted unilaterally .
 Observers and journalists had already started speculating Oswald had been killed to keep him from talking . But observers and journalists in other countries had already speculated Oswald was killed .
 One assassination attempt against the president was planned to take place in Chicago on November 2, 1963 . President Richard Nixon was assassinated in 1963 .
 It would have involved multiple gunmen, as well as a designated “patsy” a mentally handicapped ex-Marine named Thomas Arthur Vallee . The case would involve multiple gunmen and a mentally disabled ex-marine . It would be the first time multiple gunmen have been
 Thomas Vallee had also served at a U-2 base in Japan under the Joint Technical Advisory Group, the CIA’s code name for its spy plane surveillance unit .
 Vallee then “found work” in the fall of November 1963 in a building adjacent to an L-shaped turn that would be on the route for the upcoming presidential motorcade . Vallee "found work" in a Chicago building overlooking a Chicago street in 1963 .
 The plot was foiled only because members of the Secret Service had acted quickly . The plot finally had to be foiled because of the actions of Secret Service agents .
 President Kennedy had also canceled the trip as a result of President Diem’s assassination in South Vietnam . President Kennedy also cancelled the trip due to the assassination of Diem in Vietnam .
 A second plot was set to unfold during President Kennedy’s trip to Miami on November 18, but the presidential motorcade was canceled . The president was scheduled to travel to Miami, Florida, that day .
 Word of the plot had been forwarded to the Secret Service from police intelligence in Miami . The Secret Service received the information from Miami police intelligence .
 The president flew by helicopter from Miami airport to the Americana Hotel, where he delivered his scheduled speech .
 The magnitude of such threats would have been communicated to the president, it wasn’t clear how much detail was given to him .
 Mary has been portrayed as not believing in any conspiracy to assassinate her lover the president . Her biographer claimed that she accepted the idea that Oswald was the lone assassin . The deeper evidence beneath the surface reveals a far different story .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer was deeply engaged in exploration . Her suspicion had been aroused, and it grew stronger. Throughout the last year of her life, she was deeply interested in exploring .
 The lingering question was how far Mary had gone in her investigation, and what impact it might have had . Mary had been investigating for more than a decade .
 She wasn’t the kind of person to stand idly aside in the face of an event of this magnitude, she said . She wasn't the type of person who would not have stood idly by, she added .
 She was well aware of her ex-husband Cord’s work and his connection to Operation Mockingbird . Cord was involved in the CIA's infiltration of the media . Cord's ex-wife was also involved in Operation Mockockbird .
 Her vigilance would have caused an awareness of whatever narrative the media was peddling, she says . Jack had shared with her any information about what the Secret Service had uncovered earlier in November .
 Mary was a “Washington insider” with many relationships and connections inside the Kennedy coterie and beyond . Mary was also a "Washington insider" with relationships with the Kennedy family .
 As such, she was privy to information and individuals that few people could access . As such she had access to many of the world's most private secrets .
 Given the president’s regard for her, her presence in the White House for two years had accorded her an unique status . Her presence within the intimate confines of the . White House has accorded .
 Kenny O’ Donnell respected Mary as a special, trusted person in the president’s life . Kenny O' Donnell certainly respected Mary O'Donnell . Mary was a trusted confidante to the president .
 Mary had sought out O’ Donnell several weeks after the assassination, inquiring about his recollection of events that horrific day in Dallas . O' Donnell: "Mary sought out" O'Donnell's memory of the assassination .
 According to O’Donnell’s statements to author Leo Damore, he confided to Mary what both he and Dave Powers had witnessed from their vantage point in the car directly behind the president's . O'Donnell's statements to Damore were published in the New York Times
 The smell of gunpowder, the sound of rifle shots, and other features of gunfire were well known to the two close Kennedy advisers . Kennedy advisers, both World War II combat veterans, were both seasoned WWII combat veterans .
 At least two shots had come ‘from behind the fence,” in front of the motorcade . Both men remained adamant for the rest of their lives that the shots came from behind a fence .
 O’ Donnell told author Leo Damore, although he never spoke about it publicly . O' Donnell never spoke publicly about what he told Mary .
 Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill confirmed his account in his 1987 memoir Man of The House . O'Neill's account was further confirmed twenty-five years later by Speaker of House Tip .
 Before O’Neill published his memoir, he checked with Dave Powers to make sure his memory was not failing him, since O'Donnell had already died . O'Neill checked with Powers to ensure that Powers' memory wasn't failing him .
 Dave Powers stood by his story, and went further in a few years later . Powers stands by the story . Powers says he stands by it . Powers: "It's not a lie"
 Whatever conversation Mary had with O’Donnell, her worst suspicions would have likely been confirmed . Mary's worst suspicions were confirmed, she says .
 Scores of eyewitness accounts have been gathered, analyzed, and published that corroborate the O’Donnell-Powers account . Scores of other eyewitness accounts from people who were in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination have been collected, analyzed .
 Had they done so, they could have altered the course of history as we know it today . Had they . done so they could . have altered history as well as history as today .
 The cancerous malignancy rapidly spread. Instead, they succumbed to the intimidation of J Edgar Hoover and the FBI . Instead, the victims succumbed to intimidation of the FBI and the . FBI .
 Immediately after Dallas, there were a number of suspicions swirling around Washington that Mary, given her position, would unquestionably have accessed .
 There were direct accusations leveled at the CIA almost immediately, and from within the Kennedy family itself . According to some accounts, there were direct allegations leveled at CIA . The CIA was accused of involvement in the Kennedy assassination .
 CIA director John McCone arrived at the Kennedy compound in McLean a short time later that afternoon . McCone was the CIA director at the time .
 For three hours on that November 22, the two walked together on the grounds of the Hickory Hill estate . For the first time, they walked together for three hours .
 Bobby directly confronted McCone about whether the Agency had assassinated his brother . According to historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Bobby confronted him about the Agency's assassination . Bobby's brother was killed by the Agency .
 Bobby Kennedy’s own monitoring of the Agency right after the Bay of Pigs had acquainted him with many of the CIA's operational plans and methods . Bobby himself knew more about many of these things than McCone .
 John McCone replaced Allen Dulles, the infamous father of American intelligence whom Jack had fired . Jack had replaced Dulles with McCone, who replaced him as CIA chief .
 The elite of the Agency still “carried the flag” for Allen Dulles behind the scenes . Dick Helms, Jim Angleton, Cord Meyer, Tracy Barnes, Bill Harvey, even Bob Crowley still carried the flag for Dulles .
 McCone's strict Catholic religious principles might have been offended by many of the CIA’s covert operations . Their loyalty to Dulles kept McCone in the dark, ostensibly because he might have offended his religious principles .
 There would be more whispers from those accompanying the presidential entourage in Dallas that day, some of whom Mary Meyer knew .
 Life magazine featured thirty-one black-and-white frames from Abraham Zapruder’s famous home movie, the film that would become legendary for revealing to the world the “kill shot” that exploded President Kennedy's head . Life magazine published the November 29 issue of
 It wasn’t an accident that the “carefully edited” photos showed up so quickly, it wasn't an accident . The photos were taken in the wake of Hurricane Katrina in New Jersey .
 Likely, Mary would have seen the issue of Life, though it's not known whether it became part of her collection of “clippings of the JFK assassination” that she kept in “the bookcase in her bedroom” next to her diary . Likely, likely
 The Zapruder film was released in 1945, but it would be barred from the public until 1975 . For the first time, the public became aware of the existence of the film . The film would be banned from being released until 1975, but was released again in 1975 .
 Only a few people were directly aware that immediately following the events in Dallas, an elite group within the National Security apparatus were moving quickly to contain anything that might reveal a conspiracy . Mary was suspicious .
 Zapruder’s infamous 8-millimeter home movie during the weekend following the assassination . Nowhere was this chicanery more evident than what took place than what happened with the film . The 8mm home movie was released in the wake of the assassination of Abraham Zapr
 Controversy has surrounded the alleged chain of custody of the original Zapruder film . The three copies of the film were processed later in the afternoon of November 22 .
 The original 8-millimeter home movie taken by Abraham Zapruder was delivered to the CIA’s most secretive facility, the National Photographic Interpretation Center .
 The film was delivered by two Secret Service agents at approximately ten o’clock on Saturday evening, November 23, the day after the assassination .
 CIA director John McCone had called NPIC director Arthur Lundahl several hours earlier to prepare for the delivery of a film . The film, not yet known publicly as “the Zapruder film’’, had captured the assassination .
 McCone told Lundahl he wanted a full briefing on the film’s contents early the following morning . Lundahl said he wanted the film's contents early on Sunday, November 24 .
 Lundahl immediately called his chief assistant, Dino Brugioni, to make preparations for the film’s Saturday evening arrival . Lundahl: "It's a movie that's going to be a very special moment" Lundahl calls the film's arrival at the end of the
 He told me it was going to involve pictures and that the Secret Service wanted support . The Secret Service has been involved in the investigation into the death of the president .
 I called Ralph Pearce, our best photogrammatist, and then Bill Banfield . Ralph Pearce is Ralph Pearce's best photographer . Bill Banfeld is our best photographer .
 In placing the Zapruder film in the hands of the NPIC, McCone enlisted the help of the world’s foremost photo analyst . McCone was enlisting the help .
 Known as the father of modern imagery analysis and imagery intelligence, Arthur C Lundahl had been recruited by the CIA in 1953 to head the agency’s Photographic Intelligence Division . He would be designated the first director of NPIC when it was formally created in 1961 .
 Lundahl expanded the center into a national, multidepartmental component of the intelligence community . Lundahl, in his capacity as NPIC’s first director, expanded the organization .
 Art Lundahl’s presidential briefings became legendary during an era when aircraft such as the U-2, the SR-71 Blackbird, and satellite imagery reconnaissance programs were made operational . Lundahl's briefings were legendary during the era of President Eisenhower's presidency .
 A ‘Lundahl briefing’ was considered the gold standard by which all other intelligence briefings to presidents were judged . The briefing was considered by all presidents to be judged by the standard of intelligence briefings .
 Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II eventually named Lundahl a Knight of the British Empire . Lundahl was later knighted by Her Majesty Elizabeth II for his services .
 Dino Brugioni had distinguished himself as part of a World War II bomber crew that flew sixty-six successful missions . Dino was a member of the Italian intelligence staff .
 Brugioni regularly accompanied his boss to the White House and all “seventhfloor” classified briefings at NPIC and CIA headquarters . He was highly trained in all aspects of photographic imagery and analysis .
 The world’s foremost photographic intelligence center, however, didn’t have an in-house, 8-millimeter film projector . The U.S. didn't have an 8- millimeter projector .
 Despite the late hour, crew member Bill Banfield called the manager of Fuller & d’ Albert, a local photo supply store, and arranged to pick up a brand-new 8-millimeter projector that night .
 While Banfield was procuring the projector, Dino Brugioni and Ralph Pearce examined the film with a microstereoscope . The film was shot in New York City and London .
 We ran it first at the regular speed, then ran it at various different speeds . We ran the video at various speeds, including at regular speed and at different speeds, to various speeds .
 Brugioni and his crew weren’t prepared for what they were about to see . The crew was surprised to find out what happened .
 NPIC crew prints frames on two identical sets of briefing boards . Under the vigilant eyes of the two Secret Service agents, the crew worked through the night to print the frames .
 Director Lundahl arrived at NPIC early next morning, reviewed notes that Brugioni had prepared, and took the two sets of identical briefing boards to his meeting with Director John McCone at CIA headquarters in Langley .
 The Secret Service also left early the next morning, taking with them the film, and a list of all the people who had been present for the night’s work . Dino Brugioni, Ralph Pearce, and Bill Banfield were among those present .
 Sometime between November 24 and December 9, McCone told Bobby Kennedy that he thought “there were two people involved in the shooting [of President Kennedy],” despite the FBI’s attempt to maintain Lee Harvey Oswald as the only assassin . The FBI and the media�
 McCone’s remark to Bobby Kennedy likely had been engendered by Lundahl's NPIC early moming briefing on Sunday, November 24 . Lundahl: "Early moming" briefing likely had an effect on McCone .
 Bobby Kennedy tured to a close group of trusted friends and advisers as he attempted to make sense of what had happened in Dallas . Bobby Kennedy was trying to find out what happened in the wake of the Dallas shootings .
 If the head of the CIA had privately shared with him that there were at least two shooters, that detail was likely shared by Bobby with people in his inner circle, as it had been with Arthur Schlesinger . Bobby Kennedy likely shared that detail with people he had been briefed on the
 How close Mary Meyer was to anyone in Bobby’s entourage wasn’t definitively known, but she was very likely acquainted with some of them . How close was Mary Meyer to Bobby Bobby Bobby?
 Given her relationship with Jack, she had to have known some of what was being revealed .
 A lone Secret Service agent showed up at the NPIC with a different Zapruder film . That Sunday night, the Secret Service agents showed up with a new film . The film was a different version of the original .
 McMahon years later said that the session that night was so sensitive and classified, even his own supervisor was not informed of the event . McMahon said that even his supervisor did not know about the session .
 The CIA Hawkeye facility in Rochester required all technicians to wear full body suits of special fabric to avoid contamination . Classified and designated top secret, known for its state-of-the-art ‘clean facility,” the facility was known .
 Some version of the film returned to NPIC in a 16-millimeter format before Sunday night . That alteration plausibly could have taken place sometime after early Sunday morning .
 The CIA’s Hawkeye facility in Rochester was the ideal place, technically superior and capable of such an alteration . The CIA was the perfect place for such a change, the author says .
 As the NPIC on-call duty officer during the assassination weekend, Brugioni should have been notified . He was on duty at the time of the assassination .
 Homer McMahon and Ben Hunter had assisted in the preparation of a set of briefing boards that were significantly different in size and composition from those made on Saturday night by Brugioni and colleagues .
 It appeared that the skulduggery that had taken place was known only at the highest levels, part of a well-organized cover-up . Even mid-to-upper level CIA officers like Brugioni weren’t privy .
 Dino Brugioni's Zapruder film was released in June 1945 . Dino's film was the subject of a book called "Zapruder," which was shot in June 1944 .
 I showed him a high-resolution image of the one and only frame in the extant Zapruder film that graphically depicts the fatal head shot, frame 313 . frame 313 is the only frame of the film that shows the fatal shot . The only frame is frame 313, the only
 Dino was incredulous there was only one frame of the head explosion . He repeatedly rejected the possibility, based upon what he had personally witnessed when he had viewed the camera-original Zapruder film on Saturday evening, November 23 .
 "It was way high off of his head ... and I can’t imagine that there would only be one frame," he says . "I can't imagine ... there would be only one frame"
 The brain photographs in the National Archives today cannot be, and are not, photographs of President Kennedy’s brain . President Kennedy's brain was taken in 1963 .
 The purpose for creating this false photographic record was to . suppress evidence that President Kennedy was shot from the front, and to insert into the record false “evidence” consistent with the official story that he was shot only from behind .
 Physical forensic evidence poses a far greater challenge than eyewitness accounts . Forensic evidence is much less likely to be misinterpreted than eyewitness evidence . Physical evidence is far more difficult to interpret .
 The most significant efforts were applied to the manipulation of physical evidence with respect to the gunshot wounds inflicted on President Kennedy’s body . President Kennedy's body was found to have been shot in the head by the assassin .
 President Kennedy’s body left Dallas in an ornamental, bronze ceremonial casket, wrapped in cloth bedsheets . Yet it arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital in a cheap, gray shipping casket . Lifton explained in his bestselling and carefully documented forensic thriller .
 There was a possibility that some of the president’s wounds had been tampered with prior to the arrival of his body at Bethesda, Lifton said .
 The entry wound in the throat had been enlarged by the time the Bethesda autopsy began at 8:15 p.M. The posterior head wound had been dramatically enlarged to five times its original size .
 Lifton presented persuasive evidence that Kennedy’s shipping casket arrived at Bethesda close to fifteen minutes prior to the official motorcade from Andrews Air Force Base carrying the bronze Dallas casket . Lifton also presented evidence .
 The bronze Dallas casket seen by millions on television was empty when it was off-loaded from Air Force One at Andrews . This meant that the bronze casket was empty .
 In 1997, the ARRB obtained an official military report that verified, beyond all reasonable doubt, the earlier arrival of President Kennedy’s body at Bethesda, thus proving there had been a break in the chain of custody of the body, prior to autopsy .
 Lifton speculated in his book that Kennedy’s head wounds were surgically altered prior to arrival at Bethesda . Horne has presented a compelling case that postmortem surgery was performed at Bethesda Naval Hospital prior to the official autopsy .
 All the facts point to the conclusion that evidence tampering of the most serious nature—the clandestine expansion of JFK’s head wound and the removal of evidence —was performed by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was a doctor at the time of JFK's assassination
 James J Humes, the lead Navy pathologist, was part of a Navy cover-up of the medical evidence, after President Kennedy’s body arrived at 6:35 p.M. and before the start of the official autopsy at 8:15 p.m. H
 The autopsy photos and x-rays in the National Archives collection today, Horne says, actually demonstrate the results of clandestine surgery performed by the Naval pathologist, not the damage caused by bullets in Dallas . Horne concludes that the damage was caused by clandestine surgery .
 Horne and Lifton are also in agreement that the “best evidence’s’ — the body of the deceased president — was surgically altered to remove evidence prior to the autopsy . The appearance and size of both the head wound and the entry wound in the throat were
 All evidence of frontal entry on President Kennedy’s body was surgically removed prior to the commencement of his autopsy . President Kennedy was found to have been shot to death in 1963 .
 A piece of conspiracy evidence was available to Mary Meyer and anyone else observing events unfolding in “real time” in the media . Ana that is why one problem in the immediate aftermath of President Kennedy’s assassination wouldn’t go away .
 After the president had been declared dead, the two attending physicians in Dallas, Dr. Dr. Donald and Dr. Ronald Reagan were declared dead . Dr. Reagan was declared dead at the scene of the shooting .
 President Kennedy’s throat wound was an entrance wound, Perry said . Perry was asked by a reporter at the press conference immediately following the announcement of President Kennedy's death, he confirmed this opinion .
 If the government was about to declare that all shots came from behind the president, Dr. George W. Bush would not be surprised to find out .
 Perry was unknowingly, and indirectly, asserting there had been more than one shooter, again making the president’s assassination by definition a conspiracy . Perry was unaware of the fact that there was no single shooter .
 In an interview by ARRB members Douglas P Horne and Jeremy Gunn on March 20, 1997, Audrey Bell confirmed her conversation with Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was a member of the ARRB .
 Perry learned about the pressure he was being subjected to on November 23 . Perry learned of the pressure she had been putting on Perry when, on the morning of November 23, she had learned about it .
 Perry amounts to another ‘alteration’ of evidence in an attempt to prove that the shooting came from behind the motorcade . The evidence suggests that Oswald shot from behind, not from sharpshooters, likely behind the fence on the grassy knoll .
 The theory of “throat wound as entrance wound” was gaining traction, as were some other anomalies . Nonetheless, long before the Warren Commission proceedings began, the theory was getting traction . The Warren Commission is expected to convene next week .
 Mary Meyer’s access to Kenny O’Donnell shortly after the events in Dallas likely provoked her suspicion as well as horror, and his perspective had to have aroused her curiosity .
 O'Donnell had been a witness to the fact that the shots were fired from in front of the limousine, not from where Oswald was alleged to have been . O’Donnell was a witness in the shooting .
 Before the end of the first month after the assassination, two articles appeared in national media outlets raising considerable doubt that there had been only one shooter .
 Whether either of these articles were included among Mary’s “clippings of the JFK assassination” or not, it is quite likely that she would have come across them . She would have been on the lookout for further validation of her growing suspicion concerning the cover-up
 A Lawyer’s Brief,” was published in the left-leaning National Guardian on December 19 .
 Lane had offered his feature gratis to any number of periodicals, including the New Republic Look, Life, Life and the Saturday Evening Post, and the Progressive . Lane's feature was offered gratis by many periodicals including Life and Life .
 Lane’s article ignited a firestorm of controversy, setting the stage for an unrelenting pursuit that ultimately took him to the doorsteps of the CIA in 1985 . Lane's article would become a defining moment in his career, setting him to a showdown with the CIA .
 So many additional press runs of Lane’s article were needed to keep newsstands supplied . The Guardian editors eventually reprinted it as a special pamphlet .
 It was inconceivable that such an article— published within a month of events in Dallas—would have escaped Mary’s attention . The article was published in the same month as the Dallas massacre .
 Wade presented fifteen assertions concerning the sole guilt of Lee Harvey Oswald . Wade had presented 15 assertions regarding Oswald's guilt in Oswald's assassination .
 Lane scrutinized not only Wade’s assertions, but also the contrived narrative that was emerging . Lane: “I’m not sure what’ll happen next. I’d like to hear Wade say, ‘” Lane said .
 He challenged the government’s narrative and exposed its many inconsistencies and half-truths . The government's narrative was challenged by the government's many inconsistencies . He challenged government's narratives and exposed them to the public .
 Wade’s remarks about Oswald were nothing but distorted half-truths that would not have stood up in any court proceeding, he says . Wade's remarks were nothing more than distorted half truths, he writes .
 Wade never reconciled the original statement of Dallas authorities that Tippit was shot in a movie theater . Wade was arrested after he was found guilty of the murder of T.J. T. Wade was charged with his murder .
 A motion picture taken of the President just before, during and after the shooting showed that the President was looking directly ahead when the first shot entered his throat, was fired .
 A series of still pictures taken from the motion picture and published in Life magazine on Nov. 11 show exactly the same situation . Life magazine published the pictures in which they were taken .
 The Life pictures also reveal that the car carrying the President was well past the turn from Houston St. and a considerable distance past the depository building .
 The Life estimate in an accompanying caption states that the car with the President was 75 yards past the sixth-floor window when the first shot was fired . Life estimate says the President's car was 75 miles past the window when it was shot .
 McClelland, too, had said he saw bullet wounds every day, “sometimes several a day.” He was quoted as saying he saw several wounds a day .
 Oswald was convicted before any defense could be assembled and before the evidence had been properly examined . Finally, lambasting the media for the uncritical reporting that had convicted Oswald, he lambasted them .
 Mark Lane’s article in the liberal New Republic would articulate some of the bedrock questions about the assassination that would never be satisfactorily reconciled by the Warren Report and that persist to this day .
 It was an entrance wound, indicating that at least one shot had been fired from in front of the motorcade . The wound was found to be a gunshot wound to the head .
 Oswald or any one person alone could have pulled off a feat of the magnitude that had occurred that day in Dallas . Taken together, both articles articulated issues that ruled out the possibility that Oswald, or anyone alone, could pull off the feat .
 Mark Lane would valiantly continue to lead a crusade to obtain the truth about President Kennedy’s assassination . Lane would continue to fight for the truth on the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Immediately after Dallas, he founded the Citizens’ Committee of Inquiry .
 Lane even volunteered to defend the deceased Lee Harvey Oswald in front of the Warren Commission . Lane offered to defend Oswald, but was turned down by the Commission .
 Oswald's mother, Marguerite Oswald, would retain Lane to defend her son’s reputation anyway . Lane was hired by Oswald to defend his reputation .
 Lane’s books would eventually become international bestsellers—after Mary had been murdered . Lane's books became international best-sellers after Mary was murdered .
 Hunt had been in Dallas on the day of the assassination, acting as one of the paymasters for the conspiracy . Hunt had acted as the paymaster for the assassination . Hunt was in Dallas at the time of the shooting .
 In Washington, the Post, as well as the rest of the national media, avoided the story about the verdict . The unanimous jury, on the basis of the evidence presented during the trial, had found the CIA's role in the president’s assassination to be conclusive . The Post
 On December 22, an unusually newsworthy editorial appeared in the Washington Post, followed by a somewhat ominous event . The editorial was followed by an ominous event, which led to the death of President Obama .
 President Harry Truman was the author of the editorial, “United States Should Hold CIA to Intelligence,” published in the morning edition of the Post, one month, to the day, after the assassination . The editorial was published one month after Truman was assassinated .
 Mary Meyer, who had a delivered-daily subscription to the Post, would have to have seen the Truman editorial that morning . Mary Meyer would have had to have read the paper .
 It contained an eerie warning, even a kind of coded message for the most discerning . It contained a warning: 'It contains an eerie threat, even kind of a coded message'
 For some time I have been disturbed by the way CIA has been diverted from its original assignment . CIA has not been able to focus on the mission of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 It has become an operational and at times a policy-making arm of the Government . It has also become a policy making arm of government .
 This has led to trouble and may have compounded our difficulties in several explosive areas, it has been claimed . This may have led to problems in the country, it is claimed .
 Truman was making such a statement exactly one month to the day after Dallas was astounding in and of itself . That Truman made the statement one month after Dallas .
 President Truman intended to neuter the operational arm of the CIA after his reelection in 1964 . Truman had come to a similar conclusion about the Agency, and with good reason .
 The editorial was never picked up by any other media outlet, nor discussed by other journalist, columnist, or broadcast commentator . Moreover, the editorial was not picked up in any other news outlet .
 Marcus came into possession of a draft of an editorial from the Harry S Truman Library and Museum that was dated December 11, 1963 . Marcus came in possession of the draft of the editorial from a draft .
 At the very first executive session of the Warren Commission on December 5, 1964, Allen Dulles had wasted no time, not only in establishing himself as the socalled intelligence expert, but also in attempting to control and narrow the parameters of the entire inquiry .
 The disgraced spymaster gave each member of the commission a copy of a book that argued that all American assassinations, unlike European ones, were the work of solitary, deranged, and disaffected gunmen . He used his influence to discourage any real investigation into the possibility of conspiracy
 Ray Marcus: Dulles traveled to Truman's home in Independence, Missouri, on April 17, 1964, using as a pretext for his visit a scheduled talk he was to give in Kansas City, Missouri . That talk was to be a planned talk that evening .
 Four days later, on April 21, 1964, Dulles wrote a four-page memorandum to a former colleague, CIA general counsel Lawrence Houston, documenting his meeting with President Truman on April 17 . Four days after the meeting, four days later he wrote a memo to Houston .
 Dulles fabricated Truman’s retraction of his December 22 Washington Post editorial; the memorandum would be placed in CIA files . It was in this memorandum that .
 Dulles’s meeting with Truman documented all the adulation he had bestowed upon his former boss during their meeting . It also documented the adoration of Dulles and Truman .
 The Dulles memorandum then documented their discussion of Truman’s editorial in the Post . The memo then documented the discussion of the editorial .
 Dulles produced a copy of the editorial that he proceeded to review with Truman in person . Allegedly, Dulles reviewed the editorial in person with Truman .
 Dulles claimed in his memorandum to Houston that Truman had “studied attentively” the Post story and seemed “quite astounded” by it . Dulles also claimed that Truman seemed astounded by the story .
 President Truman never wavered from the position he had stated in his December 22 Washington Post editorial, in which he had completely opposed the CIA’s covert operations arm . Truman: "The CIA's covert operations operations arm is not a CIA operation"
 Truman editorial had been cut off at the pass, adding weight to suspicions of CIA involvement in the death of the president . Dulles had to be worried about the possibility the editorial might be resuscitated at some point .
 William Walton was the man who had been her escort to many of the White House social events she had attended . Mary was almost sure to have sought out after Dallas was her friend and fellow artist William Walton .
 According to Leo Damore, Mary had engaged Walton’s counsel sometime in 1964 . Mary had also engaged Walton's counsel in 1964, according to Damore . Mary was married to William Walton .
 Damore: Bobby long suspected the worst of foul play in his brother’s death . Damore told Mary that he had to keep a low profile for the time being . He said he had been told by Mary that Bobby suspected foul play .
 Bobby would position himself to take back the presidency, but it would be years before he could do anything . Bobby would not be able to do anything until he had a chance to take control .
 Bill Walton had met Jack Kennedy in Georgetown after World War II . Walton and Kennedy met in Georgetown, Georgetown, during WWII . Walton's friendship with Kennedy was something extraordinary .
 Jackie enjoyed his company and came to rely upon him . And so did Jackie, who thoroughly enjoyed her company .
 She also took a keen interest in Walton’s two children, Matthew and Frances, whom Bill was raising alone since his divorce . Walton was raising the children alone since the divorce .
 I wrote a diary in those days, and she's the only one of my father’s friends I mentioned . I wrote about her in a diary . She is the only friend I mentioned in the diary, she's one of her father's friends I said .
 Walton's sexual orientation was the other variable that made him "safe" Walton said he was safe . Walton was a straight-A-Ler than anyone else in the world .
 Walton was not openly gay (which in that era would have been social suicide), but it was clear where his proclivities lay . Walton was a member of the same social strata that he was in .
 He was “a man’s man,” yet “safe” to women like Jackie who came to revere his confidence . Even so, he was "a man's man," yet "safe" to women .
 Walton had become the supreme Kennedy confidant and loyalist, not only to Jack and Jackie, but to Bobby as well . Walton became a confidant of the Kennedy family over the years . Walton had been a loyalist to the family, including his wife and children .
 Both Jack and Jackie shared intimate secrets with him, often using him to communicate with one another . Both of them used him as a way of communicating with each other .
 Walton brought to the table an urbane sense of tasteful style and elegance that had its foundation in sincerity coupled with integrity . Walton was a bit older than both Jack and Bobby .
 The president appointed him chairman of the Fine Arts Commission in 1963 . He was appointed as chairman in 1963, when he was appointed by President Dwight Eisenhower .
 Jackie and Bill Walton collaborated to safeguard various historic sections of the city . The period architecture around Lafayette Square in downtown Washington was the subject of a series of preservation efforts .
 Walton had no need to play favorites; he had no expectation or desire of any reward . Walton was unlike the other political animals who surrounded the Kennedys . Walton died at the age of 92 at the time of his death .
 Walton was privy to any number of intimate secrets regarding Jack and Jackie, as well as Bobby . Walton never betrayed their confidences, not even to his children, or revealed the full extent of his access during his lifetime .
 Tony Bradlee was aware of Mary Meyer's romantic liaison with Jack . He escorted her to the White House on many occasions, as were others .
 How much Jack actually confided in Billy Boy about his feelings for Mary (as he had done with Charlie Bartlett), no one knows, not even Walton's own children .
 Not even Walton’s children were aware of their father's secret mission after Dallas . The mission was ostensibly for the support of the arts in Russia . Walton's children were unaware of the mission .
 Bobby Kennedy asked Walton to undertake the mission following President Kennedy’s burial in Dallas, Texas . Walton died three years later, three years after his death, in 1968 .
 Walton had been scheduled to leave for Russia on November 22 on a goodwill mission to open a dialogue with Russian artists . Walton had planned to go to Russia on Nov. 22 for a goodwill visit .
 Walton was to be the president’s emissary to Leningrad and Moscow, where he would preside over the opening of an American graphic arts exhibit for the U.S. Information Agency . Walton was also to preside at opening of a graphic arts exhibition .
 As he was preparing to leave for Russia that day, he received word of the president’s death and immediately canceled his trip . But as he was about to leave, he got word of President Obama's death, he canceled .
 A few days after the president’s burial at Arlington Cemetery, Bill Walton and his children, Matthew and Frances, visited Bobby Kennedy's Hickory Hill estate . The Walton family visited the estate a few days later .
 She recalled seeing her father walking with Bobby alone outside later that afternoon . She also recalled seeing him walking alone with Bobby .
 The pieces of the puzzle would not be fully revealed to her until 2007, when her brother showed her David Talbot’s book Brothers .
 The loyal Kennedy ally had proven his integrity on innumerable occasions and to a degree rarely seen in the political snake pit .
 Bobby and Jackie asked their close friend to quickly reschedule his artistic mission to Russia . That day, during the Waltons’ visit to Hickory Hill, within days of the assassination, asked their friends to rescheduled his trip to Russia.
 They wanted him to deliver a special, secret message to Georgi Bolshakov, formerly a KGB agent under journalistic cover in Washington . The Kennedys had come to rely upon when they needed to communicate with Khrushchev directly during critical moments .
 Bolshakov had once been referred to by Newsweek as the “Russian New Frontiersman” because he had become so close to Bobby. Newsweek once called him the ‘Russian new frontierman’
 Official Washington was averse to using a known KGB agent for diplomatic missions, but that didn't stop Bobby from developing a substantial relationship that had proven reliability over time .
 Walton sat down with Bolshakov at the Sovietskaya restaurant . Walton had instructions from Bobby to bypass the American Embassy upon arrival in Moscow . He had explicit instructions that he bypassed the embassy .
 Bolshakov, who had been deeply upset by the assassination, listened intently . Walton explained that the Kennedys now believed there had been a large domestic political conspiracy at work . Walton: "We believe there was a large political conspiracy"
 Lyndon Johnson’s ties to big Texas oil and military defense companies would, in their own way, sabotage John Kennedy's plans for world peace and détente with the Soviet Union .
 Bobby Walton told Bolshakov he had a plan to eventually retake the White House where he would then continue his brother’s vision for world peace . But that wasn’t going to be possible before 1968, he said .
 He did recall a strange outburst from his father one evening at dinner shortly after his return to Moscow .
 Bill Walton, the usually calm, even-tempered, urbane gentleman, exploded . Bill Walton exploded . Walton was usually calm . Walton exploded in anger at the incident .
 The day Mary Pinchot Meyer was murdered, Bill Walton received an upsetting telephone call . Ten months later, Walton received the upsetting phone call from the police station .
 Matthew Walton said his father was never given to emotional outbursts . The elder Walton did something very uncharacteristic, he said .
 Bill Walton once again embraced the Kennedy dream in 1968 . Walton was excitedly planning to do whatever he could for Bobby’s presidential bid . Walton: “I'm excited to see what I can do for Bobby's campaign.”
 The Kennedy dream would die with Bobby’s assassination . Once again, the Kennedy dream died with Bobby's assassination . And once again, this time forever, it would die forever .
 Bill Walton retreated into seclusion, even stopped painting for an extended period . Bill Walton stopped painting after he was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease .
 Mary likely knew they intended to dump him prior to the 1964 election . Mary had to have known of both Jack’s and Bobby's animosity toward him, and likely knew of their plans .
 His involvement in scandals with his aide Bobby Baker and business tycoon Billie Sol Estes were about to make headlines . His involvement with his aides Bobby Baker was about to be making headlines .
 By 1963, Billie Sol Estes had been convicted on more than fifty counts of fraud . Estes was convicted in 1963 of more than 50 counts .
 Leaks from prison suggested he had paid off the vice president on any number of occasions . Leaks suggest he paid off Vice President Barack Obama .
 President Kennedy’s personal secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, noted the implications, asked the president three days before Dallas who his choice for a running mate might be . Kennedy's personal secretary said the implications would be a surprise .
 Life magazine had been developing a major feature story concerning Vice President Lyndon Johnson and his scandalous dealings with Bobby Baker . Life magazine was developing a story about the vice president's scandalous affair with Baker .
 The in-depth story was scheduled for publication in late November, right after the president’s trip to Dallas . It was scheduled to be published after the trip .
 The story, at the time the chief assistant to Life’s Publishing Projects Director, Phil Wootton, had been researched and written by members of the senior staff at Life who had a direct line to Bobby Kennedy .
 On the very day of Kennedy’s assassination in Dallas, the Senate Rules Committee on Capitol Hill was meeting, presided over by Senator B Everett Jordan of North Carolina . Senator Jordan presided over the meeting .
 Senator John Williams of Delaware was being given documented testimony from a panicked Don Reynolds, a close associate of Bobby Baker’s, who had been asked by Baker to arrange Lyndon Johnson’�s life insurance policy . Don Reynolds was asked to arrange the policy by Baker .
 Reynolds bombshell was that he had seen Bobby Baker with a suitcase containing what Baker alleged was a $100,000 payoff to Lyndon Johnson for his role in securing the Tactical Fighter Experimental contract for General Dynamics in Texas .
 Reynolds also stated that he refused several attempts by Johnson to buy his silence . Reynolds also said he had refused to buy Johnson's silence . He said he refused to pay Johnson for his silence and that he has refused several times .
 Reynolds’s testimony abruptly ended when news reached the committee that President Kennedy had been assassinated . Reynolds testified at the Kennedy memorial service .
 Reynolds’s information would not only have ended Lyndon Johnson's political career, it also would have resulted in a criminal indictment . What was clear was Reynolds's information would have ended Johnson's career, and would have led to criminal charges .
 It had been prepared in relative secrecy by a small special editorial team . It was prepared for the publication of this article in secrecy .
 On Kennedy’s death, research files and all numbered copies of the nearly print-ready draft were gathered up by his boss and shredded . On Kennedy's death, the research files were collected up by my boss and shred .
 A lot of the high-level executives in publishing companies had been involved with the OS during the war . The OS was used to make millions of millions of dollars in publishing .
 Edward K Thompson, a senior editor at Life during 1963, was a close friend of Allen Dulles’s . Wagenvoord: Thompson was a friend of Dulles's . Thompson was an editor at the Life magazine .
 Wagenvoord remembers being introduced to Dulles in Thompson’s office . He delivered a $10,000 check made out to the former CIA director .
 Oswald was gunned down on national television on November 24 . But that event paled alongside what Wagenvoord witnessed at Life's offices on Sunday morning .
 As James Wagenvoord stood outside his boss’s office, a man in a gray suit pushed through the glass door that opened from the elevator bank . The man in the gray suit is seen in the background of the incident .
 Wagenvoord remembered opening the envelope and taking out a small, blue plastic reel . The reel appeared to be a short 16-millimeter film, which he viewed later that day .
 The unsolicited footage was of Oswald handing out pro-Castro flyers on Canal Street near the World Trade Center in New Orleans . The event had been staged to falsely portray Oswald as a Communist sympathizer, which, of course, he wasn't .
 In January, the Joint Chiefs sent their new president a memo urging him to formally increase the U.S. commitment to Southeast Asia . The memo also urged him to consider a bombing campaign against North Vietnam, ostensibly as a strategy .
 By year’s end, there would be more than twenty-three thousand troops in the region, well more than the sixteen thousand advisers present when Kennedy was assassinated .
 The socalled Gulf of Tonkin Incident became the pretext to do just that . It was a contrived event during a stormy night in August in August . The incident occurred off the coast of North Vietnam . The Gulf Incident was the pretext for the invasion .
 On August 2, the destroyer USS Maddox, then operating within the framework of a program of joint U.S.-South Vietnamese covert operations against North Vietnam, was attacked by North Vietnamese PT boats . North Vietnamese boats were reacting to these covert operations by defending the territorial integrity of North Vietnam
 First of two reported events in the Gulf of Tonkin off the coast of North Vietnam was a light and inconclusive skirmish that inflicted no serious damage on the USS Maddox . The first of two skirmishes in the area was an inconclusive battle .
 Two days later, the USS Maddox and USS Turner Joy reported a second socalled torpedo boat attack in the Gulf of Tonkin . The attack was the first socalled attack on a torpedo boat in the area .
 President Lyndon Johnson and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara exaggerated the nature of the second “attack,” and falsely claimed U.S. Navy vessels, innocently operating on the high seas, were attacked .
 This nefarious plan worked like a charm, to their everlasting discredit, and ultimately to America’s misfortune . This nefarious scheme worked, to the everlasting discredit of the U.S.
 A manipulated Congress, once again led to view the reported incident as an escalation in the global Cold War between East and West, responded with the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution . The resolution was a blank check for President Johnson’s unlimited proliferation of a hot war in Vietnam .
 Sadly, a nonevent had been used as a casus belli to justify the escalation of U.S. involvement in Vietnam from a socalled technical advisory effort into a shooting war . Sadly, the nonevent was used as an excuse for the escalation into Vietnam .
 President Kennedy’s 1963 policy of disengagement and withdrawal from Vietnam had irrevocably been overturned, just eight months after his assassination . With the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, President Kennedy's 1963 policy was overturned, eight months later .
 Until its repeal in May 1970, the Tonkin Gulf Resolution provided the “legal” basis for all subsequent escalation and continuation of the Vietnam War by both President Johnson and his successor, Richard Nixon . The resolution was repealed in 1970 .
 McNamara would never answer that question when he realized it had all been so wrong . McNamara, even in later life, would never say that question .
 Despite a superficial public “mea culpa,” Robert McNamara would forever avoid any real accountability or responsibility . McNamara’s public apology would be a failure to take responsibility for his actions .
 His answer to Talbot—”Oh, I don’t want to talk about that’*—revealed once again his patronizing chief executive arrogance, as if the deaths of 3. million Vietnamese had no meaning in his equation .
 Mary could not have helped but witness McNamara's betrayal of Kennedy’s peace agenda, she says . McNamara betrayed Kennedy's peace agenda and allowed Johnson’ reckless, destructive escalation to occur .
 It must have left her utterly demoralized to observe the White House, now inhabited by a ruthless, criminal cowboy, she says .
 Mary’s views had apparently made her a person of interest to someone . Whatever her suspicions before the release of the Warren Report, Mary had apparently been a suspect . The Warren Report was released on Friday .
 Author Nina Burleigh documented the fact that Mary’s “maid found the doors to the garden open on a January morning while Mary and her sons were upstairs asleep” in their house .
 When she returned from being away the following summer, wrote Burleigh, Mary was sure someone had been in her house . Burleigh wrote that she thought someone was in the house .
 Burleigh’s interview with CIA wife Joanne Bross was revealing . Even more revealing was Burleigh's interview with Bross .
 John Bross rose to become deputy director of the Agency in 1963, a position he would hold until his retirement in 1971 . Bross was Harvard blue-blooded .
 The Brosses were close to all the upper-level CIA honchos, including the Angletons and the Meyers . They were also close to the Anglets and Meyers, who were CIA favorites .
 Joan Bross and Mary Bross were close enough that Mary dreaded CIA social functions and parties . Mary would call Joan for information . Mary dreaded social functions .
 Joan Bross indicated that Jim Angleton boasted to her that he had bugged Mary Meyer’s telephone, and her bedroom as well . Bross said Angleton had boasted to Bross that he was bugging Mary Meyer's phone and bedroom .
 How long this had been going on, or when it had started, was never revealed, perhaps never known . How long it had gone on, when it started, never revealed .
 Without question, Angleton and every other high-level CIA official, had been aware of Mary’s undisguised contempt for the Agency. Angleton, and every . other high . level of CIA official had been . aware of her contempt, she says . Angleton .
 From the very beginning of Cord’s CIA tenure, she had increasingly made no secret of her loathing of Allen Dulles . After her divorce, she would have been regarded as even more dangerous after her divorce .
 Spymaster Jim Angleton had the means to accomplish whatever he wanted was never in question . Angleton's ability to accomplish what he wanted never questioned .
 If Mary was using her telephone to discuss any of her suspicions or research into Jack’s downfall, as well as what she had come to discover and was recording in her diary, Jim Angleton knew about it .
 Angleton’s “Mary spying” escalated into a fullblown surveillance operation at the time the Warren Report was released in late September 1964 . According to Leo Damore, Angleton's ‘Mary’ spying’ escalated to a full-blown surveillance .
 Damore: 'She was enraged at the cover-up taking place. She had bought the paperback version, said Damore, and read it carefully' Damore said she was enraged by the cover up .
 Damore, in fact, never mentioned Morrow . Morrow, nor was there any reference to him in Damore’s notes . Morrow was never mentioned in his notes .
 Morrow also claimed he became part of the plot to assassinate Kennedy, though some of Morrow’s claims have also been questioned, even discredited . Morrow claimed he was part of a plot to kill Kennedy .
 In First Hand Knowledge, Robert Morrow provides a chilling account of an event that took place prior to Mary Meyer’s murder . Morrow provides an account of the events that occurred prior to the murder of Meyer .
 Diggs said the woman's talking might open up a lot of trouble for the CIA’s anti-Cuban counterfeit money operation . Morrow himself had been running the operation, which Bobby Kennedy had shut down before his brother's assassination . Diggs went on to say the woman�
 Morrow reminded his boss that the Warren Commission hadn’t found out about the counterfeiting operation, and therefore thought himself safe . Not understanding the significance of Diggs’s comment, Morrow told his boss he was safe . Morrow said he was not aware of the meaning of D
 There’s a certain lady in town who has an inside track to Langley, and most importantly, to Bobby . As I said, there's a certain woman in town .
 Morrow’s counterfeit money operation had been run by an anti-Castro Cuban by the name of Mario Kohly, the son of the former Cuban ambassador to Spain under the Batista regime before Castro took power .
 Kohly came to the United States to set up an organization known as the Cuban Liberators . At that time, Kohly was in the U.S. at the time, he was in Cuba . Kohly: "I was a Cuban Liberator"
 Morrow was recruited by Marshall Diggs in 1960 as a CIA contract agent . Diggs recruited Morrow to work as a contract agent for the CIA .
 Shortly after his recruitment, Morrow met with high-level CIA covert operative Tracy Barnes, who asked Morrow to become Mario Kohly’s CIA contact . Morrow was asked to become Kohly's CIA contact.
 According to one account, if the Bay of Pigs operation had been successful, the CIA was going to replace Fidel Castro as the president of Cuba with Mario Kohly . The CIA was planning to replace Castro with Kohly, according to the account .
 Morrow exclaimed to Diggs, realizing that his old boss was intimating that Mary Meyer should be eliminated immediately . Morrow exclaimed that he was worried that Meyer would be eliminated from the show .
 Robert Morrow came to suspect his meeting with Kohly had triggered Mary Meyer’s death, and that he had set it all up . Robert Morrow immediately came to . suspect he had a meeting with . Kohly, who had met with Morrow, had set up the death .
 Author Nina Burleigh chose to dismiss Morrow’s account as “rife with holes”—never identifying what exactly those “holes” were*—but further inquiry suggests his account may well have been reliable . Morrow's account of Mary Meyer's death may well
 John Williams was with Morrow at his house when Nina Burleigh called to interview him for her A Very Private Woman .
 His visit with Mario Kohly right before Mary’s death had become the catalyst for her murder . Mary's murder was the murder of her mother-in-law, Mary's killer says .
 Bob Morrow was more upset over Mary Meyer’s death than he was with the conspiracy to assassinate the president, his wife said . Williams told Morrow's wife, Jeanne, that he thought Bob was upset over Meyer's death .
 If the Warren Commission ever got beyond Oswald, it would only be a short time before Morrow himself would be implicated, even though he wasn't in Dallas that day . Morrow was not in Dallas when Oswald was assassinated .
 John Williams spent four years interviewing Morrow, combing everything Morrow had written and researched . John Williams interviewed Morrow and interviewed him for four years . Williams spent the time interviewing Morrow .
 The two talked intimately about all of Morrow’s undercover assignments . The two were able to talk to each other about their undercover work .
 Morrow was not only a CIA contract agent, but for more than two years he had also been the right-hand man of Tracy Barnes, one of the CIA’s most senior covert action specialists . Morrow was also the right hand man of Barnes, a CIA covert action specialist .
 They had started working together early in 1961, right after Marshall Diggs had recruited Morrow into the Agency . Diggs recruited Morrow to work for the Agency in 1961 .
 Morrow continued to investigate Mary Meyer’s death . Whether it was his guilt or just an obsessive need to know, Morrow continued .
 Bob Morrow’s ongoing research, as well as his intuitive sense, had changed his mind about who had murdered Mary Meyer . Shortly before his death, Williams called Morrow's "wonderful, intuitive sense"
 When first developed by Kodak in Dallas the day of the assassination, the film was still in its unslit, 16mm wide “double 8” home movie film format . INQ was developed in the days before the assassination .
 After three contact prints were struck at another lab in Dallas, the Kodak lab then slit the original and all three copies, as was normal practice, and joined the two halves of each of them together . Each film could then be played on a home 8-mm projector .
 He vividly and independently recalled during his first ARRB interview that this 16-mm wide film (from which he made enlargements of individual frames for briefing boards) contained opposing 8mm wide image strips going in opposite directions .
 Dino Brugioni's 8-mm wide original film had been magically transformed back into an unslit, 16mm wide double 8 “original” film 24 hours later, when it was delivered to Homer McMahon . Homer McMahon: "What had been a slit, 8-
 The clear implication here is that the courier from the Hawkeye facility delivered to McMahon an altered film, masquerading as a camera original . McMahon says the courier delivered the film to McMahon .
 Since the film had been altered, it had to be handled by a different group of NPIC employees . Dino Brugioni, who was the NPIC duty officer in charge that weekend, and his crew were never notified of this event . The second NPIC event on Sunday night
 Homer McMahon and his assistant Ben Hunter were brought in to handle the altered film . McMahon and Hunter helped create a second set of briefing boards for the film .
 The official suicide statistics were so much lower was that in many cases the suicides were documented as accidents, primarily single-car drunk driving accidents and selfinflicted gunshot wounds that were not accompanied by a suicide note or statement .
 Underreporting of suicides was an act of kindness to surviving relatives, doctor says . Underreporting was a kindness to the surviving relatives of those who committed suicide, he says .
 He who accepts evil without protesting against it is really cooperating with it, says King Jr. King . King: Acceptance of evil is really cooperation with it .
 A winter blizzard in 2004 blanketed the UK by snowfall in Santa Monica, California, left stranded in 2004 . The storm was the first to hit the U.S. in a snowstorm .
 Peter Graves is a Hollywood actor who has appeared in films and TV shows . Graves is best known for his role in the 1980s and '90s TV series . Graves appeared at a local travel agency when he was forced to give up .
 Graves, readers may recall, was one of the stars of the 1966 television series Mission Impossible . Graves starred in Mission Impossible as a member of the cast .
 The show was a fictionalized chronicle of an ultrasecret team of U.S. government agents known as the Impossible Missions Force . The show is based on the team of American government agents called the Impossible Mission Force .
 Peter Graves played the part of Jim Phelps, the team leader who began each episode selecting a cadre of skilled contract agents to accomplish the assigned clandestine mission .
 Each week a new episode followed the exploits of the elite Impossible Missions Force as it employed the latest technological gadgets and state-of-the-art disguises in an effort to sabotage unfriendly governments and dictators .
 So successful was Mission Impossible, it has currently spawned four blockbuster Hollywood action films starring Tom Cruise . Mission Impossible is currently being played by Tom Cruise in four films .
 Peter Graves and Peter Graves were reunited at the end of the series . Graves: "I was a fan of the show, but I was never able to miss an episode"
 My father was a fan of Graves’s character, Jim Phelps . Graves played Jim Phelps for the CIA in the 1960s and '90s TV series .
 The “Rubik’s Cube” of the murder of Mary Meyer had remained impenetrable until a mysterious linchpin was uncovered . For years during my research, the ‘Rubik's Cube’ of the . murder of . Mary Meyer remained imp
 It was only then that I began to understand the ingenious design that had been employed—one that created the illusion of something very different from what had actually occurred .
 Leo Damore and Dovey Roundtree believe Ray Crump Jr. could never have murdered Mary Pinchot Meyer . Damore spent three years interviewing Roundtree and Roundtree . The two were unequivocally convinced that Crump could not have murdered her .
 The seasoned defense attorney, imbued with an instinctive, gut-level feeling for who people really were—saints and murderers alike, never forgot her impressions upon first meeting Crump . Crump: "I have a gut level of feeling for people who really were"
 Tow truck driver Henry Wiggins Jr. had seen somebody standing over Mary's corpse within 15 seconds or so right after the second, final shot rang out . Wiggins says he saw someone standing over her body in the seconds after the shooting .
 Wiggins’s testimony during the trial concerned the appearance, clothes, and demeanor of the man he saw standing over the body . Indeed, the most intriguing aspect of Wiggins' testimony was the appearance of the bodybuilder he saw .
 Wiggins had described the color and style of the clothes in some detail . Wiggins said Crump had been wearing dark trousers, black shoes, a beige-colored jacket, and a dark-plaid brimmed golf cap . Wiggins: Crump's clothes matched what Crump was wearing
 Wiggins never indicated anything about the man’s appearance being in any way disheveled, given the murder that had just taken place . In fact, Wiggins did not indicate that the man's appearance was dishereled, despite the murder .
 Wiggins’s testimony: Neither his demeanor nor his clothes had ever indicated the man had been in any struggle . Wiggins: The man's demeanor and clothes had never indicated he was in a struggle just seconds before .
 Wiggins was not agitated or anxious that Wiggins had spotted him . Upon looking up and seeing Wiggins staring at him, he was composed and unconcerned . Wiggins was composed .
 "I ducked down behind the wall at that time, not too long, and I come back up from behind the . wall to see him turning around and shoving something in his pocket," she says .
 Wiggins says the man calmly walked away over the embankment . It was as if he wanted Wiggins to see him before he walked away . Wiggins says he saw the man before he calmly walked off .
 His unflustered demeanor contrasts sharply with that of a trembling, petrified Ray Crump, only because they weren’t the same person . Crump’s demeanor appeared to contrast sharply with his petrified demeanor .
 Nearly thirty years later, Leo Damore interviewed Henry Wiggins in 1992 . Wiggins was the subject of a new book, "Henry Wiggins"
 Damore said the government's star witness still vividly remembered the man standing over the woman’s body . Damore: The man standing in front of the woman's body was the man who stood over the body .
 He confided to Damore that he felt ‘strung along’ by the prosecution and had been “used” to present their case . Damore confided that he was ‘used’ to present the case .
 As the interview came to an end, Henry Wiggins proffered one last reflection about what had happened that day . Wiggins: "I'm not going to give up on what happened to me and I'm not giving up on it"
 It was the kind of remark that wouldn’t have been lost on a crime sleuth—someone like Sherlock Holmes, or Leo Damore .
 Lieutenant William L Mitchell, USA, appeared at D.C. Metropolitan Police headquarters the day after Mary's murder . Attorney Dovey Roundtree’s suspicions had been aroused .
 Mitchell told police he not only believed he had passed the murder victim as he ran eastward toward Key Bridge from Fletcher’s Boat House that day, but also that he was sure he'd passed a “Negro male” following her . Mitchell said he thought he had
 In an effort to convict Crump, neither the police nor the prosecution team had bothered to investigate William L Mitchell’s story . Crump was convicted of murder of William Mitchell .
 He stopped at the westward end of the narrow footbridge to allow Mary Meyer to cross . All of this took place, he testified, before allowing her to cross the narrow bridge .
 Nobody has corroborated Mitchell’s story, or ever testified to seeing Mitchell on the canal towpath the day Mary Meyer was murdered . Nobody has ever corroborated his story .
 Police officer Roderick Sylvis encountered a white couple walking westward from Fletcher’s Boat House . Sylvis had himself encountered a young man and woman in their thirties walking .
 The officers had neglected to get the couple’s names . However, the officers, in a peculiar lapse of procedure, had not named the couple .
 No matter in which direction the “bermuda shorts” runner was headed, he, too, would have run into the murder scene, either before or after the police had arrived .
 His identity, like that of the young white couple, would remain unknown . The identity of the man would not be known .
 Roundtree had tried to speak with Mitchell before the trial, she told Damore . Roundtree said he would never return her phone calls, she said .
 Mitchell was listed in the Department of Defense Telephone Directory in the fall of 1964 . Mitchell's signature tenacity took him on a journey that began with Mitchell’s listing in the Defense Telephone directory .
 William Mitchell gave his account to police the day after the murder, William Mitchell said he was stationed at the Pentagon .
 Mitchell also gave his address as 1500 Arlington Boulevard, Arlington, Virginia . The Virginian is a building known as the Virginian .
 William L Mitchell was nowhere to be found during the search for the missing man . William Mitchell was not found by the police .
 The directories of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and of the Army itself produced no identification or record of any William Mitchell stationed at the Pentagon in 1964 .
 Damore interviewed former CIA contract analyst David MacMichael in 1992 . MacMichael was still living in Washington, D.C., when he was interviewed by Damore .
 MacMichael and Damore visited Mitchell's former apartment building in Arlington, Virginia . MacMichael recalls visiting Mitchell’s former address at 1500 Arlington Boulevard .
 Any trail of Mitchell's identity or whereabouts, however, appeared to have vaporized . Mitchell was found dead at the scene .
 Roger Charles is a military researcher and investigative journalist . He was introduced to Mitchell by military researcher Roger Charles in 2005 . Charles is an investigative journalist for the U.S. government .
 The story exposed the Pentagon’s attempted cover-up of the U.S. downing of an Iranian civilian airliner in 1988 . Vincennes, Indiana, was involved in the attack on the Iranian airliner .
 He and his colleagues provided the viewing public with a picture of the horrors inflicted by U.S. soldiers on Iraqi prisoners . Iraqi prisoners were tortured by American soldiers on their own .
 Roger Charles had learned his craft under the tutelage of former marine colonel William R Corson, author of the controversial book The Betrayal .
 Corson created a huge crisis that nearly brought him a court-martial . Corson exposed President Johnson’s corrupt, deliberate deception during the Vietnam War in 1968 .
 Had Corson not done what he did, the Vietnam War would have been even further prolonged . Corson's actions would have saved the war from being prolonged, but he did it .
 He co-authored Engine of Soviet Power, which he co-wrote with Robert T Crowley, an elite operative in the CIA’s covert action directorate . Crowley was a close colleague and friend of Jim Angleton's .
 Roger Charles became Corson’s protégé and chief research assistant . He was also the executor of the Corson estate . Charles was Corson's confidant .
 With regard to William Mitchell, Roger Charles was asked to review Mitchell’s office listing in the 1964 DoD telephone directory . Roger Charles reviewed Mitchell's office listing .
 Through his own channels, he sent an inquiry to the U.S. Army military database in St. Louis .
 "William Mitchell" was stationed at the Pentagon in 1964 . Mitchell was stationed in St. Louis for any “William Mitchell’s” who was stationed there in 1964. Mitchell was a U.S. Army officer in the mid-'60s .
 Mitchell’s name no longer appeared after the fall 1964 edition of the Pentagon's Pentagon directory . Charles Charles discovered that Mitchell's name was no longer on the cover of that edition .
 He next investigated the military personnel who were located physically adjacent to Mitchell’s alleged office . He created a list of approximately twenty individuals . The list includes approximately twenty military personnel .
 Fifteen of those individuals could be verified through their military records, but none of the other five servicemen had any military record in any service database .
 "They’re taught how to evade all the conventional bureaucracies and channels," he says . "They're taught how they’ve got to evade the conventional bureaucracy and channels"
 Mitchell, whoever he was or is, had some kind of covert intelligence connection . Mitchell had no matching military record I can locate, but it's almost a certainty this guy Mitchell had some of the connection .
 Albarelli’s magnum opus took me by the hand and held me hostage for several days, he says . Albarellas’ ‘Magnum Opus’ is a masterpiece of art and science fiction, he writes .
 The most convincing account of how the CIA “terminated” one of its own . The best history ever written of the Agency’s infamous MKULTRA program .
 I mumbled something about the trail having ended at “1500 Arlington Boulevard” in Arlington, Virginia . The trail ended at 1500 Arlington Boulevard, in Arlington .
 I then mentioned my phantom—William L Mitchell—and some of the dead-end information I had amassed . The phantom, William L Mitchell, was William Mitchell, the author of a novel .
 He said he would get back to me later; he thought he had come across the name before . He said: "I thought he thought I'd come across a name before. He thought he'd find it again."
 Albarelli source revealed in September 2001 something more about the identity of William Mitchell, author says . Author: "Someone whom the author had known for many years and whose information was corroborated by other sources"
 Albarelli asked if he would telephone the source and confirm several of the statements he’d made during his 2001 interview . Albarellan said he would phone the source to confirm the statements made in the interview .
 Albarelli's first attempt at this follow-up with the source wasn’t home, but his wife was . In his first attempt, the source was not home . Albarelli also knew well, but the source also knew his wife, whom he knew well .
 Mitchell and her husband, she told Albarelli, always drank too much when they were together . “They were drunk and crazy for days,” Mitchell said of her husband and friends .
 Albarelli reached the source, but he wasn't amenable to talking about Mitchell, or even acknowledging whether Mitchell was still alive . Albarelli called back later that day, he reported he did finally reach the source . He said he didn't want to talk about Mitchell or
 Albarelli asked whether he remembered telling him in 2001 that Mitchell killed Mary Meyer . He said he did not remember telling him that Mitchell had killed Meyer . Albarell: "I don't remember that I told him that Mary Meyer was killed"
 By the end of 1992, “playing his cards close to his vest,” Leo Damore had learned something else . Damore: “Playing his cards very carefully, very carefully" Damore says he learned something from Damore .
 Damore told Leary that Mary’s real diary still exists and that he believed he had discovered its whereabouts . In 1990, Damore said he had found the diary's whereabouts .
 Leo had sometimes cryptically referred to Mary’s diary as “the Hope Diamond” of the Kennedy assassination . He faithfully guarded not only the fact that he had eventually come into possession of the diary, but its contents as well .
 He finally revealed both to attorney Jimmy Smith on March 31, 1993, in a conversation that will shortly be discussed in more detail .
 Angleton had shown Mary’s diary to a man named Bernie Yoh in 1980 . Yoh was the person to whom Angleton showed the diary to .
 It claimed to do what Fox News Network now purports to do for TV news— providing “fair and balanced” reporting . It claimed for print media what the Fox News . Network now claims to be providing ‘fair, balanced’ reporting .
 Newsweek carried a positive review of the book that had infuriated former CIA counterintelligence chief Jim Angleton only because of Martin’s unflattering portrayal of him .
 The book details the cause of Angleton’s termination in disgrace from the Agency in late 1974 . Angleton was fired from the agency in disgrace in disgrace .
 His paranoia had, for years, paralyzed crucial intelligence gathering by the Agency . The Agency had to rely on his paranoia to gather intelligence .
 He had violated innumerable laws, as had the Agency as a whole, through mail tampering and privacy invasions of hundreds of individual citizens . He had also violated numerous laws, including mail tampering, privacy invasion .
 He sought out Bernie Yoh at AIM, asking him to “counter-spin” the recent Newsweek story in a way that was favorable to him . Yoh said he wanted to counter-spin the story in an unfavorable way .
 Yoh willingly obliged by publishing “An AIM Report” in defense of Angleton . Yoh defended Angleton in the defense of his clientele .
 In 1990 interview with Leo Damore, Bernie Yoh revealed more about Angleton’s astonishing behavior in 1980 . Angleton's reputation had taken a huge tumble when the Cold War was over .
 Angleton had “flashed his credentials,” mentioning JFK and the towpath murder of his mistress Mary Pinchot Meyer, Yoh says . Angleton also mentioned her tell-all diary, also mentioning her tell all .
 Yoh remembered a conversation about the Kennedy administration and related matters . That conversation, Yoh said, had taken place in light of some prior discussion about Kennedy administration . Yoh: "It's a good thing that you can talk to the White House"
 Yoh himself had not fully grasped what Angleton was actually referring to . At the time, Yoh was not fully aware of what he was actually saying .
 Leo Damore had finally come into possession of Mary’s true diary . This was how he had finally been able to find out what had been true .
 Prouty knew all about the inner workings of America’s intelligence apparatus, having been summoned to countless classified briefings with Allen Dulles and his brother, John Foster Dulles, even at their homes .
 Prouty attended many of the CIA’s MKULTRA meetings and was considered part of “the nerve center” of the “military—industrial—industrial complex” in the late 1950s .
 President Kennedy's father facilitated many CIA coups d’état around the globe, including military support for these operations . He became disturbed when he discovered the CIA’s involvement in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The CIA, Vietnam, and the Plot to Assassinate John F Kennedy , have remained two of the most authoritative works of that era . The CIA and Vietnam are the most important works of the era .
 At the end of 1992, unable to locate Mitchell or any forwarding address, Leo Damore had reached an impasse . Damore was unable to find Mitchell or his forwarding address . Mitchell died in 1992 .
 His last resort was sending a letter to Mitchell to his last known address, the CIA "safe house" at 1500 Arlington Boulevard in Arlington, Virginia .
 The actual contents of Damore’s letter were never known, but it had to have contained something that would motivate Mitchell to reply . That could have only been what Damore had learned from Fletcher Prouty .
 Leo Damore’s telephone rang March 30, 1993, March 31, 1993 . Damore died of a heart attack in March 1993 .
 He had received Leo’s letter, he said, and had also read his book Senatorial Privilege . He said he had also received the letter from Leo .
 He agreed to talk with Damore, but made it clear he didn't want to be labeled the fall guy in history . Damore: "I'm not going to be a guy who doesn't like to be seen as a guy that doesn't deserve to be in history"
 At approximately 8:30 on the moming of March 31, 1993, the telephone of James H Smith, Esq., in Falmouth, Massachusetts, began to ring .
 Jimmy was also Damore’s attorney, and Leo dedicated his 1988 book Senatorial Privilege to him . Damore was introduced to Ted Kennedy's cousin Joe Gargan, who would reveal to Damore what had been taking place behind the scenes while Mary Joe Kopechne
 Jimmy Smith had returned to his private law practice after a stint as a U.S. magistrate and federal trial judge . Jimmy Smith is a former judge and magistrate .
 Smith had been one of Robert Kennedy’s chief advance men for his presidential campaign in 1968 . Smith was a longtime Kennedy insider, and a member of the elite Kennedy “Irish Mafia” Smith was one of the Kennedy "Irish Mafia"
 Smith was so traumatized by Bobby’s death that he momentarily lost his struggle with alcoholism . Smith was also traumatized after the assassination of Jack Jack, who was assassinated five years earlier .
 Kenny O’Donnell lost his own battle and died in 1977 . He was killed by the second Kennedy assassination .
 Smith had returned to his law practice on Cape Cod and recommitted to a life of sobriety . Determined to save himself, Smith had vowed to save his life .
 Attorney James H Smith meticulously saved six pages of notes, all of which he meticulously saved . The attorney kept his notes on his yellow legal pad next to his phone .
 The following account is reconstructed from Smith’s original notes , interpreted and explained by Smith over many hours of reviewing their meaning and context . Smith's notes are reconstructed from his original notes .
 Smith quickly began writing, trying to keep up with Leo’s exhilaration . Smith quickly started writing, ‘I’m not sure what I’ll do next.’
 The murder of Mary Meyer had been “a CIA operation” in which Mitchell had been the assassin . Mary Meyer was murdered by the CIA in a CIA operation, Mitchell said .
 He said his position at the Pentagon in 1964 had been just “a light bulb job,” a cover for covert intelligence work . He said he had been working for the CIA in 1964 .
 Damore told Damore he had done stints in the Air Force, the Army, and the Navy . Damore had also been “an FBI man” when circumstances required it, he said . He said he had served in the Navy, Air Force and Air Force .
 Mitchell told Damore that his listed residence in Arlington, Virginia, was in fact a CIA safe house . Damore: The listed residence at 1500 Arlington Boulevard in Arlington is in fact an Arlington, D.C. home . Mitchell: The home is a safe house.
 He had been assigned in September 1964 to be part of a “surveillance team” that was monitoring Mary Meyer .
 It was the “Angleton connection w/CIA ” “ and the CIA’s orchestration of the events in Dallas that put her in harm” way . It was “The Angleton connection” and “the CIA” was the CIA
 Her indignation at the cover-up in the Warren Report pushed her to confront her ex-husband, Cord, and possibly Jim Angleton as well . Angleton may have been involved in the cover up, she says .
 Smith’s notes indicated that it had to have been Cord who conveyed to Jim Angleton how infuriated Mary had become . Angleton had been infuriated by Mary's anger, Smith notes show .
 Mary had a separate confrontation with Jim Angleton alone, or with Cord present, wasn’t clear . Whether Mary and Cord were together at the time wasn't clear .
 Fletcher Prouty had assisted Damore in understanding more clearly how Mary Meyer’s murder had itself been a microcosmic copy of what had taken place in Dallas .
 Mary's murder had all been planned in advance, designed to take place in an open setting, away from home territory . And, as in Dallas, Mary’s murder, the murder was designed to be random, creating the illusion of randomness .
 A plausible suspect, a patsy who happened to have been in the wrong place, at the wrong time . It was followed by the speedy apprehension of a plausible suspect .
 The police would also unknowingly feed the details to the media that would, in turn, be used to publicly imply the suspect’s guilt, complete with mug shots of suspect Ray Crump in handcuffs at the murder scene and the police station . The media would then use the details
 It had all been "standard CIA procedure," Mitchell said to Damore, as recorded in Smith’s notes . Damore: It had been “standard CIA procedures”
 Mitchell: The couple on the towpath that morning had been spotters for the operation . Mitchell: "The bermuda shorts" runner that no one had seen was seen except Mitchell .
 Damore never turned in a manuscript for “Burden of Guilt” to his new agent . Damore recorded all the Mitchell bombshell revelations, all of which he recorded, but he recorded none of them .
 Damore’s former wife, June Davison, kindly gave me as much assistance as she could in my attempt to locate Damore's tapes . The former president of the U.S. House of Representatives is a member of the Republican Party. Damore is a former member
 At my request in 2004, she made searches of their home in Old Saybrook, Connecticut, but could find nothing . At her request, she said, "I made searches for nothing"
 Damore received the call from Mitchell and then placed the call to Jimmy Smith on March 31, 1993 . Damore's last residence in Centerbrook, Connecticut, was where he had received the phone call . Mitchell's last call was to Smith from Damore .
 Fruitlessly, I scoured the area around the building, thinking he might have buried the tapes somewhere near, but to no avail. Fruitlessly. I scour the area .
 In April 1993, Leo Damore returned to Washington and met with his research assistant, Mark O’Blazney, for lunch at the Henley Park Hotel . Damore: “Leo’s research assistant Mark O'Blazny met with him for lunch
 William Mitchell had come to the conclusion that he had been involved in Mary’s murder . He, too, had concluded that whoever William Mitchell was, he had to have been involved .
 O’Blazney’s wife, though not present at the luncheon, corroborated what Mark had told her later on that after his meeting with Damore, she said . The wife was not present, but corroborated her husband's account .
 Mitchell told Leo Mitchell that witnesses were placed at the murder scene . Leo said Mitchell told him that witnesses had been placed there at the scene of the murder . But Leo also said Mitchell said witnesses were at the crime scene .
 At some point—the precise date is unknown—the order was given to ‘terminate” her . At some time, the precise date of the order was unknown .
 It was to be done in a public place, then made to look like something it wasn’t . It was done in the public place then made into something it’s not .
 Mary’s routine of taking walks around noon on the C & O Canal towpath . She would typically walk out to Fletcher's Boat House and then return, a distance of about four miles in total .
 Within that venue, a designated kill zone had to be selected where Mary would be accessible . Within that zone, the kill zone was chosen where Mary was accessible .
 The planners wanted to create the impression of a wanton, random act of violence, unrelated to Mary’s identity or political connections . By choosing an outside location, rather than her home, the planners chose to create an impression of the attack .
 It had to be skillfully executed with Mission Impossible precision beyond the intersection of where Canal Road intersects with Foxhall Road .
 The ideal time for such an operation was determined to be a weekday, when the towpath was less frequented . The ideal day for the operation was a weekday .
 The operation’s planners very likely were prepared to carry out their mission on any number of days, depending on certain variables, including the availability of an appropriate patsy . The mission could be carried out on days or days .
 "These were the kind of painstaking calculations and details that were involved in the extensive planning of professional assassinations," says CNN's John Sutter .
 There are any number of challenging factors to control and overcome . Any significant mistake or oversight could be disastrous .
 As little as possible could be left to chance, the whereabouts of Cord Meyer, Mary’s ex-husband, Cord Meyer . Mary's ex-wife was found dead in the early hours of the day . Cord Meyer is believed to be in hiding .
 The team put in place to conduct this operation likely consisted of at least six to eight operatives, not including the architects of the plan itself, or the ancillary adjacent personnel dispatched to monitor and control other important operational details .
 In order to execute an operation of this nature, there had to be some kind of command center in the C & O Canal area to coordinate logistics . It would have to include radio communication to and from Mitchell, and his team, on the towpath .
 The operational plan of “standard CIA procedure,” similar in design to what had taken place in Dallas, albeit on a smaller scale and within a shorter time sequence, called for a patsy . Someone who could be unknowingly and immediately easily framed .
 The operation required the use of disguises and/or costumes, an absolute necessity . Such an operation would have required the . use of . disguises or costumes, such as masks and costumes .
 CIA had resources like the CIA’s Technical Services Division under the direction of Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter: "No other entity on earth had resources such as the CIA's technical Services Division"
 Ray Crump Jr. had been picked up by his girlfriend, Vivian, in her car “very early that moming’s” shortly after eight p.m. He was picked up shortly after 8 a.m., his girlfriend said . Crump was picked
 Crump and Vivian didn't have enough money for a motel room that morning . Crump, Vivian and Crump say they didn't get enough money to stay in a motel .
 Crump had likely been spotted by the CIA team early that morning as he and Vivian began walking out from the Georgetown entry point of the towpath to some predetermined area he was familiar with from earlier fishing trips to the area .
 It was still probably two to three hours before the murder would take place, police say . The victim was shot and killed in the early hours of the day .
 There may have been more than one candidate for patsy the team was monitoring that morning before a decision was made .
 Someone was assigned with a radio to keep tabs on Crump and his whereabouts . Eventually, someone was assigned—with a radio, to keep track of Crump's whereabouts .
 Whoever the designated patsy, the operation would have immediately had to procure clothing similar to what he was wearing . The operation would also have had to buy clothes similar to his .
 In Crump’s case, that meant generic dark shoes, dark pants, a light-beige-colored Windbreaker and a dark-plaid golf cap .
 A specialized team from the CIA's TSD had the capability of transforming almost anyone into whatever was called for, including changing someone’s race from white to black if necessary .
 The Ray Crump look-alike was larger than Crump . So they had to make do with what was available . The man they used for the standin, the look-a-like Crump, is larger than the Crump himself .
 Mitchell’s team would not have been greenlighted and alerted to begin positioning themselves . Until Mary exited her studio that morning she started walking toward the canal, Mitchell's team would have been unable to move .
 Another member of the surveillance team was assigned to monitor her whereabouts from the moment she left her house and arrived at her studio .
 When it was Clear shortly after noon that she was headed for her daily walk on the canal towpath, all operational parameters would have been initiated .
 The mysterious Nash Rambler had likely already been placed adjacent to the designated kill zone on the canal . The mysterious, stalled vehicle was likely already in the designated area .
 The Rambler could have been set up earlier that morning, or several mornings in a row . The operation was finally given greenlighted-to-go status .
 At some point the key to the stalled vehicle would be delivered to the Key Bridge Esso station with a request for someone to fix the vehicle . The key would then be delivered at some point to the station with the vehicle's key .
 The team already would have had a good idea how fast she walked, and approximately how long it would take her to reach the wooden footbridge . The bridge is a place where vegetation around the towpath area became denser .
 Her assassination would eventually take place exactly 637. feet west of the footbridge . The assassination would take place in exactly exactly exactly the exact location .
 Mitchell admitted to Damore that there were two sets of spotters, “a couple walking together” and another runner wearing Bermuda shorts . They were tracking Mary’s whereabouts on the towpath and likely communicating by radio to some unknown command center .
 Mitchell could not have been running on the towpath prior to the murder . Mitchell and the dressed-up Crump look-alike were positioning themselves on standby status .
 The entire operational was crystallizing—waiting for whoever was going to be servicing the stalled Nash Rambler to show up (and unknowingly play the role of “witnesses) and waiting for Mary Meyer to approach the designated kill zone .
 Another member of the operational team had to be monitoring the whereabouts of the real Ray Crump and reporting his activity to the command center . Meanwhile, the real Crump was still at large .
 The team had to know where Crump was situated and when he and Vivian reached the spot on the Potomac where their tryst would take place . Vivian and Crump would have a tryst at the site of the tryst .
 Even if Crump and Vivian had arrived at the towpath entrance in Georgetown as late as 10:30M., that still gave the team close to two hours to set up, orchestrate, and carry out the assassination of Mary Meyer .
 Ray Crump told attorney Dovey Roundtree that he and Vivian had gone to a particular spot on the bank of the Potomac that he was familiar with, having fished there before . Crump said he had fished at a spot in the area where he had gone
 Ray passed out on rocks at the water’s edge . They did some drinking, he said, then “fooled around a little,’ at which point he passed out, he added . He said they drank, then fell asleep on rocks .
 He couldn't swim; he panicked and struggled to climb out, likely tearing his trousers and cutting his hand in the process . He couldn’t swim; . He struggled and climbed out of the water .
 Vivian had disappeared, however, while Ray was passed out from intoxication . Ray had been passed out of intoxication . Vivian disappeared, but Ray was still drunk . Ray passed out .
 If Ray was being monitored and set up as a patsy, Vivian’s mere presence was an obstacle the operation had to surmount . Vivian's mere presence—an alibi for Ray—was an obstacle for Ray, the operation must have surmounted .
 The terrified Vivian would never testify, even with Ray’s life hanging in the balance . Ray's life was on the verge of his death when he was shot by police .
 She told Roundtree she feared “being killed by her husband,” should he discover her affair . She said she feared being killed by him if he found out about it .
 The operation to terminate Mary Meyer would have been fully greenlighted by radio communication . As soon as Henry Wiggins and Bill Branch arrived at approximately 12:20 P.M., the operation would have had to be greenlightened by radio .
 Mitchell would have signaled by radio that the ‘witnesses’—Wiggins and Branch — were in place . Mitchell’s radio signal would have indicated that they were there would be .
 Mary’s screams from the canal lasted “about twenty seconds,” Wiggins said, before the first gunshot rang out . The screams lasted ‘about 20 seconds” before the shooting, Wiggins said .
 Mitchell now needed Mary to scream in order to attract the attention of whoever was servicing the Rambler . In a full embrace, Mitchell pinned Mary’s arms at her side, pinning her arms at the side .
 As a highly trained, skilled assassin, he could have easily, quickly shot Mary before she was even aware of what was occurring . He could have shot her before she knew what was happening .
 He could have picked her off with a high-powered rifle from behind an adjacent tree as she walked by . Or he could have killed her with a sniper rifle from a nearby tree . He could also pick her off from behind a tree .
 Mary’s screaming, her cries for help, were essential to drawing in the witnesses to the murder taking place . Ray Crump look-alike stood over her body . Mary's screaming was essential to draw in witnesses .
 Whether Mitchell underestimated Mary’s strength and lost his grip, or whether he let go of her because he expected she would fall to the ground, fatally wounded, after his first shot .
 Mary appeared to have broken away and tried to escape over the embankment . She finally grabbed a tree limb with her saturated, blood-soaked glove in order to steady herself .
 That wouldn't do for Mitchell, or the operational intent of the mission . That wouldn’t do for the mission, Mitchell says . Mitchell: "It's a mission to protect the U.S. from harm"
 Mary had to be positioned close or right next to the canal itself where the murder scene would be clearly visible to someone looking across from the Canal Road wall . Mary's location would be near the canal where the crime scene would have been visible .
 Mitchell quickly grabbed Mary again and dragged her some twenty-five feet from the embankment to the edge of the canal’s edge . With a perfectly placed shot under her right shoulder blade angled slightly to the left, he killed her instantly .
 Mitchell’s escape was quickly accomplished by slipping into the woods, as the Ray Crump look-alike rapidly assumed his position, standing over the now slain body of Mary Pinchot Meyer . Also executed with extreme precision was Mitchell's escape from the scene of the murder .
 Wiggins started moving toward the wall of the canal across the street from the stalled vehicle that he and his partner had come to fix . Wiggins heard the first gunshot and moved to the wall . Wiggins says he heard the gunshots and moved away from the vehicle .
 After Mitchell twice shot and killed Mary, the upper part of his body and/or clothes would have almost certainly been spattered in Mary’s blood . Mitchell's upper body would have probably been covered in Mary's blood .
 The red sweatshirt would have to have to some degree camouflaged the bloodstains . The bloodstained sweatshirt had to be covered in blood .
 His likely escape was through the Foundry Underpass, the nearest exit out of the area . He was likely to be able to escape through the foundry underpasses .
 Albarelli’s longtime source says Mitchell would have had little difficulty evading detection by police . Mitchell was a highly trained assassin from the “Army Special Forces kill teams,” according to the source . Mitchell is believed to have worked for the Army's "Special Forces
 A man thought to be a “Negro male” very possibly the Ray Crump look-alike, had been momentarily spotted by officer Roderick Sylvis west of the murder scene more than an hour after the murder had occurred .
 This “Negro male,” as Sylvis described him during the trial, would also elude capture, disappearing and staying hidden, as he had no doubt been trained .
 When he was first spotted by Detective Warner at least ten to fifteen minutes—approximately 1:00mM—before his actual arrest by Detective Crooke, Crump wasn’t wearing a light-colored beige jacket or any cap . Yet when he was spotted by detective Warner
 The CIA operation was in control of everything. The answer, of course, was that the CIA was in charge of everything . The answer to that was that .
 Once Crump had become the designated patsy, the team knew where he was and what he was doing at all times, and especially what he wore . Crump has been a long-suffering victim of racial profiling in the past .
 Wiggins was to be seen by the man standing over the body . They had gone to great lengths to duplicate his clothing for the man . Wiggins was seen by Wiggins at the scene of the murder .
 They also knew, from surveillance of Crump, that he had jettisoned his jacket and cap, or perhaps lost them when he had inadvertently slipped into the Potomac . Crump was also believed to have lost his jacket or cap .
 It had taken Byers less than forty-five minutes to locate Crump’s jacket . Crump's jacket was found in Byers’ pocket .
 CIA operative was given enough direction by the CIA’s operating team . Likely because he was given too much direction by CIA operating team.
 Without the jacket and cap, there would be no circumstantial evidence against Ray Crump, the evidence would be against him . Crump's clothing is critical to the prosecution of his son's murder conviction .
 Crump was charged with murder in the death of his wife in 2008 . Crump has been charged with her murder, but prosecutors say he is innocent .
 By 2:00 that afternoon, Deputy Coroner Linwood Rayford had arrived at the murder scene, and he pronounced Mary Meyer dead at 2:05 pm .
 He didn't leave the scene immediately after he was arrested because too many police cars were blocking the exit at the Foundry Underpass . He didn’t leave the site immediately after his arrest because he was blocked from leaving .
 Crump was escorted away from the area sometime between 2:00 and 2:15 p.M. and taken to police headquarters . Crump is finally escorted out of the area at around 2:30 p.m. and is now in custody .
 In handcuffs, wearing a white T-shirt, Ray would be photographed and paraded around police headquarters . Ray was arrested and charged with murder in 2007 .
 Before the end of the day, the media would begin drilling Crump’s guilt into the public psyche . Crump's guilt would be drilled into public psyche.
 The only thing left to do was to establish Mary’s identity for police, but in a controlled manner . Police were able to find Mary's identity after she was found dead .
 CNN.com's John Sutter writes about the mystery of a mysterious man in the U.S. He says it's a mystery that has haunted him for years . Sutter: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was a mystery"
 By 2006, after several years of painstaking research, I had not yet fully grasped how comprehensive an ‘operation’ Mary’s murder had been. By 2006 I had still not fully grasped the extent of the ‘opera’
 There were still too many unanswered questions, too many lingering details I wasn’t able to resolve, and I had nowhere to go for answers . "There were still unanswered questions," she says .
 Early one morning, hours before dawn in February 2006, I awoke disoriented, soaking wet as if sick with a fever in a night sweat . I awoke soaking wet and soaking wet, as if I was sick .
 "With darkness all around, I struggled to make sense of my current disposition," says author . "I struggled to find a way to cope with the darkness," she says .
 "I felt as if I'd been talking to someone in another dimension, almost sensing some lingering presence in my bedroom with me," she said .
 "Like a waterfall, rainbows of cascading images and thoughts from months of intensive study and research tumbled through my awareness," says the author .
 A horrid insight suddenly gripped me, though not yet fully comprehended or understood . "Horrid insight" gripped me as I read the book, but I'm not sure how it happened .
 A veiled form of the clue had actually been in public view for years, since 1980 in fact, but I hadn't noticed it then, or even when it appeared more dramatically in 1995 . The clue was actually in the public eye for years .
 The reader may recall in an earlier chapter the mention of the telephone call that Ben Bradlee received “just after lunch” from his CIA friend . The reader .
 The truth was, Bradlee never revealed that his “friend” Wistar Janney was a high-level career CIA officer in this passage . Bradlee's "friend’s friend” was a career CIA agent .
 Bradlee said he had learned that something might have happened to his sister-in-law, Mary Meyer . This had been the very first moment, Bradlee claimed, when he learned that .
 My father had been a career officer of the CIA since 1949, almost from the Agency’s inception .
 Ray Crump, it will be remembered, was just leaving the murder scene in handcuffs on his way to police homicide headquarters . Crump was leaving the scene just before he was arrested for the murder of Michael Clifford . He was leaving in handcuffs .
 Wistar Janney just happened to be “listening to the radio” in his CIA office, where he allegedly heard a “radio description” about a murder that had just taken place on the canal . Janney was allegedly listening to a "radio description" about
 Mary Meyer was the subject of a new documentary, "Mary Meyer" The film is based on Mary Meyer's book, "Meyer" The book is published in New York, New York and Washington, DC .
 Mary’s outspoken, disapproving comments against the CIA drew resentment and hostility from other CIA wives, it also infuriated men like my father, whose blood boiled at the slightest criticism of his beloved CIA from anyone . Mary's outspoken comments drew resentment from other wives, and infuriated
 A conveniently placed eyewitness had identified Crump, standing over the victim just seconds after the fatal second gunshot . Crump was identified by an eyewitness as the victim's killer .
 At the Janney family home during the evening of Mary’s murder, a bit of veiled intrigue was occurring . At the night of Mary's murder, the family was in the midst of the murder .
 My younger brother, Christopher, 14, was living at home at the time of the incident . However, Christopher was still at home when the incident occurred . Christopher was the youngest person to be involved in the shooting .
 During the course of his research, I asked him to recollect what he remembered that evening .
 Christopher recalled that during dinner there had been absolutely no mention of Mary Meyer’s murder . Christopher recalled how he had been shocked by the revelation .
 Christopher was in his bedroom nearby with his door open doing homework . Christopher was doing homework at the time of the incident .
 Our mother, he remembered, was in the master bedroom, most likely either reading or working at her desk . He said she was likely either either reading, or working on her desk at the time .
 During the seven-year period I worked on this book, my mother volunteered on two separate occasions—and with no prompting from me—her own recollections of that evening . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author .
 I made a point of not leading her in any direction; I just listened and let her talk. "I just listened to her talk," she says of her mother .
 On both occasions, she distinctly remembered the phone call that evening . She said: "I remember the call that night. I remember it all."
 Mary was found dead on the tow path along the canal that borders the Potomac . She was apparently murdered that afternoon by an unknown assailant .
 To my incredulous questions, he assured me that there could be no mistake . He assured me there was no mistake. To his incredulous .
 Wistar Janney had known, during the afternoon of the murder, the identity of the ‘unidentified’ murder victim . Janney's killer had known during that afternoon that the victim had been identified .
 He had played ignorant when he arrived home to his family, and said nothing until the mystery phone call took place . Yet he had played ignorance when he returned home to the family .
 Cord Meyer, like Bradlee, would conveniently omit the fact in the previous description that his “old friend, Wistar Janney,” was, like himself, a high-level CIA official . Cord Meyer omitted the fact that he was a CIA official in the 1980s
 Mary’s identity hadn’t been established officially until Ben Bradlee identified her in the D.C. morgue, “sometime after six o’clock in the evening,” in the company of Sergeant Sam Wallace .
 The only logical explanation was that Wistar Janney was part of the CIA operation to “terminate” Mary Pinchot Meyer . Cord Meyer himself was himself, although peripherally and indirectly, as was Cord Meyer .
 The same question might be asked of Ben Bradlee, especially considering the incriminating time frame of the call in Bradlee’s account .
 Neither Cord Meyer nor Ben Bradlee wanted to be accused of withholding critical information in their respective memoirs as to how they had first learned of Mary's death .
 Cord had, it seemed, safely revealed this fact in 1980 with no repercussions . Bradlee may have thought in 1995 that it was safe for him to do so, given the longer span of time .
 Bradlee's 1995 revelation of the phone call from Wistar Janney was, and still is, potentially more damaging because his entire memoir account contradicts his 1965 trial testimony . Bradlee’s 1995 revelation was more damaging than his 1995 revelation .
 CIA official Wistar Janney had called Bradlee to inform him of Mary’s death “just after lunch” less than two hours after the murder took place, with Mary still unknown to police . Bradlee was a possible accessory to murder .
 The prosecution at any time knew about either of Wistar Janney’s calls to Cord Meyer or Ben Bradlee . Still another lingering question was whether the prosecution knew about the calls .
 Alfred Hantman could have been disbarred for suborning perjury . He could have known and withheld that information, he could have had to suborned perjury .
 The courtroom proceedings would have been exposed as nothing but a sham . Some believed they had been engineered to convict Ray Crump as part of a greater cover-up, not only of Mary Meyer’s assassination .
 Wistar Janney died suddenly in January 1979 of a heart attack while playing squash with Jack Oliver at the Metropolitan Club in Washington . By 1980, Janney was dead; he died in January .
 Wistar Janney feigned his entire reaction to his wife and youngest son . He feigned the entire reaction on the evening of Mary’s murder .
 Six weeks later, home from boarding school for Thanksgiving, I would sit at our family dinner table and listen to my mother reveal the murder of Mary Meyer earlier that fall . My mother would later reveal that Meyer was murdered .
 During her explanation, some part of me would also observe my father vacantly staring off into space . "Some part of my father also observed my father staring into space," she says .
 It would take more than forty years to finally realize that it had been his ghostly, eerie silence that evening that had so deeply haunted my psyche . It would be more than 40 years to realize that .
 CIA had experienced a slow walk through hell in the post-Watergate era of the late 1970s . The CIA was in the midst of a crisis in the wake of Watergate .
 Investigative reporting was fast becoming a career choice for talented young journalists . Wistar Janney was forced to close its doors on investigative reporting . The company was forced out of the company in 2010 .
 Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, under the ironic tutelage of Ben Bradlee and Washington Post owner Katharine Graham, had raised the bar. Bob Woodward, Carl Bernstein and Carl Carl Bernstein raised the . bar .
 The Post’s Watergate exposés had made the prospect of journalism glamorous again . The Post's Watergate scandal made it look glamorous again.
 Revealing “deep politics” and “secret history” was becoming a national obsession . Revealing "deep politics" and "secret history" was becoming an obsession in the U.S.
 Cord Meyer’s 1980 memoir, Facing Reality, would reveal Wistar's knowledge of Mary's identity long before the police knew . Cord Meyer's 1980 memoir would reveal that Wistar knew of Mary Wistar .
 Wistar thought a graceful, grand exit from the play of life would spare everyone . Never realizing that eventually, one way or another, the sins of the father would be visited upon the son . Wistar may have tried to make a graceful exit from life .
 During the last two years of his life, Wistar Janney was living his own private version of hell . Janney: "I was living my own private hell. I was living in hell"
 His beloved Agency had fallen into disrepute, and with it the reputation of many of those who had been there at the beginning . His beloved agency had fallen . with it .
 Retirement at age sixty loomed ominously on the horizon, and he wasn’t at all happy about it, nor did he have any substantive plans as to how he might occupy himself .
 "Even a doctoral graduate student in clinical psychology such as myself could see he was intermittently agitated, still drinking heavily, sneaking cigarettes whenever he could," he said .
 His depression, an ongoing heart condition and no regular exercise, created an ideal prescription for an acute, made-toorder coronary event .
 Wistar has a typical high-caloric, saturated-fat lunch, accompanied by a generous side order of martinis . Wistar went upstairs and played his predictably aggressive game of squash .
 It was, as the Beatles song lyric echoed, “a ticket to ride,” but one with no return . The Beatles song lyrics echoed: “A ticket to . ride, but a ticket with no . return.” It was ‘a . ticket to
 Angleton opened people's mail and collected their pictures and diaries . Angleton's program was his program, collecting their pictures, diaries. Angleton collected their mail, opened people’s mail, collected their photos .
 JFK's assassination plan was designed to neutralize intelligence and security, insure that there would be no real investigation . JFK would have designed into its very fabric a failsafe mechanism, says author . "I cannot envision a plan that did not have designed a plan"
 Whoever they were were, their reach extended into this apparatus to someone who knew its workings so well that he could design a plot that could do this . Whoever they are, they knew it well enough to design an attack on the world's most important infrastructure .
 Cord Meyer had wept openly at Mary’s funeral . Richard Helms and his close friend Jim Angleton, Cord Meyer, wept at Mary's funeral . Cord Meyer was a CIA colleague .
 His former wife, the love of his life and the mother of his three children, had again departed, this time forever . His ex-wife, the wife of three years, had once again departed .
 Cord’s defense of the official story was nothing less than a ploy, a deflection away from the stubborn facts that have haunted this case and remained unexplained until now . Cord's defense was a ploy—a deflection from the truth, he says .
 His absence had to have been part of the operation, designed to create an appearance of innocence for Cord . Cord's absence had been designed to make him appear innocent in court .
 Removing him physically from Washington had diverted any suspicion of involvement in his involvement in the Iraq War .
 Mary confronted Cord with her accusations of CIA involvement in Kennedy's assassination after she had read through the Warren Report . Cord’s complicity would have been inevitable if Cord had read her diary, Damore maintained .
 E Howard Hunt’s deathbed confession that Cord was part of the ‘mastermind’ behind Dallas might have contained some kernel of truth . Cord was the 'mastermind' behind the Dallas killings, Hunt said . Hunt's deathbed confessions might have been a kernel of
 There would never be proof, at best only scant evidence, except possibly for the contents of Mary’s diary . Yet there would be proof of Mary's death, except for her diary .
 "To my knowledge, after the release of his book Facing Reality in 1980, he never said anything further publicly regarding the death of his former wife," says Bob Greene . Greene .
 The statement was breathtaking, particularly coming from someone so close to Cord, Cord . The statement comes from Cord Cordell, a friend of Cordell's .
 Carol Delaney's statement was never confirmed on the record . Delaney never confirmed the statement .
 "I’ve seen nothing indicating that she ever repudiated it. Yet in the last seven years, she’s seen nothing," he says . "She’ll never repudiate it," he adds .
 Cord Meyer's widow called Cord's widow, Starke Meyer, to inform her of the book project I was undertaking . Instead, she immediately called Cord’s widow to tell her about the project .
 Starke then took it upon herself to “sound the alarm,” calling Mary Meyer’s sons, Quentin and Mark, as well as other members of the Pinchot-Meyer clan . Starke even called my mother, not only to complain, but
 The attempted stonewalling replicated author Nina Burleigh’s experience when she first began her own research for A Very Private Woman in the mid-1990s .
 The CIA’s community of former operatives, their wives and families, adhered to a Mafia-like code of silence . Former operatives, wives and . families, secretaries and research assistants, used to be CIA operatives . The CIA's community of ex-employees adhered .
 To challenge their version of events was to call into question the edifice of the secretive house of cards within which they lived . To challenge them was to question the entire edifice, the author says .
 Delaney was asked to confirm or deny her account of Cord Meyer’s statements . Delaney says she was asked by Heymann in 2010 to confirm her account in 2010 .
 Heymann’s undocumented book was what the author alleged Cord Meyer had said to him shortly before his death . Heymann also alleged that Cord Meyer himself had spoken to him before he died . The book was published by Heymann in May 2013 .
 It is perhaps inevitable, given Jim Angleton’s ubiquitous CIA presence, that his journey should reach some finality with him . Several days later he left a voice mail, saying, “I’m beginning to think you’re working for the CIA ...�
 Two of Angleton’s closest comrades conspired to preserve his reputation and reign by gathering up his files and cultivating sympathetic writers to rehabilitate his tattered legacy . Angleton was unceremonious dismissal by CIA director William Colby in 1974 .
 Mary Meyer’s murder led to a complex chain of events that shone the bright light in unexpected ways upon some of the most significant questions surrounding Mary Meyer's murder . In so doing, they set in motion a complex sequence of events .
 The chain of events bears the most careful scrutiny, not because it is conclusive in and of itself, but because, in the aggregate, it moves us ever closer to the horrifying truth . In the aggregate of these statements and documented facts, the truth is that, viewed in context of other
 The chief architect of the mission to burnish Angleton’s controversial career was Robert T Crowley . Crowley was a formidable covert action specialist . Crowley is one of the Agency's most powerful covert action specialists .
 Crowley joined the Agency at its inception and rose quickly through the ranks despite the fact that he lacked the Ivy League pedigree of most of his associates . A Chicago-born West Pointer who'd served in World War II in the Pacific, Crowley served in Army intelligence .
 He was second in command in the clandestine services directorate until his retirement in the mid-1980s . As assistant deputy director for operations, he was second-in-command .
 Nicknamed “the Crow,” he was one of the tallest men to ever work at the Agency . His career was legendary, and he was nicknamed the Crow .
 Crowley was the chief go-to guy in the CIA’s liaison with multinational corporations . International Telephone and Telegraph was often used as fronts for moving large amounts of money to fund international covert operations .
 Crowley was involved in the CIA’s overthrow of the democratically elected Allende government in Chile in 1973 . Crowley had earned the highest regard from his colleagues .
 "Mutual loyalty and trust among operatives were always the gold standard of conduct," says the CIA . Mutual loyalty among operatives was always the 'gold standard' of conduct, he says .
 Two Crowley colleagues wanted ‘the Crow’ on their ‘air hose’ were William R Corson and James Jesus Angleton, the CIA’s notorious counterintelligence chief . James Angleton is already well-known, mercurial, and already well known,
 Bill Corson was never officially titled in the Agency, but his close ties to both Crowley and Angleton were well known . Corson's many covert operations for U.S. intelligence were well-known .
 Corson was a brilliant Strategist, an intellectual powerhouse in his own right, and a man who didn’t want to be ultimately tied to anybody or anything . Corson’s career spanned more than 30 years .
 Corson's CIA was "support staff" for Corson, a Cold War intelligence historian once quipped . Corson was the CIA’s first CIA director, and Corson is now a CIA director of the CIA. Corson died in 2009 at age 65 .
 Corson and Crowley devised a plan to squirrel away Angleton’s most highly classified, top secret files out of Langley . William Colby finally sacked Angleton in 1974, it was Corson .
 The Musketeers appeared to have decided it was time for the world to know their true history, or at least some of it . Toward the end of their careers, the trio appeared to be trying to shed light on their history .
 Corson forced Trento to jump through any number of hoops to prove his trust . Corson one day told Trento it was time he met Angleton . Trento was forced to meet Angleton for the first time .
 Angleton closed the circle and introduced Trento to Crowley . Angleton would be Angleton's successor to Crowley, Crowley's CIA boss .
 Once a lone pyramid protecting America’s most dastardly deeds, the Musketeers had chosen a scribe, or so it appeared . The Muscheeers chose the scribe instead of a writer .
 Bob Crowley went along with the plan, at least for a while, but reluctantly . Crowley: "I'm not sure if I'm going to go along with it."
 The deal was that nothing could be published until 1997, ten years after Angleton’s death . Angleton died at the age of 50 in 1968 .
 At least six years before his death, Crowley had become a bit disenchanted with Trento . Crowley had a history of disenchantment with the Italian city .
 Crowley had decided he wanted the truth to come out about the CIA’s role in the Kennedy assassination, according to an account . Crowley: "I want the truth out of the CIA's role in Kennedy assassination" Crowley says he wants to know the truth about the assassination .
 Angleton's and Corson's blessing wasn’t entirely known . Whether this had Angleton’s and Corsons’ blessing wasn't entirely known.
 Corson met regularly with former students from Naval Academy . Corson had met regularly and held court with a group of his former students . For years, Corson was a Naval Academy student .
 The group enjoyed long lunch discussions together, coupled with a generous intake of alcohol . The group also enjoyed a large amount of lunch discussions .
 Oliver Stone’s film JFK had been creating controversy since its release in 1991 . Oliver Stone's film JFK was the subject of much of the Kennedy assassination controversy .
 Kelly contacted Corson’s executor, Roger Charles, whom he knew well from their days together at Annapolis . Kelly contacted Charles after Corson's death two months later .
 The next step was to approach Corson’s attorney, Plato Cacheris, whose office was in the same building as Joseph Trento . They discussed the matter and agreed to talk to Corson's attorney . They agreed the next step would be to approach the attorney of Cors
 Cacheris had been a well-known figure in Washington power circles for years . He defended Nixon attorney general John Mitchell of Watergate fame, then represented Fawn Hall, who worked with Oliver North during the Iran-Contra scandal . He also defended Nixon Attorney General John Mitchell in Watergate
 His clients included the infamous CIA spy Aldrich Ames, as well as the FBI’s Robert Hanssen . Both were able to avoid the death penalty, thanks to Cacheris's legal prowess .
 Cacheris brokered the deal with the Soviets . Of course, in exchange, both had to reveal everything they had given them to them .
 Kelly sat down with Cacheris over lunch at Morton's on a Thursday . Kelly's interview with the author is published on CNN iReport .
 Cacheris seemed to play along with the request at the time, Kelly Kelly said . Kelly said Cacherus seemed to be enthusiastic about it . Cachersis was actually enthusiastic about the request .
 He told Kelly he would get back to him on the Monday of the following week . Kelly says he will get back on the phone on Monday the next week .
 Kelly suspected that after lunch with Cacheris, the lawyer had contacted Joe Trento . Kelly has since always suspected that Trento had contacted him .
 Corson’s executor, Roger Charles, was adamant that ‘Plato was Bill’�s attorney during the The Betrayal flap . Corson's executor was adamant “Plato’ was ‘Bill’'s attorney during The Bet
 Corson's son, Chris, was sure “he was dad’s attorney” during his parents’ divorce . Corson was sure his parents' divorce lawyer was Bill Corson . Chris Corson says he was the attorney during the divorce .
 Chris then conferred with his mother and asked her what she recalled about Plato Cacheris . Chris then asked her to share her thoughts about the Greek philosopher .
 It was not Joe Trento who precipitated Bob Crowley’s most critical revelations of Agency secrets, but a relatively obscure, unknown writer calling himself Gregory Douglas . Douglas was an unknown writer who wrote about the Agency .
 They smuggled into the U.S. under new identities to join America’s Cold War against the Soviets . They were smuggled in the United States under false identities . They joined America's Cold War effort against the Soviet Union .
 Douglas claims that he met Miiller in California and the two became instant friends . Miiller eventually gave Douglas some of his personal diaries to him .
 Corson and Crowley were immediately smitten with the Douglas account . They believed the account was accurate, and they thought the author had been courageous for stepping forward to write such an account .
 They were so enamored that they contacted him and began a collegial relationship . In fact, they contacted each other and began their own relationship .
 Two years later, Corson and Crowley, the two biggest intelligence titans of the Cold War, each contributed a short, highly favorable foreword to Douglas’s second volume of what would become a trilogy about Miiller and his life .
 In early 1996, Bob Crowley and Gregory Douglas began an intense telephone relationship that lasted nearly three years . Crowley and Douglas began a phone call that lasted almost three years together . Douglas and Crowley were married at the time .
 Douglas allegedly began, apparently unbeknownst to Crowley, tape-recording and transcribing many of the calls . Douglas allegedly recorded and transcribed many of Crowley's calls . Crowley was the subject of a federal investigation .
 Crowley’s plan, according to Douglas, was that he and Douglas were first going to meet alone before noon . Crowley's plan was to meet with Douglas before noon, Douglas says . Crowley: "I’m not going to be surprised if you’re going to
 Crowley was Crowley’s “personal insurance policy, should someone start to point the finger at him,” said Gregory Douglas in 2007 . This document, reprinted in 2002 book, Regicide, was reprinted in Douglas's 2002 book .
 Crowley’s wife Emily recalled, “Bob was so looking forward to meeting this guy, but he never did.” Crowley's wife Emily said . Crowley was "so looking forward" to meeting the man, she said .
 Douglas allegedly continued to record their conversations, transcribing each of them . Crowley-Douglas telephone relationship resumed in earnest shortly thereafter .
 ‘Gregory Douglas’ is considered a pariah within the JFK assassination research community . Douglas has a history of shady dealings and trouble with the law . This, among other things, has led to skepticism regarding the journalistic credibility of Douglas' work .
 Crowley’s evolving admiration of Douglas continued to baffle Tom Kimmel, the senior FBI man . Kimmel: Crowley's evolving admiration for Douglas baffles Tom Kimmel .
 Kimmel: "Peter Stahl [was obviously enormously bright" Kimmel: Stahl was "immimmagnificent bright"
 Corson and Crowley were introspective, very accomplished intelligence officers, especially Crowley . "I just couldn’t understand it," he says of Corson, Crowley .
 "They didn’t raise any objections or doubts, and that was not the way they approached anything," he said . "That's not what they did, they didn't raise any doubts," he added .
 Crowley would again be admitted to the hospital for exploratory surgery for lung cancer . Crowley was admitted to hospital in 1997 for lung surgery . Crowley died of lung cancer in 1997 .
 Legend had it that he packed up two footlockers of documents and sent it all by mail to Gregory Douglas before going to the hospital .
 The deal was that they were not to be opened until after Crowley’s death . Crowley's death was the last of his long list of unsolved unsolved crimes .
 Crowley, unfortunately, came back from the hospital with severe dementia, remained mostly bedridden, and died in October 2000 . Crowley died from severe dementia and was bedridden after coming back from hospital .
 Douglas mentioned the transaction to Tom Kimmel . Shortly after receiving the cache of documents, Douglas mentioned it to Kimmel .
 Kimmel pressured Douglas to reveal what Crowley had given him . Kimmel was concerned by the national security implications . Crowley was involved in CIA covert operations .
 Kimmel: “That’s why he gave it all to Stahl as opposed to Trento or someone else,” replied Kimmel . Kimmel: "That's why I asked ‘That” he gave all of the information . “I asked “that
 Kimmel ordered an FBI team to investigate the matter, even dispatching a female agent to Crowley’s house . Kimmel was so alarmed that Kimmel finally became, he ordered an investigation into the matter .
 It's not clear whether anyone has ever seen, or verified, the documents Crowley allegedly sent to Douglas . Douglas included in his 2002 book Regicide, which highlighted Crowley's Operation Zipper record .
 Douglas allegedly recorded Crowley-Douglas conversations but no recordings have been made . Crowley and Douglas have never been able to listen to any of the conversations . Douglas is accused of recording the conversations he allegedly recorded .
 Douglas said he destroyed the tapes, but later contradicted himself . Douglas claimed to have destroyed them, but said he had destroyed them . Douglas says he did not destroy the tapes .
 Douglas is the author of a new book, "Chicago Tonight," on CNN.com . The book is published by CNN iReport.com/Heritage .
 Some of the transcripts remain not only intriguing, but also fascinating in terms of certain pieces of information . Douglas Meyer could never have fabricated the transcripts, he says .
 Douglas began asking Crowley for specifics about the Kennedy assassination in January 1996 . Douglas asked Crowley for specific details about the assassination .
 Crowley then mentioned what a “first class bitch” Oswald’s wife, Marina, had to deal with when she finally realized the impasse she was in . Crowley then said Marina was a ‘first-class bitch’ and what Marina had to do .
 Crowley blurts out, “Most company wives are a pack of nuts.” The two men then chauvinistically ruminated about “the mystery of women,” with Crowley finally blurting out . Crowley: Most company wives in the company are "pack of nuts
 Douglas vaguely remembers Cord Meyer from somewhere, but he wasn't sure . Douglas vaguely remembered the name Cord Meyer . He said he wasn’t sure .
 Crowley then described Cord’s wife as a “very attractive woman but her sister was even better.” Crowley then said Cord's wife was “a very attractive woman”
 Cord's wife was what they call a free spirit, liked modern art, ran around naked in people’s gardens and so on. Cord’�s wife was . Cord, who died in 2011, was a 'free spirit' and a 'modern spirit' who liked
 Cord was so angry at being dumped that he hated her from then on . Cord hated her after she broke up with him . Cord is still angry about being dumped .
 She had become the steady girlfriend and he was very serious about her, he said . She had been a steady girlfriend .
 Mary had money and far more class and she knew how to get along with Jack . Mary had a lot of class and was far more successful than Jack . She had money, class and class .
 She didn't approve of mass orgies and introduced him to pot and other things . She didn’t approve of the mass . orgies . She was introduced to pot .
 After she assumed room temperature, he and Jim went over to Mary’s art studio to see if she had any compromising papers, and ran off with her diary . He and Jim then went to Mary's art studio and ran away with her .
 Douglas was curious to know how Cord felt about the CIA ‘terminating’ his wife . Douglas: Cord felt the CIA "terminated” his wife. Douglas: "I'm not sure how Cord feels about it."
 When Jim talked to Cord about this, Cord didn't let him finish his fishing expedition . Cord didn’t let Jim go fishing again . Jim talked about this with Cord .
 She hated Cord, loved Kennedy, and saw things in the Dallas business that were obvious to insiders or former insiders . But she made the mistake of running her mouth .
 Crowley talked about how the sale of Newsweek to the Washington Post had been engineered by the CIA’s Richard Helms . Crowley said that the sale was engineered by Helms, the CIA .
 Cord’s exwife was one of Kennedy's women . Everyone felt she had too much influence with him, not to mention her hippifying him with LSD and marijuana . Cord's ex-wife was also hippified him with psychedelic drugs .
 Without access to tape-recorded phone calls with Bob Crowley, it is impossible to confirm whether the voice speaking was Crowley’s, and therefore impossible to verify the authenticity of the statements . The statements were made by Douglas and Crowley in a taped conversation .
 The unsavory character of “Gregory Douglas” leaves a great deal to be desired,’s author says .
 There remain details included here that are confirmed by other, more credible sources already presented . And yet there remain details that have been confirmed by others, such as other credible sources .
 Crowley’s allegation that Cord Meyer was devastated after Mary left their marriage was true . Crowley: Cord Meyer is devastated after his wife left him and Mary .
 It was well known to Cord’s CIA colleagues and closest friends that he had been furious . Cord was furious at the decision to give up his job as a CIA director .
 Mary’s departure from the marriage had turned Cord upside down, he says . Cord was shocked to discover his wife had left him in a mess .
 Cord had once lunged for Ben Bradlee’s throat during a Washington dinner party conversation . Cord, the reader will recall, had once attacked Bradlee during a dinner party .
 Cord’s Yale classmate, U.S. attorney David Acheson, recalled Cord physically threatening to fight another guest at a dinner party at my house . Cord's Yale classmate said Cord physically threatened to fight someone at a party at his house .
 Crowley mentions twice the fact that Angleton and Bradlee together were in Mary’s studio sometime after her murder that evening . Second, she mentions twice, that both of them were in the studio after the murder .
 According to Crowley’s account, it appears that Jim Angleton had, in fact, accompanied Ben Bradlee to Mary's studio on the night of the murder . This was when Mary's diary had been stolen .
 Bradlee himself appeared to have lost track of his various versions of the story, as he completely contradicted his own sworn testimony thirty years later in his memoir .
 Leo Damore told his attorney Jimmy Smith that he had recovered Mary’s diary . Damore said the diary had apparently come from Bernie Yoh in 1990 . Jim Angleton himself had given the diary to Angleton in 1980, he said .
 Angleton had made at least one copy of the diary, before giving it to Yoh . That likely meant that Angleton made a copy of Yoh's diary . Angleton likely gave what he had to the Yoh, according to the diary .
 Meyer claimed to a friend that she positively knew that Agency-affiliated Cuban exiles and the Mafia were responsible for killing John Kennedy . Meyer also claimed to have told a friend she knew the Mafia was behind Kennedy's killing .
 Kenny O'Donnell had expressed a similar fear regarding Mary’s influence . Kenny O’Donnell also expressed a fear about the influence of Mary .
 Crowley-Douglas caper is a last linchpin to the Crowley and Douglas caper that gives it further credibility . Crowley is believed to have been involved with Douglas in the 1980s .
 Gregory Douglas sent Joseph Trento a congratulatory email to Trento in November 2001 . Douglas also congratulated Trento on publication of The Secret History of the CIA . Douglas says Trento's book was published in 2001, and Douglas congratulates him .
 I enjoyed reading your book on the CIA and was gratified to see your comments about the CIA’s employment of Heinrich Miller on page 29 .
 Also gratified to note your citation of Crowley’s CIA files as a source . Crowley's CIA files are a source of interest in this article .
 Miller has written six books on the subject of his CIA connections . Miller's CIA connections and authoritative support is certainly helpful, he says .
 Douglas was referring to his own book, Regicide . Unbeknownst to Joe Trento, Trento had been referring to Douglas' book .
 It would be another year —November 2002 — before Trento read Regicide; and when he did, he began to see red . Trento: "It would be a year, November 2002, before Regicide" Trento's book was published in 2002 .
 I want you to know, as I told Walter earlier, that I am the literary executor of Bob Crowley . "I have the legal right to all of his documents. I want to know," Crowley says .
 I notice that you are using documents from him in your book and this has to be stopped right now. This has to stop right now, says CNN.com's editor .
 This is a gross slander on the reputation of a fine American and, I want you to know, these papers are all classified documents under Federal law . You may not keep or use them. This is the reason you should not keep, use them, he said .
 "I intend to write to your publisher and inform him that if he does not cease and desist selling this book, I will sue him and you," she said .
 I have strongly suggested to both Emily and Greg [Bob Crowley's son] that they sue you for defaming Bob’s good name . Also, I have also suggested that you sue them for defamation of Bob Crowley's good name.
 You can stop all of this legal action by sending me a full list of all the papers you got from Bob and then sending me the actual papers . Now you can stop the legal action .
 This copy was retrieved by myself after Bill’s death and returned to the proper agency but apparently, Bob had sent out the original to you . This copy of the original was retrieved after Bill's death .
 As you know, Bob was badly failing in his last years and I and others, including Tom Kimmel, think it was a low blow for you to trick a trusting Bob into giving you sensitive papers . As you . think it . was a . low blow .
 If you want to avoid future problems, I suggest you do as I say, make a list of all your documents you got from Bob . Send it to me and then return all of these documents to me immediately .
 Tom Kimmel has told me all about you and I want you to know I won't hold still for any monkey business from you . If you don’t want the FBI knocking your door down, do as I say. Tom Kimmel will not be surprised if he does not hold still
 Nowhere in Trento’s book The Secret History of the CIA does he even mention or allude to Crowley's “Operation Zipper” document . Trento was well aware of the document, but was not aware of it existed . Nowhere mentions the CIA�
 He pimped Angleton’s ridiculous, longtime public assertion that the Kennedy assassination was the work of the Soviet KGB using Lee Harvey Oswald as a tool . Angleton also claimed that the KGB was behind the JFK assassination . He said it was done by the KGB in the Soviet Union
 The documents I received from Bob Crowley, mailed by his son Greg, in 1996, were freely given to me as an author .
 Bob had been assisting me with important material for several years previously . Bob had assisted me in the making of important material . Bob was a friend of the author of the book, which is published in New York .
 His only caveat was that I not make use of these before he died and I have not done so . His only caveats was that he not use these before his death and I've done so. He has not made use of them .
 What I have are the originals and also the originals of many other fascinating subjects . The originals of these subjects are also originals .
 Please be advised that Bob sent these to me prior to his death and that they therefore do not fall under any literary property over which you now claim to have rights . Bob sent them to me before his death, so they are no longer considered literary property .
 In answer to your specific demands, be advised that I have no intention of sending you any list of this material in question . Neither do I have any intention of . sending you anything else .
 In the event that you dare to address me again, I will personally post some of the more sensitive documents on the Internet and personally thank you for having sent me these from your own holdings of Crowley’s papers .
 Bob told me you were a light weight hack and it was also obvious that you have no knowledge of the law . Bob told him you were an 'light weight hack' and said he was a 'light-weight hack'
 Peter Stahl may have been somewhat truthful regarding what had transpired between himself and Bob Crowley . Storch may be somewhat truthful about what had happened .
 The details purportedly revealed by Crowley about Mary Meyer, her diary, and her murder are solidly supported and substantiated by other events and accounts covered in this book . Yet despite the remaining ambiguity surrounding the Crowley-Douglas affair, the details remain consistent with Crowley's account .
 Ben Bradlee never took kindly to anyone who accused him of having CIA connections . Bradlee took no kindly to those who said he had connections to the CIA .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, working for, or with, the CIA, directly or indirectly, didn't necessarily mean being on the CIA payroll as an employee . Working for the CIA didn’t necessarily mean working for or with the CIA .
 In the Cold War era, many journalists considered cooperation with the CIA a kind of patriotic duty . In the 1960s, the CIA was involved in the CIA's covert operations in Afghanistan .
 After Watergate, it was considered deeply suspicious, if not downright duplicitous, because so much CIA chicanery had been exposed . After Watergate the CIA was considered suspicious, but it was still suspicious . The U.S. government is investigating whether the CIA's actions were duplicit
 Deborah Davis and her book Katharine the Great paid the ultimate price in 1980 . Under pressure from Ben Bradlee and Katharine Graham, her publisher, William Jovanovich, recalled and shredded her book .
 Bradlee's job as press attaché at the American Embassy in Paris in 1952— 1953 functioned as a CIA front at the time . Davis’s assertion in her book that Bradlee’�s job in Paris functioned .
 Bradlee was writing propaganda aimed at ‘persuading’ Europeans that Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were spies and deserved to be executed . Bradlee’s propaganda was aimed at persuading Europeans that the Rosenbergs were spies .
 Of course, Bradlee was purposely not on any CIA payroll as an employee; that would have made it too obvious . Bradlee purposely not employed as a CIA employee .
 In later editions of Katharine the Great, Davis included documents that corroborated Bradlee’s CIA connections .
 First edition of the Davis book was recalled in early 1980, but damage to Bradlee’s reputation had already been done .
 It upset Bradlee profoundly . It shook the pedestal onto which the Washington Post had been elevated since Watergate . The Washington Post was elevated to prominence since Watergate.
 President Obama said he had falsely accused him of being a CIA agent . He said he attacked him viciously and he attacked me viciously . Obama said that he had been falsely accused of being an undercover CIA agent.
 Mary Meyer broke into her studio to find her diary . The two were collaborating to find out what was happening .
 Bradlee never once publicly mentioned he had been inside Mary’s studio on the night of the murder .
 The only revelation of that fact was contained in the 1965 Crump murder trial transcript . It was never again mentioned by Bradlee himself, or anyone else .
 It was at this time, Crowley—who mentioned it twice —that the real diary was discovered and given to Angleton for safekeeping . Angleton was given the diary for safe keeping . Crowley said it was at the time that the diary was found .
 The exact account of what actually took place may never be fully known . Ultimately, the exact accounts of the events may never fully known.
 Crowley maintained that the diary was taken on the night of Mary's murder . But more than likely, as Crowley maintained, it was taken from the bookcase in her bedroom .
 Mary’s bedroom, according to the Statements Jim Truitt made to Ron Rosenbaum in 1976, was where she usually kept it . The bedroom was where Mary kept her gun, Truitt said in 1976 .
 On the one hand, concerning Mary’s murder, the memoir was so rife with factual errors, omissions, and contradictions that it cried out for careful scrutiny . The memoir was rife with facts and contradictions, but it was so much more accurate than the book itself .
 Ben Bradlee was even more circumspect in 2010 when being interviewed for David Baldacci’s Hardcover Mysteries television documentary .
 Nine months earlier, he and others had conspired to erase his sister-in-law’s private life . Nine months later, he admitted to conspiring to erase the private life of his wife .
 At the time of the trial in July 1965, Bradlee’s career was already being transformed .
 In March, Katharine Graham wooed him back to the Washington Post after a 14-year hiatus . Graham had been on the job for 14 years .
 In 1976, after the first revelation of Mary’s relationship with President Kennedy appeared in the National Enquirer, Bradlee told journalist Ron 3” Rosenbaum in an interview that there had been no “CIA angle,” no Agency “shadow”
 By all police, witness, and forensic accounts, she struggled mightily, screaming for twenty seconds or more, before the first gunshot ripped through her skull . The first gunshot was fired after the woman was shot in the head by police .
 Mary’s thoughts or feelings during the final conscious seconds of her life, she had to be aware her death was fast approaching . Mary would not succumb without a fight, before the second fatal shot ended her life .
 Perhaps Ben Bradlee wanted to assuage his guilt by publicly spinning yet another yarn that his sister-in-law hadn’t really suffered, or that she had faced head-on the terrifying realization that her life was about to end violently .
 Ben Bradlee played as fast and loose with the facts in this instance as he had with nearly every other aspect of Mary’s death . Whatever his motivation, he played a fast-and-loose with facts in the death of Mary .
 "We watched the full flowering of Mary as the kind of woman that Mom might have become," says the author .
 Mom lived off the idea that JFK had a crush on her for years—before she disappeared up the asshole of spirituality . Instead, Mom lived on the idea of JFK having a crush, she lived off it .
 Tony Damore avoided any possibility of an encounter with Leo Damore in 1991 . Asked in 1991 whether she would be willing to be interviewed about the events surrounding her sister’s death, Tony said, “I feel as I have always felt—that the case is closed,
 Anne Chamberlin, a former Vassar classmate and close friend of Mary Meyer’s, had remained the only person left who could have unraveled some of the impenetrable, unanswered questions surrounding the last years of her life, and death .
 Anne maintained extraordinary level of physical health and vitality through a daily, grueling exercise regime . A known friend to Katharine Graham, regarded as an intrepid, charmingly sharp-witted commentator, who had a ‘distinguished and eclectic career”
 Her phone interviews with Leo Damore in the early 1990s indicated she’d been a part of Mary’s Washington ‘LSD group’ that took shape in 1962 . Yet she became indignant when I asked to talk with her about this, yet she became
 Chamberlin fled Washington for Maine out of fear shortly after Mary’s murder, Damore Damore says . Damore: Chamberlin side-stepped being named in any of the accounts surrounding Mary's death .
 J ames Jesus Angleton had what might be called a “second career” sending newspaper reporters and journalists on never-ending wild-goose chases . Angleton was a newspaper reporter and journalist for the late 1960s and '90s .
 Angleton relished seeing how far he could push their limits of gullibility . He did so convincingly, often leaving many of them awestruck, as if they had just been given the actual location of Noah's Ark or the whereabouts of Jimmy Hoffa's body .
 National Enquirer exposé involving Mary’s relationship with Kennedy in 1976 supported historian Newman . What took place in 1976 after the scandal was revealed in 1976?
 It would take a masterful performance from the master Angler himself, along with supporting actors like Ben Bradlee to neutralize its implications .
 The elite circle of Mary’s acquaintances had to figure out how to hoodwink journalists Rosenbaum and Nobile . They had taken an ‘omerta oath’ of allegiance never to reveal the facts surrounding either her diary or her murder .
 The two most high-profile players among them were forced to make a showing . Jim Angleton and Ben Bradlee were among those forced to show up .
 For whatever reason, Cord Meyer and Anne Chamberlin would remain hidden, as would Anne Truitt, and to a large extent Tony Bradlee . The White House would have to keep them hidden, too, for whatever reason .
 Bradlee's 1976 selective recollections carefully excluded the most critical events . Like his misleading trial testimony in 1965, Bradlee’s 1976 selective testimony in . 1965 .
 The Angleton-CIA house of cards would have collapsed immediately, author says . Dare it be said that had Rosenbaum and Nobile become aware of these linchpin events, the . Angleton's house of . cards would collapse immediately .
 The ruling leaders of America’s premier intelligence establishment had learned how to manage almost any crisis, particularly when it came to accountability to the public, or even to Congress . Within the hallowed halls of the Agency, the ruling leaders had learned to manage a crisis .
 With their backs to the wall, the Agency gives up a few classified, titillating tidbits, making everyone feel as though they’ve actually come clean . The Agency continues to withhold what is most critical, continuing to withhold the most critical .
 No greater master ever demonstrated this technique more skillfully than James Jesus Angleton, the “Delphic Oracle” of counterintelligence, the chief himself . Angleton was a master of the technique .
 Ron Rosenbaum and Phillip Nobile thought they had closed the door on the case, solving everything . The author of the book says the case was solved, but not solved . The book is published on Amazon.com .
 Mary's murder, like Jack’s before her, was a random, indiscriminate, violent murder committed by a deranged, lone gunman . Alas, the authors declared, Mary‘s murder was like Jack's before her . The authors declared that Mary”s murder
 Angleton’s influence on Rosenbaum likely ignited his fascination with Kim Philby . Rosenbaum was fascinated with Angleton's mentor, Soviet double agent Kim Phil by the time he met him .
 Philby and Angleton had met during Angleton’s stint in the OS during World War II . Philby was ostensibly working for the British Secret Intelligence Service . Angleton was working for Philby during the war .
 Angleton learned all the fundamentals of the craft of intelligence, including masterminding the world of counterintelligence . Under the masterful Philby tutelage, Angleton was able to learn the fundamentals .
 Angleton came to revere his mentor just the way Philby wanted him to; it was part of Philby’s strategy . Angleton revelled in the role of his mentor, Philby said, but it wasn't enough .
 Angleton consulted Philby on almost everything, sharing with him all that was going on at the highest levels of U.S. intelligence . Angleton was the eager-beaver Angleton . Philby was the CIA's top intelligence official .
 Therein lay Angleton’s tragic fatal flaw—trusting anybody, especially Kim Philby . Angleton trusted anyone, especially Philby, to trust anyone, but Philby did not .
 Angleton would never recover, only deteriorate . Angleton's mistake would eventually eviscerate Angleton, and he never recover .
 Angleton sank even deeper into paranoia, his daily alcohol-nicotine intake dismembering his overall capacity and grasp on reality, cell by cell . Angleton had been penetrated by the entire arena of U.S. intelligence .
 Everything, and everybody, viewed through the Angleton prism, was vermin—moles, to be exact—digging relentlessly and eternally, toward Langley, Virginia, their final destination . Angleton's final destination was Langley headquarters, Langley .
 “Mother” Angleton would create and leave behind a footprint that was the footprint that ‘Mother’ Angleton created and left behind . That was the footprints she would leave behind for the next generation .
 The mole, the penetration agent, does not merely betray; he stays . The mole is not only a mole, but a mole who stays, writes CNN.com's Robert Greene .
 He doesn't just commit a single treacherous act and run; his entire being, every smile, every word he exchanges, is an ultimate violation (an almost sexual penetration) of all those around him . He doesn’t just commit one treacherous act but also commits an entire violation of
 All his friendships, relationships, his marriages become elaborate lies requiring unceasing vigilance to maintain . Only he can follow, he says, in a play-within-a-play only he can .
 Kim Philby is the playwright behind the scenes of espionage . She plays a spy for the CIA in a new film based on the book .
 Angleton had successfully modeled his entire being on how Philby had shaped his own . Angleton's entire being had been shaped by Philby's success in shaping his life .
 It was no accident that the obsessive mission of “Angleton the mole hunter,” forever protecting his beloved Agency no matter what the cost, resulted in paralyzing entire sections of the CIA’s operational directorates, and eventually gave rise to the biggest crisis the American intelligence
 By the 1960s, it was well known within the highest levels of the CIA that the CIA had been penetrated . The CIA was penetrated by the highest level of the agency .
 Edward Clare Petty, a protéé of Angleton’s and a member of the Special Investigations Group within Counterintelligence, was ordered to begin an extended study to identify who the mole was, and how he was able to operate .
 Angleton thought his clout would allow him to contain the study, and slant it in any direction he wanted . Angleton, of course, thought he would be able to control the study .
 Petty turned in his report, revealing to his superiors, including CIA director William Colby, that the mole Angleton had been hunting for twenty-five years was Angleton himself . Petty retired in 1975 after 25 years in the CIA .
 The Petty Report was so explosive that it was kept under armed guard when it was first completed . One source confirmed that the so-called Petty Report had been kept under an armed guard at the time .
 Angleton’s real reign of terror had been far more nefarious, the author says . Angleton's real reign was far more sinister, he says .
 Authors Rosenbaum and Nobile relied on Angleton as a primary source for their seminal article “The Curious Aftermath of JFK’s Best and Brightest Affair .” Their efforts to solve the mystery were immediately contaminated .
 Rosenbaum's certainty about his rightness precluded any real penetration and exposure of the evil that had been perpetrated . Rosenbaum’s own certainty about the rightness further precluded . In addition, Rosenbaum was also certain about his own rightness .
 In 1964, Angleton’s reputation was legendary, in and out of the Agency . Angleton's reputation became legendary in and around the world .
 Angleton duped the entire national security apparatus, including the CIA, into believing that Oswald had been collaborating with both Cubans and the Soviet KGB during his trip to Mexico in the fall of 1963 . Allen Dulles, with the completion of the Warren Report in 1964, had duped
 President Lyndon Johnson then used “the Mexico City trump card” of a World War III nuclear confrontation that would kill 40 million Americans in the first hour to persuade people like Supreme Court justice Earl Warren to make sure the Warren Commission would establish Oswald as a lone nut assassin acting his own
 Every detail, however minute, had to be taken into account in an “operation” of such magnitude as Mary’s “termination,” so as to arouse as little suspicion as possible .
 Jim Angleton was Cord Meyer’s closest and dearest friend, and the godfather to his children . Cord Meyer's best friend, Angleton, was Cord's godfather . Angleton is the son of Cord Meyer and the father of Meyer's children .
 Any overt involvement by “Mother’s Angleton would have forever raised dangerous suspicion . ‘Mother” Angleton was a key figure in World War II . The U.S. government has long been skeptical of any involvement by Angleton .
 Angleton had given himself another role to play, procuring Mary’s diary and other artifacts, personal papers, letters, and the like that might incriminate the CIA in her murder, or President Kennedy's assassination, he says . Angleton wanted the diary and any other artifacts
 With aplomb, he had completely erased the most important phase of Mary’s life, he said . ‘He had completely wiped out the past phase of her life,’ she said. ‘I’m not surprised,” she said .
 Angler himself, known for designing his own special fishing lures, cast his bait into just the right pool, then hooked one of his biggest catches of all time, journalist Ron Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum is a master fly-fisherman himself .
 Angleton then drove away in his signature black Mercedes . Rosenbaum had been delicately reeled into Angleton’s nexus of deception, while the master himself drove away .
 ‘Delphic Oracle’ Angleton at last confronted the final curtain on the stage of life . Angleton was finally invaded by the mole of cancer .
 Even the mercurial spymaster, stricken with lung cancer and facing imminent death, earnestly acknowledged to his scribe, Joe Trento, that Jack Kennedy and Mary Meyer “were in love.”
 Jim Angleton's last paternal effort was to seek out his daughter, Truffy, who had joined Yogi Bhajan’s effort to bring Kundalini yoga to the West . His marriage to Cicely ruptured, and his two children estranged from him,
 Her mother, Cicely, before her death in 2011, and her sister Lucy would find a second home there, too . Eventually her mother and sister would eventually find a home there . Lucy's sister Lucy and her mother would find homes there .
 According to one source, Jim Angleton regularly consulted with Yogi Bhajan as his “spiritual adviser” in the final years of his life . According to the source, the family knew the family well . The family of the late Angleton is said to be in
 He wanted to understand what had driven his daughters to renounce their former existence, or whether he wanted “spiritual absolution” as death drew near, his family had mostly abandoned him . Whether it was because he wanted to . understand what drove him to seek ‘spirit
 During one of Angleton’s final meetings with author Joseph Trento, the frail, emaciated, cancer-ridden “Ichabod Crane” surrendered more secrets . Angleton's final meeting with Trento was one of his last meetings with the author .
 Trento wrote that Trento's all-encompassing power “had struck fear into most of his colleagues’s colleagues,” he wrote . Trento: “The man who had been able to end a CIA career with a nod or a phone call,
 They were afraid that their own business dealings with Hitler’s pals would come out . The Nazis were afraid they would reveal their business dealings to Hitler's pals .
 Angleton: "There was no accountability. No accountability" Angleton said in the same conversation, “There were no accountability."
 "Fundamentally, the founding fathers of United States intelligence were liars," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Fundamentally, the founders of U.S. intelligence are liars"
 The better you lied and the more you betrayed, the more likely you would be promoted . The best you lied was likely to be promoted, according to the president of the United States .
 Outside of duplicity, the only thing they had in common was a desire for absolute power . "They had to be united in their desire to absolute power," says the author .
 Allen Dulles, Richard Helms, Carmel Offie, and Frank Wisner were the grand masters . The grand masters were the CIA, CIA, and White House .
 "If you were in a room with them, you had to believe they would deservedly end up in hell" "They were people that you had had to be in hell," she says . "They had to end up with them," she adds .
 Timothy Leary describes encounter with "a well-known West Coast figure" in Hollywood Hills of California . Leary says it was an attempt for some reason to camouflage the identity of Leary . He described encounter with Leary in the late 1980s in the Hollywood Hills .
 Nina Burleigh interviewed Wistar Janney in 1996, two years before her book was published . She spent hours interviewing Janney before she published her book . Janney says she is proud of her work .
 Cord Meyer and Ben Bradlee had inadvertently revealed “the master key” that proved conspiracy . Neither Rosenbaum nor Burleigh had even bothered, or possibly dared, to consider such a fact .
 In the sacrosanct halls of the CIA, where such kingpins as Jim Angleton, Richard Helms, Cord Meyer and Cord Meyer, lied professionally and with impunity, a decision had been made .
 If she talked and told what she had come to understand about what really had taken place in Dallas, what had been done to her beloved ally, the president, and the country, and by whom, people with influence would have listened to her, people such as Philip L Graham of the
 These imperious CIA men lived in a world that answered no authority; they knew exactly what they were doing, and how it had to be done . They lived in the world that answers no authority, and knew what they had to do .
 The CIA’s true, unwritten code for dealing with anything, or anyone, that happened to inconveniently get in its way . But it was nothing more than window-dressing, camouflage for “the ends justify the means”
 Their fatal flaw was to underestimate something much more forceful and compelling than their corrupted, villainous power . And yet their fatal flaw, no matter how much water would pass under the proverbial bridge, was that they underestimated something more forceful than their power .
 It was, in its purest form, the supreme force of truth itself, and the human need to pursue and know it, no matter what the cost . "It was, for the first time, the truth itself," says the author of the book .
 Both Joe Trento and Gregory Douglas’s email addresses have been purposely withheld . Both Trento's and Douglas's email addresses are being withheld .
 I can verify that the email addresses above were valid and still in use . Having received email from both in previous years, I can confirm that they are still in contact .
 His excesses will demand the return of the republic and you, my son, will return to restore it, says the king . "You will restore it," says King George III .
 The Buddha says the American people live in a country where they can have almost anything they want . Not going all the way, and not starting, is not going all-the-way, he says .
 Many people asked me whether Leo Damore really committed suicide . And my regret is that it seems that they don’t want much of anything at all . —Eugene Debs .
 He shot himself in the presence of a nurse and a police officer in October 1995 . He was shot in the face of a hospital nurse and police officer .
 There was no conspiracy here, I maintained; the facts spoke for themselves . The facts speak for themselves. There were no conspiracy theories, he said .
 Leo DiCaprio's death was not the only ‘facts’ that surrounded his death . But I soon reckoned those weren’t the only "facts” that surrounded Leo’s demise .
 For two years, Leo’s former wife, June Davison, graciously allowed me to read all of his private diaries . For two . years, I was allowed to read the diaries of the late actor's wife .
 "I wanted to know anything that might further offer clues, particularly about the last few years of his life," she says . She says she hopes to find out more about her husband's last days .
 Leo purposely never mentioned any of his most secretive research in his journals . He did recount some of his battles with panic attacks, anxiety, and depression in his journal .
 Leo appeared to be generally optimistic after our visit in April of that year and the subsequent phone contact we shared during that summer . Yet in his own dealings with Leo during 1993, he appeared to have been optimistic .
 Leo made no secret of the fact that he had met with the person who, he believed, was Mary’s assassin, the same man who had testified at the trial . I didn’t press him for further details, as I was preoccupied with grief over a broken
 That fall, however, he was still working on the manuscript for “Burden of Guilt,” though he was increasingly agitated and upset . The fall of that year he was working on a manuscript for the novel, but he was agitated .
 Another of Leo’s closest friends, who asked to remain anonymous, agreed to be interviewed .
 She and Leo had talked many times after his 1993 telephone interview with Mitchell, as well as after his subsequent in-person interview . Leo’s mother and daughter had been in touch with Mitchell since 1993 .
 Leo had learned, she said, about some of the other people who had assisted in the operation . That meeting was even more definitive because Leo learned about other people involved in it, a friend said .
 Some weeks later, Leo told a friend he was sure he was being followed, “watched,” and he was growing increasingly alarmed . Leo told his friend he thought he had been followed and watched .
 He wasn't sure how, or when, when it happened, but he knew something was wrong . He wasn’t sure how it happened . He said he was going through a difficult period of grief .
 Leo was becoming more frantic, more anxious, agitated, agitated and unable to focus . Leo became more frantic and more anxious . He was becoming increasingly agitated, more agitated, and more agitated .
 Increasingly paranoid, under financial pressure, he apparently consulted not one but two different psychiatrists, both of whom were giving him different psychotropic medications . Both of the psychiatrists were psychiatrists .
 Leo called me a month before he shot himself in October 1995, pleading for a place to live, and threatening suicide . About a month later he called me, desperately pleaded for a home, and threatened suicide . Leo's suicide was suicide suicide .
 "Not having heard from him for months, I realized how serious his deterioration had become," she says . "I realized that he had become seriously ill," she adds .
 I pleaded with him to immediately check into a hospital, even offered to accompany him, if he needed assistance . I pleaded for him to check in to a hospital and offered to help him if needed .
 Leo's friend Jimmy Smith had received a similar plea shortly before he took his life . Jimmy Smith also received a plea, again shortly before his death . Later on, I would discover his friend Jimmy had received similar plea .
 Following his death, Leo’s former wife told me his autopsy had revealed an undiagnosed brain tumor . His former wife said his former wife had told me that his autopsy showed he had undiognosed brain tumors .
 Sidney Gottlieb, the Agency’s MKULTRA program had developed an arsenal of undetectable elixirs for getting rid of people when it became necessary .
 For the CIA, murder became ‘standard operating procedure,’ as demonstrated by CIA Director William Colby in his testimony before the Church Committee in 1975 . The CIA Director testified before the Committee of the House of Representatives .
 In April 1953, James Speyer Kronthal, a brilliant, young Allen Dulles protégé and deputy, was found dead in his Georgetown home in what police said was a suicide . Kronthal was in line for a high-level job at the Agency .
 The night before, Kronthal had been confronted by his boss Dulles for his sexual orientation . Kronthal was confronted by Dulles the night before .
 Kronthal had been secretly filmed with young boys by the Soviets before blackmailing him into becoming a spy . Then, while working for the CIA in Switzerland, he had been filmed with boys . The Soviets blackmailed him into joining them as a spy before forcing him to join the CIA .
 Sidney Gottlieb and the medical people produced all kinds of poisons that a normal postmortem could not detect . A normal post-mortem would have been able to detect poisons from a normal body .
 Leo Damore’s ‘suicide’ had become all the more disturbing, says Jimmy Smith . Damore's "suicide" had become more disturbing to Jimmy Smith as well, says Smith .
 "It took me by surprise, when I met a kindred soul whose father, too, had been a CIA officer," says author . It took him by surprise when he met a fellow CIA officer whose father was CIA officer .
 There's a kind of unwritten, sometimes unacknowledged, bond among those whose fathers were involved with the CIA during the Cold War era .
 Author Nina Burleigh interviewed Jane Barnes, daughter of the elite CIA covert operative Tracy Barnes . Author says experience of living within the “shadowy world of never really knowing what our fathers were doing .
 Like Jane's father, my own had also revered Ian Fleming’s mythic character . Like Jane, my father, I also revered the mythic figure of Ian Fleming .
 The Cold War’s “CIA brats” were not allowed to know the real life our fathers had chosen . But we as children, the Cold War's ‘CIA . brats,” we as . children, were not . allowed to . know the
 Such was the double life our fathers led; and eventually, one way or another, it exacted a karmic retribution on us children . The double life was a double life of our fathers, our father's double life, our mother says .
 Quentin Meyer, Mary and Cord Meyer’s oldest son, would no longer talk to me after he became aware of this book project, nor would his brother, Mark. Mark. Quentin Meyer would not talk to him after he was aware of the project .
 Quentin Tarantino's mental illness had overtaken him with one debilitating episode after another . Quentin had been suffering from mental illness since the early 1970s . Quentin was diagnosed with mental illness at the time of his death .
 Author Katie McCabe shared with me her experience after a book-signing event for her Dovey Roundtree biography at a Georgetown senior center . McCabe: "Justice Older Than the Law" is justice older than the law .
 There, in the circle of attendees, sat a slumped-over, seemingly elderly man who listened quietly, his head down on his chest .
 The sponsor of the event later told McCabe that the man was Quentin Meyer, son of Cord and Mary Meyer . The sponsor later said he was Cord Meyer's son and son of the Meyer family .
 A part of Quenty still yearned to know the truth that had robbed him of his selfhood, the demons too horrifying to confront . His mere presence at the event spoke volumes .
 Toni Shimon is the daughter of the late Joseph Shimon . She is a former journalist and author of a series of books . She has been married to the late Shimon family for over 30 years .
 When I met Toni in 2005, our chemistry was almost instantaneous, only because we shared a certain bond of somewhat similar circumstances growing up in Washington, D.C. Growing up in the U.S. grew up with similar circumstances .
 Like most of us, Toni, during her formative years, hadn’t known the true nature of her father’s work . Toni's father's work is the subject of a new book, "Toni," published by CNN iReport .
 As a young adult, she persuaded her father, little by little, to confide pieces of information he probably shouldn’t have . She persuaded him to confederally confide to her father .
 He was determined to remain a faithful, honest father to his only daughter . He was called to duty to “take care of” some of the most “sensitive” problems in Washington .
 He quickly distinguished himself, rising through the ranks to become a detective . He rose to the ranks as a detective and became a national hero .
 By the time of President Franklin D Roosevelt’s inauguration in 1933, Shimon had established a reputation for being able “to get the job done” with the utmost discretion .
 He would gain the confidence not only of President Roosevelt, but each of his successors . Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon revered his talents .
 Shimon was assigned to the White House as a “Washington Police Inspector’s Inspector,” but also secretly working for the Justice Department . Shimon also secretly worked for the U.S. Attorney's Office through the United States Attorney's office .
 In the late 1940s, though still stationed at the White House, he was part of a secret, organized crime task force . He was still stationed in Washington, D.C., when he was a member of the task force in the 1940s .
 The work was dangerous, so dangerous that his wife, Elizabeth, feared for her safety and that of their only child, Toni . Elizabeth feared for their safety and the safety of Toni, who was working in dangerous work .
 The couple finally divorced in the late 1940s, when Toni was just two years old . Toni's mother and father finally divorced when she was two .
 Elizabeth had pleaded for years for Joe to find a different line of work . Joe's wife says she has been waiting for years to find out what to do with Joe's job .
 She was terrified her husband would be killed, their only child orphaned . Their only child was left orphaned, she was terrified he would kill her husband . She was forced to flee the country with her family .
 She abhorred the work hours he kept, the secrecy, people showing up at all hours of the day and night, and the impromptu meetings that took place in her kitchen, when she would have to leave .
 It became no secret to Toni that her father carried a gun wherever he went . Toni's father was always carrying a gun everywhere he went, she says .
 She thought her dad was part of the Metropolitan Police Department in Washington, D.C., though not a uniformed officer . She had thought her father was a police officer .
 Told her father was stationed at the White House during the Roosevelt administration, then a chief inspector for the United States Attorney’s Office . All the while maintaining police department status, she began to wonder .
 He adored her; she adored him, and the way he always looked after her, even after the divorce . "He loved her, and she loved him," she said. "He adored the way she looked after him."
 The two missed each other terribly when Toni went back to her mother’s home on Long Island after periodic visits . Toni and Toni were inseparable when she returned home .
 The divorce had been a huge adjustment for everyone, but Joe Shimon had made his choice . Shimon was a true patriot who believed he was working for the betterment of his country, he said .
 Toni visited Washington in the late 1950s with her father before he left for work . Toni's father was in the kitchen when she visited Washington .
 Her father's work habits and dress code didn't escape his growing daughter’s inquisitiveness . Her inquisitive nature didn’t escape his work habits or dress code, she says .
 Her father looked at her quizzically, she remembered, as though he was wondering if now might be the time he might dare to answer . She remembered him looking at her as if he was looking for answers .
 Isolation, secrecy, deception, deception—all of the required masks—had exacted a toll . Isolation and secrecy had exacted an enormous toll on the nation's first responders .
 Unbearable loneliness and disconnection were often the initial symptoms of loneliness . "Lack of connection" was often the first symptom of loneliness, loneliness, isolation .
 With the dissolution of his marriage and family, Joe Shimon had lost the opportunity to share each day of his daughter’s life and childhood . Shimon lost the chance to share his daughter's life with him .
 "In spite of the divorce and my living on Long Island with my mother, I would visit him often," she says . "I would visit [his] often. In spite of my divorce and living in the U.S. with his mother, he visits him often"
 Shimon never told his new wife the truth about what he really did in the world, fearing it might endanger her life as well . Though Shimon did eventually remarry, he did not tell her the truth .
 A father-daughter relationship with his 13-year-old daughter that morning overpowered his usual reticence . Perhaps the prospect of a deepening father and daughter relationship overcame his usual, sometimes necessary reticency .
 At that moment, without any further deliberation, father Joe took a calculated risk . Father Joe took the risk, without further deliberating, he said .
 Joe Shimon pulled out five or six different identification badges, said Toni . Toni dropped them all on the kitchen table for inspection . Reaching into his coat pocket, Joe Shimim pulled out several different badges .
 Police Department, United States Secret Service, U.S. Department of Justice, White House identification badge, and finally, Central Intelligence Agency .
 The father and daughter would continue to deepen their newfound relationship, despite the divorce and the dissolution of the family .
 Shimon had already confided to Toni how corrupt and evil he thought Hoover was . He then told her the truth about Hoover’s sexual orientation, his secret affair with his colleague Clyde Tolson, and how he was inevitably called in to clean up any number of messes
 The uneasy memory of “the Easter good-bye walk” would be eclipsed soon enough by her phone call to her father’s White House office on November 22, 1963 .
 Toni was in college in North Carolina in the fall of 1964 when Mary Meyer was murdered . Toni is a survivor of the murder .
 The news of her death came to Toni’s attention the following spring as the trial of Ray Crump began to take center stage in the Washington media .
 After the Kennedy assassination, Toni was already witnessing a seismic shift in her father’s disposition . The Kennedy assassination was already being marked by a seismic change in his disposition .
 By 1964 Joe Shimon had become withdrawn, more cautious . Their relationship had grown exceptionally close, but by 1964 he'd become withdrawn . Shimon became withdrawn and cautious .
 During her spring vacation in 1965, Toni and her father began talking one day . Toni became close friends with her father during her summer vacation .
 She was eager to ask her father’s opinion about what had actually happened to Mary Meyer . Meyer's daughter says she wants to know what happened to her mother .
 She was already aware of several suspicious deaths that appeared to have some link to the Kennedy assassination . She said she already knew of several other suspicious deaths .
 Toni learned how to probe her father as much as she could, but there were limits . Toni had learned how much she could ask her father, but limits were limited .
 Toni started retreating, emotionally withdrawing from her father's life . Toni's father has changed dramatically since Dallas died .
 Just as he had in the late 1950s morning breakfast encounter, the father again risked something further . "Just as he did in the 1950s, he again risked risking something further"
 "You don’t know how many people are just eliminated, just on the operating table alone," she says . "Honey, Honey, you don't know how . many people just eliminated," she adds .
 Toni Shimon: "That day and its memory wasn’t lost on Toni ... nor on me when she revealed it. That day wasn't lost on me, nor on her . That day was the day she revealed the truth to the world .
 Author Jim Marrs, in his 1989 book Crossfire, established a chronological list of more than a hundred individuals . All of whom were shown to have possessed some important detail of the conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy .
 Their deaths during the twenty years following the events in Dallas were suspicious . Their deaths were suspicious. Their deaths occurred during the 20 years .
 More than thirty people on this list had been killed in violent gun-related circumstances . More than 30 people on the list had died in violent circumstances .
 It wasn’t just Mary’s murder anymore, but all the suspicious “suicides,” “heart attacks” or “cancers”—Phil Graham, Frank Wisner, Jim Truitt, Leo Damore . It wasn't just
 Even author John H Davis, who refused to complete Leo Damore’s research about what had really happened to Mary, could be included in the book .
 During the 1970s, America’s Bicentennial came and went, its underbelly not lost on Toni Shimon or her father . During the 70s, the Shimon family lived in New York .
 Toni continued her attempts to bore into her father’s mysterious treasure trove of knowledge . Chipping away little by little, Toni continues to try and find answers .
 Executive Action was released into movie theaters across the country in 1973 . In 1973, the film Executive Action went on to become a box office sensation .
 The screenplay was co-written by Dalton Trumbo, Donald Freed, and attorney Mark Lane . Directed by David Miller, the film is based on Trumbo's novel .
 The film depicts the assassination of President Kennedy as engendered by a cabal of wealthy industrialists and powerful rulers who had been angered by Kennedy’s policies . Starring Burt Lancaster, the film depicts Kennedy as being angered by his policies .
 For power brokers, the most frightening prospect of all was the specter of an unbeatable ‘Kennedy dynasty” lasting decades . For these power brokers it was the prospect of a long-lasting dynasty of power .
 The cabal enlisted a group of CIA-backed Cubans embittered over the Bay of Pigs fiasco, along with several high-level, disgruntled U.S. intelligence agents . The cabal therefore enlisted the group of Cubans .
 Some would later credit the film with reopening the entire debate about Kennedy’s assassination . The film is credited with opening the debate about the Kennedy assassination .
 The film kept coming up in their discussions, and the inquisitive daughter would want to delve more deeply into the assassination . Time and time again, the film kept up in the discussions .
 Like many of his generation, Joe Shimon was a careful drinker, not given to excess . Shimon: "Like many of my generation, I was a drinker but a careful drinkinger" Shimon died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 As the years wore on, he would talk a little more openly while having drinks with his daughter .
 In the wake of Watergate, the U.S. Senate tried to tread on the CIA’s sacred ground . The Church Committee, the Senate's investigative body, investigated allegations of CIA misdeeds .
 Joe Shimon would be called to testify, but he told his daughter he considered the committee’s inquest a joke and treated it as such . He told her they weren’t really serious enough to get to the bottom of anything, he told her .
 Toni recalls how strange people came to her father’s house during the early 1960s . Toni says the disclosures started when she brought up the fact that there had seemed to be a lot of strange people coming at her father's house .
 Shimon Shimon confided he was the principal liaison to the Mafia, a connection that was part of his CIA credentials . Shimon said he was a principal liaison with the Mafia .
 When they had started working on Castro’s assassination, meetings were held at Shimon’S house . Shimon was Shimon's house .
 People like Johnny Roselli, Sam Giancana, Santo Trafficante, and the CIA’s William K Harvey were regulars at these meetings . Some sporadic attendance by Jim Angleton .
 William K Harvey, a pear-shaped, bulging-eyed alcoholic endomorph, had the career track of a bona fide sociopath . Harvey was once paraded before President Kennedy as the CIA's exemplar of Ian Fleming’s James Bond . Harvey's career track was the
 He had originally joined the FBI in 1940, only to then challenge one of Hoover’s protocols . The FBI chief joined the bureau in 1940 .
 The squabble that ensued led Harvey to resign; he joined the CIA instead . Harvey resigned from the CIA after a dispute with the CIA .
 Harvey was assigned by Richard Helms to head the Agency’s ‘Executive Action’ program . The program was created to develop assassination operations on foreign leaders . Harvey was eventually assigned to head of the program .
 When Bobby Kennedy finally found out about what Harvey had done, he was furious . Bobby Kennedy was furious when he found out what had happened .
 The plot to kill Fidel Castro, code-named Operation Mongoose, began to take shape in November 1961 . The plot was code-called Operation 'Operation Mongoose'
 Shimon Shimon's revelations included the blessings of America’s most notorious underworld figures . Shimon said the covert operation had the blessing of some of the most notorious figures in the country .
 Santo Trafficante, who had controlled much of Cuba’s underworld before Castro took power in 1959, had told Shimon explicitly, “Pll get you you the contacts. Give you lots of names.” Shimon had told him to get the contacts .
 Harvey and Johnny Roselli recruited hit men recommended by Trafficante . Trafficante then recruited the hit men to be hit men . Harvey and John Roselli then recruited hitmen to carry out the murders .
 Joe Shimon realized, as did Bill Harvey and Johnny Roselli, that Castro must have found out he was being targeted . Castro was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Castro had been waiting for Castro to come up with the problems he faced . Castro was waiting for them to fail repeatedly, he says . Castro has been waiting patiently for years for Obama to get his chance to win .
 There were only six individuals involved in the CIA’s plot to use organized crime to eliminate Castro .
 According to Shimon, there had been no paper trail of the effort . Shimon: "Nothing had been written down. Nothing had been done down"
 Trafficante suspected that Trafficante had tipped off Castro about the CIA’s plans to assassinate him . Trafficante was killed by the CIA in the fall of the Cuban Revolution .
 Trafficante escaped from jail and Cuba unscathed, then returned to the U.S. with all his treasure intact . Trafficante had been initially jailed by Castro when he first took power, losing all his assets including the casinos .
 Trafficante quickly expanded his hegemony in the crime underworld in the South, almost overnight . Trafficante is known for his role in many of the South's most violent crime syndicates .
 The CIA had come to the same conclusion, eventually calling off their friends in organized crime, and looked for other ways to dispose of Cuba’s leader .
 Trafficante was furious with Shimon for having questioned his allegiances . Trafficante said he was furious that Shimon had questioned Trafficante's loyalty . Shimon was the prime minister of Israel .
 In 1964, Shimon took out a contract on Shimon’s life as well on his daughter and on his wife . Shimon was furious, so he took out the contract on his own life .
 'If anything happens to me, watch the movie Executive Action. I vividly remember him telling me, honey, if anything happens, watch it,' she said .
 For Toni, additional pieces of the puzzle about her father began to take shape . Toni's father died in 2010 at the age of 60 .
 She told him she would consider it, only later telling her mother about her father’s request . She later later told her mother that her father asked her to consider it .
 Her mother became furious at her former husband, knowing full well the danger her daughter might fall into . Her mother was furious at his former husband . She said: "I'm not scared of her daughter anymore. She's terrified of her own life."
 She would learn that even as late as 1989, after the Reagan administration, her father was maintaining regular contact with a group of people who had inside knowledge at all times .
 In the early 1990s, Toni had the kind of conversation with her father that she never would have anticipated . Toni: "I'm not going to be surprised when I find out what happened to me"
 The former “Washington Police Inspector” would finally spill to his daughter what he had never revealed to anyone else, other than the people he was working for . The former Washington Police Inspector would finally reveal to daughter .
 Probed even further, father Joe continued talking, perhaps knowing that the end of his life was approaching . Probed further further, Joe continued to continue talking .
 Toni recalled her father's former company, Allied Investigators, was just a CIA front for most of his undercover work . Allied Investigators offices were located on Dupont Circle in Washington .
 She wasn’t prepared for the next round of fireworks, however, however .
 It was the kind of dreaded moment that one hopes is only a nightmare, a bad dream from which to finally awaken unscathed . It was kind of a dreaded moment, one hopes it was only a dream, one's worst nightmare .
 She wasn't expecting a definitive response, but just curious as to what she might come to know or understand . She wasn’t expecting a definite response, she said .
 She had wanted to know her father, never imagining what this might actually reveal . She had never imagined what this may actually reveal to her .
 Toni exclaimed softly, as the echo of her father’s last words penetrated like nails, one after another, into her heart . Toni exclaims softly, ‘I’m going crazy,’, as her father's last words penetrate .
 Perhaps Toni hoped, like any number of us during the Cold War, that the truth about what our fathers were actually doing in the world might finally offer some consolation . Perhaps he hoped, perhaps he hoped that truth might offer consolation .
 "It really turned me off,” Toni said of her father’s admission .
 Whatever Bill Harvey was up to, it always came out of Jim Angleton’s office, it was always coming out of the office . Whatever Harvey did it, Angleton was always up to it, Harvey was never up to the top .
 I thanked Toni once again and gathered my materials, making my way to the car . I thanked him once again for his help .
 The trip back to Massachusetts, across Long Island Sound on the New London ferry, would be a relief, I kept telling myself . The trip to Massachusetts would be the relief, she said .
 Toni stood on the bow of the New London ferry as it made its way across Long Island Sound . Toni had further confirmed all my suspicions, authenticating an even darker shadow .
 The boat rocked through the oncoming swells, inching toward the Connecticut shoreline . The boat was in the middle of the storm when it hit .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer had planned to make her own “midnight bareback ride” to warn the citizens of a country that its government had been demonically stolen from each and every one of them .
 They had killed Jack because he and his ally-in-peace Nikita Khrushchev were steering the world away from the Cold War toward peace, thereby eliminating the military-industrial-intelligence complex’s most treasured weapons . Fear of war, the fear of ‘Commun
 The Cold War was about to end, and with it, with it the covert action arm of the Central Intelligence Agency . The CIA was the CIA's covert operation arm, and it was the Cold War's covert arm .
 The Agency would have been all but neutered, its funding and resources cut, its menacing grip on public opinion exposed and eliminated . The agency would have had its funding, resources cut and its grip on the public would be exposed, eliminated .
 It also meant the eventual curtailment of many of the defense industries, including the proliferation of nuclear arms . The end of the Cold War era meant the end of many defense industries .
 There would have been no war in Southeast Asia or Vietnam; that, too, was about to end . The war in Vietnam and Vietnam would have ended, but that would have led to no war .
 Little attention had been paid to the parting words of a previous president . Little attention was paid to his parting words from a previous leader .
 In less than three years, anyone who tried to stop it would be eliminated, including the elected president of the United States . Indeed, it had; so much so that in less than 3 years, it was . Anyone who stopped it would also be eliminated .
 Peace was not good for business, nor for American military and economic hegemony . Peace, particularly world peace, was good for the U.S. and for its own interests, says Julian Zelizer . Peace wasn't good for businesses, he says .
 Mary and Jack may have finally engendered together, it had evolved into a part of Jack’s newfound trajectory of where he wanted to take not only his presidency, but the entire world .
 It was the pursuit of peace that was about to take center stage . It would no longer include any obsequious bow to the insanity of America’s war machine driven by the legacy of Allen Dulles .
 After Dallas, amid utter horror and shock, Mary had taken it upon herself to discover and make sense of the truth of the conspiracy that had taken place . Mary realized the magnitude of the second conspiracy, a cover-up taking place right before her eyes .
 It was her own mosaic of people, events, circumstances, and exploration that informed her understanding of the evil that had taken place in Dallas, Texas .
 She had furiously confronted her ex-husband, Cord Meyer, possibly Jim Angleton as well, with what she had discovered . Not fully realizing the extent of their own diabolical ruthlessness, she had confronted them .
 Warren Report was ultimately nothing more than a house of cards . Once ignited with the right matchstick, it would be engulfed in flames . The Warren Report would be nothing more like a firestorm .
 If Mary courageously went public with who she was, and what she knew, making clear her position in the final years of Jack’s life, people with influence would take notice . The fire of suspicion around Dallas around Dallas would erupt into a conflagration .
 The concluding line of Roman Polanski’s film wafted through my mind, tempting me away from the task that now clearly lay ahead . The film's conclusion was the closing line of the concluding line .
 Nausea was overtaking me, but it wasn’t the ferry pitching through the oncoming swells, veteran ocean sailor that I was . The ferry pitched through the swells but it was not the ferry that was .
 It was Mary’s revulsion for the CIA, now mine as well, that gripped me in its vise . Mary's revulsion is now hers as well as hers, and it's now mine .
 "I unleashed my screams toward the sky, only to then collapse at the rail, sobbing one more time. Alone on the deck, hands outstretched toward the last bit of light on a short winter’s day"
 In a certain way, my torment had come to an end, but behind it there was an unbearable sadness, and not just my own . In the end of my torment, I felt like I was being punished for not being able to cope with the loss of love .
 The shining beacon of America, a promise unlike any other for humanity, was being extinguished, as it had been in Rome . America's shining beacon, as well as Rome, had been extinguished in Rome, Rome .
 Ignorance dipped in fear-mongering and dazzled by fabricated myths had become the breeding ground for official stupidity, darkness, and senseless wars, says President Barack Obama .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer had been struck down before she could speak publicly . She was struck down by the Supreme Court in New York City .
 Leo Damore had fallen, very likely poisoned into uncontrollable despair . Damore was likely poisoned by the loss of his life . He is now in a state of despair .
 John Davis, having picked up Leo’s mantle, finally opted out, his life threatened . John Davis: Having picked up the mantle, John Davis opted out of his life .
 "The familiar taste of salt water on my lips called me back inside my body," she said . The familiar smell of water was on her lips when she tasted it again .
 The wind and ocean spray danced all around, the cold of winter now an accustomed companion . The cold is now an indulge of winter .
 "I knew right then and there I would do whatever it took, pay whatever price was required, to allow this story to see the light of day," she said .
 RAY CROWD, JR., SUSPECT; Jone eet Direcie aint P MEYER, VICTIM; a Bey > ; ; ,, ~ sews 7.5-7.5 .
 The O15 button fe ptafter wt ths venstaieg buttoos on the + sreater in color, ores construction and button eon be one of those missing fron the Q5 svoster . No fibers wore found on the es elothing,
 The following pages are copies of the notes attorney James Smith took on the morning of March 31, 1993, when author Leo Damore called him . James Smith: "It was a great day for me. It was a good day for my family"
 Six pages of notes document the telephone call and what was said during the course of the conversation . The six pages document the call .
 After Smith shared these notes with me in 2004, we spent hours together over a three-year period going over each line, thereby further stimulating Smith’s recall and accuracy . Smith's notes were shared with him in 2004 .
 Each page of the notes has been transcribed so that the reader can make sense of what took place during their conversation .
 There is also a discussion of the information that is given on each page for better understanding . The answers to each page include questions and answers about the author .
 Mary made connection w/ it + CIA involved James Angleton . Mary had connection w’s with Angleton, who was CIA operative .
 Damore's tapes of his phone conversation with “William L Mitchell” were not found among Damore’s belongings after his death . A transcript of the call was never found, nor a transcript of it was ever located . Damore was found dead at the age of
 Jimmy Smith has aided the reconstruction and interpretation of his notes from Damore’s account of his conversation with Mitchell . Jimmy Smith helped the author in reconstructing his notes .
 The time of Damore’s call, according to Smith, was between 8:00 and 8:30. Smith: Damore called the time of the call, between 8-00 to 8-30. Damore's call is believed to have taken place around 8:
 Excitedly, Damore announces that he believes he has solved the murder of Mary Meyer . Damore: "I believe I have solved the case"
 Damore tells Smith that "Mitchell" was a former FBI liaison . Damore says he's been up most of the night talking to him . He says he has been up talking to Mitchell Mitchell, who he says was the FBI liaison to the FBI .
 Damore also indicates that he has examined Mary’s diary, in which Mary made a connection with ‘it’�’—JFK's assassination . Damore: “James Angleton figures prominently.”
 Mary knew Bobby Kennedy was going to ‘fire’ FBI director J Edgar Hoover after President Kennedy was reelected in 1964 . Mary’s diary also revealed that Bobby Kennedy planned to “fire” FBI director after JFK re-election in 1964, Damore says .
 Hoover may have also wanted Mary Meyer dead for fear of what she knew, perhaps about Hoover himself or about the FBI’s involvement in the assassination and its coverup .
 Notes of attorney James Smith’s telephone call with Leo Damore on March 31, 1993 . He ber tiedlin cuetln Unue ma Ue RB MA MA ia Lhd os Murr ch,’ ashe Storr .
 Damore revealed that “William L Mitchell” currently lived under a different alias in Virginia . According to Smith, Mitchell’s alias was William Mitchell . Damore also revealed that Angleton lived under an alias .
 Damore referenced the subject “The” “Angleton connection w/CIA,” which continues on the next page . Damore then referenced the ‘The’ ‘Angleton’ connection w with CIA, which continues .
 Damore, in talking about Hoover, is taking the following revelation from Mary’s diary . It's not clear whether Damore is taking that revelation from the diary .
 Damore makes reference to William Colby at the time of the Watergate hearings and the House Select Committee on Intelligence hearings .
 Damore says Mitchell doesn't want to become the "fall guy in history" for the murder of Mary Meyer . Damore then says that “William L Mitchell” does “not want to be the fall guy in . history” for Mary Meyer’s murder
 It appears that before “Mitchell’s called Damore, he had read Damore's book, Senatorial Privilege, about Ted Kennedy's saga at Chappaquiddick . It appears he had already read the book .
 Damore specifically states that he already knows who “Mitchell’s” really is, which was likely revealed to him by L Fletcher Prouty . Damore: “I already know who 'Mitchell' really is.”
 It was NOT the love affair * But But the murder of JFK Ben Bradlee was the murder . She went to husb + husb to Angleton + he Si tect his ass + FBI + FBI .
 Damore tells Smith that the murder of Mary Meyer was “an operation,” where “Mitchell” and others had first been assigned to a surveillance team in September 1964 around the time the Warren Report was released . Damore: "Mitchell" was assigned to
 This may have occurred before the Warren Report was released, in anticipation of it . The Warren Report may have been released before the report was released .
 The Warren Report was released to the public on September 24, 2015 . Mary had purchased a paperback copy of the report .
 Her Diary makes clear that she first confronted Cord Damore, Damore told Smith, and then Cord informed his close friend Jim Angleton about how upset Mary was . Damore later told Smith that Mary was upset, and Angleton then informed Angleton .
 The inference was that Mary confronted Cord that she wasn’t going to stand-by and let the coverup proceed without speaking out . The inference is that Mary told Cord she was going to speak out .
 Damore expressed his suspicions about Ben Bradlee’s meteoric rise at The Washington Post . Damore told Smith that Bradlee had become Executive Editor within six months after becoming Managing Editor .
 Damore also told Smith that he believed Philip Graham’s death was suspicious; he didn’t believe it was a suicide . Damore believes Graham's death was a suspicious death .
 AAce Guy’ al Case tow a Buse F tl +s w/ PoF Fuse Ly Maen popes / We Yohrs 6.6.6 . AAceGuy’s al Case Tow a . Buse . A Buse tl
 Prouty resigned his Air Force commission in 1964 and began to study and prepare for publication his account of the secret history of the Cold War . He began to write a book about his experiences .
 The CIA, Vietnam, and the Plot to Assassinate John F Kennedy, have since become classics in understanding America’s Cold War era . The CIA and Vietnam have since been a classic in understanding the Cold War .
 Damore recounts to Jimmy Smith that Prouty had been in New Zealand at the time of Kennedy’s assassination . Damore tells Smith that Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Damore says Prouty concluded, “prepared in advance,” meaning the assassination . Damore: Proutsy concluded that he was “ prepared in advance” for the killing .
 Prouty assisted Damore in putting certain pieces of the murder of Mary Meyer into focus . Damore also helped identify ‘William L Mitchell’ as an assassin . The author also helped Damore identify an assassin as Mitchell .
 Mitchell told Damore that the setup for the murder was “standard CIA procedure” The setup, Mitchell said, was ‘standard CIA protocol” Damore says .
 This very likely meant that the operation was radio-controlled with a command center somewhere in the vicinity of the murder . The operation was likely to have been radio controlled by the police .
 They were keeping tabs on where Mary Meyer was in the course of her walk along the towpath .
 Leo told Smith that he “thinks this guy had 1 or 2” spotters working directly with him . Leo says he thinks he has 2 or 2 spotters with him at the time .
 Damore tells Smith that he believes he has finally come to “my moment of truth” after finally locating “Mitchell” and having this conversation . The call ends with Damore telling Smith: “I believe I have come to the truth.” Dam
 On December 13, 1952 a Mr. Benjamin Bradlee called and informed mee that he was Press Attache with the American embassy in Paris, that le had left Paris Last night and arrived here this morning .
 He advised me that it was an urgeot matter and that he had to renam to Paris Monday night . He had to travel to Paris on Monday night to find out about the situation .
 He further advised that he was sent bere by Robert Thayer, who is the head of the C.1.1 . He said he had been sent by Thayer .
 He stated that he was supposed to have been met by a representative of the C.LA. at the aisport but missed connections . He has been trying to get in touch with Allen Dulles but has been unable to do so .
 Erik Hedegaard, “The Last Confessions of E Howard Hunt,” Rolling Stone, April 5, 2007 . Hunt was the subject of the 2007 Rolling Stone cover story .
 This entire section was based on a collection of notes over a period of nearly twenty years that I began writing in the early 1970s . The entire section of this section is based on the notes I wrote over the course of nearly 20 years .
 As a training clinical psychologist, it was part of my orientation to begin an intensive period of personal psychotherapy that lasted a number of years . As a student in the 1980s, I had to undergo intensive psychotherapy sessions .
 In the fall of 1966, New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison reopened his investigation into the Kennedy assassination . Garrison had made the mistake of turning over his earlier investigation to the FBI, which did nothing .
 Garrison arrested David Ferrie as a possible associate of Lee Harvey Oswald’s . Ferrie was arrested days after Dallas . Garrison had arrested Ferrie .
 Garrison soon widened his net to include Guy Banister and Clay Shaw . Garrison was convinced Oswald could never have acted alone .
 Garrison arrested Clay Shaw for conspiring to assassinate President Kennedy in March 1967 . Garrison arrested Shaw for plotting to kill President Kennedy . Shaw was convicted of conspiring to kill Kennedy .
 Garrison visited with Look magazine’s managing editor, William Attwood, who had been a Princeton classmate of my father's . Attwood was the managing editor of Look magazine . Garrison's trial would not begin until January 1969, but in the spring of 1968, Look had been undermined
 Look was prepared to do a major feature story on Garrison investigation, but Attwood unexpectedly suffered a heart attack . Attwood suffered a significant heart attack, and the article never materialized .
 Mellen further discussed and confirmed this event in an interview by this author on November 19, 2006 . Mellen also confirmed this in a 2006 interview by an interview with this author .
 Gaeton Fonzi, 31, was born in New York City . He is the son of the rapper who performed in the early 1990s .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was part of a 1959 false defection program administered by the Office of Naval Intelligence in Nags Head, North Carolina . The program was first discussed in an interview conducted by this author with former CIA officer Victor Marchetti in 2007 .
 ONI program was overseen by the CIA’s counterintelligence chief, James Jesus Angleton . Author Joan Mellen: ONI was overseen in the 1950s and '60s . Angleton was a CIA counter intelligence chief .
 Oswald’s return to the U.S. in 1962 was “debriefed” by a CIA officer named Aldrin Anderson . Oswald was, in fact, "debriefing" by the CIA .
 “Kennedy’s Big Mess; Savitch's Sad Life,” Wall Street Journal, August 16, 1988, 26. 26. “Savitch’�s Sad Life” is a memoir by Savitch . Savitch: Savitch ‘
 Francis I Broadhurst, “A Refreshing View of Kennedy,” Cape Cod Times, November 18, 1993 . Broadhurst: "A refreshing view of Kennedy"
 Smith recounted verbatim of the conversation with his friend John H Davis . Smith recounted the conversation to Davis .
 The poem was a tribute to her half-sister Rosamond Pinchot, who committed suicide in 1938 .
 The nature of Mary Meyer’s involvement with President Kennedy and their mutual concern with world peace initiatives, away from the Cold War, is the focus of this book and will be demonstrated throughout . Meyer's friendship with Kennedy is the subject of the new book .
 Former presidential adviser Kenneth P. O’Donnell’s extensive interviews with the late author Leo Damore, shortly before his death, were published in the week before the death of Damore . O'Donnell's death comes from sources and interviews .
 James McConnell Truitt wrote a letter to author Deborah Davis, dated May 11, 1979 . Truitt's letter to Davis was published in 1979. Truitt was the author of the book, "Deborah Davis" Truitt: "I love Deborah Davis"
 The letter was part of the files of the late author Leo Damore . It was confirmed by author Deborah Davis in 2005 in 2005 .
 Mary Meyer's intention to go public with her revelations about the CIA’s involvement in the Kennedy assassination has been documented in a number of sources .
 The mutually reinforcing effect of these sources, and the way in which they aggregate, establish Mary Meyer’s intention to go public with all that she had discovered, is discussed in greater detail in chapters 11, 12, and 13 .
 Leslie Judd Ahlander, “Frederick Drawings Exhibited’s Exhibited,” Washington Post, November 24, 1963, G10. Ahlander . Ahlander: ‘Frederick’ was a ‘great artist’.
 Leo Damore, the author of the book, was interviewed by the author in 1992 . Damore was a member of the Democratic National Committee for the Democratic Party . He is credited with saving the country from poverty .
 Between 1992 and 1994, there were at least five face-to-face meetings between Damore and this author . In addition to numerous followup telephone conversations regarding the life of Mary Meyer, her death, and Damore’s research .
 Damore stated that Mary Meyer had sought out Bill Walton’s counsel in early 1964 . Damore said Mary Meyer sought out Walton's counsel in 1964 . Mary Meyer was a member of the Walton family .
 Leo Damore, who had acquired a copy of Mary Meyer’s real diary, told his attorney, James E Smith, on March 31, 1993, that Mary had made a decision to go public with what she had discovered, sometime after the Warren Report had been released .
 Ron Rosenbaum and Phillip Nobile, “The Curious Aftermath of JFK’s Best and Brightest Affair,’ New Times, July 9, 1976, 29 .
 In 1976, the authors interviewed some of the people closest to Mary Meyer who had intimate knowledge of her habits during the last year of her life . Meyer's habits were revealed in a book published in 1976 .
 Mary also talked with presidential adviser Kenneth P O’Donnell shortly after the Kennedy assassination . In addition, according to Leo Damore, Mary talked with President Kennedy’s widow .
 The Life and Unsolved Murder of Presidential Mistress Mary Meyer was published in 304.1 pages . Meyer was the mistress of President George W. Bush . Meyer's mistress was found murdered in the White House . Meyer died in 1994 .
 Anne and James Truitt had moved to Tokyo shortly after Anne’s sculpture exhibit Black, White, and Grey opened in January 1964 at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, Connecticut . The Truitt family moved to Japan shortly after the exhibit opened .
 As noted in note 4 above, this event was also mentioned by former CIA official Robert T Crowley in a conversation to author Gregory Douglas in January 1996 .
 See Chapter 13 for further discussion of the way in which these sources are mutually corroborating with each other .
 Leo Damore revealed Mary Meyer’s altercation with Cord Meyer to his attorney, James H Smith, Esq., during the above-referenced telephone call of March 31, 1993 . Mary Meyer and Cord Meyer were engaged in an altercation .
 Smith took six pages of notes on this call, which are reproduced in Appendix 3 . Smith took notes of the call .
 Confidential source who asked to remain anonymous, interview with the author, Washington, D.C., March 10, 2006, interview .
 Iam indebted to award-winning Boston fine artist Shelah Horvitz for her insightful analysis of some of the last paintings of Mary Pinchot Meyer .
 Mary Meyer pushed hard for President Kennedy to protect the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal towpath area . Kenny O’Donnell had shared with him that Mary Meyer had pushed for protection of the towpath .
 Leo Damore said he had interviewed Mr Parmet, who gave him other details about Jack’s relationship with Mary Meyer .
 Bernie Ward and Granville Toogood, “Former Vice President of Washington Post Reveals JFK 2-Year White House Romance,” National Enquirer, March 2, 1976, 4. 4.
 Leo Damore interviewed an anonymous source who was a close friend of Mary Meyer’s who gave him more details about this encounter, which he discussed with me .
 All five volumes address John Kennedy’s emotional maternal deprivation and the toll it took on him . John Kennedy's maternal deprivation was the result of his mother's death .
 Mary Meyer’s initial foray into psychedelics appears to have taken place in the San Francisco Bay area during a late-1950s visit with Jim Truitt and his wife, Anne .
 Deborah Davis is the subject of numerous interviews with CNN iReporters . Davis was born and raised in New York City, New York, New Jersey . Davis is a Grammy-winning author .
 Davis’s research for her book Katharine the Great in 1976, she traveled to Mexico to interview Jim Truitt for more than ten hours over a three-day period . Truitt was interviewed by Davis for over 10 hours over three days .
 During his never-before-published two-hour interview by Leo Damore on November 7, 1990, Timothy Damore commented extensively on Mary Meyer’s experience with psychedelics and the impact it had on her worldview .
 Timothy Leary was interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., November 7, 1990 . Leary says Leary's life has changed dramatically since his death . He says he is proud to be able to talk to Leary .
 Leary spoke about Mary Meyer's mission with psychedelics in 1990 interview with Leo Damore . Leary also spoke about how Meyer defined her mission with LSD .
 Damore repeatedly stressed that Mary Meyer had been in large measure ‘a healer’ in Kennedy’s tortured emotional life . Damore: Meyer was a "healing" in Kennedy's tortured life . Meyer was "a healer"
 Damore’s insight had been based on his talks with Kenny O’Donnell regarding Mary Meyer’S influence on the president . Damore: “Mary Meyer is a strong influence in the president.” Damore said he had been in talks with O�
 The first edition of Deborah Davis’s Katharine the Great was recalled and shredded due to pressure from Ben Bradlee and Katharine Graham . There has been controversy over whether Phil Graham actually mentioned during his infamous “meltdown” in Phoenix at a newspaper convention in January
 Carol Felsenthal, whose 1993 book Power, Privilege and the Post was vetted, maintains that Phil Graham did, indeed, reveal the affair during his drunken tirade . Graham's book was thoroughly vetted and vetted by Felselsenthal .
 CIA wife Joanne Bross talks to Nina Burleigh about her CIA wife . Ms. Bross is married to the CIA director of operations in Washington DC .
 James Angleton bragged on more than one occasion that he had wiretapped Mary Meyer’s telephone and bugged her bedroom . Bross said Angleton said he had bugged Mary Meyer's bedroom and wiretapped her .
 “William L Mitchell” confessed to being part of a surveillance team assigned to Mary Meyer around the time of the Warren Report’s release to the public in September 1964 . Damore said that he had just talked for several hours with Mitchell, who confessed to be part of
 The description of the final seconds of Mary Meyer’s life and what occurred at the scene of her death was outlined in detail in a fifteen-page opening statement at the trial of Ray Crump, Jr. in July 1965 .
 Linwood L Rayford, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., February 19, 1991 . Rayford died of a heart attack in February 1991 at the age of 92 . Rayman was diagnosed with multiple heart attacks .
 Henry Wiggins Jr., interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., April 2, 1992 . Wiggins Jr. talks about his life in Washington, DC . Wiggins: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die"
 Roderick Sylvis, interview by the author, Wake Forest, North Carolina, July 23, 2008, .
 JFK’s Best and Brightest Affair occurred in 1976, 1976, New Times reported in 1976 .
 Henry Wiggins reiterated his account several times throughout the trial . Henry Wiggins was convicted of manslaughter in 2012 .
 Under cross-examination by defense attorney Dovey Roundtree, he reiterated that it was “approximately 1:00 o’clock” when he received his instructions to look for the jacket .
 Unnamed colleague of Detective Bernard Crooke interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., October 28, 1990 . Crooke was killed in the line of duty in 1990 .
 George Peter Lamb, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., December 20, 1990 . Lamb: "George Peter Lamb's life is going to be very interesting" Lamb: I am proud to be able to tell the truth about my life in the U.S.
 Detective Edwin Coppage testified at the trial that the gloves were removed at the murder scene by Detective Bernie Crooke . Dr. Dr. Michael Lister testified that Dr. Lister's gloves were taken from the scene of the murder .
 Rayford testified that he remembered the victim had been wearing the gloves at the murder scene . Rayford said he remembered that the gloves were found at the scene of the murder .
 Crooke had already left the murder scene with Ray Crump before Rayford arrived at approximately 2:00 pm. Crooke was found dead at the scene of the murder . Rayford says Crooke left the scene with Crump and Crump .
 Rayford specifically remembered that the gloves were removed at the autopsy and given to Crooke after 3:45 pm on the day of the murder . Rayford said the gloves had been removed from the autopsy at the time of Crooke's murder .
 Dovey Roundtree shared numerous documents relating to her defense of Ray Crump . Roundtree also shared the account given to her by Robert Woolright the morning he came to pick up Crump for work .
 Crump's jacket was a Father’s Day present given to him by his wife, Helena, and their children the preceding June . Dovey Roundtree mentioned that Crump had been a Father's Day present to him .
 Dovey Roundtree told Leo Damore during several interviews that no one in Ray Crump’s family, church community, or anyone she interviewed ever recalled Crump with a firearm of any kind . Also, Roundtree said no one from her family, friends or family ever recalled
 Ray Crump’s brother, Jimmy Crump, had at one time years earlier owned a 22-caliber rifle, but that was the extent of any firearm noted in Crump's immediate and extended family . Ray's brother had a rifle at one point years earlier .
 Woman dies in robbery on Towpath in 1964 . Suspect was found dead in canal slaying .
 During this interview, Damore revealed many of the details that Kenneth O’Donnell had shared with him about what had taken place during the dedication of the Pinchot Institute for Conservation at Grey Towers in 1963 .
 A Journal of the History of Falmouth and Vicinity (Woods Hole, Mass.: Woods Hole Historical Collection) no. 19, no. 31. : 31 .
 Bradlee, Good Life, 266; Ben Bradlee: "Good Life" is a memoir of his life in Washington, D.C. Bradlee .
 Tony Bradlee gave the account to Sally Bedell Smith . This was further confirmed by the account he gave to the author of the book . The account was confirmed to have been made public by the author .
 Angleton kept a voluminous set of files in a number of different safes at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia . All three of these sources attest to the fact that the files were kept in various safes .
 Antoinette Pinchot Bradlee was the wife of Washington Post Executive Editor Benjamin Bradlee . She was married to Bradlee for decades .
 Letter to the editor: Angleton Children Tell Their Side . Angleton children tell their side .
 Sally Bedell Smith said she had conducted an extensive interview with Tony Bradlee in January 2001 and a follow-up in September 2001 .
 Tony decided to destroy the diary after James Truitt’s interviews with the National Enquirer, author Sally Bedell Smith says .
 Pinchot, a niece of Mary Meyer’s, says this diary still exists somewhere in Milford, Pennsylvania . The diary is believed to have been found by a family member .
 It contained an account of Mary Meyer’s struggle with her father Amos, her daughter Rosamund, and at least one other relationship with a man Mary Meyer was involved with at the time .
 Because of the nature of my book, the MeyerPinchot family denied me access to this earlier diary of Mary Meyer’s. The Meyer family is not allowed access to the diary .
 Winston Scott’s son, Michael, told Russell that an ex-CIA colleague of his father's had confided that “certain people” had come by to see Win when he was bedridden after his backyard fall, which everyone believed had precipitated his death . Michael
 Michael Scott said he was told that James Angleton was on a plane to Mexico within an hour of his dad's death . Michael Scott then added that he was held for a while at customs at the airport . Scott then said he had no visa or passport so quickly that he carried no
 Dovey Roundtree was interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., November 4, 1990 . Roundtree: "Dovey's life is not going to be easy, it's a life of fun"
 The fact that Ray Crump had been with a girlfriend named Vivian on the towpath at the time of Mary Meyer’s murder was revealed to attorney Dovey Roundtree by both Crump himself and by his mother, Martha Crump .
 Dovey Roundtree interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., April 4, 1992 . Roundtree: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be alive"
 The distances were measured again by the author on February 6, 2008, using GPS portable technology and found to be accurate within ten feet . The distances are measured again using GPS technology .
 U.S. Park Police officer Ray Pollan interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., December 19, 1990 . Pollan was a member of the United States Park Police in the 1990s .
 Circuit Judge George Thomas Washington pointed out in his dissent during Crump’s appeal for a writ of habeas corpus, which was denied . Crump's appeal was denied by the judge .
 George Peter Lamb and the Legal Aid Association withdrew from the Crump case on November 3, 1964 . The case was settled in 1964 .
 Ray Crump's attorney says Crump was deteriorating mentally soon after entering his plea . Roundtree made it clear that her client, Crump, was deteriorating mental soon after he entered plea .
 She continued to believe that he was being abused by prison guards, despite daily visits from her and his family . She believed that guards were abusing him, despite visits from his family and friends .
 Ray Crump, Jr., Jr. was awarded the award in a federal court in Washington, D.C. The award was awarded to Crump by the United States .
 The motion also supports Detective Bernie Crooke’s statement to Dovey Roundtree that he had smelled beer when he arrested Crump . Crump was arrested at approximately 1:15m. on October 12, 1964 .
 Superintendent Dale C Cameron, MD, is the superintendent of the St. Louis County School of Health, Education, and Welfare .
 D.C. District Court Clerk to Clerk of the Criminal Division for the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, January 13, 1965 .
 The transcript of the coroner’s inquest on October 19, 1964, is no longer available . The inquest was held at the Coroner's Court in New York City .
 Jerry Hunter, Esq., interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C.C., November 6, 1990 . Jerry Hunter was interviewed in 1990 by Leo D. Damore .
 River Patrolman police officer Frederick Q Byers of the Harbor Patrol testified on three different occasions that he retrieved a jacket alleged to have belonged to Crump at 1:46 pm on the afternoon of the murder .
 The distance computed to Three Sisters Island was from a GPS navigation instrument and Google Earth maps . The distance was computed using Google Earth and GPS navigation .
 Wiggins and Branch would testify at the murder trial that they had no knowledge of the ownership, the work ticket, or the ultimate disposition of the stalled Nash Rambler sedan . The two men would testify they did not know who owned the vehicle or who owned it .
 David Acheson is a former British ambassador to the United States . He was assassinated in 1968 during the Soviet Union invasion of Georgia in 1968 .
 Dovey Roundtree was interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., May 25, 1991 . Roundtree died of a heart attack in the fall of the year .
 Charles Duncan, Esq., interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., December 20, 1990 . Charles Duncan was a prominent lawyer in the late '90s . He was interviewed in 1990s .
 U.S. Department of Justice memo addressed to na ‘Mr Conrad,” February 24, 1965 . The memo was sent to Conrad in 1965 .
 Dovey Roundtree was interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., February 23, 1991 . Roundtree died of a heart attack at the age of 50 .
 Alfred Hantman, Esq., interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., May 21, 1991. Alfred Hantsman was a prominent attorney in the late '90s . He was convicted of perjury in federal court in 1991 .
 Cord Meyer was met at the airport by his former brother-in-law and Washington attorney Steuart Pittman and career CIA official Wistar Janney .
 Robert S Bennett, Esq., interview by the author, Washington, D.C., November 11, 2009. Robert S. Bennett is an attorney for the plaintiffs .
 The distance from the 4300 block of Canal Road at the point that was directly across from the murder scene on the towpath to Fletcher’s Boat House was measured by both an automobile odometer and a GPS instrument and was found to be exactly 1.63 miles .
 Roderick Sylvis, interview by the author, Wake Forest, N.C., July 23, 2008 . Sylvis: "I don't want to be left alone"
 Sylvis, interview with author, July 30, 2008; Roderick Sylvis interview by the author . Sylvis: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future"
 Damore’s notes appear to have taken place during the winter of 1989, though it is not completely clear . From Damore's notes, this appears to have occurred during the Winter of 1989 .
 Author Dovey Roundtree believes Ray Ray had been repeatedly beaten, abused, and “probably raped” during his eight months in jail before trial .
 Gifford's grandfather Cyrille was forced to leave France for participating in a plan to free Napoléon from the island of St. Louis . Cyrille left France in 17th century for helping to free the French king from the French port .
 Char Miller, “All in the Family: The Pinchots of Milford,” Pennsylvania History : 126. One Man’s Evolution Toward Conservation in the Nineteenth Century .
 The Attwood family graciously allowed me access to Bill Attwood’s private diaries, which were extensive, right up until his death in 1989 . The family of Attwood, who died in 1989, allowed me to see his diaries .
 The letter documents William Attwood’s date for Winter Festivities Weekend, February 1936, and the fact that John F Kennedy was in attendance . The letter was written by Attwood and is dated from 1936 .
 A former 1942 Vassar classmate of Mary Meyer’s who asked to remain anonymous, interviewed by the author, November 27, 2009 . The author of this article is anonymous .
 Cord Meyer Jr., “Waves of Darkness,” Atlantic Monthly, January 1946, De.. a Ibid, 80. Cord Meyer, ‘Waves Of Darkness’
 Charles Bartlett, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., December 10, 2008 . Bartlett: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future"
 Joseph Shimon testified before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence . Restricted, top secret testimony given by Joseph W Shimon, September 12, 1975 . Shimon's testimony was classified as classified .
 The document was provided to the author from Joseph Shimon’s daughter, Toni Shimon . Joseph's daughter Toni gave the document to the writer .
 Cord Meyer Jr., “A Serviceman Looks at the Peace,” published in Atlantic Monthly, September 1945 .
 The Success of the American World Federalism in the 1940s,” Peace & Change 24, no. 24, is published on October 24, 2010 .
 There were also letters between Walter Lippman and Cord during 1951 that might have suggested that he helped Cord in procuring a job as a journalist, but nothing specific . pS 42.
 Victor Marchetti, interview by the author, Ashburn, Va., October 4, 2007. p.S 45. pS 45 . pS
 Cord wrote several pages on what had occurred on the afternoon of August 31 . Here, Cord wrote a few pages of his thoughts .
 The letter was part of the files of the late author Leo Damore . It was subsequently verified by author Deborah Davis .
 Victor, Marchetti, interviews by the author, Ashburn, Va., November 18, 2005, and October 4, 2007, respectively . Victor and Marchetti were the subject of two separate interviews .
 Carl Bernstein: The CIA and the media are at the center of the Cold War . He says the CIA is at the heart of the CIA’s efforts to discredit the media .
 Scottie Lanahan, “Are You Playing the Games by the Rules in Washington?” News to Me ... ..., Washington Post, April 2, 1967 .
 Many women from prominent families wanted to avoid the embarrassment of getting a divorce in their hometown . Divorce in sparsely populated Nevada was popular with women from high-profile families .
 Kenneth Noland was interviewed by Nina Burleigh on September 13, 1996 . Noland is credited with saving the lives of children in the U.S.
 Deborah Davis’s research for her book Katharine the Great in 1976, she traveled to Mexico and interviewed Jim Truitt for more than ten hours over a three-day period . Truitt interviewed Davis for over ten hours in Mexico .
 Laura Bergquist, “The Curious Story Behind the New Cary Grant,” Look, September 1, 1959 .
 Torture’s Ugly Echoes,” Truthout, Sunday, May 23, 2010. “The U.S. Torture is the result of torture, torture, and the result is that the world needs to know more .
 This is, by far, the most thorough account of Frank Olson’s death and the history of the CIA's MKULTRA program . The book is by far the most comprehensive account of the death of Olson and his role in the CIA .
 Kenneth Noland and Mary Meyer taught art at Georgetown Day School in the 1950s . Noland declined to speak with me when asked about his association with Noland .
 I am indebted to Nina Burleigh, who graciously shared a copy of her notes taken during these interviews .
 Ben Bradlee is the director of the U.S. State Department of the Navy . He is the son of former Vice President George W. Bush .
 Priscilla J McMillan claimed to have no recollection of making the quoted statements, or of the interviews she had given to David Horowitz and Robert Dallek . During an interview with this author in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on July 8, 2009, she said she had no recollection
 Both authors confirmed with me that they had interviewed Priscilla J McMillan, and that she gave the statements as quoted in their respective books .
 David Horowitz confirmed this with me by telephone on July 13, 2009, and Robert Dallek confirmed it via email on July 14, 2009 . David Horowitz: "David Horowitz confirms this to me by phone and emailing me . The story goes back to the original story .
 Timothy Leary interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., November 7, 1990 . Leary's interview is published in Leary, Flashbacks, 129.1.
 Burleigh’s interview with White House counsel Myer Feldman provides the most specific, thorough documentation of how closely President Kennedy relied on the counsel of Mary Meyer . Burleigh's interview with Feldman is the most detailed documentation of the relationship between President Kennedy and Meyer .
 Bradshaw confirmed that she and her late husband, Jon, were very close friends of Timothy and Barbara Leary . Bradshaw and Leary spent a great deal of time together .
 In Leo Damore’s possession were two letters/reports from investigator William Triplett . Damore was found with two letters from Triplett in his possession .
 The first was dated “14 December 1983” and was eight single-spaced typewritten pages in length . The first page of the book was dated 14 December 1983 and eight pages were typewritten on typewritten .
 The second letter/report was dated “5 January 1984” and was six pages in length . It was dated five years ago and was dated six pages long .
 Sometime in early 1991, Damore communicated with Triplett . Triplett responded to Damore in a letter dated March 7, 1991, in which he verified his previous work with Timothy Leary .
 Damore followed up with Leary in several telephone calls over the next two-plus years into March 1993 . Damore's notes indicate that Leary asked Damore specific questions that arose from the interview in 1990 .
 Timothy Leary’s relationship with Cord Meyer was also documented by Leary biographer Robert Greenfield . Greenfield told me that Leary's secretary in Berkeley verified this when he interviewed her .
 Peggy Mellon Hitchcock was interviewed by Peggy Greenfield in 2009 . Greenfield is the author of the book, "Peggy Mellon Hitchcock" Hitchcock died in 2007 .
 In his notes for Chapter 22, Heymann stated that he had interviewed “James Angleton,” but provided no citation as to the date or location of such interview . Heymann said he interviewed Angleton but did not provide a citation for such a time or location .
 Recently, much of Heymann’s so-called research has met with increasing criticism, questioning its veracity . Heymann has been accused of being a fraud .
 A Love Story at Citizens for Truth about the Kennedy Assassination, www.ctka.net/reviews/heymann .
 Deborah Davis, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., March 17, 2009 . Deborah Davis: "I'm not going to let it slide down"
 Davis about Timothy Leary, whom she came to know well, and Jim Truitt . Davis about Leary: "I was very close to him. He was a great friend of mine"
 January 1962 was the date first disclosed by James Truitt in the March 1976 issue of the National Enquirer . Truitt first published the story in a March 1976 edition .
 White House Secret Service logs at John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, Mass.
 This is the latest and most thoroughly researched book documenting these facts . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 Brugioni knew personally some of the agents in Kennedy's Secret Service detail . They told him that they took the president on a number of occasions to Mary Meyer’s house in Georgetown .
 Damore mentioned this incident the very first time we met in February 1992 and repeated it several times subsequent to that . Damore: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was a mistake" Damore says the incident happened in 1992 . He says Dam
 Damore shared O’Donnell’s comments with his close friend and attorney Jimmy Smith, as well as with Timothy Leary . Damore also shared his interview with Leary and Jimmy Smith .
 Wolfe’s account was meticulously researched and substantiated by several different sources, Wolfe said . Wolfe's account has been meticulously researched by several sources, including Wolfe . Wolfe said Wolfe's accounts are meticulously researched .
 Bryan Bender, “A Dark Corner of Camelot’s Camelot,” Boston Globe, January 23, 2011 .
 John Foster Dulles and the law firm Sullivan & Cromwell had been the legal counsel for the United Fruit Company for decades . Dulles' legal counsel was Sullivan and Cromwell, who had been on the legal team for decades.
 John Foster and Allen Dulles were both major shareholders in the company . Allen served as a member of United Fruit’s board of trustees .
 Donald E Deneselya, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., April 10, 2007. Donald E. Deneseleya .
 Daniel Schorr wrote a piece on Noah Adams’s NPR program All Things Considered, March 26, 2001 . Schorr: The author of the book, "I’m not afraid to say yes" Schorr says the book was a good read .
 Dulles did not learn that he would be fired from the CIA until the last week of August 1961 .
 President Kennedy announced on September 27 that John A McCone would replace him . President Kennedy then announced that he would be replaced by John McCone .
 Sally Bedell Smith, Grace and Power: The Private World of the Kennedy White House . Smith: The private world of the White House was the private world .
 They can also be accessed online; see “Kennedy-Khrushchev Exchanges,’ United States Department of State .
 All quotations from that correspondence appearing in this chapter were obtained at that web page . All quotations are obtained at the same web page as those of this page .
 Damore shared a number of incidents that Kenny O’Donnell had told him about concerning Mary and Jack . Mary confronted Jack on the dangers of the resumption of nuclear testing in April 1962 . Damore: Mary confronting Jack about the danger of nuclear tests .
 The wing commander’s SAC alert bombers “deliberately flew past their turn around points toward Soviet airspace,” he said . “Soviet radar operators would certainly have recognized and reported and reported," he added . The mission was “an unambiguous threat which
 There is extensive documentation of the existence of the CIA’s Operation Mockingbird, as noted in previous chapters .
 Victor Marchetti is a former CIA operative and author . He provided information to CNN.com's John Sutter for an interview with him .
 White House telephone logs, calls to Evelyn Lincoln on January 18, 1963, John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, Massachusetts. White House .
 The Murder of Frank Olson and the CIA’s Secret Cold War Experiments (Walterville, Ore.: Trine Day, 2009), 115. Frank Olson was murdered by the CIA during the Cold War in 1968 .
 Mary Meyer allegedly sent Leary a postcard to him . Mary Meyer's postcard was further confirmation of what his confidential source had told him, Damore says .
 I suspected that the source of this information was Mary Meyer’s close friend Anne Chamberlin, whom I also knew, but who refused to be interviewed by me .
 Alun Rees, “Nobel Prize Genius Crick Was High on LSD when He Discovered the Secret of Life,” Associated Newspapers, 2004 . Crick was high on LSD at the time of his discovery of life, Rees says .
 This article originally appeared in the Mail on Sunday , August 8, 2004 .
 The Strange Life and Times of Bill Wilson, Founder of A.A.,,” Modern Drunkard Magazine, www.moderndrunkardmagazine.com/issues .
 The source text is a Department of State translation of a commercial telegram from Moscow . The telegram was sent from Moscow to the United States .
 Meyers called at 2:14 p.m. and was transferred to the president by Evelyn Lincoln . Meyers ‘called at 2.14 pm.M. and . transferred to President Lincoln’s desk at 2 pmm.
 Secret Service logs show “Mary Meyers’s” signed in at 7:30 PM. on July 3, 1963, and was escorted to the White House residence . White House Secret Service log shows ‘Meyers’ signed in .
 Katharine Graham documented “William Smith” as their “caretaker” at Glen Welby at the time of Phil Graham’s death . Phil Graham's death was the death of his friend, Phil Graham .
 Bill Corson made the remark to Roger Charles at the time of the Senate subcommittee hearings led by Frank Church in 1977 . Charles commented on the number of alleged “suicides” that had taken place in connection with the Kennedy assassination .
 Speech given in 1988 by Washington Post editor-owner Katharine Graham at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, to senior CIA employees .
 Stephen L Vaughn, Encyclopedia of American Journalism , 201. Smith, Grace and Power, 395. Smith . Vaughn . Vaughn. Vaughn, Vaughn, Smith, Vaughn .
 Simone Attwood was interviewed by the author, Ithaca, N.Y., November 3, 2009 . Attwood is the author of the book, "Ithaca" Attwood's book is published by the University of New York .
 President Kennedy and I had tremendous problems with Diem, but my God, he was the authority, he said . "He was the head of state," he said of Diem . "My God, the authority" of the Vietnamese government, he added .
 Dougherty was a student at Georgetown Day School in Washington, D.C., when Mary Meyer and Ken Noland taught art studio classes in the late 1950s .
 Timothy Leary reiterated this event to Leo Damore during his interview of November 7, 1990 . Leary also reiterated this issue in an interview with Damore in November 1990 .
 Butch Burroughs was an employee at the Texas Theater, according to author Marrs Marrs, and assassination researcher John Armstrong . According to Armstrong, Burrough's was a Texas Theater employee .
 He heard someone enter the theater shortly after 1:00 pm. and go to the balcony . The man says someone entered the theater and went to balcony .
 It was Lee Harvey Oswald who had apparently entered the theater and gone to the balcony without being initially seen by Burroughs . Oswald had apparently gone into the theater without being first seen by the poet .
 Oswald came down from the balcony and bought popcorn from Burroughs . At approximately 1:15 PM., Oswald came . down from his balcony . Oswald's popcorn was bought by Burrough's, a friend of his .
 Burroughs then watched him walk down the aisle and take a seat on the main floor of the building . He watched him take his seat in the main room .
 Matthew Walton, interview by the author, Woods Hole, Mass., August 28, 2007 . Walton: "I'm not afraid to go out of fear. I'm scared to go to the woods"
 Matthew Walton recalled Agnes Meyer making the remark to his father, William Walton . William Walton said the remark was made to his son .
 Secret Service agent Bolden documented the initial evidence for this assassination attempt in Chicago . The assassination attempt was a failed assassination attempt .
 David Duffy and Bennett Bolton, “JFK’s Secret Mistress Assassinated Because She Knew Too Much,” National Enquirer, July 9, 1996 .
 Burleigh interviewed only Mary Fischer on the topic of Kennedy’s assassination . Burleigh never pursued any of Meyer's concerns about what had really happened in Dallas .
 Damore spoke often to me about what Kenny O’Donnell had told him regarding Mary Meyer’s influence on President Kennedy . Damore: “Kenny told me what he thought about Mary Meyer's influence on Kennedy .”
 This was confirmed in an interview on July 15, 2009, with an individual who wanted to remain anonymous . The person who knew well the person who had been in the presidential entourage in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . The interview was made in 2009 .
 The person in the president’s entourage also knew Mary Meyer very well, the person said . The person said he knew her very well . Meyer is a well-known figure in the White House .
 It was during that initial interview I first learned that he had worked closely with my father, Wistar Janney, on several operations . Janney: "I'm glad to have worked with him, and he's a good friend"
 When I made a passing reference to the Zapruder film, Brugioni corrected my reference and told me that the CIA had been in possession of the film the day after the assassination . The film was released by the CIA the next day .
 This revelation prompted a subsequent series of interviews between Brugioni and myself that took place between February 12, 13, 14, March 6, 10, and April 30, 2009 .
 Dino Brugioni visited Dino at his home in Hartwood, Virginia, on June 27, 2009, for additional clarification and input . Dino later visited Dino to discuss the controversy surrounding the death of Dino .
 The Parkland Memorial Hospital’s press conference convened at 3:16 P.M. on November 22, 1963 . Clark attended the press conference . Clark was the only person to die in the shooting .
 Malcolm Perry, March 25 and March 30, 1964, Warren Commission Proceedings. Malcolm Perry was a member of the Warren Commission . Malcolm Perry died March 25, March 30 and March 31, 1964 .
 Harry S Truman, editorial, “United States Should Hold CIA to Intelligence Role,” Washington Post, December 22, 1963, A11 . Truman: U.S. should hold CIA to intelligence role in intelligence .
 John Kelin interviewed by the author, September 16, 2010, for an interview with him .
 John Kelin, Ray Marcus and Raymond McGovern discussed the incident in interviews with CNN's John Sutter . McGovern, Kelin and McGovern have also discussed it in interviews .
 Ray McGovern, “Are Presidents Afraid of the CIA?” December 29, 2009, Common Dreams . McGovern: Are Presidents afraid of CIA? McGovern says .
 Leo Damore stated that he had talked with William Walton and that Walton confirmed Mary had come to him grief-stricken after President Kennedy’s assassination, though there was no tape of any recorded interview or notes in any of Damore's research . William Walton confirmed that Mary had
 The discreet Walton may have insisted that their interview not be recorded . Walton may also insist that they did not record the interview .
 Frances Buehler, Frances Walton and her family were in Woods Hole, Mass., in 2006 . Walton's family was in the U.S. at the time of her death . Walton was a member of the Walton family, a physician and a physician .
 James Wagenvoord profile, Spartacus Educational, November 3, 2009 . Spartacus.com .
 James Wagenvoord, interview by the author, January 9, 2011. In addition to the author's interview with James Wagmanvoord.
 Karnow has always been convinced of this quote’s accuracy, having heard it from General Harold K Johnson, then the Army chief of staff, who was in attendance at the White House Christmas Eve meeting .
 Toni Shimon interviewed by the author, Long Island, N.Y., February 15, 2007 . Shimon: "Toni's life is going to be very interesting"
 Leo Damore, the author of the book, appeared in 1992 and 1993 . Damore was a member of the Republican Party in New York City .
 Henry Wiggins, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., April 2, 1992 . Wiggins: "I'm not afraid to die. I'm scared to die" Wiggins: I'm afraid to go to the grave, but I'm glad to see my son .
 This particular directory was part of Leo Damore’s material and research . The directory was published in the 1990s .
 All past Defense Department directories can be located at the Library of Congress . i, Roberta Hornig, “Teacher Says He Passed by Mrs. Hornig’s”
 Donald E Deneselya and Victor Marchetti interviewed by the author, Washington, D.C. and Leesburg, Va., in 2007 . The author has published a book on the subject of a series of interviews with journalists .
 Albarelli Jr. dated September 2001 and faxed to the author on February 11, 2010 . Albareelli Jr. faxed the author a copy of this article dated September 11, 2001 .
 Albarelli Jr. Jr., communications by email and telephone with the author, February 12, 2010. The author of this article is asked to share his thoughts with CNN iReport .
 Albarelli Jr. Jr. and his confidential source met on February 12 and 13, 2010, as reported to the author . The author was contacted by the source in the days before and after the alleged meeting . The source provided the information to the writer .
 Du Berrier documents that Bernie Yoh did “public relations” work for the president of South Vietnam . Yoh was the stooge to fly back and forth between Washington and Saigon, the document says .
 "I have been in the jungles with the guerillas, killing Communists, and we are winning," says Guerillailla leader . "We are winning. We have been killing Communists," he says .
 See David Martin, “Spook Journalist Goulden,” August 11, 1998, DC Dave’s, www.dcdave.com .
 Bernie Yoh was interviewed by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., October 30, 1990 . Yoh died at the age of 92 in October 1990 .
 Leo Damore, to his attorney, James H Smith, on the moming of March 31, 1993 . Damore died at the age of 92 .
 The CIA and Its Allies in Control of the United States and the World in control of the U.S. and the world, 1973, Institute for Historical Review says .
 Prouty’s duties at the Pentagon were to provide the CIA with the military resources needed to carry out its clandestine operations . He was tasked with providing the CIA the resources needed for clandestine operations.
 He created a secret network of agents throughout the military service sectors and U.S. government agencies, including the FBI and the FAA, he says . The network includes the FBI, the FAA and various foreign governments .
 Mary Meyer bought a paperback copy of the Warren Commission’s report when it first went on sale in September 1964 . Leo Damore stated to this author several times starting in 1992 that Mary Meyer had bought the report . The Warren Commission's report was published in 1964, 1964, and
 Richard Pine, interview by the author, October 21, 2004. Mark O’Blazney, . interview by author, Washington, D.C., November 27, 2008. Richard Pine. in oa
 In passing, Bradlee did reference Wistar Janney earlier in his memoir . The page reference was not part of the heading in the index of the Bradlee memoir .
 The most recent criticism of author C David Heymann’s journalistic credibility has come from researcher Lisa Pease .
 C David Heymann, voice mail left on the author’s home telephone, March 9, 2007 . Heymann: "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with you"
 J Michael Kelly, interviews by the author, March 9, 2004, and April 12, 2007, respectively .
 Roger Charles, who became the executor of Bill Corson’s estate, was in the class behind them . Roger Charles was in a class behind Corson and Corson .
 All three were mentored by Bill Corson when he taught at the U.S. Naval Academy . Corson mentored them when he was at the academy .
 Roger Charles and Tom Kimmel recalled and confirmed the accuracy of this event . Tom Kimmel also confirmed that Roger Charles recalled the event .
 Roger Charles, interview by the author, April 13, 2007; Thomas K Kimmel, May 14, 2007. Roger Charles is the author of the book, "The Life of Roger Charles," published by Roger Charles .
 Plato Cacheris, Esq., is a lawyer who represents a client in Washington, D.C. and New York City . He says he has been a client for more than 30 years .
 Emily Crowley, interview by the author, March 24, 2007; Thomas K Kimmel, March 13, 2007 . Emily Crowley and Thomas Kimmel were interviewed by Emily Crowley on March 24 .
 James H Smith, Esq., interview by the author, April 7, 2004, quoting from pages 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of his notes on March 31, 1993, conversation with Leo Damore .
 John Williams interviewed by John Williams, Jeanne Morrow and Jeanne Morrow . John Williams interviews by the author, May 18, 2007, and November 16, 2009; Jeanne Morrow, January 28, 2004 .
 Leo Damore mentioned O’Donnell’s comments on this matter repeatedly . During the author's three-year association with Damore starting in 1992, he mentioned O'Donnell's comments .
 Damore’s former wife, June Davison, also remembered Leo discussing the statement with her . Damore's attorney, James H Smith, Esq. also remembers Leo discussing O'Donnell's statement with him .
 Gregory Douglas to Joseph Trento, November 19, 2001, given to the author by Gregory Douglas . Email communication from Gregory Douglas gives to author by Douglas .
 Email communication from Joseph Trento to Gregory Douglas, November 3, 2002, given to author by Gregory Douglas .
 The Official Assassination of John F Kennedy (Huntsville, Ala., Monte Sano Media, 2002) The Official assassination of JFK is published in 2002 . The official Kennedy assassination was the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Oswald’s direct handler or handlers were, we must now seriously consider the possibility that Angleton was probably their general manager . Angleton may have been Angleton's general manager at the time of Oswald's assassination .
 No one else in the Agency had the access, the authority, and the diabolically ingenious mind to manage this sophisticated plot . The Agency had access to the Agency and authority to manage the plot .
 No one had the means necessary to plant the WWIII virus in Oswald’s files and keep it dormant for six weeks . The virus was planted in Oswald's files and kept dormant until his assassination . No one could have the means .
 Whoever those who were ultimately responsible for the decision to kill Kennedy were, their reach extended into the national intelligence apparatus to such a degree that they could call upon a person who knew its inner secrets .
 Gabe Torres, interview by the author, Washington, D.C.C., April 22, 2010 .
 As a chief consultant for this production, I had purposely not been present during the filming of Bradlee’s segment, but conferred with Torres afterward . Torres is the chief consultant of this production .
 John Newman, personal communication with the author, Harrisonburg, Va., April 29, 2004 . John Newman: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to do it"
 CIA director William Colby presented to committee chairman Frank Church a pistol resembling a .45caliber automatic equipped with a telescopic sight . During the Church Committee’s Senate investigations in 1975, Colby gave the pistol .
 Toni Shimon interviewed by the author, June 17, 2004, February 15, 2007 and January 7, 2008 .
 Jack Anderson and Joseph Spear, “Witness Tells of CIA Plot to Kill Castro,” Washington Post, Nov. 1, 1988 .
 Probe Magazine on JFK, MLK, RFK and RFK, and Malcolm X . Los Angeles: Feral House, 2003. Probe Magazine .
 The Pinchot Institute for Conservation Studies was dedicated to Samuel Ordway, Samuel H. Ordway . Ordway was the founder of the Institute of Conservation Studies . The Institute is now housed in the United States .
 The COMPLETION of this project represents the culmination of more than thirtyfive years of contemplation and inquiry that began in 1976 .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer was murdered on the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal towpath in Washington, D.C. Nearly fifty years after her death, there is still a dearth of information as to exactly what occurred .
 We may never discover all the answers, but we now know nearly all of the questions . We now know the answers to nearly all the questions, but not the answers .
 When I first considered this project in 2003, my initial endeavor was to collaborate with Christopher Keane, a Hollywood screenwriter, to write a Hollywood screenplay . I'm working on this project for the first time since 2003 . This is the first film to be directed by a major studio in Hollywood
 Garby Leon’s guidance, and additional support from Linda Lichter, Esq., the film script Lost Light was conceived . The film script was conceived by the film team and was written by Linda Lichters .
 "Much of the story still remained unresolved and unknown," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I soon realized that many of the stories still remained unsolved and unknown"
 In 1992, I had the good fortune to meet and befriend the late author Leo Damore . The late author died at the age of 92 .
 Our friendship progressed rapidly before his untimely ‘suicide” in October 1995 . His death was a suicide .
 Leo shared many of his insights into what he believed had occurred between Mary Meyer and Jack Kennedy, as well as how and why her murder had been orchestrated, as he had also done with his dear friend and attorney James H Smith . Leo shared his insights with James Smith .
 Mark Damore had guarded most of the Damore "treasure trove" in hopes that someday, someone might come along and pick up where Leo had left off . To his credit, Mark had guarded his treasure trove in hopes of someone coming forward .
 Author John H Davis had, in fact, attempted such a feat in 1996, but he, too, had faltered . Davis had attempted to do so in 1996 .
 It was the Damore family who finally made it possible for me to undertake in depth this project, allowing me to access additional material in their possession . It was also the family who allowed me access to additional material .
 Leo’s former wife, June Davison, graciously shared with me a number of the insights Leo had previously shared with her . I am particularly indebted to Leo's former wife .
 Leo's children, Chuck, Leslie, and Nicholas, all put their faith in me. As well, Leo’s children—Chuck, Leslie and Nicholas—all put their trust in me, he says . As well as Leo, Chuck and Leslie, Nicholas, and Chuck,
 Were it not, however, for Leo’s attorney, Jimmy Smith, it's doubtful he would ever been able to unravel the crucial pieces of his most important discoveries, he says .
 Jimmy saved a set of historically important notes from a telephone conversation with Leo in 1993 . Jimmy will always be one of the unsung heroes in the quest for the truth regarding the murder of Mary Pinchot Meyer .
 Many new people, many of whom were women, found their way into my life and offered their insights and guidance . During my five years of intensive writing, a number of new people—many of whom are women—found their way .
 Barbra Dillenger, who I had known many years before, went way beyond the call of duty to keep me focused . She kept me focused. Barbra kept me going, I said . Barbra was a great friend, she said .
 Katie McCabe, coauthor with Dovey Roundtree, Esq., of Roundtree’s biography, Justice Older Than the Law, never allowed me to lose sight of some of the most important revelations in this book . Katie McCabe is coauthor of the book, Justice older Than
 Her steadfast support throughout this experience was an inspiration to be remembered . She was a "inspiration to the family" and a "stronger support"
 During the Cold War, it might have been “a man’s world,” but the power of women and their emerging sisterhood was demanding to be heard .
 As many of my women friends pointed out, an acolyte for world peace had been engendered in Mary Pinchot Meyer . Meyer was a world peace advocate . Meyer died at the age of 92 on December 31, 1981 .
 Antonia Kabakov has been married for more than 20 years . She says she was inspired by Antonia's love for her work . Kabakov: "Antonia never allowed me to lose sight of this"
 Renowned author and astrologer Tracy Marks wouldn’t allow me to forsake certain principles . Tracy Marks is an astrologist and author .
 Janet Clark always showed up at critical moments, says author . Clark: "Janet showed up in critical moments. Amid "bumps in the road,” she says .
 Ariel Dougherty had been a student of Mary Meyer’s art student in the 1950s . Ariel was a Georgetown Day School chum . Ariel had been an art student of Meyer's .
 Joanna Duda took me by the hand and walked with me to the edge, only then to suggest that I just jump into the abyss, she says .
 I am indebted to author James W Douglass for his valuable and indispensable work JFK and the Unspeakable . I am also indebted to the author of JFK's "Unspeakable" JFK .
 Mr Douglass’s journey into the real vortex of the presidency and assassination of President John F Kennedy is unparalleled . The journey is unparalleled.
 "His willingness to take the time to explain certain minutiae has been invaluable," he said .
 Doug Horne is a true patriot and a great American, says friend and researcher . Horne: "Doug is a great patriot and great American. Doug is a real patriot" Horne says .
 "There is a special collection of people who provided me with additional, invaluable assistance," she says . "There was also a lot of help from other people," she adds .
 I wish especially to thank Dick Russell for his stellar work The Man Who Knew Too Much . Dick Russell's work is based on The Man who Knew too Much .
 Dick’s seventeen-year odyssey writing his book, as well as the personal insights he shared, have been a guiding light . Dick's 17-year journey with Dick has been a guide light for the author, Dick says .
 Toni Shimon took a huge risk in opening up to me about what had transpired between her and her father . The daughter of the late Joseph Shimon, Toni, took the risk of revealing what happened .
 Victor Marchetti, Hank Albarelli, Donald Deneselya, Tom Kimmel, J Michael Kelly, Deborah Davis, Carol Felsenthal, Dino Brugioni, John Williams, Shelah Horitz, Bob Schwartz, Joan Mellon, Garby Leon, Joel Kab
 Timothy Leary’s biographer, Robert Greenfield, shared many observations from his years of research . Tim Leary's wife, Barbara, and his former colleagues Ralph Metzner and Peggy Mellon Hitchcock also spoke .
 "The late William Attwood cannot go unmentioned. In addition, I'm grateful to the family of the late William. Attwood," he said .
 Attwood’s wife, Simone, and his daughter, Susan, graciously allowed me to examine and reference Bill's extensive diaries . Attwood's wife Simone, Simone and Susan, gave me the opportunity to look at his diaries.
 Bill Mueller of Cambridge Health Associates has intuitively known for more than twenty-five years where the acupuncture needles belong on my sometimes exhausted body . Mueller: "I've been here for 25 years. I've been there for over 20 years. It's time for me to get acupuncture to
 Ian Boehm, always made himself available to me, sometimes on a moment’s notice, I say . Ian Boehem, always makes himself available for a moment of interest, says Boehm .
 Physical therapist Connie Sardelis kept her back and shoulders from becoming frozen . Physical therapist kept her shoulders from being frozen .
 Homeopath Begabati Lennihan found a remedy that forged a will of steel . When nothing else seemed to work, she found her remedy .
 Last, I wish to prostrate myself before several editors, Kelly Horan and Margot White among them, Kelly .
 "To all of you, and all my "ethereal friends," I bow in gratitude and give you my deepest, heartfelt thanks . To all the readers, I bow to all the you and all of us,” I say .
 Peter JANNEY grew up in Washington, D.C. during the Cold War era of the 1950s and 1960s . He is the author of a new book, "American Sniper"
 The Janney family was intimately involved with many of Washington’s social and political elite that included the family of Mary and Cord Meyer as well as other high-ranking CIA officials and dignitaries . Richard Helms, Jim Angleton, Tracy Barnes, Desmond FitzGerald,