 Cuba was the focus of the world’s attention for 13 nerve-wracking days in October . Cuba is a small island about 90 miles from the coast of Florida in the USA .
 The United States supported the rightwing dictator, Batista, by supplying weapons to his military . The U.S. supplied weapons to Batista's military .
 Cuba’s main export, sugar, was almost exclusively sold to America, and the richest members of American society used to visit Cuba to gamble .
 The problem was that despite all the millions of dollars pouring into Cuba, very little of it actually made its way to the poorest members of Cuban society . Batista and his friends were corrupt and took much of it for themselves .
 Fidel Castro was a socialist rebel who mounted a campaign to topple Batista’s corrupt government and return Cuba to the people . This was too much for Fidel Castro, who was trying to topple the Batista's corrupt government .
 He then nationalised all American firms in Cuba so that their wealth would be invested in Cuba itself rather than leave the island and go to foreign countries . The Cuban government then nationalized all American companies in Cuba .
 The money made from this measure was primarily spent on a national health system so that all medical treatment was free, and on education . The money was spent primarily on health care and education .
 Cuban exiles were treated by some Americans as heroes, and told stories that outraged the U.S. press . These stories outraged the American press, and outraged some of the world's media .
 Even though many of the stories were false or exaggerated, the American press didn’t care . The U.S. press didn't care about the stories of the Obama administration .
 The emergence of a pro-communist Cuba was an enormous threat to the new American President J F Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in Cuba in 1961 .
 He funded an attempt by anti-Castro Cubans to try to land in Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . He funded a failed attempt to land at the attempt to topple Castro Castro .
 The group aimed to overthrow Castro’s government but failed due to poor organization . They aim to overthrow the Castro regime . The group was a failed coup de force in Cuba .
 An American U2 spy plane took photographs of Cuba that revealed a missile base . The U2 plane was sent to Cuba to take photos of the base .
 American Intelligence reported that more than 20 more Russian ships were sailing to Cuba with more missiles . To make matters worse, American Intelligence also reported that 20 more ships were being sent with missiles .
 This was not a sensible option because it would make Kennedy look 1 weak, and the missiles would still be threatening America. This would be a mistake, and would make the U.S. look weak,’s president said .
 This was dangerous as it may lead to a 2 full war with USSR, possibly involving the use of nuclear weapons . This may have led to a war with Russia possibly involving nuclear weapons. This may also lead to an invasion of nuclear arms by Russia .
 It could also lead to lots of American casualties and couldn’t be a guaranteed success . The U.S. military has never won a combat mission in the past .
 The problem again would be 3 Russian casualties and the Air Force was not sure it could deliver pin-point bombing raids on what was relatively small targets . The Air Force would not be sure if it could .
 The missiles would still be on Cuba, but Kennedy would be seen to be doing something while negotiations continued in the background . Kennedy would have been seen doing something with the missiles on Cuba . The missiles still would remain in Cuba .
 Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, vowed to ignore the blockade and continue to deliver supplies to Cuba . Tensions rose in the 1960s as the Soviet Union continued to blockade Cuba .
 More U2 photographs on October 25th 1962 showed that the missiles on Cuba would be ready to fire within a few days .
 Tensions rose even further when an American pilot was killed when his U2 plane was shot down by a Russian missile . Two days later, an American plane was also shot down .
 By this time Khruschev had sent Kennedy two telegrams that offered to remove the missiles . Kennedy had already received a telegram from the Soviet Union . The missiles were removed .
 One letter said that the missiles would be withdrawn if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba . One letter also said that if the missiles were withdrawn, they would have been withdrawn . The letter was sent to Kennedy's office in 1961 .
 It argued that as USA had missile bases in Turkey, the USSR should be able to have bases in Cuba . The USSR argued that the U.S. should be given the right to bases .
 Khruschev said that if USA removed her missiles from Turkey then USSR would remove them from Cuba . USSR would also remove missiles from Cuba if US removed them from Turkey . USSR said it would remove the missiles if Turkey removed them .
 Khrushchev's offer to remove missiles from Turkey was to be kept secret . Kennedy, after deliberating with his advisers, chose to accept the offer . Kennedy insisted that the agreement to remove missile missiles was kept secret.
 Khrushchev could claim a victory in that Cuba, a Communist country, remained unharmed just a few miles from the coast of America . The Cuban Islands were just a short distance from the United States .
 Kennedy negotiated removal of missiles from Cuba and contained the Communist threat . Kennedy had successfully negotiated the removal of the missiles from the island .
 Following the crisis a hot-line was installed between Moscow and Washington to allow for easier communication between the two nations leaders at a time of crisis . The hot-lines were installed between Russia and Washington .
 Both nations signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . Just one year later in 1963, both countries signed the treaty .
 This treaty stated that neither would explode nuclear bombs during testing in the atmosphere . This treaty was signed by the U.N. to ensure no nuclear bombs exploded in atmosphere .