 He disappeared in full uniform in Cape Town after VE Day in 1945 . He served in the SA Navy, and disappeared from Cape Town in 1945.
 It was a time to think the unthinkable, in lecture halls and even at the movies . It was also a time when the U.S. was in the midst of a world of political turmoil .
 Henry Kissinger taught us a popular course in nuclear realpolitik, says CNN's John Sutter . Kissinger was a professor at the University of Columbia University in South Africa . Sutter: Kissinger's nuclear diplomacy is a key to the success of the West .
 Based on his book, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy, his lectures assessed the feasibility of a ""limited" nuclear war . His lectures assess the feasibility of a limited war .
 In Kahn's view, Mutually Assured Destruction was not inevitable; there could be a winner, he says . Kahn: Mutually assured destruction is not inevitable, but it's possible to have a winner .
 Our favourite movie was On The Beach, based on the Nevil Shute best-seller, starring Gregory Peck, Ava Gardner and Fred Astaire in his only non-song-and-dance role .
 50 years ago this month, reality caught up with academic theory and fiction . Waltzing Matilda ended with a sign above a lifeless street in Melbourne proclaims that ""There is still time ... brother"
 The crisis ended when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev made a secret deal with JFK to remove his missiles from Cuba if Kennedy removed America's missiles from Turkey at a later date . The deal ended when JFK agreed to remove the missiles if he removed them from Turkey .
 "We went eyeball to eyeball with Russia -and they blinked,"" was the false boast of an unidentified Kennedy aide . "They blinked," was the claim .
 If JFK's hawkish successor, Lyndon Johnson, had been President in 1962, a more dangerous form of nuclear brinkmanship likely would have taken place . These were JFK's finest hours. JFK's best hours.
 LBJ was soon led into the Vietnam quagmire by the same advisers -Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk - who had insisted on the hard-line military response to the Soviet threat in Cuba .
 In their living rooms, families clustered around black-and-white TV sets for news about whether they might live or perish . Families gathered around black and white TV sets to see if they might survive or perish.
 One of my best friends simply repaired to bed for the duration of the crisis with the new-found love of his life . One of his best friends also repaired to sleep with his new-fiancée .
 My future father-in-law quickly converted his basement into a bomb shelter . His basement was converted into a shelter .
 People with deep basements or jerry-built nuclear shelters like him were suddenly popular . People with a deep basement or a nuclear shelter like him suddenly became popular .
 Some wondered if it would be morally defensible to shoot a neighbour if he tried to break into their basement shelter . Some wondered whether it would have been moral defensible if they shot a neighbour .
 Adult fear can be infectious to children, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "This was a great story, perhaps the last great story," says Sutter.
 My wife remembers being terrified when told by her teacher that nuclear fallout was invisible and odourless . Her teacher told her she was terrified when she was told that fallout would be invisible and odorless .
 A class of 10-year-olds in the Town of Mount Royal was taught how to seek cover under their desks . The incident happened in Mount Royal, Montreal .
 Some kids told me they were watching the sky for Russian bombers or missiles . Some kids said they were looking for Russian missiles or bombers .
 In a Catholic school, children were told to recite the rosary under their desks . In the 1990s, children in the Catholic school were forced to recite it under the desks .
 To children, the necessary tests of air raid sirens seemed to be the real thing . The necessary tests were the real things, the children said .
 I figured the safest place would be Washington, because, if the nukes were fired, the capital cities would be spared so there was someone left to negotiate with . My most vivid memory is of ""the circles" -circles drawn on maps to depict how far north missiles of
 In 1962, the prescient novel Seven Days in May, co-written by Charles Bailey, one of my mentors when I covered the LBJ White House, told the story of how rogue generals had plotted a coup to seize the presidency . Montreal seemed to be out of ""the circles
 If you have questions or concerns, please check our FAQ or contact support@huffpost .