 Jordan L Cerbone Senior Honors Thesis: How John F Kennedy Used History to Prevent Armageddon . The year was 1962. Kennedy’s Crisis: How Kennedy used history to prevent Armageddon .
 John F Kennedy prepared to address his country; the citizens of the United States, Russia and the rest of the world listened intently to his words . The challenge he now faced affected everyone everywhere .
 What might have culminated in a nuclear war with the Soviet Union instead resulted in a peaceful agreement . The leaders of both countries agreed to remove key nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy doggedly sought a diplomatic solution to the Soviet Union's missile threat to Cuba . Kennedy was pressured by his advisors to engage in conflict with the Soviets . The Soviet Union placed missiles on the island of Cuba .
 This thesis will examine how the youngest elected president in our country’s history had the perception to understand what could result from an uncompromising and forceful response to its most powerful adversary .
 Kennedy had a profound sense of both political history and international relations . He was also famously interested in decisions made by previous negotiators . Kennedy was famously fascinated by previous negotiations .
 The answer to Kennedy’s unique level gumption and discretion may lie in his past, his father, authors and politicians, as well as his own experience in the U.S. Navy as a young man .
 This nurturing created a man who could rise to the challenge of guiding stubborn nations away from destroying one another, says President Obama . "This nurturing created an incredible leader," says Obama .
 The island of Cuba was drawn into the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union . The crisis at hand was as suspenseful as the resolution .
 In 1959, the guilla leader Fidel Castro ousted military dictator Fulgencio Batista . Castro overthrown the military dictator in 1959 .
 Castro ruled Cuba as a dictator for many decades before consolidating power . However, once Castro consolidated power, he ruled Cuba for decades . He ruled Cuba in the 1960s and '70s .
 When Castro assumed power, it became apparent during the U.S. presidential elections that our country, which allowed Castro to establish power, could no longer tolerate his continued rule . Castro's continued rule was evident during the United States presidential elections, President Obama said .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower severed ties with Cuba . Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sought to establish a diplomatic relationship with his country . Ultimately, outgoing President Eisenhower severed the diplomatic ties .
 Incoming President John F Kennedy inherited from the Eisenhower administration a proposal which would later result in the failed Bay of Pigs invasion . The failed invasion was the first attempt to invade Cuba .
 Cerbone 3 invaded the Cuban Bay of Pigs with secret training and support from U.S. forces . Cerbone was part of the Cuban invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Castro responded to this attack by establishing even closer ties to Russia . Castro instructed his band to play the worldwide communist anthem during a visit from a Russian diplomat . Castro announced publicly that he adhered to the Communist ideology .
 Khrushchev declared that Russia would defend Cuba from all future invasions . He promised not to place missiles on the island . Kennedy said he would not place missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev did not intend to keep his promise, he said . Ultimately, this assurance would not be sufficient, he added . The future of the Soviet Union was not assured .
 Kennedy’s advisors in the CIA brought to his attention a series of “secret” missile sites on Cuba, bearing weapons shipped from the Soviet Union, which were in early stages of assembly . The sites were found on October 16th, 1962 .
 Kennedy was enraged as the photo interpreter explained that the missiles were medium-range ballistic weapons that, if launched, could destroy Washington, D.C. in 13 minutes . Kennedy maintained a calm demeanor as the interpreter explained the missiles could destroy the nation in less than a minute .
 The deadly warheads were not visible in the photographs, indicating that the missiles would not be immediately ready to fire . However, the deadly warheads (tips of the nuclear weapons) were visible in photographs .
 Cerbone 4 had been made aware of their scheme, but there was still time for the president to decide his next move . Cerbone had not yet decided what to do with the scheme .
 Stern praises Kennedy’s “cautious and thoughtful leadership” as well as his understanding that “history is not a game.” Stern praises his understanding of history . Stern: Kennedy's understanding that history is “not a game”
 Had Kennedy responded differently, the result might have been disastrous for the entire world . Kennedy responded to the situation differently, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 His brilliance in handling this most dangerous task was occasioned by his ability to think independently, understand the risks from all sides and assert his final decision over the hawkish .
 First, John F Kennedy’s father, Joseph Kennedy, Sr. influenced the future president during his formative years . His relationship with his son would contribute substantially to his decisions in the face of stress and confrontation .
 He oversaw and encouraged the development of his son’s personality but also his political ambition . He also encouraged and encouraged his son to become a politician .
 In 1957, Joe said, ‘I got Jack into politics…I was the one told him…it was his responsibility to run for Congress.’
 Joe Kennedy was a controversial figure who famously cared little for military service . Joe Kennedy died at the age of 92 at the time of his death . He is survived by his family and friends .
 In place of the military, he took a job at a bank and later at Bethlehem Steel’s Fore River Company, a Massachusetts-based shipbuilding plant . This sense of ambition began when, in place of military, took a position at bank .
 Cerbone 8 Kennedy: "The person who now monopolizes conversation in the studios ... is not an actor, but one of the executives of this important new industry"
 Joe Kennedy indirectly encouraged his children to think independently . Joe Kennedy also encouraged his kids to be independent thinkers .
 John F Kennedy’s famous propensity for making independent decisions and defending his viewpoints in the face of adversity no doubt originated in Joe Kennedy's willingness to respect and engender independent ideas in his sons . Joe Kennedy is known for his willingness to show independent ideas and defend his viewpoints .
 Lasky relates an interview between Kennedy and Drew Pearson in which Pearson questioned whether Kennedy was influenced by his father’s political views . Pearson questioned Kennedy's political views in the interview . Pearson said Kennedy's father's views influenced Kennedy's views .
 Kennedy replied, ‘‘Father wants me to be President all right…But as far as influencing me, I think my voting record in the Senate speaks for itself.”
 Brandon asked whether seeing Kennedy become President was more important to his father than having his son agree with his ideas and views . Brandon asked the pointed question of whether seeing his father become President more important than seeing him agree to his ideas .
 "His responsibility is not to impose his political views on his children," he says . His responsibility is to not impose his views on the children, he adds .
 John F Kennedy would encourage his brother to apply himself as his elder brother Joe did . His father would say, ‘I don’t want to give the impression that I’m a nagger, for goodness knows I think that is the worst thing any parent can be
 He understood that the best way to help his son to succeed was to encourage him to succeed and let him develop his own viewpoint . He said: "The best way of helping your son succeed is to encourage you to succeed"
 Kennedy learned from an early age to struggle and use his abilities to the utmost . Since this proved difficult, Kennedy learned to use his talents as an adult, he has been successful .
 Joe Kennedy, Jr. provided John F Kennedy with one of his deepest, most personal memories from World War II . The memory served as a connection to the lost soldiers and sailors of war and strengthened Kennedy's resolve to avoid needless tragedy .
 By August of 1944, Joe, Jr. had served enough time in the armed forces to return home but instead “volunteered for a mission so dangerous that some members of his ground crew pleaded with him not to go,” Ted Kennedy says .
 Joe, Jr. and an assistant were to pilot an “experimental drone’s” drone deployed to bomb Germany . Joe Jr. was to pilot the drone, which was to be used in a bombing raid on Germany .
 Due to a possible technical error, the drone exploded before Joe, Jr. and his copilots were due to eject themselves . Joe Jr. was the pilot of the drone when it exploded in a possible malfunction .
 Joe, Jr. would be posthumously awarded the Navy Cross by the United States Navy . Neither Joe Kennedy, Sr. nor John F Kennedy would forget that his brother’s life was lost due to war .
 As president, Kennedy understood that young men like his brother and brother-in-law would die . Even a glorious death would not return them to their families, he said .
 John F Kennedy’s position as the son of one of the richest and most ambitious men in America granted him a sense of independence that at first proved difficult for him to apply .
 John F Kennedy found himself at odds with his environment during his time as a student . The student would later prove useful to the President of the United States .
 As the son of a rich and powerful man, the stigma of being over-privileged as well caused him to venture from his father’s shadow . As the . son of the rich and famous, he was able to venture out of the shadow .
 Kennedy's competitive and ambitious spirit would allow him to harness his independent nature and drive to become one of the most respected presidents in our country’s history . Ultimately, however, Kennedy would harness his ambition to become a respected president .
 As the son of an ambassador, John F Kennedy had opportunities to witness the diplomacy and negotiations that were involved with foreign policy . More importantly, as a child, he was able to witness diplomacy and diplomacy .
 Kennedy opposed appeasement because it was clear that Adolf Hitler was reaping an advantage from Neville Chamberlain’s government . On one hand, Kennedy opposed appeasing Hitler because of Chamberlain's government . Kennedy: "On the one hand"
 One of Kennedy’s idols was Sir Winston Churchill, who inspired his nation to unite against the Nazi threat . Kennedy was inspired by Churchill's work in the fight against Hitler .
 It was at this early age that he came to the conclusion that presidents had an ‘obligation” to utilize every possible strategy to negotiate peace before turning to war .
 Kennedy never advocated for caving in to the demands of enemy nations, nor did he believe leaders should lose track of the seriousness of any given confrontation . Nevertheless, Kennedy did not want to cede in .
 The outcome of the present war [World War II] will throw more light on the subject . Dallek, An Unfinished Life, 58, says what can be learned from a study of the events?
 John Quincy Adams and Robert A Taft were presidents of the U.S. House of Representatives . Taft was one of the most powerful men in the world . He died at the age of 92 .
 The overriding attributes of this collection of statesmen was their ability to make unpopular decisions which agreed with their own consciences . The overriding attribute of these men was their willingness to take unpopular decisions .
 President Kennedy felt that he was better qualified to determine the reaction to Soviet placement of missiles on Cuba . With his experiences in the Navy and his overall aptitude for foreign policy, Kennedy felt he was more qualified to make the decision .
 Although many members of his cabinet did not approve, he courageously stood by his principles, he was able to courageously stand by his principle .
 Some of these principles Kennedy had concerning compromise can be traced to the figures he admired in Profiles in Courage . Kennedy had some of the principles he was inspired by in his work .
 Daniel Webster, a famous Senator and Secretary of State, and Sam Houston, a politician from Texas, both spoke in favor of compromise during our country’s history .
 Kennedy admired Daniel Webster for speaking in favor of the Compromise of 1850 . Webster was opposed by pro-slavery Democrats in the South . Kennedy admired Webster for his work on slavery in the U.S.
 Kennedy respected Webster for his willingness to stand for his ideals, despite adversity . Kennedy especially respected Webster . Webster was a hero of the day .
 Even at the point of death, Webster proclaimed his loyalty to his country and his indifference to the drop in popularity, for his convictions .
 Kennedy admired the courage of Senator Sam Houston of Texas . Kennedy admired Sam Houston for his courage .
 He was a southern Democrat who spoke in favor of the Compromise of 1850, which limited the power of the southern, slave-holding states .
 Kennedy: “We should not be too hasty in condemning all compromise as bad morals.” Kennedy: "All compromise is not just bad morals."
 Compromise was underrated and at times tended to be the best possible course of action, though it was often scorned by the masses . Compromises were underrated and often often seen as the best way to get around the world .
 As President, Kennedy would remain courageous and reach a compromise with the Soviets at the disapproval of some members of his cabinet . Kennedy would be courageous and reached a compromise .
 John F Kennedy, 74, sought to emulate the leaders he he was inspired to emulate . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 at the age of 55 .
 Cerbone 17 felt served the best, most patriotic interests of their country, even if they did not always receive praise from others . Cerbone felt served their country's interests, even though they were not always received praise .
 "Not only did he understand the consequences of failing to take action," he said . "But he also understood consequences of an impulsive and hasty action," the author said .
 The Navy's board of review failed to properly address a design defect, he says . His brother was killed in an accidental detonation of explosives, possibly due to a design fault .
 John F Kennedy’s friend Andrew Kirksey, whom he poignantly called ‘the boy in my boat,” was killed in the famous PT109 boat commanded by Kennedy . Additionally, John F. Kennedy's friend Andrew .
 Kennedy had always looked at history to learn what he learned from history . The week of the World Stood Still, 24, is 24. ET .
 Cerbone 18 could result from a poor decision but his personal history added reality to the consequences of inaction or misguided action . Cerbone's personal history gave reality to reality .
 He was unwilling to give ground to Castro and Khrushchev but he knew his soldiers as people who depended on his leadership . He was willing to give up on his troops, but knew his troops needed him .
 Kennedy's experiences gave him a lifelong desire to avoid armed conflict if diplomacy could avert it . Kennedy's idealism strengthened his view that leaders are obligated to avoid such conflict if possible .
 He was “as passionately anti-communist as any of his advisors,” he said . He recognized the dangers of any form of warfare, especially one which involved nuclear weapons .
 Witnessing firsthand the horrors of war allowed Kennedy to understand the human cost of hawkish foreign policy . Witnessing first hand of war helped Kennedy understand the cost of war . Kennedy: "It's a war of war. It's a human tragedy"
 He was firm in his anti-communist ideals, but equally firm in not entering a potentially disastrous conflict if it could be avoided . He was also firm in deciding not to enter a potential disastrous conflict .
 As President, he displayed the ideals not only to his adversaries, but to his cabinet and military advisors as well . President Obama displayed these ideals to his Cabinet and military advisers as well as his adversaries .
 This was manifested in the distribution of an emerging bestseller among his assistants . This is manifested in his distribution of the emerging best-seller among assistants .
 As a soldier, Kennedy likely pondered this question while on his PT-109 patrol boat, or while reading They Were Expendable .
 Tuchman’s book perhaps reminded Kennedy of these days as a young officer pondering the inevitability of World War II, which resulted in the deaths of his brother and friends and his own narrow escape . Kennedy: "It's not easy to say goodbye to your brother and
 Kennedy’s past sense of history did not conflict with the views presented in the book . However, it seems safe to assume that Kennedy's past . history .
 William White’s fictional but realistic bestseller They Were Expendable had arguably the greatest impact on Kennedy as a serviceman .
 Their lives are perceived as of little worth by senior soldiers and politicians . Senior soldiers have little, if any, frontline experience and their agendas do not illuminate to them the reality of war. That is to say, their lives are of little value .
 They Were Expendable introduces the concept of expendability with an analogy from one of the young naval officers .
 He calls to the author’s mind a sergeant machine-gunner who is ordered to hold a position indefinitely . The author's mind is that of a sergeant sergeant machine gunner .
 In such a situation, the serviceman claims, “You know you're expendable. You know you’re expendable,” he says .
 As in The Guns of August, the soldiers are left to ponder the greater context of their misfortune .
 They find themselves questioning why they were sent to fight in the first place and why they don’t receive adequate supplies and aid . They often question why they’re not receiving adequate supplies or aid .
 Officer: "Because we little guys never get to see the broad picture of the war, never find out the reasons back of the moves or failures to move"
 An American Torpedo Boat Squadron in the United States Retreat From the Philippines Retreat from the Philippines , 3.3.5.5 .
 Kennedy was a president who understood from experience what it meant to be expendable . He served as captain of a patrol, in company of common sailors . Therefore, Kennedy was president .
 In They Were Expendable, a measure of direct criticism was aimed at senior officers, such as General MacArthur . The book was published in 1988 .
 The decision to promote MacArthur to Commander-in-Chief of forces in the Pacific meant that the remaining forces were left to fend for themselves . MacArthur was ordered to leave his position, leaving his post in charge of forces .
 To the servicemen, “our last hope of seeing America and escaping a Japanese prison – was gone forever,” says one of them . The servicemen's last hope was to see America and escape a prison .
 Kennedy felt that he better understood what it was like to be “expendable,” and didn’t want the people who would have fought in a nuclear war with the Soviets to become as such . Kennedy: "When they advocated bombing Cuba and potentially starting a nuclear
 John F Kennedy was influenced by The Forty Days of Musa Dagh, Franz Werfel’s tale of Armenian life during the Turkish genocide during World War I . A central point Werfels makes is that evil must be resisted .
 According to his biographer, Kennedy read the book enthusiastically . Kennedy read it enthusiastically, according to his biography .
 Werfel's arguments are useful against the philosophy of appeasement but also against losing faith in one’s ability to overcome adversity . Werfels’ argument is useful against appeasment and against losing confidence in adversity .
 The other character replies, “Every man and every nation at one time or other becomes the weak.”
 Kennedy would say in a speech, “Too many of us think is impossible.” Cerbone 23 is a 23-year-old woman . Kennedy would like to say, ‘Too much of us thought is impossible’
 Kennedy continued to refute that notion, saying, “We need not accept that view.” Kennedy said . Kennedy said he would not accept the view .
 The idea that humans must step aside and allow atrocities or war to occur when it could be prevented, did not resonate with Kennedy . Kennedy said that humans should not be responsible for historical forces beyond their control .
 As president, he understood that it was both his right and his duty to take control of the situation and resolve it to the best of his ability . President Obama understood it was his right to resolve the situation, he said .
 World War I era implemented the idea that problems need not be repeated on account of past mindsets that they must repeat and allowed him to demonstrate that he indeed learned from history . Therefore, writings and occurrences during the WWI era .
 John Buchan, later known as Baron Tweedsmuir, wrote memoirs . Cerbone 24 Way, or Memory-Hold-The-Door, is a set of memoirs by Buchan . The set is published by Baron Tweedmuir .
 Tweedsmuir reminisced about his early life, experiences during World War I, and provides ample advice and critiques of political and social life in the British Empire . Tweedmuir also discusses his experiences during the war, and his critiques of social and political life .
 The Kennedy Library lists Pilgrim's Way as among Kennedy’s personal favorites . Senator Ted Kennedy dedicated some remarks to the memoir during the Kennedy Library and Museum's Rededication Ceremony of 1993 .
 An Essay in Recollection (Cambridge and Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin Press, 1940), 296. He wrote: "An Essay In Recollections" He also published a book on the same topic in 1940s .
 Cerbone was able to find solutions to both the everyday challenges of the U.S. and one of historical proportions . Cerbone 25 to provide answers to the challenges of America .
 Had Kennedy been the embodiment of this “tragedy,” the result could have been tragic for humanity as well . Kennedy was not the only person to be killed in this tragedy .
 Buchan admired Prime Minister Arthur Balfour because he “revered the fortitude of human nature, the courage with which men stumbled up the steep ascent of life’s .
 Buchan believed that humanity had both the ability and the responsibility to create a better, freer world .
 Kennedy and Buchan shared several key experiences and arrived at similar conclusions as a result of these experiences . Buchan's relevance in Kennedy’s life was not only as an admired author but as an admirer .
 Buchan, Pilgrim’s Way, was published 158 years ago . Buchan had a period of wealth that allowed him to travel and learn . The book was published by Buchan in 1964 .
 Cerbone 26 shortly before World War I . Like the Kennedys, he enjoyed travelling and reading .
 Buchan was acquainted with Kennedy's father during the latter’s ambassadorial visit to Britain in 1938 . Buchan met Kennedy during the visit of the latter to Britain .
 In Pilgrim's Way, John Buchan dedicates a portion of his memoirs to the generation of young men lost during World War I . Buchan lost friends, classmates, his wife’s cousin, and his youngest brother to the war .
 Richard D Mahoney writes that Kennedy “jotted down” quotations from Pilgrim’s Way in a notepad he kept with him during World War II, as a tribute to the lives lost in the war .
 Kennedy was touched at the death of Buchan’s thirty-five-year-old friend, Raymond Asquith . Kennedy was especially touched by the death, writes biographer Geraldine Hawkins .
 He associated himself with the courageous and young who ran the risk of losing their lives for a cause, he said . Therefore, he associated himself . with the courage and young .
 Kennedy, while willing to serve his country, did not want his sacrifice to be for no reason . Kennedy was willing to sacrifice his life to protect his country .
 The writings of Tuchman, White and Buchan, coupled with his own experience in the Navy, left him a profound impression on him during his political life . He says the writings of the writers left him with profound impression .
 He did not want future generations questioning whether he could have done anything to prevent a nuclear war . He said he wanted future generations to ask if he had been able to prevent war .
 The Days of Jack and Bobby Kennedy” (Arcade Publishing, 1999), article. “Jack and Bobby’s days were the most memorable moments of the Kennedy era. The Days were the Kennedy years before the Kennedy family was assassinated .
 Cerbone 28 with the beliefs that he could overcome any challenge with sufficient determination and that he had the responsibility as a leader to attempt to do so . Cerbone said he had a responsibility to try and overcome any challenges .
 Basil Liddell Hart, a military theorist and historian, was praised by Kennedy for his work . Kennedy praised Hart's work on military theory and history . Hart was the author of several books, including a book by Kennedy himself .
 In 1960, both Kennedy and Nixon were invited to review Hart’s latest work, Deterrent or Defense . Hart's work was published in 1960s .
 He “fully understood the danger represented by Nazi Germany, was an archfoe of appeasement” and opposed it when Hitler demanded the Sudetenland territory of Czechoslovakia in 1938 . The feeling was ignored by “hidebound” British generals .
 In 1981, the Congressional Military Reform Caucus’s principle spokesman said in part, “British…ignored prophets like Liddell Hart.” The British government has been criticized for ignoring “propheasmen” like Hart .
 This version of Hart also appears in some of Kennedy’s interpretations as well as some of his interpretations .
 Kennedy quoted Hart several times in his dissertation, Why England Slept, in which he quoted him . For example, Hart’s advice against appeasement corresponded to Kennedy's in the dissertation .
 Hart is criticized for lack of evidence to suggest that he opposed appeasement . Alternatively, some postulating that there is evidence to the contrary . Hart is also criticized for not supporting appeasment .
 In 1940, he quoted Hart in his thesis, Why England Slept, admiring Hart’s view, “I do not criticize persons, but only a state of affairs,” he said . Hart's view was, ‘I do . not criticise persons
 From Hart, Kennedy honed his ability to question the system itself . Kennedy was further shaped during his time in the Navy, and when reading They Were Expendable .
 Kennedy convinced Kennedy that senior military officers and policy-makers do not always make their decisions in the best interests of their men . That Basil Hart’s advice was not highly regarded by the afore-mentioned ‘hidebound” generals .
 Kennedy praised Hart’s Deterrent or Defense, in which Hart argued that while nuclear weapons provide a useful deterrent to any attack by the Soviet Union against the West, they should not be considered an adequate defense against Soviet forces .
 Cerbone 31 kept “high up the sleeve” and used only in the event of a last resort . Cerbone is kept ‘high up sleeve’ and used in the events of a . last resort.
 It is not enough for the West to possess nuclear weapons; they should also develop conventional forces to use in smallscale conflicts, such as defending Europe . Therefore, the West should not only have nuclear weapons, but also have conventional forces for small conflicts .
 Cerbone 33 being forced to relay a message in a coconut shell demanding rescue . Cerbone was forced by the group to relay the message in the coconut shell .
 Kennedy would refuse to be hailed as a hero, instead bestowing the title upon his deceased comrades . Kennedy refused to be a hero and would instead bestow the title to his comrades .
 He would recall this incident for the rest of his life, keeping memorabilia in the Oval Office during his tenure as president .
 Kennedy made certain never to allow the perceived experience of military officers to overrule his brand of logic . Kennedy never allowed the perceived . experience of . military . officers to override his own brand of . logic .
 He considered his own wartime experiences to be deeper than those of even his closest military aides . He considered himself to be a better man than his closest aide .
 He had found himself involved in the war and forced to face the gruesome aspects of combat . But he did not feel that his superior officers understood from experience how their decisions affected their inferiors .
 His refusal to adhere to his hawkish generals as President is reflected in his writings as a young soldier . He has written that he would not adhere to the hawkish policies of the military .
 When given the chance to avoid a nuclear war with the exchange of the removal of missiles from Turkey, and an American promise not to invade Cuba, he responded to opposition . “Two or three days we may have a military strike which would bring perhaps the seizure of Berlin or a strike
 He used his own judgment over objections from his generals because he felt he had a better understanding of what was at risk . “We should take ‘121” to the U.S. We should take '121'
 He felt that their decisions might result in miscommunications or inept response he had always criticized . He said he was always critical of the government's decisions .
 John F Kennedy was shaped by his understanding that negotiating with an enemy involved showing respect, something influenced by the military theorist Basil Hart . Kennedy was also influenced by Basil Hart's theory of showing respect .
 Hart's words provided one of the strongest influences on Kennedy’s foreign policy during his presidential career . Hart was a strong influence on the president's foreign policy .
 Kennedy “appreciated how difficult it must have been for Khrushchev to back down,” as the removal of missiles from Turkey was kept secret for several decades to avoid public outcry, Kennedy said .
 John F Kennedy's experiences as a diplomat’s son and as a junior officer during the World War II era ingrained in him the desire to favor good judgment over potentially disastrous warfare .
 From his father he learned to have and defend his own opinions . He learned to see the strengths and weaknesses involved with different forms of foreign policies .
 From the military he saw firsthand the repercussions of decisions on the part of superior officers or politicians who never served in the frontlines . He came to believe that he as President had the obligation to exhaust all possible courses for peace before turning to aggression .
 From the military he also came to the conclusion that a decorated officer does not always understand the effects of his decisions on soldiers in the frontlines .
 Kennedy always questioned the judgment of his advisors urging him to bomb Cuba . This caused Kennedy to always question his advisors' judgment .
 He had a profound knowledge of history and an incredible ability to weigh in on his options, as well as a feeling of obligation to do what was best . He had to decide whether to take his own life in the future .
 He would not stand aside and allow Cuba a chance to launch a nuclear attack on his country, nor would he begin an armed conflict if he had the chance to avoid it, he says .
 Kennedy was influenced by each of the factors discussed but his sense of history shaped his perception of these experiences and caused him to examine policies he had witnessed during his lifetime in the context of history .
 This made him the man who led his country from the brink of nuclear conflict with Russia to a peaceful settlement that benefited everyone . This led him to lead the country from brink of a nuclear war to a peace settlement .
 Kennedy’s presidency was eventful for the decisions he made during a two-week period, but these decisions were the result of a lifetime of experience . Kennedy made the decisions during the two weeks of his presidency .
 Gerhard Peters and John T Woolley, The American Presidency Project, online . Woolley: The American presidency Project is based on the American experience .