 U.S. U-2 jet was on an information-gathering mission in Havana, Cuba, on October 16, 1962 . JFK and Nikita Khrushchev were killed in the attack .
 In fact, this crisis is the closest the world has ever come to this unthinkable catastrophe, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The crisis is closest to the world's unthinkable catastrophe .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union almost instantly vied for world dominance . This was the beginning of the Cold War .
 The Cold War was a war over ideologies the U.S. promoted business-friendly capitalism and the Soviet Union promoted worker-led communism . The Cold war was a battle of ideologies the United States and the USSR .
 No direct war was ever fought between the United States and the Soviet Union . proxy wars dotted the globe for the next two decades with both countries hoping to extend their ideology around the globe .
 In this investigation, you will navigate through the events of the late-1950s and early-1960s to understand just how close the world came to nuclear war . The investigation will focus on events in the 1950s and 1960s and 1950s .
 The U.S. seeks a way to stabilize the region and keep the Soviet Union in check . October 28, 1958: The United States seeks a solution to the problem .
 Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev sends his first deputy, Anastas Mikoyan, to Cuba in order to discuss a potential economic and trade agreement . February 4 13, 1960 ● Russian Premier Khrushche sends first deputy to Cuba .
 The Soviet Union and Cuba officially establish diplomatic relations in 1960 . May 7, 1960, was the day Soviet-Cuban relations were officially established .
 Fidel Castro orders the seizure of all U.S. companies and properties . July 5, 1960 ● Fidel Castro ordered the seizure . Fidel Castro: "The United States is a very important part of the world"
 The first weapons shipment from the Soviet Union arrives in Cuba without U.S. knowledge of the transaction . September 1960: First weapons shipment arrived in Cuba from Soviet Union . September 30: The first arms shipment arrives in the country without the knowledge of its origin .
 All U.S. citizens and companies are banned from exporting any goods to Cuba, except for food and medicine . October 19, 1960 ● All United States citizens and . companies are not allowed to export any goods . to Cuba .
 A CIA-backed plan to overthrow the Castro regime is launched in 1961 . April 16, 1961, is the date of the CIA's first attempt to overthrow Castro .
 Soviet cargo ships arrive in Cuba carrying nuclear missiles and mid-range ballistic missiles . September 8-15, 1962 was September 8, and then again on September 15 .
 The day before, on October 14, a U.S. aircraft was deployed to take several photographs of Cuba . October 15, 1962 ●
 At 7pm EST, Kennedy addresses the United States public via a nationwide emergency broadcast . October 22, 1962, Kennedy addressed the U.S. public via an emergency broadcast to the nation's public .
 Publicly the Soviets call the blockade an “act of aggression” and claim their ships will not be intimidated . October 25, 1962 ● The blockade was declared an ‘act of . aggression’ and claimed their ships would not be . intimidated .
 State Department receives a letter from Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev that offers a solution . State Department received letter from Nikita to offer a solution to the crisis .
 Use your understanding of the crisis, events that you have analyzed, and your judgement to answer the overarching questions below . Use the questions below to help you understand the events surrounding the crisis in Syria .
 The Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev sent his first deputy to capitalize Cuba’s resentment toward the U.S., or President Eisenhower for refusing to talk with the Prime Minister because of his radical policies .
 If Soviets didn’t capitalize the resentment, there may have not been so much tension, or if the US president talked to the Cuban Prime Minister, maybe they could have found a way to be peaceful with one another .
 On one hand, the U.S. must remove their missiles from Italy and Turkey, and to never invade Cuba . On the other hand, they must remove missiles from Turkey and Italy and remove them from Cuba . The United States must also remove its missiles from Cuba, and never invade
 The Soviets promised to remove their missiles from Cuba . On the other hand, the Soviets promised that they would remove their own missiles .
 Most historians believe that the crisis severely weakened Khrushchev's power in the Soviet Union . The crisis ultimately led to his removal just two years later .
 The USSR would remove all missiles from Cuba if the U.S. removed their missiles from Italy, Turkey, and promised to never invade Cuba . "I think that it was viewed as a failure because he was the one who first wrote the letter saying that . He was one of the
 Other countries may perceive the U.S. as weak without missiles in other countries, so those countries may try to damage the United States in some way .
 Many within President Kennedy’s inner circle did not agree with his decision to strike a deal with Khrushchev . Instead, they wanted to invade Cuba to rid the island of both the missiles and the Communists .
 President Kennedy saved his country from possible danger because it probably would have caused the Soviets to release those missiles and kill many, many people . He was not willing to sacrifice the lives of every person in his country only to seem very powerful and for other selfish reasons .