 I think Mr Merchant's conclusions are a hit more depressing than they need be. I think he's wrong to say: 'I'm not happy with this. I'm happy with it'
 The Soviet willingness to pour more money and effort into Cuba is open to a good deal of doubt . In the first place, as Mr Brown points out, as well as the willingness to invest in Cuba .
 The Russians must surely have come to realise that the bigger their stake in Cuba, the more vulnerable they become to counter-measures if they try anything in Berlin . It is perfectly on the cards that a reduction rather than an increase in the Soviet stake is being seriously considered .
 Castro's stubbornness in not' allowing inspection, the Cubans are not going to get a formal guarantee against invasion . In the second place, thanks to Castro's refusal to allow inspections, the Cuban government will not be able to guarantee a guarantee of invasion .
 The Americans will make a statement disclaiming any intention of invading Cuba . But this will be subject to good behaviour on the 'part of Castro behaviour' of which the Americans themselves will presumably be the judges .
 Though an American invasion of Cuba is highly unlikely, there will remain an element of uncertainty about American intentions which will at least serve to keep up counter revolutionary morale . It follows that, though, though . though an invasion of . Cuba is unlikely, it will remain .
 Any record of the story of these first two weeks of the Cuban crisis must necessarily read more like a wildly improvable sequel to ""Our Man in Havana" than a Foreign Office despatch. My Lord, My Lord .
 Soviet Russia was to be credited with shipping some four dozen assorted giant missiles, each one longer than cricket pitch, across the Atlantic to Cuba . Military technicians disguised as agricultural advisers would set them up in secret on launching sites .
 As observers, we in Havana have been curiously isolated in the tense, unnatural calm of the eye of the cyclone which has so shaken the world .
 "I am nevertheless taking this first opportunity of available safe hand to submit for Your Lordhip," he said .
 The Right Honourable The Earl of Home was as unprepared for the breaking of the storm as was the rest of the world . He said: "Cubans have been waiting some hopefully some fearfully for at least 2 years for, ""something to happen"".
 'We did not see anything of until too late was vital equipment and the larger missiles which were almost certainly moved only by night. What, we did . We did not . see nothing of until . too late is the vital equipment, the vital . equipment and larger missiles . which were
 In fact, we saw no rockets of any kind in or around Havana until the 25th of October when a convoy of several ground to air missiles appeared in daylight and larger ones after dark .
 Khrushev ' s order for withdrawal on the 28th of October . This was perhaps significant of a relaxation of security precautions in 'a frantic last minute rush before the machine went into reverse'
 After several days .delay, when dismantling was presumably going on at the sites, activity on the road began again . There has been no. lack of evidence of a hurried evacuation to the ports .
 A Russian passenger ship left Havana crowded with technicians on the 5th of November . Loaded ships have been seen leaving Havana .
 It is still too early to say whether evacuation is partial or .complete . Evacuation is still under way at the time of the latest incident .
 It was therefore our opinion, and we thought it was also Castro's opinion, that the installation of ..offensive missiles in. Cuba was also also considered to be a problem .
 'It -seemed'to-us/ axiomatic that with offensive -rockets, baser """" in Cuba he"" could, not survive as ""maximum leader"" and this country could not survive . as a Soviet satellite. U.S. government .
 Neither Castro nor Khrushchev would consider such a move, according to the report .
 The results of photographic reconnaissance of mid-October showed just how wro#g we had been . The results were the results of a reconnaissance of the area .
 It seems probable that the fault lay in not realising how high the stakes were tiat Khrushchev was prepared to play for . Although we still do not know exactly why our reasoning went astray it seems probable .
 Fidel Castro declared by Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro to be on a war footing . U.S. decision to impose quarantine on Cuba was made in response to the Castro government's decision .
 A record of significant happenings inside this island would scarcely fill a short paragraph . Strangely enough, a record of subsequent significant events in this country would hardly fill a small paragraph .
 Organisation of American States and even Lord Russell filling • ih/minor parts that Fidel Castro managed to climb back into 'tiie-act'
 He did so with the announcement of his so-called ""Five points"", five conditions of which one is the evacuation of G-uantanamo which he demanded should be met within the framework of the Kennedy/Khrushchev agreement . One of the five conditions was the evacuation
 These live points were subsequently nailed to the mast to the accompaniment of a massive propaganda exercise with meetings, resolutions, pamphlets, posters and full orchestration by press and radio . They are still there . But apparently nobody but Castro takes them very seriously .
 I, myself, shall* not be surprised if they give us all and ""particularly Mr ""Mfkoyan, a lot of trouble" However unrealistic they may s-eem to most people, it is not in Castro's nature to allo.v them, to be
 No account of these obviously important discussions with Fidel Castro has yet to be made' public as we enter the third week of the crisis .
 This can also partly be explained by the government's efforts to keep the temperature down and to encourage business as usual in industry and agriculture, both of which have been hard hit .
 Two weeks of windy, wet weather have done nothxng to helT, maintain revolutionary -ardour amongst militia on guard duties and in flooded fox holes on the beaches .
 The same calm has, I am glad to say, prevailed amongst the British oolony both white and eoloured . The same . calm has also prevailed among the British . eolour .
 There have been'no signs' of, and indeed no reason for abomination against ourselves or the natieh^s of any other country. There hss so Jar there have been no signs of . abomination .
 An early interest in the possibility of evaeuetaen has subsided us it beeame evident that if it was a nueiear “er we were heading for, Cuba was perhaps a better plaoe to be in than Britain . An early early interest has subs
 It may seem strange to those outside Cuba that nowhere in the whole country was there an attempt to rise in protest against the government . The Cuban fatherland was ruthlessly cast in the role of a convenient launching pad for the Soviet Union .
 The short answer to this is that in spite of a much improved service by the Voice of America many people, perhaps the majority of people, in this country do not even now kno.v what the main issue has been. In spite of the improved service, many people do not
 The weapons in question were owned and manned by Russian military technicians . They also learnt that the weapons were owned by Russian technicians .
 Cuban and Soviet (overnments) withdrawn from Soviet Union . Soviet Union had decided to withdraw them . There had been differences of opinion between the two countries .
 Mth hi8 ba0 ba0]t ,“ ^ wail he shewed himself desperate but determined, often mart convincing “hen Ms argent was most dishonest,” he said . “I’m sorry. I’ll never be able
 Bloody hrt head certainly was but it was unbowed and I could not help deling that if the counter revolution could throw up B leaaer of half his weigM . victory might well be theirs, says author .
 To discover in the early stages of an 18 round contest that you are not even one of ""the contestants but only the prize money" is not an easily forgotten experience for a sensitive young nation . To discover you're not even part of the contest is not a difficult experience .
 Castro and the Cuban nation will very soon regain confidence in their international sponsor the U.S.R. and he able to convince themselves that all has been for the best . But better to be humiliated than wiped out, better than being humiliated .
 I find it depressingly easy to imagine a sequence of events developing from the present situation which could be highly satisfactory to the present regime . Indeed, I find that a series of events could be very satisfactory to present regime.
 A U.S. guarantee not to invade seems certain; a Soviet promise to increase aid seems likely . A Soviet plan to underwrite Cuba economically and build it into a Caribbean show-piece instead of a military base is a possibility .
 In these circumstances it is difficult to foresee what forces would unseat the present regime . The regime has been in power for more than a decade .
 Castro will have to work through an agonising period of readjustment . Castro himself must be 'the key figure for some time to come', says Castro .
 But this is not beyond a man who has already shown' a remarkable talent for survival . The former Manchester United star has shown remarkable resilience .
 I am copying this despatch to Her Majesty's Representatives at Washington, Moscow and all Latin American posts, and to the United Kingdom High Commissioner, Jamaica .