 Where the statement is true, mark T Where it is false, mark F, and correct it in the space immediately below .
 Kennedy’s attempt to control rising steel prices met strong opposition from big business . Kennedy's attempts to control steel prices meet strong opposition to big business.
 Kennedy doctrine was applied primarily to conflicts with Soviet communism in Europe . Kennedy doctrine of “flexible response” was applied only to Soviet communism . The doctrine was used primarily to protect against Soviet Communism .
 The U.S. supported coup against the corrupt Diem regime brought South Vietnam greater democracy and political stability . The United States supported coup to bring South Vietnam to greater democracy .
 Kennedy financed and trained the Cuban rebels involved in the Bay of Pigs invasion but refused to intervene directly with U.S. troops or planes .
 The Cuban missile crisis ended in a humiliating defeat for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union . The crisis was a humiliating victory for the U.S.
 Kennedy encouraged the civil rights movement to become more outspoken in its opposition to segregation and discrimination . Kennedy encouraged a more outspoken stance against segregation . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Johnson’s landslide victory came in every part of the country except the traditionally Republican Midwest . Johnson won the election in every region except the Midwest .
 The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution authorized the president to defend American forces against immediate attack . Congress kept the power to make war in Vietnam firmly in the hands of the president .
 Johnson’s Great Society programs attempted to balance the federal budget and return power to the states . Johnson's Great Society program was an attempt to balance federal budget .
 The nonviolent civil rights movement achieved great victories in integration and voting rights for blacks in 1964 and 1965 . Martin Luther King, Jr., led the nonviolent movement, led by King, was assassinated in 1968 .
 The urban riots of the late 1960’s demonstrated that the South was having little success in dealing with its racial problems . The riots were the result of racial riots in the South's South .
 Johnson was unable to defeat the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese . Despite sending half a million troops to Vietnam and conducting massive bombing raids, he was unable .
 Domestic critics of the Vietnam War argued that the Johnson administration had used faulty military tactics to fight the enemy . Domestic critics said the war was a waste of time and resources .
 The campaigns of Senators McCarthy and Kennedy forced Johnson to withdraw as a presidential candidate and promoted de-escalation the Vietnam War . The campaigns led to Johnson's withdrawal from the presidential race .
 The Roman Catholic Church was largely unaffected by the cultural upheaval of the 1960s . The church was largely untouched by cultural upheaval .
 The “sexual revolution” of the 1960s included the introduction of the birth control pill and the increasing visibility of gays and lesbians . The ‘sex revolution’ of the '60s included introduction of birth control pills .
 Multiple Choice Select the best answer and write the proper letter in the space provided . Write the correct letter for each question . Multiple Choice is a multiple choice .
 Kennedy’s proposals for increased educational aid and medical assistance to the elderly . were traded away in exchange for passage of the bill establishing the Peace Corps. were stalled by strong opposition in Congress were strongly opposed by business interests .
 The aircraft industry provoked a bitter conflict with President Kennedy over price increases . The meat industry, the meat industry and the steel industry were the industries that provoked the president's ire .
 The fundamental military doctrine of the Kennedy administration was to develop a “flexible response” to “brushfire wars” in the Third World . threaten massive nuclear retaliation against communist advances . build up heavy conventional armed forces in Western Europe against the threat of Soviet invasion . provide
 The first major foreign-policy disaster of the Kennedy administration came when Middle East governments sharply raised the price of imported oil . The price of oil in the Middle East rose sharply in the 1960s .
 American-backed Cuban rebels were defeated by Castro’s Cuban army at the Bay of Pigs . The Cuban army defeated the Americans-backed rebels in the Cuban invasion of 1961 .
 American Green Beret guerilla forces began suffering heavy casualties in the jungles of Vietnam 5.5.5 years ago . American Green . Beret forces suffered heavy casualties .
 The Cuban missile crisis ended when the American-backed Cuban invaders were defeated at the Bay of Pigs . The United States agreed to allow Soviet missiles in Cuba as long as they were not armed with nuclear weapons . The Soviets agreed to pull all missiles out of Cuba and the United States .
 The Kennedy administration was pushed into a stronger stand on civil rights by the civil rights movement led by the Freedom riders and Martin Luther King Jr. the pressure from foreign governments and the U.N. the threat of violence in northern cities . The Freedom Riders, Freedom Riders and MLK Jr
 Lyndon Johnson repudiated many of the policies of the unpopular Kennedy administration . he promised to take a tough stand in opposing communist aggression in Vietnam . he won an overwhelming landslide victory in the 1964 election .
 Republican candidate Barry Goldwater was seen by many Americans as a “triggerhappy” extremist . Republican candidate Senator Goldwater seen as a "triggerhappy" extremist .
 Johnson had achieved considerable personal popularity with the electorate . Johnson was a popular figure among voters . Johnson's popularity was high enough for Johnson to win the election .
 President Johnson was more successful in pushing economic and civil rights measures through Congress than President Kennedy because he was better at explaining the purposes of the laws . Democrats gained overwhelming control of Congress in the landslide of 1964 .
 Republicans were more willing to cooperate with Johnson than with Kennedy . Republicans were willing to work with Kennedy, but Kennedy was not .
 Johnson was better able to swing southern Democrats behind his proposals . Johnson was able to win support from southern Democrats .
 The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was primarily designed to guarantee desegregation in interstate transportation . The act was intended to guarantee job opportunities for African Americans and high schools for African-Americans .
 Most of the racial riots of the 1960’s occurred in northern inner-city areas. white neighborhoods where black families attempted to move in. college campuses. southern . white neighborhoods .
 Escalation of the aerial bombardment in Vietnam bolstered the stability of the South Vietnamese government . Forced the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese to turn to conventional warfare . U.S. limited the use of ground forces in Vietnam .
 The primary political problem that the U.S. faced in waging the Vietnam War was the opposition of America’s European allies, the danger that the North and South Vietnamese would strike a deal and ask the United States to leave . The repeated collapse of weak and corrupt South Vietnamese governments
 Opposition to the Vietnam War in Congress centered in the House Foreign Affairs Committee . The Republican leadership of the House & Senate opposed the war . The Senate Foreign Relations Committee was the Senate Armed Services Committee .
 The two antiwar candidates whose political showing forced Johnson to withdraw from the race were Nelson Rockefeller and Ronald Reagan . Rockefeller and Reagan were both antiwar presidential candidates .
 A dominant theme of the 1960s ‘youth culture’ was conflict between the generations. distrust and hostility toward authority. the widespread use of mind-altering drugs. a positive view of sexual experimentation. the use of drugs. The culture of youth in the U.S
 The cultural upheavals of the 1960s could largely be attributed to the “three P’s” of pot, promiscuity and publicity presidential failure, political rebellion, and personal authenticity . Poverty, protest, population bulge, protest against racism, and prosperity .
 Identification supply the correct identification for each numbered description . Supply the correct ID for each description .
 Kennedy administration program sent youthful American volunteers to work in underdeveloped countries . Kennedy administration was part of program that sent young Americans to volunteer in developing countries .
 High barrier between East and West erected during the 1961 Berlin crisis . High barrier erected during Berlin crisis between 1961 and 1961 .
 Site where anti-Castro guerilla forces failed in their U.S.-sponsored invasion ________ 6.6.6 . Site was site of failed invasion of Cuba in 1959 . Site is site of site of U.N. invasion of the country .
 Tense confrontation between Kennedy and Khrushchev that nearly led to nuclear war in October 1962 . Tense showdown nearly ended in nuclear war . Kennedy was president of the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 New civil rights technique developed in the 1960’s to desegregate lunch counters and other public facilities in the South . The technique was used to deserify lunch counters at lunch counters .
 LBJ’s broad program of welfare legislation and social reform that swept through congress in 1965 . LBJ was president of the United States in 1964 . He was elected to the presidency in 1966 .
 The hastily passed 1964 congressional authorization that became a “blank check” for the Vietnam War was passed by Congress . The Vietnam War became a "blank check" for the U.S.
 Law, spurred by Martin Luther King, Jr.’s march from Selma to Montgomery, that guaranteed rights originally given blacks under the fifteen Amendment  _________ 11.11. 11.
 Racial slogan that signaled a growing challenge to King’s nonviolent civil rights movement by militant younger blacks .
 U.S. campaign of heavy bombing of North Vietnam, begun in February and March of 1965 . North Vietnam was the focus of the bombing campaign in 1965 .
 The communist guerrillas in South Vietnam who, along with the North Vietnamese successfully matched the American escalation in Vietnam, successfully matched that of the U.S.
 The Vietnamese New Year celebration was during the communist launched a heavy offensive against the U.S. in 1968 . The offensive was launched against the United States in Vietnam .
 Student organization that moved from nonviolent protest to underground terrorism within a few years . Student organization became underground terrorist organization in 2009 .
 Site of bitterly divided 1968 Democratic convention, where police clashed with antiwar demonstrators . Site of the bitterly divided Democratic convention .
 Site of off-duty police raid in 1969 that spurred gay and lesbian activism . Site of police raid that led to gay activism in 1969 .
 People, Places, and Events Match the person, place, or event in the left column with the proper description in the right column . Match the correct letter on the blank line by inserting the correct letters on the left .
 Robert S McNamara B Cabinet officer who promoted ‘flexible response’ but came to doubt the wisdom of the Vietnam War he had presided over .
 Former vice president who staged a remarkable political comeback to win the presidential election in 1968 . D Former Vice President D.C. won the presidential race in 1968. D .
 Lyndon B Johnson E Charismatic Black Muslim leader promoted separatism in the early 1960s . He was a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood .
 Barry M Goldwater F Minnesota senator whose antiwar ‘Children’s Crusade’ helped force Johnson to alter his Vietnam policies . Goldwater's antiwar "Children's Crusade” helped force him to change his Vietnam policy .
 Malcolm X H Nonviolent black leader whose advocacy of peaceful change came under attack from militants after 1965 . Malcolm X was an advocate for peaceful change in the 1960s .
 Mario Savio I Vice president whose loyalty to LBJ’s Vietnam policies sent him down to defeat in the 1968 presidential election . Mario Savo I Vice President of the U.S. Senate from 1968 to 1968 .
 Eugene McCarthy J Charismatic president whose brief administration experienced domestic confrontations with communism . Eugene McCarthy was the president of the McCarthy administration . McCarthy was known for his anti-communist tendencies .
 Robert F Kennedy K Third-party candidate won 9 million votes and carried five states in 1968 . His conservative, hawkish 1968 campaign won nine million votes . Kennedy was the Republican Party's third-party nominee .
 Richard M Nixon L. L. Aggressive Soviet leader whose failed gamble of putting missiles in Cuba cost him his job . Nixon's failed gamble with the Soviet Union cost him a job .
 George C Wallace M Conservative Republican whose crushing defeat opened the way for the liberal Great Society programs . Wallace's crushing defeat led to the liberalization of the Great Society . Wallace was a conservative Republican whose defeat in 1964 opened the door to liberal programs .
 Matching Cause and Effect Match the historical cause in the left column with the proper effect in the right column by writing the correct letter on the blank line . Matching cause and effect is the result of a historical cause or effect .
 Kennedy’s unhappiness with the corrupt A Pushed Johnson into withdrawing as a Diem Regime presidential candidate in 1968 . Johnson withdrew from the presidential race as a result of his dissatisfaction with the government .
 Khrushchev’s placement of missiles in B brought ever-rising American casualties and a Cuba strengthened will to resist on the part of the Communist Vietnamese . The U.S. continued to lose ground in Cuba .
 Johnson’s landslide victory over C. Johnson led to a U.S.-encouraged coup and greater Goldwater in 1964 political instability in South Vietnam .
 The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution D helped push through historic civil rights legislation in 1964 and 1965 . It was the first Gulf War of the Vietnam War .
 Martin Luther King, Jr.’s civil rights E Brought along huge Democratic congressional majorities that passed a fistful of Great Society laws . The civil rights movement paved the way for civil rights reform .
 Nixon won a minority over his divided ghettos opposition . Angry discontent in northern black F helped Nixon win a minority .
 Became the questionable legal basis for all of Johnson’s further escalation of the Vietnam War . American escalation of Vietnam War G became the basis for the questionable legality of the war . The U.S. continued to escalate the war in Vietnam .
 Tet H Led to a humiliating defeat when Kennedy Offensive in 1968 forced the Soviet Union to back down . The Communist Vietnamese Tet H led to the humiliating defeat in 1968 .
 Senator Eugene McCarthy’s strong I Sparked urban riots and the growth of the antiwar campaign militant “Black Power” movement . The ‘I Sparked Urban riots’ was the catalyst for the anti-war movement in the 1960s .