 The world had never been closer to a thermonuclear war than during the tense thirteen-day standoff between U.S. President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . The standoff was a tense 13-day stand-off between the United States and the Soviet Union
 Scholars have shown that countries and societies of all parts of the world were strongly impacted by the crisis . Countries and societies were influenced by it, and influenced, in multiple and sometimes key ways, how the standoff played out .
 Latin America stood out as one of the main regions where the U.S.-Soviet stalemate produced major social and political impacts . As the geographic theater of the story, Latin America .
 Kennedy’s 23 October public announcement about the existence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba sent shockwaves across the continent, prompting different reactions from state and non-state actors . This included government crackdowns against Communists and leftist groups, as well as multilateral initiative for establishment of a nuclear
 Washington’s overture towards Cuba was secretly made through Brazil, presented to Castro as a Brazilian proposal . Cuba would cut off all military ties to the Soviet Union, including withdrawal of Soviet weapons from the island .
 Brazil’s so-called “independent” foreign policy of the early 1960s, and the fact that Brasília had been constantly presenting Page | 2 itself as a mediator between Cuba, the United States, and other anti-Castro Latin American governments, made
 President João Goulart’s close links with left-wing labor groups, including Communist trade union leaders . Kennedy administration had not reached the conclusion yet that he needed to go . U.S.-Brazilian relations were far from warm at the time, especially .
 Since mid-1962 Washington had been providing economic aid through the Alliance for Progress to anti-Goulart state governors . The policy was named ‘islands of administrative sanity” by the United States Ambassador Lincoln Gordon .
 Washington's goal was only to limit Goulart’s political moves by strengthening proU.S. politicians in Brazil, not to overthrow him, as it would be the case later . Washington was only trying to strengthen proUnited States politicians, not overthrow him .
 Hershberg’s 2004 two-part article had already pointed out that Kennedy officials became exasperated by the way Brazil behaved during the missile crisis .
 Brazil abstain at the Organization of American States on the use of force against Cuba if needed . Top officials of the Goulart administration delivered public remarks in support of Havana’s right to self-determination .
 The situation grew worse in the following weeks, including two tense standoffs between President Goulart and U.S. officials . The situation worsened in the weeks following .
 We still knew almost nothing about President Goulart’s interactions with Moscow and the Communist bloc during his administration . We still . knew almost . nothing about the interactions between Moscow and Moscow . during his . administration .
 Goulart praised U.S. efforts against Havana and Moscow in private conversations with Ambassador Gordon . He agreed to carry out a secret mission to mediate between Cuba and the United States, but presented it as a purely Brazilian initiative . The acting Soviet Ambassador to Brazil, Andrei F
 Goulart justified Brazil’s position at the OAS claiming that his government was being subjected to constant U.S. blackmail and pressures . He also claimed that his country was being pressured by Ambassador Gordon, about whom he talked about with profound disdain .
 The lack of Brazilian accounts weakens Hershberg's conclusion regarding Goulart’s ‘double game’ strategy . One could reasonably claim that the lack of . Brazilian accounts of the meetings weakens .
 Many pieces of information that Goulart passed on to the Soviet official are backed by what happened . The Brazilian mission to Havana on behalf of the United States was unknown until Hershberg’s 2004 two-part article came out .
 Goulart applied a similar anti-U.S. rhetoric when talking with other Communist leaders, Hershberg says . Hershberger: Goulhart applied similar rhetoric to Mao Zedong's China and Antonín Novotný's Czechoslovakia .
 The sequel to this amazing story sheds light on Brazil’s links with the Communist bloc during a critical juncture of the Global Cold War . It also contributes to our understanding of the deterioration in U.S.-Brazilian relations and the conditions that led to Goulart’
 He is the author of A Aliança para o Progresso e o governo João Goulart . He is currently working on the history of the New Right in the United States and its impact on Brazilian politics .