 Marvel's Spider-Man superhero makes his first appearance in a comic . The Space Needle an observation tower in Seattle, Washington, was completed .
 The Cold War continued to worsen when the Russians placed Ballistic Missiles on Cuban land just 90 miles away from the coast of Florida . JFK called the bluff by threatening war unless they were removed which they were . The world was on the brink of nuclear war and self destruction .
 The president then set a goal of landing a man on the moon before the end of the decade . He became more involved in politics in Southeast Asia by training South Vietnamese pilots .
 John Glenn becomes the first American to orbit the Earth in February of 1962 . John Glenn was the first man to orbit Earth in the early 1960s . The first man in space was John Glenn in 1962 .
 A United States embargo ordered by President Kennedy goes into effect on all imports from Cuba including tobacco, seafood, fruits and vegetables . February 7th a United States ban on all Cuban imports . The U.S. embargo was ordered by Kennedy .
 April to October Cuban and Soviet governments secretly began to build 9 missile bases in Cuba for launching medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missiles . Missiles capable of reaching 2,800 miles covering most of the United States . on August 6 United States begins to suspect Soviets building Missile Bases
 August 7 United States Protests to Soviet Union who refute the allegations . August 7 U.S. Protests held in Moscow, Russia, August 7 .
 October 14th U.S. Air Force U-2 plane on a photo reconnaissance mission captured photographic proof of Soviet missile bases under construction in Cuba . U.2 plane was on a photographic reconnaissance mission to Cuba .
 President Kennedy is informed proof of Cuban Missile Installations 7. October 16th . President Kennedy was informed proof by President Kennedy of the Cuban Missile Installation .
 U.2 flight discovers intermediate range SS-5 nuclear missiles installed in Southern Cuba . October 17th U-2 flight discovered intermediate range nuclear missiles in southern Cuba . U.S. mission to Cuba found intermediate range missiles installed by U.N. mission .
 Andrei Gromyko assures Kennedy that installations are purely defensive . October 18th at a Personal meeting between Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs and President John F Kennedy, Gromyco assures Kennedy .
 U.2 flight discovers further missile bases in Northern Cuba . October 21st U-2 flight found U.S. bases in northern Cuba . U.N. mission to find out more missile bases .
 October 21st U-2 flight reveals Soviet bombers and Migs numbers increasing . U-1 flight reveals increased numbers of U.S. bombers, Migs .
 October 22nd President Kennedy addresses the nation in a televised speech, announcing the presence of offensive missile sites in Cuba . The speech was broadcast on October 22, 1962 .
 Most Soviet Shipping slows down or turns round except 1 ship 16. October 24th Most Soviet Ships slows down, or turns around except one ship 16 .
 Discussions focus over withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . October 25th Discussions focused on withdraw of United States missiles from Turkish in exchange with withdrawal from Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev proposes removing soviet missiles if President Kennedy publicly announces U.S. would never invade Cuba . October 26th Nikita proposed removing missiles if president Kennedy publicly announced United States would never invasion Cuba . Khrushchchev proposed to remove missiles if Kennedy announced U
 Khrushchev proposes in letter public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. missile in Turkey . October 27th Khrushche proposed in letter to U.K. for United States missile trade in Turkey.
 October 27th American U-2 is shot down over Cuba while on reconnaissance killing the pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson . Major Anderson was the pilot of the U.2 .
 October 27th Kennedy writes Khrushchev a letter stating that he will make a statement that the U.S. will not invade Cuba if the United States removes the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy writes a letter saying that he would not invade the country if the missiles were removed .
 October 28th Khrushchev announces over Radio Moscow that he has agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba . October 28, Khrushchchev announced that he had agreed that he would remove missiles from the country .
 I have included this to show how close full scale nuclear war was between the world's two superpowers . We can only guess that the Soviet Union was at similar alert status and had similar plans in place .
 The spacecraft was launched from Cape Canaveral with the mission to study the Moon, return data, and transmit images .
 The mission failed to relay any useful information back to NASA due to a computer and battery issue . The mission was a failure as it did not relay useful information .
 Ranger 4 stopped operating after 10 hours of flight and later crashed into the surface of the Moon . Ranger 4 crashed into a crater on the lunar surface after it stopped operating .
 The mission was notable in that it was the first Ranger mission to have a successful launch . It was also the first United States spacecraft to land on the Moon . The mission landed on the lunar surface .
 The Mercury capsule carried astronaut John Glenn who conducted the first orbit around the Earth by an American . John Glenn was the first American to orbit the Earth around the globe .
 Glenn orbited the Earth three times in a five-hour flight that lasted just under five hours . Glenn's orbit of the Earth was the first time he orbited it three times . Glenn was the last person to orbit the Earth in space .
 Glenn splashed down in the Atlantic Ocean successfully but faced a moment when the automatic control system failed and he had to manually control the capsule . Glenn splashes down successfully .
 The Soviet Union had already made the first human orbit during April of the previous year with cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin . The first human space flight was made in 1961 .
 Marilyn Monroe serenades President Kennedy on his birthday . Marilyn Monroe sings Happy Birthday To President Kennedy .
 Marilyn Monroe made one of her last public appearances on May 19th at a birthday celebration for United States President John F Kennedy before her death . Marilyn Monroe attended the birthday celebration of President Kennedy .
 The event became an iconic moment in pop culture when actress sang an intimate, sultry, and memorable rendition of ""Happy Birthday"" to the world leader .
 Monroe wore an intricately designed skin-tight beaded dress that was considered a little scandalous at the time . Monroe wore the dress in which was considered scandalous .
 Monroe died three months later of a drug overdose, ruled a probable suicide, under suspicious circumstances . The performance added to rumors that the two were having an affair .
 Meredith was forced away by Mississippi's governor and denied entry to the university . Meredith, an army veteran had made several attempts to enroll at the university but was denied entry by the governor . Meredith is a former soldier who served in the Army .
 President Kennedy was finally able to enter the school after being escorted by United States Marshals at the insistence of President Kennedy . He was finally allowed into the school by the president .
 Meredith actively tested the new integration mandate and became a fearless pioneer of the Civil Rights Movement . Meredith was a pioneer of integration and was a leader in the civil rights movement .
 NASA’s Ranger 3 spacecraft launches on January 26th . Ranger 3 will be the first of its kind .
 It was the United States’ first attempt at landing a spacecraft on the surface of the Moon . The mission to the Moon was the U.S. first attempt to land on the moon .
 The spacecraft was designed to transmit photos of the lunar surface before making a rough landing . If successful, the spacecraft would have been able to take photos before landing on the moon .
 Ranger 3 never made it to the Moon due to malfunctions with the guidance system . Ranger 3 was the first Ranger 3 to reach the Moon .
 It missed entering the lunar orbit by about 22,000 miles and instead entered a heliocentric orbit . The spacecraft is now in heliocaentric orbit, rather than entering a lunar orbit .
 NASA was never able to transmit photos of the surface from the mission . They did gain some engineering data related to the mission to the surface . NASA was able to send back some images of the planet .
 His speech outlined four basic rights intended to protect consumers from misleading advertising, defective products, and monopolistic practices .
 The rights that were mentioned included the right to safety, the . right to be informed, the. right to choose, and the right . to be heard . The rights were mentioned in a video posted on YouTube .
 Kennedy also proposed certain measures to enforce and implement the rights . Kennedy also suggested that certain measures should be implemented . Kennedy has proposed a number of measures to implement and enforce the rights.
 Once we receive your order we create your personalized print using the information that you include with the order . This personalized print will be used to print .
 The CIA began to recruit anti-Castro Cuban exiles training took place at United States Bases in Florida, Panama and Guatemala 3.5 years ago . The CIA recruited anti-Cuban exiles to train them in Cuba .
 March 1960, the CIA put forward their plan for the overthrow of Castro's administration to the U.S. National Security Council . The plan was given the support of United States President Dwight D Eisenhower 4. March 1960 .
 President Kennedy briefed on the latest plan for the invasion of Cuba to overthrow Castro . President Kennedy is briefed by all the major departments on the plan .
 Kennedy authorized the active departments to continue, and to report progress . President Kennedy authorized them to continue and to continue .
 President Kennedy approved the invasion of beaches bordering the Bahia de Cochinos 7.7. April . The beaches were invaded by President Kennedy .
 Che Guevara stressed the importance of an armed civilian populace, stating that all the Cuban people must become a guerrilla army . Due to their secret intelligence network, anticipating the invasion, he stressed the need for an armed populace .
 Eight Douglas B-26B Invader bombers in three groups simultaneously attacked three Cuban airfields at San Antonio de los Banos and at Ciudad Liberadad . April 15th eight Douglas bombers attacked three airfields near Havana, Cuba .
 April 16th CIA/Brigade 2506 invasion fleet sailed from Puerto Cabezas in Nicaragua to 'Rendezvous Point Zulu', about south of Cuba . April 16 was the first time the fleet was sent to Cuba by the U.S.
 Brigade 2506 ground forces retreat to the beaches in the face of considerable onslaught from Cuban government artillery, tanks and infantry . They hoped for rescue by United States ships but due to heavy fire by Cuban tanks they were forced to withdraw 13 .
 The Space Needle an observation tower in Seattle, Washington is completed in time for the 1962 World's Fair . December 1962 1,113 prisoners taken during the attempted invasion are exchanged for $53 million in food and medicine United States --The Space Needel .
 It was completed in less than 1 year just in time for the opening of the 1962 World's Fair 3 . It is completed in just over a year and completed in 1962 .
 The last elevator car was installed the day before the Fair opened on April 21st 5th 5th .
 The Space Needle is considered an icon of Seattle and still one of the most popular places to visit and photograph over fifty years later . During the World War II, the space Needle drew over 2. million visitors to the World Fair .
 Spider-Man made his first appearance in the Amazing Fantasy #15 comic in June . In June the iconic Marvel superhero made his debut in the comic book . The comic book is based on the Marvel superhero superhero's adventures in Amazing Fantasy .
 The issue was dated for August but had actually hit the shelves in June . The issue of the issue was actually released in June, and it was actually published in August .
 Created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko, Spider-Man was a teenage superhero whose nerdy alter-ego Peter Parker represented adolescent concerns and teenage tribulations in a way that no other comic book superhero had been able to do so .
 Many teen readers connected to the character making him one of the most popular and enduring comic series characters in history . He is one of many teen readers who have dedicated their lives to comics .
 Brazil beat Czechoslovakia 3-1 to win the 1962 World Cup . Marilyn Monroe found dead on August 5 after apparently overdosing on sleeping pills . The United States Navy SEALS are created on January 1st as the Navy's principal special operations force . The special force was in existence
 First Wal-Mart discount store is opened by by Sam Walton in Bentonville Arkansas United States - First Motel 6 opened it's 1st location in Santa Barbara, CA on June 25th, 1962 .