 The end of the Cold War has led to a dramatic upsurge of interest in and writing about the Cuban missile crisis .
 There is a natural fascination with the one brief moment when the world had to confront the possibility of total destruction . Now that we no longer live under the threat of nuclear holocaust, there is a fascination .
 The United State journalists, has released a fl estimated 80 percent of the information about Soviet action . Equally helpful, Soviet officials in the late 1980s, have been information . The new literature can be d declassified documents, grou scholarly commentary. n
 The tw scholars a glimpse of the much has released since the mid-19 the two the two, because it is confine rather than containing acco highlight the prescience of D believe that the Russians were August 1962 .
 Documents selected by much better insight into the d much larger body of materials government to release throu documents . Government to release documents enable scholars to e in detail in detail .
 As the editors make helpful annotated chronology, most important decisions are out of dark . Most important decisions outsid dark .
 'Laurence Chang' and David Welch with David A Welch with bot important supplement to 'critical 'critical' view of the crisis . For that reason, the group co-wrote a book on the missile crisis .
 The first, at Hawk' consisted of Americans who took part in the ExComm and scholars who had studied the documentary record . to keep the conversation focused on key points .
 Three decades ago, a meeting of Soviet officials in the U.S. was held in Boston, Massachusetts, in October 1987 . It was the first meeting of the Soviet Union's ExComm, the successor of Khrushchev's speechwriter, Sergo Mikoya .
 Khrushchev felt that the American Jupit justified his placing SS-4s and SS-5s in Cuba . The first was assertion that the first was . assertion that Khrush . felt that . the American . Jupits justified his . placing SS .4s in
 In addition to American and Soviet participants, the last three c delegation attended . The last three members of the c. c. delegation were in attendance .
 Mark Kramer argues that Gribkov has since retracted his statement that the Soviet commander had the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons . He argues that Dobrynin has also withdrawn his claim to have met with Robert Kennedy on the evening of 26 October 1962 .
 Historians should avoid relying on tantalizing statements by Soviet participants that cannot be checked against the documentary record . It seems fair to conclude that historians should not rely on such statements .
 Dino Brugioni offers a fascinating glimpse into the crucial role played by photo interpreters at the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington . The center is located in the U.S. and Canada .
 U-2 photographs reveal telltale signs of Soviet SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba . Photographer explains technical expertise required to take the faint images of military equipment in Cuba on the U.2 .
 Kramer says he accepts Gribkov's later statements at face value while refusing to credit his earlier assertion . Blight and his coauthors rebut Kramer's assertion, pointing out that Kramer's earlier statements are not accurate .
 Brugioni spent years preparing photo interpreters to spot the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Brugioni also emphasizes the importance of the low-lev conducted by the navy and air force during the cruci President Kennedy's 22 October speech . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missiles and Castro's own antia were deployed at the sites located by the U-2 fligh targeting information for either a surgical air strike or ta American invasion of Cuba .
 Only on Saturday, 27 Octo aircraft guns fire at an American reconnaissance plane, h . Had the American plane not been able to return safely to Brenner, this loss, added to the U-2 loss, would have led President Kennedy to launch a retaliatory m .
 In an effort to reach a broad audience, Robert Smith Thompson writes a breezy and irreverent narrative that ranges from the bizarre to the shrewd in its interpretation .
 Kennedy knew all along about the SS-4s and SS-5s and simply set Khrushchev up for a confrontation in which the U.S. nuclear advantage would force him into a humiliating surrender .
 Thompson says Kennedy's signal of U.S. willingness to trade the Jupiters in Turkey led Khrushchev to make this part of his public proposal . Thompson is on somewhat more solid footing in using the Dobrynin disclosures to argue .
 The early satellites were programmed to focus on the Soviet Union and China . It took several weeks before film capsules were ejected and processed .
 U-2 photographs were also much sharper and clearer than the early satellite pictures . The U.2 photos were also sharper than satellite photographs .
 Satellite pictures of Soviet Union proved very helpful in establishing the normal ""signature"" of Russian missile sites . Brugioni points out that the satellite pictures of the Soviet Union had proved very useful in establishing a 'signature' of Russian sites .
 Michael Beschloss presents the interaction between the U.S. and Cuba . Kennedy could have avoided th spring of 1962, that the Unit Cuba could have been a peaceful resolution .
 Beschloss provides a more substantial argument by using new informa tion to indict Kennedy for making a secret deal to swap the Jupiters in Turkey for SS-4s and SS-5s in Cuba .
 Beschloss accuses Kennedy of playing politics with the crisis by doing covertly what he refused to do publicly . Citing recent disclosures by McGeorge Bundy and Dean Rusk, he says Kennedy played politics .
 He realized that he could not convince the world that obsolete nuclear missiles in Turkey were worth the risk of nuclear war . Yet in light of Republican warnings on Cuba, he felt it would be impossible politically to back down in public .
 His solution was to negotiate a private deal through his brother and Dobrynin if possible, through U Thant and the United Nations if necessary . His solution would be to negotiate private deals through Dobrynins' brother and brother .
 When Khrushchev gave in without demanding a public quid pro quo, Kennedy won a great political and personal victory . Kennedy won't have to make a public statement about the deal, but it was a victory .
 The contributors to James Nathan's important collection of essays are much harder on Kennedy . Kennedy's essay collection is published by James Nathan at the University of Cambridge .
 Ted Sorensen admitted deliberately omitting passages from the attorney general's diary that confirmed that the U.S. was giving a secret pledge to remove the Jupiters as part of its offer to Khrushchev .
 Bernstein and Lebow conclude that Kennedy was indeed playing politics with the Cuban missile crisis . They conclude that contrary to the argument, Kennedy was actually playing politics .
 It was not a simple case of using the crisis to win votes, Lebow argues . Lebow: "It was not an easy case of use of crisis to gain votes" Lebow says .
 Sorensen, when asked by Bernstein, had no knowledge of their whereabouts . He said he had no idea where they were .
 Laurence Chang relies on heavil disclosures, particularly those of Burlatsky, to argue t advisers misread Khrushchev's intentions .
 The Soviet initiative was a defensiv Khrushchev saw as a 'provocative' move . Rather than offensive in the Cold War, including a possible move a argues that the move was a possible military move .
 The Mongoose could only culminate in an American in lending credence to Khrushchev's claim that the Soviets were defensive in character . James Hershberg, in an updated version of History article, stresses this last point, arguing that it is quite understandable that it was quite understandable
 Nathan volu support to revisionist arguments and to sustain T Khrushchev, not Kennedy, was the real victor . Overall, the Nathan support to reviseist arguments is overwhelming .
 Two themes stand out clearly amid the continuing d Soviets term the Caribbean crisis of 1962 . Two themes of the crisis are clear in the book: 'The Caribbean Crisis of 1962'
 The crisis, while inherently dangerous, did not bring the world to the brink of nuclear war . The crisis was not nuclear war, but it did bring it to a very low level .
 The principal players behaved quite differently than contemporaries believed . And they behaved very differently than historians believed .
 Recent information suggests that the danger of nuclear war was not as great as once thought . Recent information on both American and Soviet behavior during the crisis suggests that .
 Dean Rusk's revelation about Kennedy's willingness to seek a swap of the Jupiters in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba reinforces the arguments made by McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara at the Hawk's Cay conference .
 If Khrushchev had not given in on Sunday, 28 October, Kennedy would have intensified the blockade of Cuba rather than authorizing an invasion of the island .
 McNamara asserted that he thought the chances of a nuclear war were only one in fifty . Despite the skepticism of the scholars at this conference, McNamara said he thought he thought it was one in 50 chances of war .
 Lebow: New evidence confirms and refutes various of the traditional and revisionist arguments . Lebow argues that the new evidence both confirms or refutes some of the arguments and thus requires a new synthesis .
 An American invasion of Cuba, in light of the new information, could only have ended in ""utter disaster ""t® It seems unwise, however, to rely on the recollection of a single Soviet official to conclude that Khrushchev would have risked nuclear war over Cuba .
 Raymond Garthoff points out that U.S. intelligence could find no indication that the Soviets placed their nuclear forces on alert during the crisis . American intelligence could not find any indication that Soviet nuclear forces were on alert .
 Garthoff has expressed skepticism of General Gribkov's later claim to the contrary, noting that he seemed puzzled that his disclosure at the Havana conference caused such consternation . Garthoffs says that he has skepticism of his claim to have been made .
 Unless documentary evidence can be found to substantiate Gribkov's assertion, there seems to be little reason to accept it as proof .
 Khrushchev's reaction to Castro's plea for Soviet Union to launch a preemptive nuclear strike against the U.S. to thwart the expected invasion of Cuba . Castro's urgent plea for the Soviet Union was revealed in the recent disclosure .
 Khrushchev may have given in so quickly and accepted the American no-invasion offer on 28 October .
 Dean Rusk claimed in his memoir that he suggested the UN approach to Kennedy, who then told him to go ahead . Barton Bernstein notes that in . his memoir published in 1990, . Rusk claims that he had suggested that he . suggested the approach to . Kennedy, . who then
 Rusk's initial, 1987, statement read at the Hawk's Cay conference asserted that Kennedy had instructed him to make the approach to U Thant by way of Andrew Cordier . Rusk: Kennedy instructed me to make an approach .
 There is no documentary evidence to support Rusk's statements or to clarify who in fact first suggested this approach . Unfortunately, there is no evidence that Rusk suggested it .
 Cordier wrote down the precise words Rusk gave to him over the telephone . A search of his papers might yet tum up this missing evidence .
 As our knowledge of the crisis continues to expand, o behavior of the leaders changes as well, as well as the behavior of those leaders . As we learn about the crisis, we can expect behavior of leaders to change .
 Arthur Schlesinger's description of Kenned toughness and restraint, of will, nerve, and wisdom, so so matchlessly calibrated that dazzled the world, is damaging to the revisionist claim that the Ameri pursue a diplomatic approach and needlessly risked nuc both Beschloss
 He knew he had to than risk war over the obsolete Jupiters, but he would keep this move as his trump card, to be rather than the beginning of the negotiations .
 It seems c have given up the Jupiters through some form of U bluffing so well that he even fooled most of his own a force Khrushchev to accept his terms without disclosing regarding the missiles in Turkey . The U.S. gave up Jupits through some
 As Kennedy's rec shown, his conduct was always more prudent and cautiou the Cuban missile crisis . He proved successful in running nuclear war to achieve a stunning political victory .
 The usual stereotype of Nikita Khrushchev as a dang nearly brought about a nuclear war with his reckless behavior is gradually changing . The average stereotype of the dang almost brought about nuclear war is slowly changing .
 Khrushchev was acting defensively, both to protect against attempts to topple him from power and to redress the e that Kennedy had opened up over the Soviet Union . One need not go as far as Thompso the Soviet leader as the true hero .
 Kennedy failed to realize that Kennedy woul risk both political defeat at home and humiliation befor did not make the same mistake, being careful to giv saving way out with the pledge not to invade Cuba .
 Nathan even leaves out the reference to ""restraint"" in his version of the book . Three of the contributors to Nathan's volume c leave out a reference to restraint .