 On May 22, 1972, President Richard Nixon landed in Moscow for an unprecedented week-long summit with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev . The summit marked the height of the détente era and marked the SALT I Treaty .
 The Détente Years, 1969-1972’ is a look at the Cold War era that marked a détente or a “thawing” of Cold War relations between the two superpowers . The book, "Détente," is based on the period
 Henry Kissinger forewords by both Nixon’s Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . The book will be published by the Library of American History .
 In them, they talk about their personal relationship that forged ‘The Channel’ of communications between the two governments that finally led to the breakthrough in negotiations . They talk about how they forged "The Channel" of communications .
 What was later named ‘The Channel’ began as a general exchange of views . The Channel is now known as The Channel .
 Starting in 1971, the Channel became the principal venue for U.S.-Soviet relations . The Channel was a principal venue in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The two sides also published an agreed statement on principles of international conduct . The U.S. and Russia published a joint statement of support for Syria .
 The highlight of the publication is the discussion about the lead-up and issues during the Moscow Summit and the final negotiations of the SALT I Treaty . Pass the Salt, please, please .
 SALT I, the first series of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, had begun in November 1969 to explore ways to halt or reduce the arms race, particularly nuclear weapon proliferation . The talks were intended to stop or reduce proliferation of nuclear weapons .
 This week of meetings from May 22 to 26 was set up after years of negotiations to finalize and sign a number of agreements that increased cooperation and reduced the mutual nuclear threat between the two nations .
 On May 26, Nixon and Brezhnev signed the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty . The treaty was the most significant of the multiple agreements reached during the Moscow summit .
 The agreement laid the groundwork for the first joint Soviet-US space flight . The first Soviet-U.S. space flight was the first of its kind . The two nations shook hands at the summit .
 The Channel worked best so long as the bureaucracy did not know of its existence . Paradoxically, the channel worked best when it was not known of it .
 The Channel was an innovative attempt to transcend the formalities of an increasingly bureaucratized diplomacy . For all the bureaucratic dismay it caused, the Channel was a successful attempt .
 It helped contain crises, saw America through a period of domestic divisions and sketched prospects for a more peaceful world . It was a crucial period of stability for America and the world .