 In the end, cool heads prevailed, but for 13 days, nuclear war was a real possibility . Cool heads prevailed in the end .
 Many feared the worst amid rapidly escalating tension between the Soviet Union and the U.S. Many feared worst amid escalating tensions between the United States and the Soviet Soviet Union .
 In October 1962, a U.S. spy plane spotted Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba . The missiles were spotted in Cuba by a plane flying over the island .
 The Kremlin's secret operation to deploy warheads on the island was a direct response to America placing Jupiter missiles in Turkey a year earlier . America placed Jupiter missiles on Turkey in 2010 .
 President John F Kennedy made his televised address on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy was the first president to make a televised address .
 The first simmering tensions appeared after a televised speech by U.S. President John F Kennedy on October 22 . Games and Reality are a reality TV show .
 The United States went on to impose a quarantine zone around Cuba to ensure that Soviet ships could not carry more military hardware to the island . The U.S. imposed the quarantine zone on Cuba in order to stop Soviet ships carrying military hardware .
 Villagers from San Cristobal in Cuba recall how Soviet troops came to build military installations on their farms . Villagers say Soviet troops built military installations at their farms in the countryside .
 Retired CIA agent Dino Brugioni examines the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . Ex-CIA-trained Cuban exiles attempted to overthrow Fidel Castro’s government .
 Two incidents, one in the air and the other underwater, could have pushed Moscow and Washington into all-out war . Russia and the U.S. have been at odds for years over the years .
 Soviet Air Defence Unit officer speaks of being told to prepare for a third world war . Major Rudolf Anderson shot down a U.S. reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba .
 Ryurik Ketov relives that same day when submarine B-59 from his flotilla was engaged in a covert operation in the Caribbean . Ketov: "A submarine commander from Russia's Eastern Front was killed in the attack on the U.S. Gulf of Mexico in
 United States warships detected the vessel and the crew had to decide whether or not to deploy a nuclear torpedo . The crew of the vessel had to choose whether to deploy the torpedo .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev managed to find a compromise . Soviet weapons in Cuba would be dismantled in exchange for security guarantees for the island nation .
 Fidel Castro reportedly flew into a rage and Soviet statesman, Anastas Mikoyan, was sent to Havana for talks . The Castro was reportedly angry at the situation and flew into rage .
 His son, Stepan, reveals how his mother’s death might have influenced Castro . Castro showed ‘a great deal of compassion’, which helped ease the negotiations .
 Russian icon turned timeless Russian icon, by those who knew him . A genuine hero turned timeless .
 Mysterious film and the Syrian spy wars in the 60s in the 1960s .
 A story of a legendary british Intellgence officer, who helped USSR . Leningrad Siege Reflections. A story .
 Blockade victims share stories of starvation, death, and survival . 70 years after the bombing of Hiroshima & Nagasaki .
 Visiting the ghost town of Pripyat twenty-six years after the Chernobyl disaster . Visiting a ghost town in the aftermath of the disaster .