 The utility of models like this one for addressing counterfactual and policy questions is discussed, and substantive conclusions based on the model can be reached .
 A shorter perceived crisis time might well have led to the selection of more severe military options . The most noteworthy of these is that the U.S. may have had to wait longer than a crisis time .
 Other conclusions deal with the implications of changes in Kennedy's beliefs for option choices, with Kennedy's low ranking of most nonmilitary options, and with the minimal chance of a passive U.S. response .
 President John F Kennedy assigned a team of advisers (later known as the ""Executive Committee of the National Security 1") to his team of advisors . President Kennedy assigned the team to a team that later became known as "The National Security Team"
 The use of the adjective ""offensive"" reflects the way the purpose of the missile base was described to Kennedy . Kennedy described the base as 'offensive'
 We found no strong evidence to suggest that this description was not widely shared within the ExCom discussions .
 All this is, of course, independent of what the ""actual"" purpose of the base may have been .
 As best we could determine, the Soviets never granted that the purpose of either the base or the missiles was offensive . The Soviets did not grant that the purposes of both the base and missiles were offensive .
 The U.S. agreed only to remove missiles you call offensive . Indeed, they agreed to remove those missiles you called offensive .
 Those considered ranged from doing nothing to launching a surprise air strike on the installations .
 A U.S. naval quarantine of Cuba led to assurances that the United States would not invade Cuba and a Soviet promise to remove certain missiles from Cuba . A United States naval quarantine led to negotiations with the Soviet Politburo Chairman Khrushchev .
 This incident is of considerable historical importance as one of the few known nuclear crises in world history . It is one of only a few known cases of nuclear crisis in the world .
 There are some more subtle reasons for the event's importance . There are, however, reasons for some of the importance .
 Decision makers use significant ""precedents" in developing ways of dealing with new problems . Decision makers often use significant "preparents" to develop new solutions to new problems, experts say .
 U.S. decision making during the missile crisis is widely regarded as being of high quality . United States decision making in missile crisis regarded as a 'quality' decision .
 To a large extent, this positive evaluation may be related to the apparently benign ending of the crisis . The crisis may be linked to the 'peaceful' ending of this year's crisis, he says .
 If the outcome could plausibly have been less desirable, the status of the crisis as a positive precedent must be questioned . If, however, the outcome was less desirable then the status should be questioned, says Simon Tisdall .
 Many of the ""revisionist" accounts of the U.S. handling of the missile crisis have raised serious objections to treating the case as a positive precedent . Many of these accounts have been critical of the case, including that of Russia .
 Counterfactual assertions are of importance both to the ""science"" of foreign policy decision making and to the policy relevance of that science . Such counterfactorial assertions are important to foreign policy making .
 The initial programming was done by Paul Anderson with help from Jim Ludwig . Jim Ludwig is the son of Paul Anderson and Jim Anderson .
 We have benefited from the comments of Hayward Alker, Kristi Andersen, Paul Anderson, James Bennett, Janet Martin, and Howard Tamashiro .
 A discussion of both the overall utility of asking counterfactual questions and the role of such questions in policy analysis will appear later in this article . A discussion will be later on .
 Understanding how decisions are made involves knowing something about the rationale used in reaching the decision . Addressing Counterfactuals is a way of understanding how decisions were made . Addresses Counterfactuallys. Addressing counterfactual .
 Decision making is a contextual activity; how one evaluates and selects possible courses of action will depend in part on how one interprets the environment . Decision making will depend on the context of the environment, whether it is a good or bad .
 If Kennedy viewed the presence of missiles in Cuba as only a domestic political issue, his decision making might well have been different . If he had interpreted it as primarily a United States national security issue, he might have made a different decision .
 Kennedy would have considered different alternatives under different interpretations . The point is that he would have interpreted the ""same"" alternatives in different ways .
 Kennedy would have had the option of doing nothing under the domestic or national security interpretations . As an example, under either of these interpretations just mentioned, the president would have been able to do nothing .
 The meaning of doing nothing would have been linked to his interpretation of the problem . Yet the meaning of nothing would be linked to doing nothing, he said .
 In other words, decision makers deal with problems under some description . Decision makers are dealing with problems with some description, not just description .
 To understand their actions, we must know something of the description actually used . To understand this, we need to know something about the description .
 An adequate understanding of how a decision was reached should be capable of addressing counterfactuals, says the author . "An adequate understanding" of how the decision was made should be addressed, he says .
 It is in providing guidelines for what might have happened had events unfolded in a different, though not implausible, 4.4.4 .
 Brandon provides a description of the importance of issue interpretation in Kennedy's decision making with respect to the Skybolt Agreement . Brandon provides an account of the significance of the issue interpretation .
 Historical counterfactuals are especially muddled within the social sciences . Unfortunately, the issue of historical counterfactsuals is especially muddied within the science of history .
 To talk of counterfactuals one must be willing to assume that, given some theory of social phenomena, it makes sense to talk about 'possible worlds' that are different from, though similar to, the world in which we live .
 A possible world might be viewed as a set-theoretic structure that can serve as a model for a version of the theory at hand . The structure of a possible world can be viewed in a way that it can be used to model a new world .
 The model-theoretic perspective has the advantage of making it clear that a possible world could contain different objects than does the actual world . The world is a world that could contain objects that do not exist in the world .
 In the missile crisis, we can ask what would have happened had Robert McNamara dropped out of ExCom after he had asserted ""a missile is a missile"" and been ignored . We can ask if McNamara would have dropped out .
 Counterfactual assertions express propositions about possible worlds and can be assigned truth values . The point of the point is that counterfactorial assertions can be given truth values, as such, they can be true .
 Among the criteria viewed here as central to ""designing"" policies,6 are the ability to identify and evaluate options, consideration of goals and clarity of assumptions,6 .
 We will examine how exploring conterfactuals affects each of these . We will then examine how explore confactuality affects each other .
 This view of counterfactuals does not, of course, obviate the need to have a ""good"" understanding of relevant causal and intentional interactions . This is not, however, the need for a 'good' understanding of these interactions .
 The simulation model we describe below is intended to provide such an understanding . It will serve as our theory, and it will be used as a model for our theory .
 Documents show options such as a blockade and an air strike were identified and researched well in advance of the missile crisis . The Kennedy Library documents show that options such a blockade, air strike and a blockade were identified early .
 Analysis that uses counterfactuals necessarily fulfills the spirit of the option identification criterion . Since the nature of the question involves posing alternatives, analysis must be used to answer the question . The answer to the question is whether or not the answer is the answer .
 Option evaluation involves tracing through the consequences of alternatives and comparing those consequences to each other in order to facilitate the choice process . Option evaluation, on the other hand, involves tracing the consequences and comparing them with each other .
 Asking counterfactual questions makes the baseline of comparison clear, thereby aiding considerably in option evaluation . Counterfactorial questions can be helpful in evaluating an option .
 Many scholars who have observed policy processes have disagreed on the degree of which goals are and should be considered . Many scholars have disagreed concerning the degree to which goals should be included .
 It seems apparent that to select policies, some sense of direction must guide choices . However, it seems that it seems obvious that to . select policies must be guided by direction .
 The use of conterfactuals allows one to ask questions about how various alternatives might have achieved a desired outcome .
 A better understanding of paths to goal achievement can be facilitated through an appropriate use of counterfactuals . In other words, a better understanding is facilitated through the use of these counterfactories .
 Carefully constructed theory will support answers to various counterfactual questions that link past alternatives to goal achievement . Theory will provide answers to questions about the past alternatives .
 When this happens, better goal achievement in future foreign policy situations is possible, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 Human nature seems to dictate that judgments about similarity of context are often used as guides . In making foreign policy decisions, human nature dictates that comparisons of context should be considered .
 Which previous situation is seen as being most analogous leads to assuming that certain lessons should apply in a given situation . Which previous situations are seen as most analogous to those seen in the world is most likely to be the case .
 Abram Chayes to McGeorge Bundy in early September 1962 . Norbert Schleir to Robert Kennedy on August 30, 1962 .
 Making such a judgment and its implications clear are important features of effective foreign (or domestic) policymaking . Given the crucial role that that judgment can play, making such an important judgment is important .
 The way in which we use counterfactuals in our simulation involves stating which conditions lead to which actions are possible . The simulation is a simulation of what would happen if the conditions were different to what happened .
 When an argument is constructed in such a way that a particular statement linking a condition with an action applies to both a past and a present circumstance, a judgment of context similarity has been incorporated . This is when a statement is constructed such a certain statement is linked to both past and present circumstances
 Counterfactuals are useful for designing effective policies, authors say . We chose to ask counterfactual questions because of the criteria offered here for design of policies .
 The approach we have taken in analyzing Kennedy's decision making during the missile crisis has its roots in work done in artificial intelligence . The approach to analyzing Kennedy decision making has roots in the work done by artificial intelligence.
 More familiar computer modeling efforts such as Forrester or Crecine have been designed to capture the dynamic behavior of parts of the political system .
 The model equations are intended to capture the behavior of the system being simulated . The equations are meant to be used to simulate the system's behavior .
 The approach presented in this article is a first attempt to go one step deeper to develop a theory of how the system behayeses .
 We are primarily interested in plausibly capturing how Kennedy reached his decisions . Therefore, while we are initially concerned with descriptive adequacy, we are primarily concerned with how Kennedy reaches his decisions. We are concerned with the plausibility of these decisions .
 The United States is willing to negotiate privately with the Soviet Union concerning missiles in Cuba . The U.S. is willing privately to negotiate private with the Soviets over the issue .
 The United States will not negotiate privately with the Soviet Union concerning missiles in Cuba . The U.S. will not discuss private matters with the Soviets over the issue .
 While each of these three sentences is ""about"" negotiations between the United States and the USSR, the meanings are different . The meanings of each of the sentences are different.
 The semantic kernel is designed to take advantage of common characteristics of sentences, while letting such things as ""actor,"" ""subject,"" and ""logical connective"" vary . It is designed for common characteristics such as actor and subject .
 In the instance of negotiation, the basic kernel structure contains a symbol indicating negotiation, together with variables for the initiating actor, the target actor, and the subject of negotiation . The kernel structure also contains variables for initiating actor and target actor .
 NEGOTIATE (ACTOR 1, ACTOR 2, CHANNEL, SUBJECT) is the basic kernel scheme for a negotiation . Thus, NEGotiate (NEGOTiate) is . The basic scheme is the "NegotiATE
 The meanings of S I, S2, and S3 depend in part on whether the statement is positive (S I and S2) or negative . The statement is declarative or interrogative, and whether the source is the United States or the USSR 10 .
 While semantic kernels have a strong structural similarity to the conceptual dependency theory developed by Schank . No claim is being made here of having identified ""basic"" political verb forms .
 There are four other verbs (WARN, OFFER, CONDEMN, ACCEPT) that share this basic kernel structure .
 The semantic kernels ""solve "" the combinatorial explosion that would result if JFK/CBA were to have a separate procedure for recognizing every distinct sentence . The semantic kernel solves the problem .
 Our ability to ""understand"" the sentence depends on our ability to create a context in which to interpret it . We can't understand the sentence without creating a context for it to be understood .
 In decision making, the meaning of an alternative or offer is in 11.11.11 . Similarly, in decision-making, in . decision making . The meaning of the meaning in 11 is in 12.11, in order to be successful .
 These kernels are compatible with an infinite number of natural language sentences . These kernels can be found to be compatible with any number of sentences .
 The point of the grammar and the grammar is to do the work of ""creating"" the semantic kernels . The parsing and grammar does the work for the purpose of creating the kernels .
 Bransford and Johnson present a fascinating experiment that forcefully illustrates this point . The experiment is the result of a successful experiment by Branson and Johnson .
 When we say the meaning of an alternative is context dependent, we are saying its meaning depends in part on the decision makers' current knowledge of the state of the decision environment and beliefs about that environment .
 Within JFK/CBA, the interpretation of semantic kernels is modified by both a data structure containing tokens representing knowledge of the current state of the crisis and a set of rules that describes Kennedy's beliefs about such things as the USSR, diplomacy, and the military .
 This data structure is referred to as an ambient information structure . The tokens it contains are called state knowledge elements . State knowledge elements are state information elements .
 Kennedy's beliefs are in the form of CONDITION ACTION statements or production rules . Kennedy is the president of the U.S. House of Representatives . Kennedy has been married to Senator Ted Kennedy Jr.
 These rules can be interpreted as saying that if certain conditions are satisfied, then certain actions are to be taken . These rules are often interpreted as meaning that certain conditions must be satisfied .
 If a semantic kernel is received indicating that advisers recommend a surgical air strike against Cuba and that they believe the USSR will offer to negotiate after such a strike, then JFK/CBA takes the action of telling his advisers that he finds their advice implausible . The AIS contains tokens indicating
 If the AIS has a token indicating ""Khrushchev is a low risk taker,"" then JFK/CBA will interpret the ""same"" advice as being plausible . However, if a token indicates that Khrushchev is low risk, JFK will interpret it as plausible
 In this way, context interacts with new information to produce an interpretation . Context interacts with context to produce a new interpretation, says author .
 Each of these languages carries with with it a precise control structure . Yet, as Newell observed, each of them carries with . it's not all languages with precise control structures .
 For many purposes, it is perfectly appropriate to let the programming language determine in large part the control structure . The programming language is a powerful tool for many purposes .
 The structure of the program itself is important to pay attention to the control structure . Any control structure will have imbedded within it theoretical claims about the mechanism being simulated . If, however, as in the present case, one wishes to make a theoretical statement, it is important .
 Production rules are fairly simple to write and do not require that relations be specified in an algebraic manner . At the same time, production rules do not need to specify relations in algebraic ways .
 The form of production rules is flexible enough to permit stating relations in a fairly ""natural"" way . Moreover, the form of the production rules are flexible enough .
 The ACTIONs consist of modifications in the AIS, behaviors, or other forms of symbolic activities . The actions are intended to make modifications to AIS or behaviors .
 The term ""control structure"" refers to the conditional sequencing of the flow of information provided by the compiler . The term "control structure" is used in computer programming .
 The JFK/CBA program is written in SPITBOL (an interactive version of SNOBOL) to run on an AMDAHL V6 machine . The JFK and CBA program was written in SpitBOL . It is written to run in the same way as
 If a condition is not satisfied, the next production rule in the ordered list of production rules is considered . The next production rules are considered if a condition not satisfied .
 If a condition is satisfied, the actions to the right of the arrow are taken . The actions are taken to the left of an arrow . If the arrow is taken, the action will be taken .
 The AIS is a stack in which a new element appears at the top of the stack pushing all else in the stack down one position . The new element is placed in a stack to push all other elements in a new position .
 The list is structured as a linear list, and the tokens it contains represent Kennedy's current knowledge about the crisis . It is structured like a list, with each of Kennedy's tokens representing his knowledge of the crisis in question .
 JFK/CBA is capable of modeling limitations of human beings in processing ""new"" information . In this way, JFK is able to model limitations in processing "new" information .
 A new token might represent a combination of the information in several old ones . Thus, a new token may represent a new information . A token might also represent the information from several previous tokens .
 JFK/CBA models how Kennedy's past ""experience"" modifies behavior . The interpretation of a semantic kernel is itself a modification of the contents of the AIS . Kennedy's behavior modifies the meaning of the semantic kernel in this case .
 The examples that follow illustrate how critical this feature is to the analysis of counterfactuals .
 Thorson and Miller discuss the logical relations between production systems and mathematical systems theory . Miller: Production systems and systems theory are logical relations . Miller discusses the relationship between production and production systems .
 "interpretation" is a function that has the crossproduct of production rules and AIS tokens as its domain and range . Formally, within JFK/CBA, this function is called interpretation . It is the result of a function with production rules as its domains and range as its
 Kennedy is modeled as a decision maker who requests and evaluates advice about possible courses of action for the U.S. and probable USSR responses . Kennedy is a decision-maker who requests advice from the United States and the USSR .
 JFK/CBA will either await further information or select some course of action . JFK will not comment on the matter of further action .
 The user of the simulation presents information to JFK/ CBA in the form of semantic kernels . The user presents information in the way of the semantic kernels to JFK .
 Attached to each new kernel must be a parameter indicating the ""timeliness"" of the information . The information is attached to each kernel to indicate the 'timeleness' of information .
 When attached to kernels representing actions taken by JFK/ CBA or Khrushchev, they are used to decrement the ""clock"" showing the estimated time remaining before the missiles become operational . The kernels are used in the countdown to the launch of the missiles .
 JFK/CBA uses the time parameter to determine how many half-days it will take to complete the action . JFK and U.S.C.R. use it to determine the time it takes to complete an action . The time parameter is attached to possible United States or U
 JFK/ CBA is started by informing it that there is evidence that the USSR is constructing an ""offensive"" missile base in Cuba . JFK/CBA was told that there was evidence that Russia was building an "offensive" missile base .
 This information goes into the AIS and JFK/CBA responds with a request for options . This information is then sent to JFK's AIS . JFK responds to the request with an AIS request for an additional option .
 JFK/CBA asks for probable Soviet responses to each option provided . JFK asks for possible Soviet responses from each possible Soviet response provided .
 JFK/ CBA then evaluate the plausibility of the suggested possible Soviet responses . JFK/CBA then evaluates the plausibilities of the possible possible responses .
 This plausibility evaluation is a result of both current knowledge and beliefs , and the production rules . This is based on current knowledge, beliefs and production rules, and the rules of production .
 JFK/ CBA will ask advisers what the United States should do in light of each possible Soviet response . JFK/CBA will then ask what the U.S. should do to deal with each possible response .
 The result of all this is a decision tree with U.S. actions forming the initial nodes and possible Soviet responses, and 21 possible responses . The United States actions are likely to be the first nodes in the tree .
 These rules are intended to reflect Kennedy's beliefs about future states of the world given particular U.S. actions . Kennedy: "These rules are meant to reflect his beliefs about the future of America's future .
 63 production rules are the theorized basis of Kennedy's beliefs about relevant causal and international relations . X This function takes the form of 63 production production rules, which constitute the theory . X .
 The substantive content of the production rules is based on both the published literature and an analysis of available documents at the Kennedy Library . We are happy to clarify the content of this article .
 At least some of the ExCom meetings were taped, but these tapes have not been made available for study . While it now appears that at least some . perhaps some of these meetings were . taped, these tapes were not made available .
 Library documents were especially useful in helping to establish a detailed time line for the crisis .
 The crisis period22 was divided into half-day periods . All meetings were charted together with the names of participants .
 The minutes of many ExCom meetings made it possible to get fairly good estimates of the kind and time of information President Kennedy had available to him during the most acute period of the crisis .
 At this point, JFK/CBA is not detailed enough to take into account all of the information that has been collected . At this time, JFK has not been able to make an estimate .
 If an acceptable alternative is identified, JFK/CBA adopts that action and the AIS is updated . The AIS will then be updated and JFK adopts an alternative to the current action .
 JFK waits for new semantic kernels indicating actions by the USSR or new advice . JFK/CBA then waits for a new semantic kernel to come up with new ideas . JFK then waits to get new information from the USSR .
 This process continues until the simulation enters one of four terminal states . The simulation continues until it reaches one of the terminal states of the simulation .
 THE CURRENT SITUATION IS BEYOND THE CAPABILITY OF THE SIMULATION is printed . The current situation is beyond the CAPABILITIES of the SIMulation is printed.
 Any alternative whose completion would extend beyond the missiles' expected operational date is rejected . The missiles are expected to be operational by the end of the year .
 JFK/ CBA will select the first acceptable alternative considered . If two alternatives are both acceptable, JFK/CBA will choose first acceptable option . JFK will then select the second acceptable alternative .
 Space limitations prohibit a complete listing of the program, though copies are available on request from the first author . The program is available to download on request .
 These production rules (plus those not provided) serve as our theory of Kennedy's decision process . Examples of several of the production systems within JFK/ CBA are provide in Appendices .
 The easiest is to provide JFK/ CBA with either different information or the ""same"" kernels in a different order .
 The size of the AIS might be modified or new production rules might be written . For example, the size of an AIS may be modified .
 A simulation capable of distinguishing a greater number of ""macro"" states might be constructed . In this way, a simulation could be able to distinguish between 'macro' states .
 One of the nice, albeit frustrating, aspects of these sorts of simulations is that seemingly everything must be specified . It's nice, but frustrating, to have to be specified, of course .
 The ""BEYOND THE CAPABILITY OF THE SIMULATION"" message appeared frequently in the initial development of the simulation . The message was frequently seen during the simulation's initial development .
 This reflected our having left relevant detail out of the code, indicating the importance of the order in which alternatives were considered . This reflected the fact that the code had not been included in the code . It was a result of the decision to leave out relevant detail of the alternative options .
 JFK/ CBA had to be able to distinguish between the U.S. and the USSR deliberately initiating a war . It also became clear that JFK had to . distinguish between . the United States or the USSR . deliberately initiating war . and war simply ""breaking"" out 23.
 This reflects an attempt to model Kennedy as a satisficing decision maker . Kennedy is the president of the U.S. Senate in New Hampshire .
 Given the importance of the crisis and the relatively small number of alternatives under active consideration, this is a debatable design decision . The decision is debatable, but it is a good design decision to make .
 In any event, there are a number of ways in which the user can explore alternative situations within JFK/CBA . These changes do not involve simply changing a numerical equation or modifying a parameters .
 The accuracy of answers to counterfactual questions is dependent in large part on the quality of the theory used to suggest those answers . Question Surrounding the Model's Validity is that the accuracy of the answers is dependent on the theory .
 We will show that our base-run model accounts rather well for the events of the missile crisis . We will discuss the documentary evidence that was used in constructing the model, and then discuss in some detail a base-case run of the simulation .
 Allison lists options considered by the U.S. in the missile crisis . Allison lists diplomatic pressure, secret approach to Castro, invasion, surgical air strike, and blockade . All options considered include doing nothing, diplomatic pressure .
 We supplemented such option summaries as Allison's and Kennedy's with a search of United States government documents .
 Research on this project relied heavily on recently declassified documents obtained through the John F Kennedy Library .
 Base-case run reported here does not trace the crisis all the way to its conclusion . One important point to note here is that the base-case runs do not trace all the time to the end .
 Depending on which ""branch"" is followed, between 11 and 26 half-days are traced in this base run . The base run includes 11 to 26 half days .
 We failed to find documentation to convince us of the exact identity of the U.S. responses to each of the posited Soviet responses .
 The option considered most favorable through the base run reported here is a blockade of Cuba . The option is considered most likely to be a blockade .
 "A blockade was the favored option at this stage of the crisis," says CNN.com . "Our documentation supports the assertion that a blockade was a favored option"
 The simulation seems to generate accurately both the actual events and the timing of these events with the base-run input .
 This run was started by indicating that the simulated Kennedy views the USSR as a high risk taker . This run is run by a simulated Kennedy who views the Soviet Union as a threat to the United States .
 JFK/ CBA interprets this to mean that evidence of 25.5% is found . JFK and CBA interpret this as evidence that 25.25% of 25% was found . The user next provides a semantic kernel that JFK interprets to mean 25% of the 25%
 JFK/CBA has the capability of tracing the crisis through to its finish . JFK has the ability to trace the crisis from its start to its end, says CBA .
 This article's substantive conclusions summarize patterns drawn from counterfactual runs that continued to the end of the crisis . The conclusions are based on counterfactional runs that continue to be conducted until the crisis ended .
 JFK/CBA prompts users to find out what advisers believe the USSR will do in response to each of the U.S. options .
 JFK/ CBA rejected some S. S options, although some rejected as implausible Soviet responses . Some were rejected by JFK/CBA as being implausible .
 The Soviets might respond to a medium intensity U.S. attack on Cuba by negotiating through private channels with the United States. concerning the possibility of the Soviets attacking Berlin. An example of one such response is advice .
 JFK/CBA judged this not to be a plausible response for the high-risk Soviets, for whom actual attack would be more likely than private negotiations . JFK/ CBA judged that this was not a plausible .
 Kennedy rejected the idea that Kennedy viewed the Soviets as high risk takers . They were rejected because they were inconsistent with the assumption that . Kennedy viewed them as high risks takers.
 JFK/CBA may select new options and reevaluate old ones . As the crisis unfolds, new information becomes available, JFK may choose new options .
 Each suggested U.S. option together with one plausible Soviet response is ranked before JFK/CBA selects a policy . JFK and CBA selects the policy based on each other's suggestions .
 These descriptions are intended to provide an illustration of how JFK/CBA can be used to address counterfactual questions about the missile crisis .
 First run was intended to reproduce the actual early stages of the crisis . Later runs were designed to introduce various counterfactuals and examine their impact on Kennedy's decision making .
 The purpose of this counterfactual run is to evaluate what impact a change in Kennedy's perception of his adversary might have had on the crisis . This is the result of a counterfactional run .
 None of the offered Soviet responses was rejected as being implausible . One resultant difference was that, of all the offered responses, none were rejected as implausible.
 The simulation has the capacity to follow through to the end of the crisis, but that path was not traveled in this particular run . The simulation was not followed through to a path that would have led to an end of crisis .
 It was chosen with the reasoning that one of the Soviet responses to that U.S. option-blockading Berlin-resulted in a state of the world that was tied for most desirable . The decision was made in the wake of the Berlin option .
 Order in which alternatives are considered is a part of the simulation itself . Order will result from the order in which ""advice"" is given and sequencing of the production rules themselves .
 The scenario of the U.S. intercepting Soviet ships is now seen as plausible . One difference is that the scenario of ""the United States intercepting . Soviet ships"" followed by ""the USSR publicly warning the United States that they might launch a nuclear attack against the . United States
 The high-risk simulation rejected this scenario as implausible,28 this low-risk -run accepts i and ranks it tied for the most favorable ranking .
 The second run of the simulation is changed due to the changed view of the Soviet Union's attitude toward risk . Thus in the second run, the rankings of world states are changed .
 simulated Soviet responses to a U.S. blockade of Cuba were posited . We (as simulated advisers) did not suggest the possibility of a Berlin blockade .
 It was suggested that the Soviets might either invade Berlin or move troops to Berlin . However, it was also suggested that it might be possible to move troops into Berlin .
 All other changes in run 3 involved changes in the posited intensity of specific actions . Run 3 also included changes to the intensity of certain actions .
 Two U.S. air strikes of Cuba were moved from medium to low intensity . One attack on Cuba was also moved from low intensity to medium intensity . Cuba was attacked by the United States in 1961 .
 In the first of those cases, the Soviet air strike response was changed from medium to high intensity . In the second of those strikes, the response to the first was changed to medium intensity . The first strike was in response to a threat of Soviet air strikes .
 In all five cases, Kennedy's perceptions of relative rankings are not altered by changes in intensity estimates . Kennedy: "In all five of these cases, these rankings are based on relative rankings"
 The results of the various runs illustrate how JFK / CBA can be used to address counterfactual questions . The results are the results of a run of JFK and CBA .
 The image JFK/CBA has of the Soviet Union's willingness to take risks is of considerable importance in determining which responses will be considered . The image is important in deciding which responses are considered .
 Any study of historical counterfactuals can't be no better than the model it uses, it says . However, any study of history can be better than that of the model they use, he says .
 Since counterfactuals have not occurred (at least in this world), actual outcome is not a very helpful measuring device for evaluating such models . Counterfactual outcomes are not a good measure for evaluating models such as this model .
 This raises some difficult issues to which we offer only very tentative and incomplete responses . This raises many difficult issues, which we can only offer only tentative responses to .
 An analysis of the production rules themselves can be of help in assessing the quality of the model . First, an analysis of production rules can help assess the quality, say experts .
 In the former case, questions concerning whether a particular condition empirically seems to lead to the posited ""resultant"" action can be used in evaluating the rules . In the latter case, the question is whether a certain condition emphasically appears to lead to
 In the case of plausibility, one essentially asks whether it makes sense that a particular condition is posited as leading to a particular action . The question is whether a certain condition is plausible to lead to a certain action .
 In both ways, the explicitness of assumptions helps provide a basis for assessment . In both of these ways, it helps provide an assessment of the situation .
 The reader should keep in mind the difficulty of assessing the quality of any model based on counterfactuals . Nevertheless, the reader should be aware of the difficulties of assessing any model using counterfactorials .
 With these caveats in mind, we will examine how (under the JFK/CBA model) Kennedy's assessment of options and consequent actions would have changed had his ordering of states of the world been different .
 A representation of Kennedy that placed a higher value on immediate tranquillity would presumably reverse the ordering of these two states of the world . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in Washington .
 This new representation of Kennedy would result in a different set of option choices . Kennedy would be the first person to represent Kennedy in a new representation .
 They then enter into negotiations on the subject with the United States, and simultaneously continue to construct the missile base . The North Korean government then enters into negotiations with the U.S. and continues to work on the project .
 The second scenario finds the U.S. challenge to the Soviet actions followed by inaction on the part of the United States . The United States challenge to Soviet actions follows by inaction, the second scenario suggests .
 This in turn triggers a statement by the Soviet Union that it will remove missiles from Cuba . The Soviet Union says it is removing missiles from the country . This triggers a decision to remove the missiles, which will be removed .
 Kennedy prefers a U.S. challenge to a Soviet nonchallenge . Kennedy has a choice of options that he feels will contribute to scenario 1 over those that he sees as likely to promote scenario 2 . The original ordering in which Kennedy prefers to a . challenge leads to a choice .
 Kennedy prefers a U.S. challenge . Kennedy would be likely to enter into negotiations under the circumstances that have been indicated .
 A representation of Kennedy as preferring a Soviet nonchallenge would be more likely to choose a path of U.S. inaction under these circumstances . On the other hand, a representation of . Kennedy as . preferring a . noninvolvement would be a more likely path of United States
 Changes in the state of the world ordering can lead to significant differences in option choices . Thus changes in the order order can be significant .
 A second finding relates to the amount of time Kennedy perceived that he had during the crisis . Kennedy perceived the time he felt he had in the crisis was the most of it .
 If he had judged that the missiles would become operational in seven rather than thirteen days, several changes would have been made .
 Fewer iterations of U.S. and Soviet responses to each other could have been carried out . Few fewer iterations of United States and . Soviet responses could have carried out.
 This means that Kennedy would have had no choice but to construct less elaborate scenarios . This means he would have been forced to construct a less elaborate scenario for himself .
 Options that included periods of inaction and merely verbal behavior would either be impossible or ranked quite low . For example, inaction and verbal behavior is impossible or low .
 The simulation shows that a shorter crisis time might well have lead to relatively severe military option choices . In short, our simulation .
 A simulated Kennedy response to a Soviet offer to negotiate regarding their missiles in Cuba is shown in the simulated response to the Soviets' offer .
 With the exact same U.S. options and projected Soviet responses, Kennedy chooses to negotiate when the time horizon for missile completion is long, but to launch an air strike or a blockade when that time horizon is short . Kennedy chose to negotiate with the Soviets, but not to launch a
 Some of the literature on the Cuban missile crisis has viewed the choice of a blockade option as indicative of a Kennedy propensity to act in a restrained manner . A blockade is the least aggressive of the options that Kennedy would rank highly, according to JFK/CBA .
 This conclusion argues that Kennedy ranked most nonmilitary options quite low . This conclusion is based on the fact that Kennedy's options were quite low. This conclusion concludes that Kennedy had the lowest possible options .
 For all practical purposes, Kennedy will reject ""no action" in the face of any option that involves action . Kennedy will continue to reject 'no action' in the future .
 Rather than considering a blockade in combination with negotiations, he prefers to consider either a blockade or negotiations . Instead of a blockade, he wants to consider a blockade and negotiations .
 passive U.S. responses have very little chance of serious consideration . passive responses to Russia's actions mean that they will not be taken seriously seriously . passive United States responses mean that a passive response is unlikely to be considered seriously .
 It should be remembered that this simulation deals only with the missile crisis . The simulation is only a simulation of the crisis, not a real crisis .
 Our purpose was to investigate counterfactual questions by constructing a mechanism that could be asked to behave in ""worlds" other than the one that actually existed . Our purpose is to construct a mechanism to ask people to behave differently .
 Important questions that were not discussed are those dealing in a more rigorous fashion with standards for evaluating the empirical adequacy of constructivist forms of explanation .
 Clearly, many of the standard approaches to testing are of only marginal use here . Clearly, the standard approach to testing is only a marginal use .
 JFK/CBA needs to be discussed about the policy utility of JFK and CBA . JFK's policy utility in the U.S. should be discussed here .
 It does not necessarily follow that a simulation like JFK/CBA is or can be 29 . Even if the reader is convinced by our earlier arguments that asking counterfactual questions can be useful in policymaking, it doesn't necessarily lead to a simulation that is 29 .
 This conclusion is corroborated by declassified documents discussed earlier . This conclusion was corroborated with the declassified document discussed earlier in this article .
 Let us now, then, address the issue of the utility of JFK/CBA for policymakers for policymakers . Let us talk about the use of JFK and CBA .
 Simulating the Cuban missile crisis is currently of greater interest to academics than to policymakers . We must acknowledge that simulating the crisis is presently of greater importance to academics rather than policymakers .
 The issue might better be generalized to the utility of similar simulations of individuals and situations that are deemed current or relevant by a particular policymaker . The simulations could be used to simulate individuals or situations in a particular case .
 "The basic task of policymakers leads them to ask questions concerning what they can do in a given situation," says the author of the book .
 Such statistically oriented approaches as Bayesian decision analysis have often been advanced as useful tools for policymakers . Such statistical approaches are often used to help policymakers make decisions .
 JFK/CBA may have an advantage over such approaches if policymakers are uncomfortable having to estimate the probabilities of large numbers of events . JFK and CBA may be able to work together in the future .
 Building a comparatively small number of ""if-then scenarios"" would probably seem more natural to policymakers than putting numbers on each option . Building a small set of scenarios would seem more intuitive to policymakers .
 Historical work supports historical work so that it would certainly be useful as one input into a decision process . However, enough careful historical work .
 We hope to have illustrated how computer simulations using artificial intelligence techniques can help to provide leverage in understanding a complex political phenomenon such as crisis decision making .
 It does a farily good job of reproducing a number of important aspects of the crisis, supporting its use as a basis for both substantive and methodological investigation . Nevertheless, for reasons discussed above, it does do a good job .
 C,US/' , 'S7') A '0,'UC <S7>','OLD','S11') :S EPD1O C/POS,DEC,US //','S7") * A ',BVTC<S7 >',' LO','S