 US History/Kennedy and Johnson from Wikibooks, open books for an open world . We're looking forward to your contributions to this book .
 John was born May 29, 1917 in Brookline Massachusetts . Of Irish descent, John is of Irish descent .
 President Kennedy took office January 20, 1961 and served till he was assassinated in November 22, 1963 . Lee Harvey Oswald assassinated President Kennedy in 1963 . President Kennedy served as president of the U.S.
 Kennedy is the only Catholic President we have ever had in the United States. Kennedy is only Catholic president .
 President Kennedy was a Democratic and served in the United States House of Representatives before becoming President . He was a member of the U.S. House and served as a Democrat .
 John Kennedy graduated from Harvard in 1940 and served in the Navy in World War Two . He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1964 .
 In 1943, Kennedy led the survivors through perilous waters to safety . Kennedy's PT boat was rammed and sunk by a Japanese destroyer . Despite grave injuries, Kennedy was able to lead the survivors to safety.
 Kennedy was elected to the Senate in 1952 . He served three terms as a representative for Boston . He was elected into the Senate from Boston in 1952.
 In 1955, while recuperating from a back operation, he wrote Profiles in Courage, which won the Pulitzer Prize in history . Profiles In Courage is the most Pulitzer Prize-winning book ever written .
 Kennedy almost gained the Democratic nomination for Vice President in 1956 . Four years later, he was a first-ballot nominee for President . Kennedy almost became the first person to be nominated for President in 1968 .
 Millions watched his television debates with the Republican candidate, Richard M Nixon . Millions watched him debate with Richard M. Nixon .
 He wrote a thesis in 1940 called Why England Slept which became a best-seller . He also wrote a book about the country's sex life .
 President Kennedy wrote again in 1956 and the piece was called Profiles in Courage which won the Pulitzer Prize . President Kennedy also wrote a piece in 1956 which won a Pulitzer Prize for Courage .
 As a Democrat, John F Kennedy inherited the New Deal Commitment to America’s Social Welfare System . Kennedy inherited a New Deal commitment to the Social Welfare State .
 He generally cast liberal votes in line with the pro-labor sentiments of his low-income, blue collar constituents . He generally voted in favor of the liberal elements of his constituents .
 Kennedy’s rhetoric and style captured the imagination of many Americans . Kennedy was a popular figure in Washington, D.C. and beyond .
 His advisers were mostly young and intellectual as well as his advisers as well . Another attribute that made him more appealing was the fact that his advisers were young and intellectuals as well.
 Kennedy avoided controversial issues such as civil rights and the censure of Joseph McCarthy . Unfortunately though, Kennedy avoided issues such a civil rights issue such as the censorship of McCarthy .
 In the campaign he had criticized Eisenhower’s foreign policy as unimaginative, accusing him of missing chances to reduce the threat of nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy’s advisers had one thing going for them, and that was confidence . Kennedy's advisers were confident in their choice of a candidate for the presidency .
 Kennedy, along with his advisers were firm in the sense that they were going to change things . They developed a multi-million dollar Alliance for Progress in 1961 to spur economic development in Latin America . Kennedy and his advisers developed the multi-billion dollar alliance .
 Critics later dismissed the Alliance and Peace Corps as Cold War tools by which Kennedy sought to counter anti-Americanism and defeat communism in the developing world .
 The programs didn't have those aims, but both were recognized as being born of genuine humanitarianism . The programs were recognized for their humanitarianism, the author says .
 Under the Kennedy Administration, the U.S. created several agencies dedicated to international development .
 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 passed by Congress and spearheaded by President Kennedy created the United States Agency for International Development . It sought to assist developing countries .
 Kennedy meets with Khrushchev in Vienna . Kennedy and Soviet-American Tensions remain high .
 Kennedy had little if any success in establishing relations with the Soviet Union . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1964 .
 Both leaders disagree over the preconditions for peace and stability in the world . The meeting went poorly with both leaders; due to the fact that they were disagreeing over the pre-conditions .
 The administration's first year witnessed little movement on controlling the nuclear arms race of even getting a superpower ban .
 Both superpowers continued testing and accelerated their arms production . Instead of testing and producing arms, both superpowers accelerated production .
 Government advice to citizens was to build fallout shelters in their backyards . This only resulted in intensified public fear of devastating war . Government advice led to increased fear of war .
 If war occurred, many believed it would be over the persistent problem of Berlin . Many believed war would be fought over persistent problem .
 In mid-1961, Khrushchev ratcheted up the tension by demanding an end to Western occupation of West Berlin and the reunification of East and West Germany . The tensions were high in the early 1960s .
 Kennedy stood his ground and remained committed to West Berlin and West Germany . Kennedy was in Berlin and Berlin at the time of his death .
 In August the Soviets, at the urging of the East German Regime, erected a concrete and barbed wire barricade across the divided city to halt the exodus of East Germans into more prosperous and politically free West Berlin .
 On April 17, 1961, President John F Kennedy launched an attack on Cuba, using 1,500 CIA-trained Cuban exiles . President Kennedy launched the attack against Cuba using a group of exiles trained by the CIA .
 The exiles were to invade Cuba through the Bay of Pigs in southwestern Cuba . The Bay was the site of the first invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 The forces made many mistakes, and at the last moment, Kennedy was advised not to send air support, and he did not . He did not, and the forces made mistakes, in the war .
 The invasion was a complete failure and within days, Cuban forces crushed the United States troops . Within days, the U.S. troops were crushed by Cuban forces .
 Kennedy never trusted military or intelligence advice again, and the Soviet Union concluded that Kennedy was a weak leader . Kennedy was never trusted again .
 Fidel Castro was looking for a way to defend his island nation from an attack by the United States . Ever since the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro felt a second attack was inevitable .
 The crisis began on October 15, 1962 when U-2 reconnaissance photographs revealed Soviet missiles under construction in Cuba . The crisis was triggered by U.2 photographs showing Soviet missiles being built in the country .
 Executive committee made up of 12 of his most important advisers was formed to handle the crisis .
 EX-COMM concluded that it had to impose a naval quarantine around Cuba . It would prevent the arrival of more Soviet offensive weapons on the island .
 On the 25th Kennedy pulled the quarantine line back and raised military readiness to DEFCON 2 . It was at this time that the United States had warships that were on the Caribbean Sea and also had B-52's that were ready to with nuclear bombs flying in the sky .
 He proposed removing Soviet missiles and personnel if the U.S. would guarantee not to invade Cuba . He proposed the removing of Soviet missiles from Cuba if the United States would not invade .
 NASA was established by the National Aeronautics and Space Act on July 29, 1958, during the Cold War . NASA is responsible for the nation's civilian space program and for aeronautic and aerospace research . NASA NASA is a branch of the United States government .
 The USSR was ahead of the United States in the space race, in presence and technology . The U.S. space race was dominated by the Soviet Union .
 After the launch of Sputnik and the success of Yuri Gagarin, America was behind in the Space Race . America was ahead of Russia in the space race .
 The United States would not allow this, and decided to implement their own space program . The U.S. would not be allowed to do this .
 Eventually the United States became successful and landed two men on the moon . Eventually the U.S. became successful in landing the moon in 1969 .
 In May 1961, Alan Shepard Jr. became the first American to make a space flight . Alan Shepard was the first man to fly in space .
 Kennedy said in an address to congress on May 25, 1961, that the U.S. should commit itself to landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the Earth . Kennedy said, ""I believe that this nation should . commit itself" to achieving the goal, before
 NASA's first high-profile human spaceflight program was Project Mercury . Project Mercury was an effort to learn if humans could survive the rigors of spaceflight . The Mercury program was the first human mission to space .
 Alan B Shepard, Jr. became the first American to fly into space in 1961 . Shepard rode his Mercury capsule on a 15-minute suborbital mission on May 5, 1961 .
 The six flights in the Mercury program concluded with Gordon Cooper's launch on May 15, 1963 . Gordon Cooper launched the first Mercury spacecraft in May 1963 .
 John H Glenn, Jr. became the first U.S. astronaut to orbit the Earth on February 20, 1962 . Glenn was the first American to orbit Earth in 1962 . He was also the first astronaut from the United States to orbit earth .
 Project Mercury achieved its goal of putting piloted spacecraft into Earth orbit and retrieving astronauts safely . With six flights, Project Mercury completed six missions to orbit Earth .
 August 12, 1961, NASA announced that it intends to expand the Cape Canaveral facilities for manned lunar flight . NASA acquired 80,000 acres of land north and west of the Air Force Missile Test Center facilities at the Cape .
 The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers was designated to act as real estate acquisition agent for NASA . The Lands Division of the Justice Department handled the legal aspects of the deal .
 Kurt H Debus was named director of the Launch Operations Center which later became the John F Kennedy Space Center . Debus is credited with leading the launch operations at the Kennedy Center in Kennedy's orbit .
 He retired in November 1974, having been responsible for the launches conducted during the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab programs . He was responsible for most of the launches during the Apollo and Gemini programs .
 The American space race against the Soviets required a large amount of funding which then later brought jobs, new technology, science and general know how . The U.S. space race was funded by the Soviet Union .
 America was in high pursuit to be the first country to reach the moon and failed, but the possibility of a manned mission made it possible to eclipse all the USSR achievements in space science . America's first manned mission was in 1969, but it was not the first time the USSR had reached
 Billions of dollars were spent on hiring many research workers and engineers to put a man on the moon . Billions were spent to build the Apollo 11 mission .
 NASA program did not necessarily help the lower-class people find work, it permitted a generational leap and generated motivation for high level education that still is at the core of the leadership role it has in space science that includes many aspects from space law to telecommunications .
 Alan Shepard was the second person and the first American to enter space, just prior to launch . He was the first person to be in space and the second to be the first to be launched in space .
 Alan Shepard capsule containing Alan Shepard is recovered . Alan Shepard's capsule was recovered from Freedom 7 capsule .
 On November 22, 1963, President Kennedy was at a campaign rally in Dallas, Texas . President Kennedy died at the age of 50 .
 Kennedy and his wife rode through the streets in an open car, turning into Dealy Plaza at Houston and Elm, and suddenly several shots rang out . Kennedy was driving with his wife in a car when the shots were fired .
 The car sped to the nearest hospital, Parkland Memorial, but it was too late; the beloved President was dead . President Obama was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 Tears ran down the cheeks of CBS anchorman Walter Cronkite as he told the nation their president was dead .
 The word spread quickly, in whispered messages to classroom teachers, by somber announcements in factories and offices . The word quickly spread quickly .
 Shortly after, while on Air Force One, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson took the oath of office as President . Shortly after the inauguration, the Vice President was assassinated .
 The rough consensus is that Kennedy's assailant, Lee Harvey Oswald, shot the President acting alone . Oswald was a drifter and loner with left-wing sympathies . Oswald is believed to have shot President Kennedy in the head .
 Owsald was first spotted three miles from the plaza in which he was called to the squad car of officer Tippit, where he then panicked and shot him four times . He was then seen three miles away from where he was shot four times by police officer .
 Oswald was later arrested forty minutes later in a near by theater, and just two days later Oswald was shot dead in full view of millions of TV viewers . Two days later, Oswald was also shot dead .
 Hippies and counterculture questioned basic American values and social customs . Many of those who made up the New Left also made up counterculture . The New Left was a movement that questioned American values .
 The counterculture was also expressed in pop culture, with many icons expressing the need for peace and reform . Many icons expressed the need to reform and peace .
 Woodstock was a major music festival held in 1969, and became an icon of the counterculture movement . Woodstock became an iconic music festival of the same year .
 Musicians perform during the Summer of Love in 1967 . Hippies in 1967 sharing a joint .
 Like Eisenhower, Kennedy had viewed Vietnam as a crucial battle in the fight against communism . The Vietnam War was one of the most successful wars in the world .
 He sent many special forces troops to South Vietnam to train South Vietnamese troops . Special forces troops were sent to train Vietnamese troops in Vietnam .
 Kennedy also put pressure on South Vietnamese leader Ngo Dinh Diem to make political and economic reforms that would prevent communism from taking root in South Vietnam . Kennedy was pressured to make reforms in order to prevent communism becoming communist in Vietnam .
 After Diem refused to comply and restricted the rights of Buddhists, he lost support, and a political coup ensued . Diem lost support and was overthrown in a military coup .
 President Johnson ordered Operation Rolling Thunder to take place in February 1965 . The operation took place in the month of February 1965, when the U.S. became involved in the war .
 It was ordered due to the Vietcong Attacks on American installations in South Vietnam which was responsible for the deaths of thirty-two Americans .
 Operation Rolling Thunder was a bombing program that started in 1965 and continued until October 1968 . Operation RollingThunder was the first bombing campaign to target targets in the United States .
 At the end of November, the United States had almost 15,000 troops in Vietnam as advisers . The U.S. had almost 16,000 advisers in Vietnam .
 The United States sent the Secretary of Defense on a fact-finding mission to find if involvement was still needed in Vietnam . The U.S. sent the secretary of defense to find out if involvement still needed .
 He concluded that the South Vietnamese could not hold off the Vietcong, or Vietnamese communists, without more U.S. backing . The South Vietnamese were not able to hold off, he said .
 In 1964, President Johnson claimed that North Vietnamese patrol ships attacked American ships in the Gulf of Tonkin . Congress passed the Gulf Of Tonkin Resolution, which gave the President broad control over troops in Vietnam .
 In 1965, President Johnson gradually built up the involvement of America in Vietnam . In 1965 he began building up his involvement in the Vietnam war .
 The Vietnam War became “Americanized” and the troop increase . Operation Rolling Thunder played part in doing so . The troop increase was part of the Vietnam War's "Americanization"
 Instead of the war being a civil war between North and South Vietnam it ended up becoming an American war against the communist government in Vietnam . Instead of being a war between the two sides, the war became a war against communist government .
 It seemed that for every Vietcong or North Vietnamese killed, many more would be replacements . It also seemed that many would be replaced by new members of Congress .
 The bombing campaign in the North actually heightened the morale of the North Vietnamese rather than lowering it, and the United States' losses increased . U.S. losses increased.
 By the end of the decade, many outraged American citizens angrily opposed and protested the war . Many outraged Americans were outraged at the war.
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara no longer believed that the war could be won . Defense Secretary McNamara believed it could be impossible to win the war .
 At home, protesters, especially college students, became increasingly bitter about the war . The war has been a source of tension in the U.S.
 This division between the young and the old became known as the generation gap . This division was known as a generation gap between the old and young .
 This type of protest spread across the nation, and many related ideas and activists became known collectively as the New Left . The New Left became known as the "New Left"
 The twenty sixth amendment was passed in 1971, lowering the legal voting age to 18 . Eventually, the amendment was met with the demands of the students and lowered the voting age .
 Division in the country about the war became increasingly harsh and bitter . The war in Afghanistan was a major source of tension in the region .
 In October 1967, 50,000 people opposed to the war marched to the Pentagon in Washington D.C. to protest . The protests were held in October 1967 against the Vietnam War .
 Many students stuck flowers or other symbols of peace in the barrels of the guns held by those who guarded the pentagon . Students stuck flowers in the barrel of the weapons .
 By the beginning of 1969, well over fifty percent of the nation opposed the war . By the end of the 1970s, more than 50 percent of Americans opposed the Vietnam War .
 Riverboat shooting napalm shoots napalm in Vietnam . American troops wading through mud in 1967 .
 Operation Rolling Thunder, 1966, is the first time the U.S. has been involved in the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict to take part in Operation RollingThunder .
 Use of Agent Orange would cause birth defects and other issues long after the end of the war . Agent Orange causes birth defects long after end of war .
 The Mỹ Lai Massacre was a shocking event that saw American troops kill hundreds of civilians . Hundreds of civilians were killed by American troops in Vietnam .
 Johnson, a Democrat, served as a United States Representative from Texas, from 1937–1949 . He served as United States Senator from 1949–1961, including six years as Senate Majority Leader, two as Senate Minority Leader and two as Majority Whip .
 Johnson was asked by John F Kennedy to be his running mate for the 1960 presidential election . After campaigning unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination in 1960, Johnson campaigned for the White House .
 He signed many programs into law that helped Americans in poverty, that is, those who do not make enough money to survive . The programs include programs to help those who don't have enough money for survival .
 Medicare and Medicaid were among the most important programs signed into law in the early 1960s . Medicare was the first program to be signed into place in the United States .
 Medicare provided cheap health insurance to senior citizens and Medicaid provided health insurance for the poor . The War on Poverty made much difference to the poor people living in America . Medicare provided low-cost health care to seniors and poor .
 It helped change and improve the way poor people were living in homes as well as changing and improving the health care that was being offered to them .
 Cities and school also received boosts with the creation of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 . Cities and schools received boosts .
 President Johnson's ‘Great Society’ really helped change things in America during the 1960's . Johnson's 'Great Society' helped change the world during the '60's .
 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his 1963 speech in Washington DC . Protests were growing in the 1960s .
 Blacks and whites in high schools and colleges in the South and the North staged sit-ins . Sit-ins are protests that are accomplished by sitting down and not being productive .
 In 1961, groups of African Americans began riding buses from Washington D.C. to New Orleans that were bound for New Orleans . They wanted to make sure that the Rosa Parks Supreme Court decision was being enforced .
 Freedom riders would be greeted with violence from angry whites in Alabama . The rides went smoothly until the buses reached Alabama, where they would be met with violence .
 In the spring of 1963, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and Martin Luther King Jr. targeted Birmingham, Alabama, for segregation protests . The SCLC and MLK targeted Birmingham in the spring and spring of that year .
 Birmingham, a city in the deep South, was a hotbed for racism and segregation . Birmingham was a city of segregation in the South .
 City police arrested hundreds of protesters, as well as King himself, but protests continued . City police arrest hundreds of demonstrators, including King himself . King himself was arrested at the end of the day .
 National television showed snarling dogs being set on unarmed protesters and children being washed away . Children were washed away on the impact of the water from fire hoses . National television .
 President Kennedy announced a civil rights bill that would outlaw segregation nationwide . President Kennedy made the announcement in 1963 .
 On August 28, 1963, nationwide support for the civil rights bill boiled over . The bill was signed by the Supreme Court in Washington, DC .
 Over 200,000 people of all races and colors came to Washington D.C. to participate in a massive march organized by the SCLC and Mr King .
 After Kennedy's death, Johnson promised that the bill would be signed into law . Johnson promised to sign it after Kennedy died .
 In the first July of Johnson's term, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The act was passed by Congress in 1964 .
 The law made discrimination illegal against African Americans in employment, public accommodations, and voting . The law also outlawed discrimination in public accommodations and public voting .
 The act not only protected African Americans, but also prohibited discrimination by sex, religion, and ethnicity . The act was passed in 1877 .
 The Voting Rights Act eliminated poll tax which is the 24th Amendment to the constitution, and literacy tests . The act helped not just blacks, but all Americans gain equal rights . It also helped all Americans get equal rights.
 Malcolm, who had to deal with watching his house burn to the ground as a child, later spoke out against the inequality against the blacks of this nation . Malcolm's house was burned down as a young boy, and he later became an activist .
 He soon appealed to both black and white, as he continued to speak out against racial inequality . He continued to appeal to both sides of the debate .
 He continued to speak out until he was shot and killed, but no one knew who killed him . It may have possibly been the work of other black Muslims, it is possible .
 Martin Luther King Jr. was a very influential person during the sixties, maybe the most influential . King was a leader in the civil rights movement during the 1960s .
 He had preached on non-violent protest and had developed many followers, both black and white . He had also developed followers of people in both races .
 He was put in jail several times, but managed to continue his preaching by writing a book . He was jailed several times but continued his preaching .
 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was president of the Southern Christian Leadership Council . Dr. King was a member of the council .
 He and his followers organized numerous marches, rallies, and strikes to call attention to the systematic discrimination against minorities that was endemic in American society . He and followers organized rallies, rallies and strikes .
 His belief was in nonviolent confrontation with the authorities and a prodding of the conscience of the white majority to effect social change, he said .
 He convinced President John F Kennedy and later President Lyndon B Johnson to push for legislation to end discrimination . He was awarded the Nobel Peace prize in 1964 for his work .
 The deaths of Kennedy and Malcolm X were a huge deal, but there was another huge tragedy in the sixties . Malcolm X's death was also a huge tragedy, with the death of Kennedy's widow .
 He was shot on the balcony of his motel room that he was staying at in Memphis, Tennessee .
 The Nation of Islam was founded in Detroit, Michigan, by Wallace D Fard Muhammad in July 1930 . The Nation was founded by Muhammad in 1930 . Muhammad was the leader of the Nation of the Muslim movement .
 He set out to improve the spiritual, mental, social, and economic condition of the Black men and women of America . He set . out to . improve the . spiritual, . mental, . social, social and economic conditions of the . people of America.
 Elijah Muhammad led the Nation of Islam from 1934-1975 . Elijah Muhammad established businesses, large real estate holdings, armed forces and schools . The NOI was led by Elijah Muhammad .
 Before his assassination in 1965, he had moved to non-separatism and orthodox Sunni Islam after his experience of Hajj to Mecca .
 The Nation of Islam, referred to as Black Muslims, took factors of orthodox Islam to form a new sect . The Nation was formed by members of the National of Islam .
 Originally the Nation preached segregation and hate towards white people . Originally the nation preached segregation . The Nation was originally the Nation of America .
 Malcolm X often suggested complete separation of blacks and whites . Malcolm X thought blacks should have their own land to live on separate from all whites .
 The Nation offered a much more radical and less subservient message to oppressed blacks than Martin Luther King, Jr. did . The Nation's message was more radical than King's did, but King was not .
 Just as the Nation of Islam had risen with the help of Malcolm X, so did they fall . Just as Malcolm X had risen, as did the nation of Islam . Malcolm X was the leader of the movement in the 1960s .
 In 1963, Malcolm X found out about the morality problems of his prophet and idol, Elijah Muhammad, they began to separate . Malcolm X and Elijah Muhammad were separated from each other in 1963 .
 Malcolm X took notice of Elijah’s sexual relations with as many as six females of the Nation, an act which the Koran forbids . The Koran forbids the act of sexual intercourse with women .
 Malcolm X made a highly criticized statement about John Kennedy’s death, Elijah took his opportunity to silence X . After this Malcolm X converted to orthodox Islam and parted ties with the Nation of Islam, crippling the amount of influence .
 The Lorraine Motel, site of the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. A Second Tragedy, is located in the heart of the civil rights movement . The Motel was the site of King's assassination .
 On the morning of April 4, 1968, King was preparing to lead a march from the balcony of a hotel when shots rang out . King was in the middle of a march when he was killed .
 This was the largest domestic civil disturbance that has happened in the U.S. The largest domestic disturbance ever occurred in the United States. This was a domestic disturbance .
 Shortly after, rioting plagued America's streets as a profound sadness and anger gripped the nation . Shortly thereafter, riots plagued the streets as the nation was gripped by sadness .
 This would be one of many assassinations that would befall the country, including those of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King . Dr. George W. Bush was assassinated by President Obama in 1993 .
 Malcolm X was assassinated on February 21st, 1965 in Manhattans Audubon Ballroom . He was assassinated in 1965 . Malcolm X died in 1968 .
 A man ran up to Malcolm Malcolm and shot him with a sawed-off shotgun . Malcolm was shot in the head with a shotgun .
 Two other men charged Malcolm with pistols and shot him with pistols about sixteen times . Malcolm was shot by two other men in the head with pistols .
 The 1960s provided a peak in American culture with movies, music, art and literature . The 1960’s were a peak of American culture .
 Truman Capote was a critically acclaimed author and good friend to all the stars and socialites of the time . Capote is best known for his work and friendship with celebrities and socialite .
 Capote kept enough friends to fill an entire phone book, and almost all of them were rich, famous, and intriguing . Capote's friends filled the book's phone book .
 In 1966, Capote threw a masquerade party in honor of his book, In Cold Blood . Capote was inspired by the murder of a Kansas man .
 Capote planned the party for over a year and developed one of the most select and exclusive guest lists . The party was held in honor of the late author, who died in 1953 .
 Guests were not allowed to bring uninvited escorts, so only the ‘who’s who” of people were allowed to attend . Guests were also banned from bringing escorts to the event .
 The publicity that the ball received before the event was somehow exceeded by the publicity it received after . The event was held in New York City, New York .
 It was immediately declared the party of the century, and all the stars raved about it . The party was declared 'The Party of the Century' at the time .
 In the years that followed the ball Capote’s popularity disintegrated . Posthumously he is remembered as much for the Black and White Ball itself as he is his writing career .
 The Gay Rights Movement largely got its start in the early 1970s . Perhaps aided by the Civil Rights Movement, or was motivated by it, the movement was largely formed in the 1970s.
 The first sign of gay people fighting for their rights as human beings started with the Stonewall Riots of 1969 . Gay people fought for their human rights in New York City .
 Gay activist: Incident just involved a lot of people who all got angry at the same time . According to a veteran gay activist, the incident just involved lots of people getting angry at one another .
 The cops went into the bars and asked everyone for their identification . The cops asked everyone in the bars to show their ID .
 Not sure how it started, the stonewall riot worked like a domino effect . Stonewall riots were like a 'domino effect' and 'domination'
 The case ignited many others to fight for their rights against the police . However, however, it started, it ignited many other people's fight against police .
 The gays would go around and chant ‘gay power” throughout the streets . Like many racial humans, the gays would chant "gay power" Throughout the streets, they would chant “gay power.”
 Throwing rocks and bottles at the police officers, the crowd chanted for gay rights . The crowd threw rocks at police officers and threw bottles at them . Police officers were attacked with rocks, bottles, but were not injured .
 After news of the riot spread, riots began happening across the nation for three days . The riots began across the U.S. for the first time since the riots .
 The Stonewall Riots are known as one of the most significant moments at the start of the Gay Rights Movement . The riots took place in the early 1950s in New York City .
 The Freedom House Ambulance Service was established in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania as one of the first modern Ambulances services in the Nation . It was staffed mostly by African American workers, mostly black .
 The 1970's and 1980s would see the modernization of Ambulance services nationwide . The 1970s and 1980's saw the modernization of the ambulance system .
 Trends shifted away from the conservative fifties and resulted in revolutionary ways of thinking and real changes in the cultural foundation of American life . Trends shifted from the 1950s to the '60s and '80s .
 Young people wanted change and the changes affected education, values, lifestyles, laws, and entertainment . Young people want change and it affected education and values, lifestyle .
 All of the changes mentioned above were a major factor in the figures below . Click here to see how the figures were made .
 An estimated 850,000 freshmen enter college; emergency living quarters are set up in dorm lounges, hotels and trailer camps . Males 66. years, Females 73. years . Auto deaths 21. per 100,000 .
 The Super Bowls, Star Trek, Rowan and Martin’s Laugh-In, Sesame Street and The Smothers Brothers, and The Dick Van Dyke Show are among the favorites .
 In the 1960s in the post war era automobiles production was increased a great deal . In the post-war era, production of automobiles was increased greatly .
 The presidential election of 1960 featured a race of John F Kennedy vs. John F. Kennedy . The election was the first of its kind since 1964 .
 Both candidates had similar political stances in believing they wanted a strong military front . Both supported funding numerous welfare programs for the poor . Both candidates believed they wanted strong military fronts .
 He opposed civil rights, legislation, wanted to make Social Security voluntary, and proposed deep cuts in social programs . He opposed Civil Rights reform, legislation and wanted Social Security to be voluntary .
 Goldwater made a comment that suggested he was willing to use nuclear weapons to win Vietnam . Johnson made a very successful campaign ad in response to that comment .
 The Ad, known as ""Daisy," featured President Johnson pleading for a more peaceful approach . The Ad was known as "Daisy" and "President Johnson"
 "To make a world in which all of God's children can live, or to go into the dark," says Pope Francis . He says he wants to make the world a place where God can live .
 This problem was the lack of education that middle-class wives and mothers received. This was a problem for the middle class, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 These women looked at their homes and their lives and wondered if that was all life had to offer . These women's homes and lives were the subject of a series of poignant questions .
 Women across the country became more and more dissatisfied with their stay-at-home life . Women in the U.S. are increasingly dissatisfied with the lifestyle they live in .
 Friedan blamed the women for being unable to adjust to their role in the home rather than blaming society for creating that role for women . Friedan's approach was different than the typical argument for a women's movement, however, because she blamed society .
 Since the EEOC was more focused on racial rights and discrimination, they did not pay much attention to gender discrimination . The EEOC did not focus much attention on gender discrimination in the 1970s .
 NOW made it one of their main purposes to pressure the EEOC into hearing them out and enforcing their rights that were given to them in the 1964 Civil Rights Act . Now is one of the main purposes of their efforts .
 The EEOC basically considered NOW and the idea of women's rights to be a joke . Even went as far as laughing when asked about it by a reporter .
 This made women in the work force that had to deal with discrimination, very angry. This made them very angry, they said . Women in the workplace had to cope with discrimination .
 Women at this time craved social change and justice and became more radical . Women were more radical and more radical in the 1930s and 1940s .
 More and more women were noticing and getting fed up with being treated as second-class citizens . Women were getting tired of being seen as a 'second-class citizen'
 These women began to look beyond the roles that they were being forced into and looked at the roles they willingly put themselves into . These women were inspired by their willingness to put themselves in the roles of others .
 In 1968, a large group of women went to protest the Miss America Pageant that was being held in Atlantic City . The protest was a protest against the pageant .
 These women were against “degrading mindless-boob girlie symbol” that the beauty pageant represents and promotes . The women said they were against the ‘mindless-boo girlie’ symbol’ that the pageant represents .
 The women who firmly believed in feminism and fought for women’s rights never really had a firm set of beliefs . Many times used arguments on the opposite side of the board .
 On one side they argued that women were more sensitive than men and that this sensitivity would greatly improve every aspect of America including foreign diplomacy, government, businesses, and alike .
 Women argued that women and men were equal and therefore deserved equal treatment . However, on the other side, women argued that socially imposed roles were unfair . Women argue that social roles are unfair .
 Many radical feminists jumped onboard with this idea very quickly . They called this ‘personal politics’ and many radical feminists jump onboard with it .
 Women began “consciousness-raising’ groups in order to discuss the fact that in their everyday lives, at work, and in the home, they were subordinated by men and how they lived in a highly patriarchal society .
 Women all across the country began these groups everywhere, in college dorms, churches, and suburban kitchens to discuss topics of male dominance in work, healthcare, romance, marriage, sexuality, abortion, and family .
 A History of the United States; The Tumultuous Sixties; 1960-1968,” 1960- 1968, ed. “The Tumults Sixties’s . 1960-68,’ ed. A History . of the U.S. A
 This page was last edited on 29 April 2022, at 0117 . Use this page to help users with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page .