 During the Cuban crisis he opposed the idea of a surprise air strike . He favored instead the blockade option, which would give time to the Soviets to reflect and consider backing down .
 Ball advised against U.S. involvement in Vietnam War . Ball later advised against United States involvement in the Vietnam War. Ball died in 1966 .
 Bundy was the youngest ever dean of Harvard’s Faculty of Arts and Sciences . Bundy served as National Security Adviser from 1961 to 1966 . Bundy was Harvard's youngest-ever dean at the age of 34 in 1953 .
 Bundy made the case for doing nothing about the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Bundy also argued that the U.S. should not have done anything about Cuba's missiles .
 The next day he changed his mind and favored decisive action – a surprise air strike . The blockade would not be enough to remove the missiles from Cuba, he said .
 Dillon proposed to begin with a blockade, refuse negotiations, demand removal of missiles, and threaten further military action . Initially he favored a military strike but later, along with Thompson, proposed a blockade of Syria .
 Dillon argued that the President had to show his firm intentions to the Russians and not look as if he were backing down . Dillon said the President must show his intentions to Russia and not back down .
 He first suggested the idea of using the blockade as a way to present the Soviets with an ultimatum to remove the missiles or face military action . The blockade was a way of presenting the Soviet Union with a threat of military action, he said .
 Gilpatric served as Deputy Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1964 . A graduate of Yale, with a background in law, he served as a deputy secretary of defense . He served in the U.S. Army from 1961 until 1964 .
 During the missile crisis, Gilpatric opposed the military strike option and supported the blockade . During the . missile crisis he opposed military strike options and supported a blockade .
 Alexis Johnson was Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs from 1961 to 1964 . Alexis Johnson had served in various diplomatic roles in Asia before becoming Deputy Under Under Secretary .
 He thought the blockade could be a valuable first step, combined with other political and military actions, and helped prepare plans to implement it .
 On October 16 he sided with those in favor of a strike . He advised the president unsuccessfully against conferring with congressmen and U.S. allies on ways to resolve the crisis . Johnson believed they would provide little help .
 At the height of the crisis, Robert Kennedy met with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and made explicit the threat of an imminent U.S. attack . The President’s secret promise to withdraw United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey in four to five months .
 From 1962 to 1964 Edwin Martin served as Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs . Martin guided the Kennedy administration’s policies toward Latin America . Martin: "It's a good thing to say that Latin America is coming to America"
 During the missile crisis, he favored the blockade option . He helped brief members of the Organization of American States to obtain their backing for it .
 After the Bay of Pigs, John McCone replaced Allen Dulles as CIA Director . McCone took over from Dulles after the CIA Director at the time .
 McCone foresaw the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba . He ordered the U-2 flights on October 14 that discovered the missiles .
 He argued that before an air strike, Castro and Khrushchev should be given warning and 24 hours to begin dismantling and removing the missiles . Therefore, he argued that .
 Robert McNamara served as Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1968 . McNamara also served as president of the World Bank . He is a former president of Ford Motor Co.
 He first raised for consideration of the option of a blockade on October 16 . He raised the issue for consideration last month .
 A persuasive advocate for the blockade, McNamara believed it was important to keep all options on the table and leave the door open to negotiations . McNamara was a persuasive advocate of the blockade .
 He feared that any sudden military move could provoke a response from the Soviets that could trigger a nuclear war . The Soviet Union feared that a sudden military action could provoke its own response .
 Paul Nitze famously drafted National Security Council memo NSC-68 in 1950, which helped shape U.S. policy during the Cold War . Nitze called for a rapid build-up of the political, economic, and military strength in the free world .
 In 1961 he became McGeorge Bundy’s deputy, and later in the year he was appointed Chairman of the Policy Planning Council at the State Department . He was appointed chairman of the policy planning council in 1961 .
 Rostow recommended putting on more pressure by instituting a POL blockade, but the idea was rejected as others doubted its effectiveness . Rostow: "During the missile crisis, Rostow recommends putting pressure on Russia, but others doubted it effectiveness"
 Rostow succeeded Bundy as national security adviser in 1966 . Rostow became a strong supporter of U.S. involvement in Vietnam in Vietnam .
 The idea was ruled out as it would give advance warning about the U.S.’ intentions, and there was only a slight chance that Castro would accept it . Castro was also ruled out because he would not accept the idea, as it was unlikely he would .
 Rusk rejected the sudden air strike option, because of the risk of escalating actions leading to general war, as well as on moral grounds . Rusk also rejected the option of a sudden strike on the Syrian border .
 He advised the President to consult with U.S. allies and institute a blockade, with the objective of freezing the situation and sending UN monitoring teams to Cuba, rather than issuing an ultimatum .
 The President’s chief speechwriter and close confidant, Sorensen, advocated a naval blockade as the best first response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Along with McNamara, he believed the blockade could only freeze the status quo and open the door to negotiations . McNamara: "The blockade can only be frozen and open to negotiations"
 The blockade would not force the Soviets to remove the missiles already in place in Cuba . While it would put a halt to further shipments of missiles, the blockade wouldn't force them to remove them .
 Army Chief of Staff under President Eisenhower and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Kennedy Administration, General Maxwell Taylor . Taylor joined with other hardliners in advocating a surprise military air strike .
 He had doubts about getting “our feet in that deep mud of Cuba” and believed a costly invasion should be a last resort . However, he had doubts over getting ‘our feet . in the deep mud’ of Cuba .
 He supported the blockade and urged the President to accompany it with a demand that Khrushchev dismantle the weapons in Cuba .
 Thompson believed that in the end the blockade-ultimatum approach would probably still lead to a strike . Thompson believed in the future that the blockade would probably lead to an end of the strike .
 Thompson influenced the President's decision to respond to Khrushchev’s first, private, more conciliatory letter of October 26, ignoring the second, public, more aggressive statement, which raised the issue of a Turkey-Cuba trade . Thompson also influenced President Nixon's decision
 Thompson argued strongly against accepting such a bargain, which he believed would involve trading not just missiles for missiles, but everything from planes to technicians . Thompson argued that the deal would lead to the effective abandonment of the United States base in Turkey .
 He suggested that the first letter Khrushchev had written himself and sent out without clearance . The second, public statement was likely dictated by Politburo hardliners, he said .