 I've tried to ensure it's accurate but I recommend checking any quotes you'd like to use against the scanned version of the original document above .
 Staff study of Office of the Deputy Director was prepared by the Office of Research and Reports .
 The conclusions drawn in the study regarding the implications of the Cuban missile base venture cannot be proved absolutely . The conclusions of the study cannot be proven absolutely .
 USSR judged the major features of the Cuban venture were the result of deliberate, rational Soviet decisions that took into account the detailed knowledge of United States reconnaissance capabilities acquired by the USSR in 1960 .
 The time period covered begins in early 1960 and ends in November 1962 with the withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba . The period covers the period between 1960 and 1962 .
 The reader is directed to a complementary paper prepared by the DD/I Research Staff entitled The Soviet Missile Base Venture in Cuba . Valuable assistance was provided in the preparation of the study by the Office of Scientific Intelligence .
 Arrival of Soviet ships in Cuba with Holds Capable of Carrying Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles, July-October 1962 . Arrivals of Soviet Ships in Cuba in 1962 include Soviet ships carrying medium-range missiles .
 Estimated Time Phasing of Construction at IRBM Sites, August-December 1962 3.3.4.5.5 . Estimated Time Phase of Construction was August-November 1962 . Estimated time Phasing Phasing was August 1962 .
 The concept and execution of the venture clearly indicate that the Soviet authorities made no appreciable effort to prevent or delay U.S. detection by aerial reconnaissance of the offensive weapons .
 It is believed that the most likely explanation is that they judged the risk of a U.S. military reaction to the situation to be very slight .
 The chain of events that culminated in the Cuban crisis of October 1962 can be traced back to visit of Soviet First Deputy Premier Mikoyan to Cuba in February 1960 .
 Visit constituted the first public endorsement of the Cuban revolution, after a year of Soviet reserve following Castro's seizure of power and diplomatic recognition of the regime .
 The first Soviet deliveries of land armaments were made in the third quarter of 1960 . It was followed by a series of economic assistance agreements with the West .
 Deliveries of fighter aircraft to Cuba were not made until about June 1961 . Deliveries were probably planned before the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Following the Bay of Pigs episode, there was a period of assimilation and assessment . After that, arms shipments, including the first naval vessels, were resumed .
 There is now available some evidence of a limited influx of Soviet personnel and increased activity in Cuba in the first half of 1962 . But the actual deployment of Soviet military forces to the Caribbean did not begin until the end of July .
 The Soviet program for the establishment of a military base in Cuba was characterized by a high degree of concurrency in deploying and bringing to operational status both the major offensive and the major defensive systems . As it unfolded over the next 3 months, the Soviet program .
 The Soviet concept of the venture obviously did not envision the initial establishment of an island defense in order to test U.S. reaction and screen the subsequent introduction of strategic missile forces . The idea of the island defense was to test the United States reaction .
 SA-2 surface-to-air missile units were emplaced in western Cuba during August and in eastern Cuba during September . An integrated, centrally directed air defense system was not brought into operation until 27 October, the day before the Soviet decision to withdraw offensive missiles was announced .
 The system's activation at that time probably was earlier than planned . The system expanded steadily for some time thereafter .
 Command and control communications links between the USSR and Cuba had been activated only a few days earlier, also prematurely and in apparent response to United States actions following detection of strategic missile sites .
 Construction and preparation of the missile sites had been underway since early September . The missiles and unique system equipment were delivered to MRBM sites from about mid-September through mid-October .
 SAM units and other air defense elements were not planned to become operational as a system for at least a month anti-a-half after the presence of MRBM1s in Cuba rendered Soviet intentions subject to detection .
 The principal uncertainty concerns the presence or absence of nuclear warheads . The evidence on this aspect of the buildup is so ambiguous and inconclusive that it is not possible to reach a judgment based on facts .
 This work was not completed at any of the sites by the time dismantling began but probably would have been completed by about mid-November .
 If nuclear warheads were available, these shortcomings probably would not have prevented the launching of some missiles from all six sites during the critical week in October . However, they might have affected significantly the time required to launch a salvo .
 On balance it remains uncertain whether the Soviet leaders could have considered the Cuban MRBM units sufficiently combat-ready to participate in a coordinated nuclear attack on the United States at any time .
 With respect to the IRBM sites, there is conclusive evidence that construction had not been completed by the end of October, nor had the missiles and most system equipment arrived at the sites .
 The missiles were almost certainly en route to Cuba when the U.S. quarantine was imposed . The missiles almost certainly arrived in Cuba at the time of the quarantine .
 All three IRBM sites that were under way in October would not have been completed until about mid-December . If a fourth IRBM site was planned, as seems possible, it could not be operational before some time in January 1963 .
 At the rate at which they were being assembled after their delivery, they would not have been fully operational until at least March 1963, thus being distinctly out of phase with the timing of the offensive missile systems . Moreover, at the rate of the . rate at . which they . were being
 Soviet authorities were fully aware of U.S. photoreconnaissance capabilities by May 1960 and may have been aware of overflights of Cuba by mid-1962 . They made no effort in planning and executing the Cuban venture to reduce the risks of detection by United States .
 President Kennedy's statements of 4 and 13 September implied that the U.S. possessed photographic evidence of the buildup to that time . The deployment of strategic missiles proceeded unscreened by an activated SAM system . President Kennedy explicitly warned the USSR of the grave consequences if the United States detected offensive
 Khrushchev may have been seeking some military means of rapidly improving the USSR's bargaining position in the German negotiations . It is not possible to trace the evolution of the Cuban plan .
 There is some evidence that planning and initial preparations occurred in the USSR and Cuba during the first quarter of 1962 . There is also some evidence of Soviet-Cuban cooperation .
 Moscow had assessed and acquiesced in Castro's assertion of authority over the Cuban Communist movement in late March and early April . It is unlikely, however, that the final commitment was made until April or May .
 One element in the Soviet miscalculation of the risks may have been the Soviet view of the role and significance of foreign military bases . The Soviet view on the role of foreign bases may have led to a miscalculculation of risks .
 The Soviet leaders probably have come to regard the ICBM as a disquieting but not major phenomenon of great power relations .
 Castro's Cuba presented Khrushchev with his first opportunity to establish an overseas military base . Castro's Cuban government gave him the chance to establish a military base in Cuba . Castro was the Cuban president of Cuba in 1959 .
 He may have felt confident that the U.S. would understand the rules as he did - that military bases on the opponent's periphery are facts of great power life which fall far short of a provocation to war .
 Soviet leaders miscalculated the risks in Cuba, but their judgment of the risks must have been based on a broader assessment of Soviet-US relations . Although such a view may have been a factor in the miscalculation of the Soviet leaders .
 Khrushchev probably had a greater objective in sight than simply establishment of a military base in the Western Hemisphere . The Soviet Union had a bigger objective than simply establishing a base, it says .
 In deciding to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba, Soviet leaders probably were seeking to reduce the strategic imbalance against the USSR . Success of the venture would improve sharply the Soviet bargaining position in world affairs and also be advantageous .
 The Cuban missile bases would have increased Soviet missile strike capabilities against the United States by more than 50 percent at the end of 1962 . The Soviet leaders must have realized that their relative power gain would have been transitory in view of United States ICBM and Polaris programs .
 Khrushchev faced with a direct military confrontation at a point where the U.S. was able to concentrate overwhelming conventional military force, backed up by a clear strategic nuclear superiority . As it turned out, the United States was able .
 It was particularly valuable in establishing the validity of information from other sources . It was used to establish the credibility of other sources.
 Although information obtained from agents, refugees, and diplomats appeared initially to constitute a major source of evidence , it was frequently proved to be unreliable .
 Even in retrospect the military assistance provided by the USSR and other members of the Bloc from mid-1960 to early 1962 does not contain indications of any objective beyond improving the ability of the Castro regime to defend itself from an invasion or internal uprising .
 Soviet military assistance to Castro, when compared with that provided to other revolutionary governments, indicates that the Soviet leaders initially were reluctant to extend similar aid to Cuba .
 The first Soviet-Cuban military assistance agreement was reached some time between Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February 1960 and Raul Castro's return visit to the USSR in the summer of 1960 .
 Soviet agreement on aid to Iraq was concluded 4 months after the revolution that put Qasim in power . By contrast, the Soviet agreement was concluded four months after it was concluded .
 MIG aircraft and frequently naval vessels had been among the first items delivered to other recipients . Castro did not receive aircraft until the second quarter of 1961 .
 Cuba's efforts to purchase military goods in the West became increasingly difficult in 1959 and early 1960 . Cubans began to make military contacts with Bloc countries, mainly Czechoslovakia, in 1960 .
 Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February 1960 appears to have been an important milestone in the relationship between the Soviet Union and Cuba . The visit was the moment when the USSR abandoned its reserved attitude toward the Cuban revolution .
 When Raul Castro visited the USSR in the summer of 1960, the first shipments of Soviet arms probably were being readied .
 First major shipment of Bloc arms to Cuba arrived on 8 September 1960 aboard the Soviet freighter Ilya Mechnikov . Photographs of Cuban militia carrying Czechoslovak rifles suggest that small arms may have arrived in July or August 1960 .
 The cargo reportedly included T-34 tanks, ant-aircraft artillery, machineguns, ammunition, electronic equipment, and other military material . The cargo also reportedly included ant-firearms, ammunition and electronic equipment .
 Some Mi1 and/or Mi-4 helicopters were delivered later in September 1960 . More than 8,000 metric tons of equipment was delivered by three Soviet ships in October 1960 .
 By mid-April 1961, at least 14 Soviet ships had delivered to Cuba equipment and supplies, almost exclusively land armaments, estimated at 40,000 metric tons .
 Cuban pilots apparently were training in Czechoslovakia in the third quarter of 1960 . It is possible that delivery of these aircraft was expedited in response to urgent Cuban appeals engendered by invasion .
 Two shiploads arrived at the end of 1961, and an average of two per month was noted from January through June 1962 . Two more iploads per month were noted in 1962 .
 During the period of arms delivery, Cuban personnel were being trained in the Bloc and by a military training mission sent to Cuba . The arms deal was part of an arms deal between Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 Sources reported that Cubans were sent for military training in the Bloc as early as the summer of 1960 .
 A hundred or more Bloc military technicians probably arrived in Cuba during the second half of 1960 as the first arms shipments were being received . There are continuing reports of Bloc personnel and technicians arriving during 1961 .
 Soviet Bloc military aid had turned the Cuban military establishment into one of the strongest in Latin America . Cuban military is one of Latin America's strongest in the region .
 The Cuban air force was still a very limited organization, but even its small number of older Soviet jet fighters represented a vast improvement over previous capabilities . Cuba's air force still had very limited capabilities .
 As in the case of Bloc aid to other countries, the bulk of the credits were intended for basic industrial facilities and overhead investments .
 The Bloc account for about 80 percent of Cuban foreign trade . By the time the Soviet military buildup began in mid-1962, the Bloc had come to account for 80 percent trade .
 Bloc countries generally paid a premium price for Cuban sugar, and Cuba was permitted to TLUI substantial trade deficits . Cuba was allowed to run a substantial trade deficit .
 Prices set on Cuban exports to the Bloc indicate a alight advantage for Cuba compared with world market prices for comparable items . Cuban imports of fuel, food, and raw and semi-finished materials indicate an advantage for the country .
 The Chinese Communists provided an unknown number of machineguns, including 12.7-mm antiaircraft machineguns as a gift .
 Soviet-supplied equipment probably did not involve payment in hard currencies . The equipment was supplied by the Soviets in the 1960s .
 Based on known Soviet practice, it is surmised that the initial agreements may have allowed a substantial discount on the equipment with a repayment time of 10 years or more .
 The arms agreement, or agreements, with Czechoslovakia required payment partially in pounds sterling . At least $30 million has been paid by Cuba to the Czechoslovak State Bank .
 Most of Cuba’s outstanding obligations for Bloc military aid may have been canceled subsequently . Castro stated publicly early in November 1962 that the USSR had canceled all of Cuba's military debts . However, most if not all of the Cuba's outstanding obligations .
 Early Activity Collateral reporting contains many references to the sighting, during the first half of 1962, of construction equipment, assorted vehicles, and Soviet personnel .
 There is a strong possibility that this reporting reflected an influx into Cuba, beginning in early 1962, of Soviet personnel who were somehow associated with the military buildup that began physically in late July .
 Soviet personnel first began to appear in unusual numbers during February-March 1962 . By March-April 1962 1962 groups of Soviet personnel were present all over the island .
 The Torrens area may have become a sensitive zone in June . Raul Castro visited the reformatory in June, followed by an influx of Soviet personnel in July .
 The Soviet aid program in Cuba included an intensive resource exploration survey . As in the case of Soviet economic aid programs to other underdeveloped countries, the program included an extensive resource exploration .
 During 1956-57 a system of horizontal and vertical control points for topographical mapping purposes had been established and a complete aerial photographic study of the island accomplished by a highly competent, private United States contractor . collateral sources have identified a Soviet geophysical team in Cuba under the direction of one Bog
 Members of the team appear to have been geodesists whose function probably was to extend triangulation control points as required for their intensified survey program .
 No reports of surveying in specific areas that later became missile sites . Members of this Soviet group may well have been active in such areas .
 The Soviet geophysical team had been in Cuba at least 9 months before missile deployment and a wealth of data had been immediately available to them . It must be assumed that virtually all of basic data required to locate the missile sites geodetically had been acquired before the missiles were deployed .
 Pages 16 through 21 and 3 pages of 4-page map located between pages 20 and 21 were sanitized in their entirety . Pages 16 and 21 of the map's pages were also sanitized . The map was originally printed on pages 20 to 21 .
 The pattern of Soviet merchant shipping to Cuba provides a measure of the intensity of the Soviet military buildup . It shows the abruptness with which it began .
 Dry cargo ship arrivals averaged 15 per month from January to July 1962 . Dry cargo ships arrived in Cuba from January through July 1962.
 Cuban buildup required a large relative increase in Soviet shipping allocated to the Cuban trade . The diversion of this shipping probably was not a serious problem in view of the size of the Soviet merchant fleet and the availability of shipping in the world charter market .
 All of these large-hatch ships were built outside the USSR, in Japan or Finland . With one exception, all of these were built in Finland .
 The Japanese contract, for example, was negotiated from September to December 1960, and the lead-ship was completed in December 1961 . The lead ship was completed by December 1961.
 The Finnish contract is part of a 5-year trade agreement with specific deliveries negotiated annually . The deal will be part of the Finnish contract .
 This section reviews the evidence relating to the individual elements of the integrated Soviet air defense system that eventually emerged in Cuba . The evidence is presented in this section .
 First firm evidence of Soviet radars in operation in Cuba was acquired in June and July 1961 . It is probable that early warning radars were included, along with the first jet fighters, in shipments of military supplies which reached Cuba in late May and early June 1961 .
 By late July 1962, there were between 20 and 30 early warning radars and about 20 antiaircraft artillery fire control radars deployed in Cuba . Majority of the early warning equipment was located in the western and central portion of the island .
 The fire control radars generally were sited with antiaircraft artillery units along the northern coast of Cuba between Mariel and Caibarien . The heaviest concentration of radars was around Havana, with the heaviest concentration around Havana .
 In spite of this increase in radar capability, there was no indication that a fully developed and integrated air defense system was present in Cuba . Cuba could have assembled, collated, and transmitted to appropriate control points .
 Ground-controlled intercept exercises were occurring routinely by July 1962 . MIG fighters intercepted unidentified foreign aircraft on two occasions .
 As part of the Soviet military buildup beginning in late July 1962, more modern and advanced radar equipment of greater range and effectiveness was deployed in Cuba in sizable quantities .
 Photography of late August and early September revealed the presence of SAM system target tracking and control radars at the SA-2 sites emplaced in the western half of Cuba . The presence of possible target acquisition radars is also revealed .
 Photographic images show Soviet radar capabilities against aerodynamic vehicles . Images also show a long-range warning radar and height-finding radar .
 Much of the equipment associated with the SAM system was available to Soviet personnel when the United States resumed reconnaissance over-flights of Cuba on 14 October 1962 .
 Little additional equipment is believed to have arrived in Cuba at any time since the announcement of the U.S. quarantine on 22 October . The remainder probably also was available at that time or immediately thereafter .
 SAM sites and associated radars were deployed in increasing numbers beginning in late August . This radar equipment apparently was not generally activated by the Soviets until late October .
 Evidence on the Detection and Tracking of United States Reconnaissance Overflights During 1962 . It cannot be determined when the Cuban government first became aware of these missions .
 There were numerous opportunities for identification of these flights before mid-1962 . Cubans may have been aware that their territory was being overflown by July 1962, if not considerably earlier .
 The geographical placement of SA-2 sites and support facilities in Cuba through the time when the strategic missiles were withdrawn strongly suggests that the intention of Soviet planners was to establish an area defense for the island as a whole .
 SAM sites on western half of the island activated by mid-September to screen the developing MRBM/IRBM sites from aerial reconnaissance . There was, nevertheless, no apparent reason why SAM sites could not have been individually activated .
 Almost all SA-2 sites were emplaced and equipped and could have been integrated into a fully developed SAM defense system by 14 October . The first reconnaissance aircraft photographed an MRBM site under development .
 Interspersed among the sites were seven support facilities that provided the logistic support for the whole complex of sites . Seven support facilities provided for the entire complex .
 This integration provided additional warning time, greater target tracking capability, and centralized control of the entire system . This integration greatly increased the effectiveness of the system by providing additional warning .
 SA-2 unit can be moved out of a fully developed site location, transported a distance of 25 miles, and set up again in an open field in a single day . Observations made in East Germany indicate that an SA 2 unit could be moved from a site location to an open
 SA-2 Surface-to-Air Missiles on Display in the Havana Parade of 2 January 1963 . As of 27 October 1962, when an air defense system capability was first demonstrated, only eight, or one-third, of the SA-1 sites had been revetted .
 Individual sites not tied to an over-all command and control system have limited capability for independent action . Individual sites can take action independently without being tied to a command or control system .
 SA-2 system appears to be designed to operate within the context of a fully developed air defense system . The probability of a successful target intercept would depend heavily on the skill and training of the troop unit .
 Independent acquisition of the target would be difficult without additional azimuth and elevation data provided from both early warning radar and from other SA-2 sites . Independent acquisition would not be possible without additional data .
 The reaction time of an individual site probably is too slow to enable it to launch its missiles effectively against high-speed targets initially acquired by its own radar . In addition, the reaction time . probably . likely to be too slow for the missiles to launch .
 SAM control system radar perform both tracking and missile guidance function against a single target . Radar can also be used to track and guide missile missiles to a target .
 Each launch position contains a single launcher and missile, and each hold position contains two missile transporters, each carrying a single missile . The launch position has a single launch position and a single hold position . Each hold position has two missiles and each launch position is equipped with two transpor
 There was a continuous string of sites along the northern coast providing island-wide coverage from the western end of Cuba to the port of Banes in the east .
 The area of the two MRBM sites at Sagua la Crande and the IRBM site at Remedios were each covered by only a single SAM site . Farther east the area was covered by the area of only one SAM site. The area was also covered by a
 In the Santa Clara area, where initially all the MIC-21's were deployed, no specific missile defense was provided . No specific missile defenses were provided in the area .
 The same is true for the important transport junction and the Eastern Military Headquarters site at Carnaguey . The same was true for transport and military headquarters .
 This type of point defense would have been provided for all important Soviet military installations, including triple overlaps of some . Although this type of defense leaves open several areas, at least would have provided for .
 Four of these represented adjustments of the original concept in order to provide better point defense for Soviet military installations and personnel . Four of the changes were adjustments to the original design of the Soviet system .
 The significance of the fifth relocation is not entirely clear . The move of the Cabanas site about 10 miles inland to the northwest to Maldonado is not quite clear .
 This shift may have been occasioned by the earlier proximity of the site to Guantanamo . It may be intended to provide better coverage of the eastern approach to Cuba .
 Evidence indicates most of the SA-2 units in western Cuba were emplaced by the first week of September 1962 . If they were not already in operational status, they could have been made so shortly thereafter .
 SAM units and support facilities in the east probably were emplaced during September or the beginning of October . They probably reached operational status before mid-October . SAM units are emplaced in September or early October .
 There is no evidence that these sites were activated individually or integrated into a partial or fully developed air defense system until a day or two before the Soviet decision to remove the strategic missiles from Cuba was made public .
 Each of the SAM sites has its own communications equipment . A variety of Cuban communications facilities, particularly the ROCMI network, presumably would have been available to Soviet authorities .
 The first general SAM-associated radar activity did not occur until 26 October, and an integrated air defense command communications system did not appear until 27 October .
 It appears that the Soviet leaders had no intention of employing the SAM system against U.S. reconnaissance aircraft . It appears they had not even provided for such an eventuality .
 The general west-to-east phasing of SAM site emplacement probably was not directly related to MRBM/IRBM site construction in western Cuba .
 The air defense system was not activated by the time the MRBM sites had achieved some degree of combat readiness . This indicates that defense of these sites was not the primary purpose of SAM deployment in Cuba . The fact that the air defense systems were not activated provides a further indication that defense was
 MIG-21 aircraft were introduced concurrently with the other advanced weapons intended to form a complete Soviet military establishment in Cuba in 1963 .
 The MIG-21's were the only supersonic fighters in Cuba during the buildup period . They were apparently the only ones equipped with missiles . The planes were also equipped with missile missiles .
 These aircraft were all based at a single airfield throughout the buildup and crisis . They were based at the same airfield during the build-up and crisis.
 Some of the MIG-21's were deployed to two additional airfields in early November . The Soviet authorities originally planned to activate a fully operational air defense system, some of the aircraft were deployed .
 Suck evidence indicates that early-generation MIG fighters were at Cuban airfields . Early-gen MIG-15/17 aircraft and 9 MIGs-19 aircraft were spotted in Cuba in the 1950s .
 The deck cargo of two Soviet ships approaching Cuba on 29 August and 4 September included 22 MIG-21 aircraft crates . The cargo included at least 22 crates of cargo .
 Offloading of MIG-21 crates to be taking place at the port of La Isabella on 5 September . Third Soviet ship carrying MIG -21 crates was known to be nearing Cuba .
 All the MIG-21's were offloaded at the port of La Isabella and shipped directly to the Santa Clara Airfield, where they were assembled and where they remained through the end of October .
 Deployment of these aircraft was initially observed of 4 and 5 November disclosed that about half of them had been dispersed to Camaguey and San Antonio de los Banos Airfields . This supplementing the earlier generation MIG aircraft .
 The first indication that MIG-21 aircraft were operating was obtained on 9 October 1962, when a nonmilitary radio station in the vicinity of Santa Clara made an announcement that supersonic aircraft flying in the area that day had been breaking the sound barrier .
 At least 11 MIG-21’s were armed with infrared, air-to-air missiles . There is no direct evidence to indicate the number of such weapons actually introduced into Cuba .
 Four Soviet cruise missile units were debarked in Cuba as part of the first wave of the Soviet military buildup .
 The early deployment of the three permanently sited units provided coverage of the seaward approaches to many of the Cuban beaches most suitable for large amphibious landings . the cruise missile site at Siguanea shows the typical layout of all the Cuban sites .
 The configuration of the site remained unchanged regardless of the degree of site refinement . The configuration remained unchanged . It is not the first time the site has been refined .
 Based on an assessment of the radar capability of the system, a probable range of 30 to 35 nm has been using its organic radar is a function of the range to which the sites in Cuba can fire effectively is estimated to be from 23 to 32 nm . The range of the organic radar
 There is no direct evidence concerning the arrival of the first cruise missile units in Cuba . Unidentified equipment was found at Santa Cruz del Norte site and of unidentifiable objects in the area of the Banes site .
 The equipment and objects noted earlier were associated with cruise missiles . August, which revealed the presence of operational cruise missile sites at both locations, was found .
 It is believed the missiles and equipment for the Siguanea cruise missile site probably also were unloaded in Havana area, shipped across Cuba, and transported by ferry to the Isle of Pines .
 Supporting this contention, an informant reported that from 27 August to 5 September; the date on which reported that . from 27 . August to . 5 September . The date of the equipment equipment was on which equipment was used, and the date of when it was used .
 The equipment emplaced at Campo Florido was deployed in an operational mode and apparently interconnected by cabling . The inland location of this unit and the trees surrounding the area make it most unlikely that the unit was in a position to fire .
 An adjacent ""institutional"" facility composed of 15 main buildings appeared adequate to serve the several purposes of troop housing, administration, and training . In this regard, an adjacent "institutional" facility appeared adequate . An adjacent facility appeared to serve several purposes .
 Because of the dissimilarities noted between the unit situated at Campo Florido and the sites at other locations, the following discussion of the time required to deploy an individual unit and develop a site is limited to concerning the three permanently located operational sites that was temporarily located at La Sierra .
 Equipment was in the area of Santa Cruz del Norte and Banes sites on 5 August . As previously mentioned, equipment was in an area known as Santa Cruz de Norte .
 Both sites were next observed and apparently operational on 29 August, with all equipment present and properly emplaced . Both sites appeared to be operational in time for 29 August .
 Further development and refinement of these sites, consisting primarily of completely revetting the major pieces of equipment, continues for some time thereafter . Further development of the sites will continue to be refined .
 The Siguanea site on the Isle of Pines was operational when first observed on 29 September . The site was first observed in September and was operational in September .
 Refinement of this site continued slowly through 9 November, when all major elements of the system had been revetted and extensively camouflaged with netting and canvas .
 At that time this site had its equipment in place and its cabling connected, but site refinements were limited to revetments for electronic equipment . The site was built in 1960s and 1960s .
 All equipment, with the exception of one possible missile transporter/loader and three arch-roofed vehicles, had been moved from the site . The revetting of other positions at the site was later observed to be underway .
 The Banes and Santa Cruz del Norte sites probably were operational by mid-August . The Siguanea site probably was operational by late August or early September .
 The evidence clearly indicates that this weapons system is transportable and capable of relatively rapid deployment . The evidence suggests that the weapons system can be transported easily and can be deployed quickly .
 Soviet authorities placed their three permanently situated sites in operational condition quickly, although subsequent site refinements proceeded at a much slower pace . In addition, it seems evident that the Soviet authorities, in fact, did place their three permanent places in operational .
 It should be noted that once a site has been placed in an operational condition, subsequent refinements do not improve the operational capability and so may be effected at any pace desired .
 The bulk of these crates probably were delivered by four ships that were between 26 September and 10 October . Four ships were carrying a total of 62 cruise missile crates to Cuba .
 By that time the deployed units already had missile crates on hand, and there is no evidence that they have received additional crated missiles subsequently .
 Missile transporters also were at Mayari Arriba and Guerra . It is probable that at least part of the cruise missiles were intended to equip additional units .
 Even in retrospect, it is impossible to determine whether Soviet or Cuban personnel were intended originally to receive this equipment . Even in . retrospect, however, it was impossible to . determine whether . Soviet or Cuba personnel were . intended to receive the equipment .
 There have been some indications since the crisis that control of the coastal defense missile system will eventually be turned over to the Cubans . This transfer may have been the Soviet intention from the outset, with Soviet units being deployed initially to provide an interim capability against amphibious operations .
 An informant has reported that in December 1962 he was offered a naval post as commander of Cuban coastal defense forces, including the cruise missiles . In December 1962, he was reportedly offered a post at the Cuban coast .
 During the Havana parade of 2 January 1963 the Cuban television announcer indicated that the cruise missiles passing by were associated with Cuban military units . In addition, during the parade, the Cuban TV announcer indicated . that cruise missiles . passing by showed Soviet willingness at the time to have the weapons publicly associated
 Komar-class patrol boats were first while being offloaded in Cuba during the second week of August 1962 . SAM and cruise missile equipment began arriving in Cuba about 2 weeks after SAM equipment arrived in Cuba .
 All of the boats were based initially at the port of Mariel . Komar Class Boats were based at the Mariel port in the 1930s .
 The first sighting of a Komar-class boat at sea was reported by the Navy in the vicinity of Mariel on 29 August . Komar was reported to have been at sea in the area of the island .
 None of the ships were observed with uncovered missile launchers . Subsequently they were seldom out of their port areas, and none were seen with uncovered missiles launchers .
 Komar-class boats have been operating in Cuban waters since early 1962 . Support facilities for these boats have not been identified in It is believed that the Soviet authorities made use of existing support facilities .
 There is no direct evidence as to the number of P-15 missiles delivered to Cuba for the Komar -class boats .
 Agreement between Indonesia and USSR calls for 96 such missiles and 12 Komar-class boats . Indonesia and the USSR signed a deal to build the missiles and boats . However, the agreement does not cover all of the missiles .
 Since the same number of Komar-class boats are in Cuba, 96 P-15 missiles also may have been delivered . The Komar class is also in Cuba .
 Such an arrangement would provide for eight missiles per boat, two on launchers aboard each vessel . The remaining six would be held in reserve at the port facility because the Komar-class boats are not equipped to stow additional missiles .
 The establishment of Soviet submarine bases in Cuba was the subject of many clandestine reports received before the October crisis . Submarines were subject of numerous clandestine reports from the Soviets .
 It is possible that the installation of the cruise-missile facilities in the vicinity of Banes and on the Isle of Pines may have given rise to some of these reports .
 Four F-class long-range torpedo-attack submarines were deployed about the beginning of October from northern fleet waters to the Western Atlantic . This date of deployment correlates with the general Soviet military buildup in Cuba and indicates that it was not specifically related to the United States quarantine imposed on 24 October
 There is no known instance of any of these submarines entering Cuban ports .
 Three pages located between pages 46 and 47 sanitized in their entirety . Three pages of pages 46 to 47 were sanitized .
 Based on this evidence, it seems probable that the Soviet authorities were using facilities in Cuba in limited support of submarine operations in the Western Atlantic .
 There is no conclusive evidence that the Soviet authorities intended to use Cuban ports as bases for submarines or tenders . However, there is no evidence that there was intended to be such bases .
 Four highly mobile, Soviet armored combat groups were deployed in Cuba during the buildup period . Soviet Ground Units were deployed to Cuba .
 The number and types of equipment deployed at each of these encampments were basically similar and among the most modern of Soviet ground combat weapons . The equipment deployed was basically similar to those deployed in each camp .
 Collateral sources reported the offloading of Soviet personnel and ground equipment at the ports of Mariel and Bahia Honda as early as the last week in July . Some of this equipment also was known to be deployed with the other three armored groups, but because of canvas coverings, dispers
 A similar report indicated that Soviet trucks, tanks, and artillery pieces continued to move into this same general area until at least 26 September .
 In the Guasimal area, which is near the Sancti Spiritus SAM site but more than 50 miles from the nearest armored group at Remedios, a convoy was seen moving down the highway . The convoy consisted of ""antiaircraft guns, self-propelled guns of
 In sum, collateral sources continually reported of Soviet equipment and personnel moving throughout Cuba after the end of July . It is not possible to determine the point in time or ports at which personnel and equipment associated with the four armored groups arrived in Cuba .
 For the same reason, it is impossible to determine from collateral reporting even the approximate dates on which they were deployed at their encampments . However, it does make it possible to determine dates prior to which the encampments did not exist .
 When those dates are combined with dates of first observation in photography, a time span is established during which armored groups must have been deployed .
 Three were deployed from 12 to 36 miles from the sites of long-range missile bases . Three of the deployed sites were located within 12 miles of missile bases. Three of them were deployed within 36 miles of each other .
 One of these groups also was located 9 miles from the Soviet military headquarters at Torrens .
 The fourth was approximately 6 miles from the airfield at Holguin, where nine I1-28’s were to have been deployed . The airfield was to be used to deploy the I128s .
 This deployment would not have been inconsistent with a Soviet desire to defend certain of their installations against U.S. attack . The deployment also may have been intended to provide some measure of security against “counterrevolutionary” activity . This deployment, therefore, would not be inconsistent with
 The relatively small size of each encampment, the distance from the missile sites, and the absence of major military installations near the Holguin encampment suggest that these groups may have been located for the more general purpose of supporting the Soviet military presence on the island .
 The deployment of a group at Holguin is particularly interesting because its location there would afford control over the network of major roads in the eastern end of the island .
 At the time of President Kennedy's speech on 22 October, there were six Soviet MRBM sites established in Cuba, four near San Cristobal and two near Sagua la Grande . Four of the sites were located in Cuba at the time .
 The missiles and other unit equipment then at the sites had been delivered to Cuba aboard five or six large-hatch ships that arrived between approximately mid-September and mid-October .
 Work was still in progress at the sites, and the Soviet timetable apparently did not call for their completion until some time during the first half of November . Some if not all of them probably were capable of launching their full initial round of four missiles .
 The principal uncertainty regarding their operational status concerns nuclear warheads for the missiles . Evidence remains inclusive as to whether MRBM warheads had arrived in Cuba prior to the U.S. quarantine .
 The three IRBM sites, two near Guanajay and one near Remedios, were in the mid-to-late stages of construction, and none was operational . On the other hand, none of the IRBMs were operational .
 No missiles were present on the sites, nor were most major items of system equipment . Most of the system equipment was also missing .
 The first shipment of missiles and equipment almost certainly was en route to Cuba when the U.S. quarantine was imposed . It was likely en route when the United States imposed the quarantine .
 The few pieces of indirect evidence regarding this problem are derived from the movement of large-hatch ships . The few indirect evidence of this problem is derived from movement of big-hat ships .
 The movement of Soviet large-hatch ships from the USSR to Cuba indicates that MRBM units came from an area fairly near the Black Sea . The movement of Soviet large hatch ships indicates that .
 All but one of the ships which docked in Cuba during the time period when MRBM’s probably were delivered began their journey from a Black Sea port .
 The continued presence of these Soviet personnel in Cuba after the withdrawal of offensive weapons cannot be explained precisely . The presence of such personnel is not explained precisely, the Cuban government says .
 Evidence consists almost entirely of fragmentary collateral reporting on activity in the site areas and information on shipping activity . After mid-October, virtually continuous photographic coverage is available .
 The evidence is sufficient to identify the approximate dates of significant stages of MRBM deployment . Although it is not possible to determine from this information the precise time phasing of the MRBM sites .
 The firmest information bearing on the beginning of activity at the MRBM sites is provided by of 29 August covering the area of all our sites near San Cristobal and 5 September covering the two Sagua la Grande sites .
 This coverage established that no activity had occurred in any of the site areas by those dates which is identifiable, even in retrospect, as being associated with preparation of the MRBM sites . This coverage of the dates established that . no activity . had occurred by those . dates which are identifiable,
 Access roads to Sagua la Grande sites had not been started by 5 September . Access road improvements were clearly visible in mid-October .
 A variety of collateral reports and other evidence indicates that the site areas either had already come under fire . On the other hand, the site sites had already been targeted .
 Reconnaissance missions probably preceded by only a few days the actual beginning of site preparation activities . Soviet control, or were about to, were probably under control by these dates .
 Farmers reportedly being evicted from area where San Cristobal Site 3 was later located . Farmers reportedly were evicted in the last half of August .
 Evictions, also reported to have occurred in the vicinity of San Cristobal Sites 1 and 2 during the first week in September .
 No reports were received concerning evictions in the area of the Sagua la Grande sites . Some construction, or preparation for construction, was being carried out by Soviet personnel no later than September .
 The most plausible information available convening the first delivery of MRBM’s or system indicates that at least eight missiles were delivered in the San Cristobal area about 18 September . They probably were delivered directly from Mariel, the port of entry .
 A single informant reported the movement on 12 September of 20 missiles 70 to 75 feet long from a Havana . The Poltava, a large-hatch ship of the type used to transport the MRBM’s on their transporters as hold cargo, was docked in
 The only other case in which a ship arrival can be associated directly with the delivery of missiles to a site is the arrival of the Ornsk, another large-hatch ship, in Mariel about 16 October . The other case involves the identification of seven missiles in photography of San
 Tending to confirm this timing of missile deliveries was the construction of the secure missile oxidizer transshipment point at Punta Gerardo between 29 August and 25 September .
 It is not possible to trace the shipment from ports to sites of the additional 27 missiles withdrawn from Cuba in early November . It is possible to establish with a fair degree of assurance the ships on which the missiles must have arrived .
 The six large-hatch ships that arrived dock to a Cuban military air base in the western part of the city .
 Soviet Large-Hatch Ship Poltava returning to the USSR on 31 October 1962 . After Imposition of the United States Quarantine, the ship returned to the Soviet Union .
 MRBMs were transported to the San Cristobal missile sites within 2 to 4 days after the Poltava and the Omsk docked at Mariel . MRBM's were transported . to the sites within two to four days .
 Ships arriving more than 5 days before these dates probably did not carry missiles . San Cristobal site area was unoccupied on 29 August and Sagua la Grande site area on 5 September . Ships arriving over 5 days earlier did not bring missiles .
 Large-hatch ships that docked at Cuban ports during September and October probably were carrying missiles . All ships that arrived after mid-September carrying unknown cargoes probably carried missiles . b.
 Unless information indicates otherwise, it is presumed that all these ships carried military equipment to Cuba during the buildup period .
 The Krasnograde, Kasimov, Kimovsk and Poltava could have loaded six missiles on trailers on the decks of their large holds . Four more could have been double-loaded, and four more could be double loaded .
 The Omsk and the Orenburg could have carried seven MRBM’s on trailers on the decks of their large holds and four more by double loading . The Russian-built ships could have been able to carry seven MRB's on trailers .
 The Poltava probably carried eight MRBM’s and the Omsk seven . in Cuba with unknown cargoes . The dates on which the sites were found unoccupied were so few that most must have carried missiles .
 The irregular placement of the four launch positions at each of the sites probably reflect variations in local conditions and do not appear to be significant . The varying arrangements and type of support facilities likely reflect variations on local conditions .
 Units could have achieved an operational capability as soon as the system equipment was emplaced and checked out and the units were familiarized with operating in their new environment . Nevertheless, after reaching the pre-surveyed and minimally prepared site areas, the units could have reached operational capability .
 There is conclusive evidence that supplies of the oxidizer used in the MRBM system -red fuming nitric acid – were present in Cuba at the time of the crisis . But apparently not all MRBM units had been fully supplied with the oxidiser by 27 October .
 Photography of a secure port facility at Punta Gerardo on 17 October confirmed the presence of about 24 cylindrical storage tanks connected to the quay by pipeline . Several buildings under construction, several buildings under . construction, and varying numbers of the same type of oxidizer trailer observed at
 Ten pages located between pages 58 and 59 sanitized in their entirety of 29 August shows no indication that this facility was to be converted into a secure RFNA transshipment point .
 RFNA is storable over relatively long periods of time without significant losses . Supplies of this oxidizer do not require frequent replenishment as in the case of cryogenic liquids, such as liquid oxygen . RFNA can be stored in a cryogenic liquid without loss of oxygen .
 The presence of 10 of these vehicles at Punta Gerardo on 2'7 October indicates that the Cuban MRBM sites had not been fully supplied with oxidizer by that time . It is believed that the presence of such vehicles indicates the Cuban sites were not fully supplied .
 If these vehicles were from a single MRBM site, they represented more than 60 percent of the RFNA storage capacity of that unit . The unit might not have had sufficient oxidizer on site for its initial round of four missiles .
 If kerosene is the fuel used in the MRBM, the Soviet authorities would not have needed special facilities for its shipment to site areas . That site apparently did not receive missiles until 18 October, and only a few oxidizer trailers were discernible .
 Fuel trailers of the type observed at sites could have been filled from any convenient storage point, and such a storage point would not have contained any unusual features . Fuel trailers were likely to be filled from convenient storage points .
 The presence of nuclear warheads at the MRBM sites in Cuba cannot be confirmed . Some missiles could have been launched at the United States from one or more sites by the time the sites were first identified in of 14 October .
 Sites were not so complete as the Soviet authorities evidently planned them to be eventually . On the other hand, the sites were not as complete as they were intended .
 No effort was made to alert or ""peak" any part of the MRBM force in Cuba during the crisis . There was a steady improvement in the readiness of units throughout the period of observation .
 This information is not directly applicable to the circumstances of MRBM deployment in Cuba . It is extremely useful in evaluating and interpreting the Cuban evidence .
 Documents indicate MRBM units can move into permanent sites while they are under construction . They can receive their system equipment from depots, and launch their missiles from these sites .
 Documents describe the fairly rapid movement of MRBM units to pre-survey but relatively unprepared ""alternate sites"" from which missiles are launched . Similarly the documents describe the relatively rapid movement . of MRB units .
 From these descriptions it appears that in the USSR an MRBM unit would be expected to be able to launch its initial round of considerably less than a day after all personnel and equipment had arrived on site .
 Unit equipment and personnel apparently did not arrive on site en masse . Unit equipment, personnel apparently didn't arrive en masse at the scene .
 Site 4 activity occurred over a period of at least 4 days, culminating in the arrival of missiles, erectors, 2nd other key system equipment on 18 or 19 October . In the case of San Cristobal Site 4, for example, this activity occurred .
 The problem of determining readiness status is further complicated by the inability at times to identify the presence or quantity of essential system components, owing to the limitations of coverage and analysis .
 Only 33 MRBM's were identified in Cuba before the observation of 42 being withdrawn . The most striking example of this is the fact that only 33 of these MRBMs were identified .
 At San Cristobal Site 3, only two missile transporters were ever observed . Only four were observed at Sagua la Grande Site 2, although observations during the withdrawal indicate that some additional trailers and missiles must have been present at both sites .
 It is not possible to determine whether nosecones and missiles were ever mated at any of the Cuban MRBM sites, a prerequisite to bringing missile units to Readiness 3 .
 Mating would have occurred within the missile-ready tents where it could not be directly observed . Presence of cabling into some tents indicated that some form of missile checkout had been or was being conducted .
 The nosecone vans were not identified in the immediate vicinity of the missile-ready tents at any time, the authors say . The tests did not disclose the additional 13 feet in length required if a nosecone had been attached to a main missile body .
 There is evidence available from that assists in making a general evaluation of the readiness status of the MRBM sites. Notwithstanding these difficulties, there is evidence .
 By 23 October, sufficient quantities of essential MRBM system equipment to effect the launching of at least four missiles per site were present and positively identifiable at four of the six MRBM sites .
 The missiles probably were delivered to the area of these two San Cristobal sites from the Poltava about 18 September and to Sagua la Grande from the Kimovsk about 25 September . It appears that one and possibly both sites in each area had started receiving system equipment .
 This time would have been sufficient for these units to reach a reasonably high degree of combat readiness, provided equipment deliveries were planned so as to bring them to such a condition on an individual basis relatively rapidly .
 There is evidence of practice in the movement of some equipment to the launch areas at San Cristobal Site 1 and probably at both Sagua la Grande sites . It is not known whether there were simulated launch exercises .
 At San Cristobal Site 1 on 15 October a missile transporter with prime mover was aligned with the erector at one launch area . The launch area was one of the first to be launched in the country's history .
 On 19 October, one erector was uncovered, and propellant vehicles were in the area . The following day the erector again was covered, suggesting that an exercise of some kind was in progress .
 On 26 October propellant vehicles were at camouflant positions near all four launch areas at Sagua la Grande Site 1 . Four missile transporters also were present near the launch areas, although only two were aligned with erectors .
 This may have been an exercise simulating the transition from Readiness 3 to 2 . The propellants would be moved to the launch area and the missiles erected on launcher .
 In this case, it was clearly an exercise and not an actual alert condition . The transporters, as determined by the length of their loads, were carrying missiles without nosecones .
 At Site 3, as previously indicated, it was not possible to make positive identificationfof sufficient missile transporters and propellant vehicles to support operations from all four launch positions . Site 3 will be used to launch missiles from the launch site .
 Five more missiles were withdrawn from the San Cristobal area than had been identified at the sites . However, this equipment may well have been obscured in by the relatively heavy tree cover in the area .
 By 26 October at the latest, erectors were in position at the launch by 26 October . Nevertheless, by . 26 October, by the latest at the . latest, the . launch was scheduled to take place on October 26, 2015 .
 There is no firm basis in the evidence for judging the reaction time that would have been required following a decision to launch or the total number of missiles that could have been launched from the 24 launch positions .
 Reaction time might have been affected by absence of completed hardstands and graveled roadways at some sites . Reaction time and salvo capability also would have depended on the readiness of missile and other system equipment that can't be determined .
 Potential targets within this zone include about 20 bases of the Strategic Air Command, as well as Washington, D.C., and several other major United States cities .
 Attempts were made to identify the target system against which missiles were programed by determining the probable direction of flight from the relationship between the theodolite and the launch position .
 This method, however, has not yet yielded consistently meaningful results . This method has yet to yield consistent results, however .
 It is evident from of the uncompleted IRBM sites under construction in Cuba that these sites were to be far more elaborate than the MRBM sites . The IRBM system required a number of substantial permanent installations .
 The first IRBM site would not have been ready for launch operations until mid-November . Construction of the IRBM sites may have started somewhat earlier than the MRBM sites . As a result, although construction of the first IMBM site may have begun somewhat earlier, the first MRBM
 Construction of the .other two IRBM sites was about a month behind the first . The IRBM site will be the first IRBM to be completed in the fall .
 It is virtually certain that the IRBM system is designed solely for deployment at fixed facilities . IRBM units are incapable of movement to alternate field positions . Guanajay Site 1 was in relatively advanced stage of construction at the time of the crisis .
 The other two sites under construction were far enough advanced to indicate that they would have generally resembled Guanajay Site 1 . The other three sites were also under construction in the region .
 The launch facilities were comprised of four launch positions and included a control building for each pair of launch pads . The launch facility was comprised of 4 launch positions, including four launch sites .
 Evidence concerning the timing of activity at the three IRBM sites comes only from photography . Timing of construction activity at individual sites is limited to photography .
 There is no effective coverage available for more than a month before the photography of mid-October on which the sites were first identified, following which there is virtually continuous photographic coverage .
 The earliest firm indication of activity in the IRBM site areas is contained which discloses the presence of vehicles and construction materials at a location later identified as the construction support area for Guanajay Sites 1 and 2 .
 Equipment and material must have been intended for Guanajay Site 1, for that Site 1 was in a considerably more advanced stage of development than Site 2 . Site 2 was built in the 1980s and is now being developed in the 1990s .
 There is no evidence site construction had begun by 29 August . However, there are no evidence there had been any site construction begun .
 Guanajay Site 1 and Remedios were nearing completion when they were in the mid-stage of their development . When first of mid-October, the site was approaching completion .
 Guanajay Site 1 was essentially complete except for the missile-ready buildings, but it is estimated that 3 to 4 weeks more would have been required to ""cure"" the concrete in the launch areas . Guanajays Site 1 is estimated to have been completed in three weeks .
 Two pages located between pages 66 and 67 sanitized in their entirety . This intention was suggested by the pairing of all other strategic missile sites in Cuba, which also is .
 Soviet MRBM units, at least, are organized on the basis of two sites per regiment . It is known that Soviet MRB units are organized in the Soviet Union .
 A senior Soviet official stated that 24 ""sites"" had been completed in Cuba and that 16 were under construction .
 All 24 MRBM launch positions were completed but only 12 IRBM launch sites were identified as under construction . This statement implies that an additional IRBM site was planned .
 If the construction time relationship between the two known sites at Guanajay is applied to the known and a postulated IRBM site at Remedios, activity at the postulated site would not have been far enough along to be identifiable in until just about the time of the President's
 It is possible, therefore, that a second Remedios site was planned by the Soviet authorities . Initial preparations were halted by the onset of the crisis . The site may have been planned by Soviet authorities and not identified .
 Had construction of the site been carried out at about the same pace as the other sites, it would have been operational by about the third week in January . The site is expected to be operational within two weeks .
 If the construction crews from Guanajay as well as those at Remedios were to have been used, a second site might have been completed somewhat earlier, possibly about the end of 1962 . The construction of the second site could have taken place in about three decades .
 It cannot be demonstrated from available evidence that the USSR had delivered nuclear warheads to Cuba by the time the U.S. quarantine was complete .
 It is highly unlikely that the USSR would have provided conventional, high-explosive warheads for the MRBM’s . If they had not been delivered, then the USSR probably had no capability whatever during the crisis to attack the United States .
 Evidence indicates that much of the equipment believed to be necessary for the handling and on-site transportation of MRBM warheads and nosecones was present . On the other hand, evidence indicates that permanent facilities almost certainly intended for the storage of nuclear warheads were being constructed at both the MRBM
 A thorough effort failed to uncover direct evidence concerning the presence of warheads, there is no assurance that they could have been detected by photography or other means . There is no basis in evidence for concluding that the USSR did not have a nuclear capability in Cuba .
 There are three bodies of evidence, all ambiguous and inconclusive, that may relate to the presence of nuclear warheads . The evidence is ambiguous but inconclusive .
 The first of these concerns the equipment and facilities required for their handling and storage . The first is the equipment required to be able to use .
 At five of the six MRBM sites, as well as at the Mariel Naval Air Station, special-purpose units because of their unique equipment and physical positioning have been identified as probable nosecone handling units .
 These units also may perform some function with respect to warhead handling or processing . These units may also be used to perform warhead processing .
 At the missile sites these units generally were located in an area by themselves, just as the propellant vehicles were in separate areas, indicating a special function . The units were generally located in a separate area, indicating that they were used for special purposes .
 Most of the equipment at missile sites has been identified as to function, and no other equipment that appears suitable for nosecone handling . In some cases they were positioned in close proximity to the arch-roofed, probable nuclear weapons facilities .
 It is known from Soviet documents that nosecones and war-heads normally are stored separately from the missiles for which they are intended .
 When an increased state of readiness is ordered, nosecones with warheads are transported to a missile-ready facility for mating to the missile . When an increase in readiness is needed, the nosescones will be transported to the facility to mate with the missiles .
 In Cuba the MRBM nosecones probably were stored in the vans of the nosecone handling unit . They would have been transported to the missile ready tents in these vans .
 The presence of the vans, however, provides no assurance of the presence of warheads . It is not known if the vans are carrying warheads .
 The only activity of the nosecone handling units at the MRBM sites that may have been indicative of some nosecone/warhead checkout consisted of a single instance of photography of a van at one of the San Cristobal sites being loaded or unloaded . The cargo cannot be identified .
 It is likely that nuclear warheads would have been delivered to Cuba in special hermetically sealed containers in order to maintain temperature and humidity control .
 The appearance of the Soviet nuclear weapons seems out of keeping with the stringent procedures and precautions that normally surround Soviet handling of nuclear weapons . Cuba has more appropriate facilities in Cuba than Cuba .
 If warheads were present and 02erational at the MRBM sites, therefore, they must have been maintained and stored elsewhere, presumably in vans . The warheads were likely to have been stored in vans, perhaps in vans.
 Both of the IRBM warhead bunkers were virtually completed by 28 October, in contrast to those at the MRBM sites . MRBM's and equipment had been arriving on site for well over a month . Because of its size, however, the single bunker at Guanajay probably
 The Aleksandrovsk is suspected of having had some special cargo aboard, possibly nuclear warheads . It was the only ship that departed from and returned to a Soviet Arctic naval port during the Cuban buildup .
 The Aleksandrovsk was engaged in transporting cargo to Cuba exclusively from Baltic ports during 1961 and most of 1962 . During 1961 and 1962, it was the only ship to transport cargo to the island .
 The Aleksandrovsk was photographed at the Arctic port of Guba Okol'naya, a part of the naval complex in the Severomorsk area that serves submarines and surface craft of the Northern Fleet .
 The Aleksandrovsk is the first merchant vessel known to have called at this port . It is believed to be the first vessel to call at the Russian port .
 The Aleksandrovsk was one of the first Soviet ships to depart Cuba . It left Mariel with a deck cargo of nosecone vans and arrived at Guba Okol'naya in late November .
 The reason for this unique voyage from a Soviet Arctic port is not readily apparent . It is not known why the ship was sent to the Soviet Arctic .
 It can be hypothesized that the use of Guba Okol'naya enabled the vessel to reach Cuba and return with an unusually sensitive cargo, such as nuclear warheads, without risking surveillance or an incident of any kind in narrow waters .
 Aleksandrovsk was the first delivery of warheads to Cuba, for all other known voyages transited the Baltic or Black Sea passages or, in a few cases, the Panama Canal .
 The cargo of the Aleksandrovsk had been unloaded and delivered to the sites, which seems unlikely in view of the general Soviet reaction to the crisis . Moreover, they could have achieved such a capability during the critical week thereafter only if the cargo was unloaded and unloaded .
 The movements of the Aleksandrovsk following the Soviet decision to withdraw the offensive missiles seem inconsistent with a conclusion that it was making the first delivery of warheads to Cuba . On the other hand, the movements seem inconsistent, according to a report .
 Soviet authorities would have ordered the vessel to return directly to the USSR as soon as it was safe to do so . Because of the cargo's sensitivity, the vessel would have been ordered to return to the Soviet Union .
 It is difficult to account for the ship's movement unless the ship was to load a cargo of at least equal sensitivity . Additional warheads that had previously been delivered to Cuba from some port other than Guba Okol’naya .
 The Aleksandrovsk was carrying IRBM warheads which for some reason the USSR chose to transship through Guba Okol'naya, whereas MRBM warheads were shipped earlier, probably from a Black Sea port . The only remaining hypothesis involving nuclear warheads that seems to fit all
 On 12 November, Khrushchev twice stated to British Ambassador Roberts that nuclear warheads had been removed from Cuba . The ambassador was in Cuba at the time of the incident .
 Soviet statements that missiles were operational in Cuba in October 1962, implying that warheads were present . Khrushchev and at the height of the crisis, these have been the only explicit Soviet references .
 I1-28 light bombers began arriving in Cuban ports during the last half of September 1962 . MRBM's were being delivered at about the same time as MRBMs .
 Evidence strongly indicates that the I1/ UI128's delivered to Cuba were not a part of the establishment of a Soviet offensive base on the island but were intended to be turned over to Cuban forces as the early generation MIG fighters had been .
 I1-28's were introduced to Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1962 . The first indication of their arrival was from an informant who reported seeing four crates that he believed contained I1's arriving at the Port of Mariel .
 Another informant reported the arrival of an unspecified number of possible I1-28 crates in the Port of Havana on 20 September 1962 . Another informant identified photographs of I 1-28 fuselage crates as resembling those he had observed .
 Photography of Soviet ships carrying I1-28 crates on deck and bound for Cuba was first taken in September . Photographer of ships with I128 crates first taken on board in September 2013 .
 Ten I1-28 fuselage crates were observed on the deck of the Kasimov . The Kasimov arrived in Cuba about the end of September .
 Subsequent disclosed seven I1-28 fuselage crates on the deck of the Bratsk, which arrived about 20 October . Subsequent disclosure disclosed seven fuselage crate on the ship's deck .
 The Leninskiy Komsomol, which was in Danish waters on 9 October with 13 I1-28 fuselage crates on deck, also arrived in Cuba about 20 October . The Leninskyy Komol was in Denmark waters on . 9 October .
 San Julian Airfield was on 15 October, at which time 2 fuselages and 20 fuselage crates were present . San Julian airfield was .
 Between 15 October and 27 October, one day before the Soviet decision to withdraw the missiles, only one aircraft had been completely assembled . However, from 27 October to 15 November, six additional aircraft were completed, an assembly rate of slightly more than 3 days per plane .
 At this rate, assembly of the 42 I1/UI1-28's would not have been completed until March 1963 . At this time, assembly would have lasted until March 1962 .
 Sari Julian Airfield has long been able to handle aircraft of the I1-28 type . The airfield has been used to handle planes of the same type of aircraft .
 Holguin Airfield, before the completion of a new runway in June 1962, could not accommodate either I1-28's o r MIG-21's and construction of that runway, as well as of revetments and taxiways, was observed to have been well underway
 Work on the runway itself was completed by June 1962 . Work on aircraft revetments and new taxiways continued after the arrival of I1-28 fuselage crates .
 The aircraft were assembled in the open, with no specialized equipment in evidence . The high proportion of UI1-28 trainers among the aircraft uncrated indicates it was the Soviet intention to place these aircraft under Cuban control .
 At the slow rate at which the I1/UI1-28's were being assembled, all would not have been operational until 2 to 3 months after the estimated date on which the last IRBM sites were under construction would have become operational .
 The quality of most of the other Soviet-controlled weapons in Cuba was high, the quality of the weapons was also high .
 At the time of the President's speech on 22 October, approximately 22,000 Soviet military personnel were in Cuba .
 All of the weapons systems that had been delivered to Cuba since late July, with the exception of the I1-28 bombers, were then totally manned and controlled by the Soviet authorities . The weapons systems were totally manned by Soviet authorities in Cuba .
 Cubans were excluded from areas where Soviet troops and weapons were located . Training programs that would have enabled the Cubans to operate these complex weapons had not been accomplished . An exclusively Soviet command and communications structure was established to control their use .
 Soviet authorities may have planned before the crisis to turn some of these systems over to the Cubans eventually . Transfer could not have been accomplished quickly and would have required training programs such as that carried out with the I1-28's .
 The Soviet authorities intended to maintain their complete military establishment in Cuba for an extended period of time . The Cuban military establishment was clearly intended to be maintained by Soviet authorities .
 Some actions were taken to improve the combat readiness of elements of the Soviet forces . Most of these were taken several days after the President's speech . Other elements of Soviet forces showed little change in status throughout the height of the crisis .
 The small but complete air defense system did not become operational until 27 October . It expanded steadily thereafter, suggesting it was premature activation .
 Low-altitude reconnaissance missions must have vividly impressed Soviet personnel at the sites with the danger of attack by U.S. forces . These defensive measures may have been occasioned as much by the commencement on 23 October as by reaction to the President's speech .
 The concealment of equipment may have been intended to prevent close observation of deployed units . It may also have been meant to prevent the close inspection of deployed troops .
 One cruise missile unit was moved from an inland location about 25 or 26 October and deployed operationally on the coast . One armored group was moved out of its encampment at the same time .
 The only act ever committed by the Soviet Forces in Cuba occurred 27 October, when a U-2 aircraft was shot near the Port of Banes, probably by the surface-to-air missile unit .
 Even in retrospect the causes underlying this unusual action cannot be determined, although collateral reporting strongly supports a contention that a surface-to-air missile was the weapon used to down the aircraft . The causes of the unusual action can't be determined .
 All or virtually all of the Soviet-manned MIC-21 aircraft continued to be based a t the same airfield where they had been assembled . But apparently they did not maintain an unusually high level of activity during the crisis .
 By 1 Novemeber the Soviet authorities had begun dismantling the long-range missile sites (and withdrawing the MRBM's and key items of associated equipment)
 Soviet authorities chose to use shipping immediately available in Cuba to return the missiles as deck cargo .
 Casilda, therefore, may have been the closest port to Sagua la Grande at which both suitable port facilities and shipping were immediately available . Casilda may be a port at the time of the voyage . Three pages between pages 78 and 79 sanitized in their entirety available .
 Soviet Withdrawal of MRBM's from Cuba November 1962 . Use of immediately available shipping required deckloading of the missiles and thus contributed to the overtness of the withdrawal .
 Guanajay Site 1, the only IRBM site at which concrete had been poured for the launch pad and apron, the metal launch rings were removed, and the launch areas left visibly demolished . The other IRBM sites were simply bulldozed over .
 Soviet authorities generally cooperated in drawing back the tarpaulins from missiles when challenged at sea by U.S. inspection parties .
 The nuclear storage facilities at the MRBM and IRBM sites have still not been dismantled . There is no evidence that additional construction work has been performed or that they are being used for storage of any element of an offensive weapon system .
 The 42 I1-28's in Cuba at the time of the quarantine were not removed until early December . Mikoyan had apparently spent some uncomfortable days and nights in Havana exercising his powers of persuasion .
 Assembly of the I1-28's went on slowly but steadily after 28 October until about mid-November, following which no change was observed in the status of the aircraft .
 At that time, 7 aircraft had been completed and an eighth lacked only an engine cowling; most of the remainder were still in crates . Most of the aircraft were completed and the remainder of the plane was still crates .
 All of the aircraft were moved from San Julian and Holguin Airfields to the ports of Nuevitas and Mariel, where they were loaded on the decks of three vessels that departed by 7 December . Khrushchev's announcement on 20 November that the I1-28
 The fact that they were not, together with the apparent disarray between Moscow and Havana on the subject, provides further evidence that these aircraft, as previously indicated, were intended from the outset to be turned over to Castro's forces .
 During a 3-month period beginning a t the end of July 1962 the USSR delivered to Cuba and deployed Soviet forces and weapons systems . Soviet forces were deployed in Cuba representing all major elements of a complete military establishment .
 SAM equipment probably arrived in early August, and deliveries continued throughout August, September, and possibly the first part of October . SAM equipment was probably delivered to the U.S. in August .
 Deliveries of MIG-21 aircraft began about the end of August and the first aircraft was assembled by the first week in September . The first known flight of one of these aircraft did not occur until the second week in October .
 It was not until early November that they were operationally deployed to three separate airfields . Operationally deployed in early November was the first time they had been deployed .
 It appears that the Soviet authorities did not rush to completion either the parts of their air defense capability or the entire system . The U.S. reconnaissance overflights of Cuba at least by July 1962 were known by the Soviets .
 Significant differences are apparent in the time-phasing of the various offensive weapons systems . Offensive systems are different from conventional weapons .
 MRUM's and related system equipment were being delivered to sites in mid-September . MRUM and other equipment were delivered to site sites .
 Although I1-28 bombers probably arrived in mid or late September, at the rate they were being assembled they would not have been completely operational until well into 1963 . At the rate of being assembled, they would have been fully operational until late 1963 .
 It appears unlikely that the I1-28's were regarded by the Soviet authorities as an integral or significant element of the deployment of offensive weapons to Cuba .
 By mid-November none of the IRBM sites was completed by the end of October and virtually no system equipment had arrived in Cuba . MRBM units were combat-ready to some degree during the crisis .
 It is clear that the Soviet authorities did not plan the deployment of their offensive missile systems in Cuba so as to achieve a full operational capability with both systems more or less concurrently, as appeared to be the case .
 The most striking aspect of the Soviet plan as it unfolded in Cuba was the high degree of concurrency in the phasing of the development of offensive and defensive capabilities . Implications of the timing of the program could be seen in Cuba .
 The evidence which has been presented makes it clear that the Soviet authorities did not conceive of the Cuban military buildup as a sequential program . Weapons intended for the defense of the island would be established first and brought into operation early .
 This could have been done by delaying the beginning of IRBM site construction and of MRBM deployment by only a matter of weeks to insure that the air defense system was operational before the strategic missile sites were detectable by U.S. reconnaissance .
 The first MRBM unit and its readily identifiable equipment were on site about 1-1/2 months before the air defense system was activated, on 27 October .
 First IRBM site, although not equipped, was nearly completed by that time . Also, the first IRBM sites were nearly completed in the 1970s .
 The schedule of deployment of the MRBM units could have been planned to minimize the length of time during which some MRBM sites were detectable . Some of the sites may have been detectable before all of them were emplaced, equipped, and combat ready .
 First delivery of unique equipment, including missiles, probably was made to a site area in mid-September . Approximately 8 weeks would have elapsed before the estimated date on which refinements at all the sites would have been finally accomplished .
 MRBM sites would have been readily identifiable by the presence of such obvious items of equipment as missiles and fuel and oxidizer trailers openly situated in the site areas . During most of the . time the MRBM . sites would . have been subject to and would have . been readily identified by
 The actual program would have resulted in all of the major elements of the Soviet military establishment in Cuba becoming fully combat-ready more or less simultaneously at some time between the end of October and mid-November . The only exception was the IRBM force .
 There is no apparent significant event or action in Soviet external or internal affairs that indicates the momentous decision to project their armed might into the Caribbean Sea, historically a United States mare nostrum .
 In a sense the Cuban crisis had its origin in February 1960 when First Deputy Premier Mikoyan was Bent to Cuba to conduct economic negotiations with the Castro government . The Cuban crisis began in February 1961 .
 Sometime in late 1961 or early 1962, Cuban pilots began training in I1-28 bombers . There are no indications of a Soviet intention to deliver more advanced weapons .
 The U.S. had acquired relatively full knowledge of United States photoreconnaissance capabilities in May 1960 . The Cuban government could hardly have failed to consider them in planning the Cuban venture .
 The U.S. made no apparent effort to minimize the chances of detection by establishing an operational air defense system before the introduction of offensive weapons, or by camouflaging or concealing the deployment of MRBM units . Nevertheless, they did not make any apparent effort .
 Given their knowledge of U.S. photoreconnaissance capabilities and of overflights of Cuba, the Soviet authorities could easily have judged that at least some of the United States information came from . Thus they probably calculated that the nature and general scope of the buildup visible by the end of
 The President's warnings did not cause the USSR to attempt thereafter to conceal the buildup from overhead reconnaissance . Perhaps because the IRBM sites would have been difficult to camouflage, perhaps because the sites would be difficult to . camouflage . Some publicized statements indicated increasing Soviet concern over the developing United States attitude
 In contrast to their attitude toward U.S. reconnaissance, Soviet personnel took considerable pains to prevent ground observation of or access near their weapons and related equipment in .
 In retrospect it is impossible, without photography, to judge where, when, and what weapons arrived and were deployed . In fact, Soviet personnel did succeed in concealing from the general population the true extent of the Soviet presence on the island .
 It is possible that an advance party was sent to Cuba at about this time for the purpose of planning, perhaps on a contingency basis, for the deployment of Soviet forces . In view of the magnitude and complexity of the buildup that was to follow, it is possible .
 This action would suggest that the venture was conceived at the end of 1961 or very early in 1962 . It is thought to have been conceived in 1961 or early 1962 .
 Information appeared to apply to allocation of resources in the USSR and contained no hint of establishment of overseas bases . The timing of the decision, the target date, and the motivation could have applied equally well to plans for the Cuban missile bases .
 The informant's information originated in high Soviet military circles, the report says . The report may have been a reflection of actual planning for the Cuban operation .
 Report indicates that in late 1961 or at the beginning of 1962 . In any event, the report indicates that this occurred in late 1960s or early 1962 .
 Khrushchev was seeking some military means of rapidly improving the USSR's bargaining position in the German negotiations . This suggests the climate in which the Cuban decision was made .
 Evidence suggests planning for the Cuban operation was well along by mid-May . Other evidence suggests that the planning of the operation was already underway by May .
 Only direct evidence available as to the date of the Cuban decision is a remark attributed to a Soviet diplomat, that an important decision had been made with respect to Cuba and who later, during the crisis, indicated that the decision was made in May .
 In deciding to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba, the Soviet leaders probably were seeking to reduce the strategic missile imbalance against the USSR drastically and rapidly .
 The gain in relative power would be temporary in view of the high rate of ICBM and Polaris launcher activation programed by the U.S. in 1963 and thereafter . Moreover, they would have known that even if they followed an initial success with the deployment of additional offensive missiles in Cuba
 Khrushchev may have used Cuban venture to open the way for dramatic victory elsewhere, such as Berlin, to alter the long-term ""world relation of forces"" in his favor, writes Peter Bergen .
 Khrushchev was faced with a direct military confrontation at a point where the United States was able to concentrate an overwhelming conventional military force .
 In effect, the Soviet authorities had only one possible response to the threat of U.S. conventional forces striking Cuba, and that was a nuclear response . The Soviet authorities were forced to use a nuclear weapon against the threat .
 The USSR was well aware that the United States was massing conventional forces in the southeastern United States and that the U.S. also was faced with a fully alerted, nuclear strike capability of uncomfortable proportions .
 Their only possible course of action was to insure that the Cuban crisis did not escalate, to test U.S. resolve . If it were found firm, they would attempt to salvage as much out of the venture as they possibly could .
 Khrushchev's agreement to withdraw the I1-28 bombers was announced on 20 November . This, apparently, is precisely what occurred in the days between the President’s speech of 22 October and 22 November .
 The United States position was made clear in the President's address of 22 October and his quarantine proclamation of 23 October . The U.S. position, both as regards what constituted offensive weapons lifted, was made .
 Cuban bitterness over the Soviet missile withdrawal may have played a part in Soviet reluctance to remove the I1-28's as well as their own desire to preserve as much of the Cuban investment as possible .
 The next day, in what appears to have been an action coordinated with the Cubans, Premier Khrushchev announced that the I1-28's were being withdrawn and was rewarded by the lifting of the United States quarantine . The following day, the U.S. lifted the quarantine
 Both parties allowed the ""Cuban crisis" to recede slowly and uneasily into history without further concessions on either side . The final formality was observed with a joint letter to the UN Secretary General on 8 January 1963 removing the situation from further consideration by the UN Security Council .