 In the USA, schools held regular 'duck and cover' rehearsals incase of a nuclear attack . In the U.S. schools had regular 'duck and cover rehearsals'
 USA's biggest concern was the rate at which the USSR was building nuclear weapons and the size of the weapons . USSR could not fire missiles at the USA because they had to travel further, and this meant they could no be targeted accurately .
 America had B52 bombers that could drop nuclear weapons on the soviet union . U.S. had nuclear weapons that could be dropped on the Soviet Union . America had no nuclear weapons, but could drop them on the union .
 By 1957, Russian scientists launched Sputnik 1worlds first man-made satellite . By 1960, the Russians had landed a robotic spacecraft on the moon .
 Many Americans believed that rockets used to put the satellites in space could be used to launch nuclear missiles at America . Many Americans thought that rockets would be used in space launch missions .
 The Cuban Revolution of 1959 overthrew cuba's pro american government . America banned the import of cuban sugar . Khrushchev agreed to offer economic aid to cuba .
 CIA persuaded Kennedy to launch an invasion of Cuba to dislodge Castro's government and put Batista back in charge . The Bay of Pigs incident was the result of a CIA operation in Cuba . The invasion was the first of its kind in Cuba since 1961 .
 CIA promised they could make it look like a cuban revolution by training Cuban exiles and disguising old U.S. planes to look like cuban ones for bombing . This invasion had been kept secret ad planned for over a year .
 The 'secret' plan was known to Castro so he was expecting the attack . It was a disaster. Castro was expecting it to be a disaster . Castro's 'secret plan' was known so he planned the attack on Castro .
 Targets missed and the disguised planes were photographed and the United States involvement was made public . The United States was involved in the operation . Targets were missed and U.S. involvement was revealed .
 Castro declared himself as a communist in Cuba . This ended any chance that the USA and Cuba may negotiate a friendly relationship . Castro had declared himself to be a communist .
 Khrushchev stationed russian nuclear weapons on cuban soil . This placed Russian nuclear missiles within striking range of America . Khrushchev stationed russkies on Cubans soil .
 By mid October, american spy planes had discovered what was going on . This plan was secret for a long time but by mid October it was discovered .