 17 years after the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, a stark warning of the devastating consequences of launching a nuclear warhead, was at America's doorstep .
 Over the course of 13 days, the world avoided nuclear catastrophe through shrewd diplomacy and sheer luck . The world avoided a nuclear war by avoiding a nuclear bomb .
 U.S. National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy briefs President John F Kennedy on evidence of Soviet missile sites in Cuba . The missile sites are just 90 miles from United States territory .
 Nikita Khrushchev had reached a secret agreement with Cuban leader Fidel Castro after a failed U.S. attempt to overthrow the government . The agreement was reached after the island experienced a failed United States .
 U.S. photos showed a medium-range ballistic missile site in San Cristobal, Cuba on October 14, 1962 . President Kennedy meets with a group of trusted advisors to discuss options .
 This group would meet daily during the crisis and later be named the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or ExComm . ExComm would later be known as the Executive Council .
 Kennedy decides on naval blockade after days of meetings with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko .
 Kennedy announces the U.S. establishment of a naval quarantine until the Soviets dismantle the missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy also announces the United States establishment of an emergency naval quarantine . Kennedy: The United States will quarantine the Soviet missile sites .
 Soviet freighters bringing supplies to the island move into the area but ultimately alter course or stop in their place . The island was hit by the Soviet Union invasion of Cuba in the early 1980s .
 Soviet freighters turn back toward Europe but commercial oil tanker continues toward Cuba . Commercial oil tanker Bucharest, a commercial oil ship, continues to Cuba .
 U.S. allows the Bucharest to pass through the blockade without search after the Navy is satisfied it was carrying petroleum . The Bucharest was the first ship to be allowed to sail past the blockade in Romania .
 Castro requests Khrushchev launch a nuclear first strike against the U.S. This never happens . Castro: "This never happens. As work on the missile sites continues"
 Kennedy’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, plays a crucial role in diplomatic efforts . Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin likens the Soviet buildup in Cuba to the U.S. nuclear missiles stationed in Turkey .
 AG Kennedy informs Dobrynin the United States is ready to discuss the issue as part of a potential agreement to end the crisis . U.S. ready to talk about the issue in potential deal to end crisis, Kennedy says .
 The two most powerful nations had squared off against each other, each with its finger on the button . You'd have thought that war was inevitable, but now it's all over .
 In the Caribbean, U.S. ships drop depth charges to the left and right of a Soviet submarine as a warning and to force it to the surface . The depth charges are dropped to force the Soviet submarine to surface .
 Unbeknownst to the Americans, the submarine was carrying a nuclear weapon and, believing a war had started, the Soviets prepared to launch . The Soviets believed the U.S. was on the verge of war and launched a nuclear strike .
 U.S. and Soviets in sincere efforts to find a solution to the crisis before it escalates to sustained conflict . Talks continue between the United States and Soviets .
 Khrushchev publicly announces the Soviets would dismantle the missile sites in exchange for U.S. assurance it would not invade Cuba without direct provocation . The Soviets agreed to dismantle the sites in return for United States assurance it wouldn't invade Cuba .
 The naval blockade formally ended on November 20, 1962 after the Soviets agreed to remove their bombers from Cuba . ExComm meets in the White House, 1962 .
 In accordance with the secret U.S.-Soviet agreement, United States missiles were removed from Turkey in April 1963 . The missiles were taken out of Turkey in accordance with a secret agreement .
 The crisis ended and it was clear to both the Soviet Union and the United States just how close they had come to nuclear conflict and how necessary communication was in avoiding catastrophe .
 To prevent similar situations, a direct nuclear hotline was created between the United States and the Soviets . The hotline was set up to improve transparent communication between the two countries .
 The Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963 banned further nuclear testing in the atmosphere, outer space and under water . In addition, the signing of the treaty also banned further testing under water and under the atmosphere .
 The risk of nuclear-armed countries engaging in conflict that could escalate to nuclear use remains very real . Despite reductions in nuclear arms, the risk of a nuclear war is still very real.
 Kennedy and Khrushchev deserve credit for de-escalating through diplomacy . But we cannot discount the role of luck in leading the U.S. and Soviets out of the crisis in Cuba unharmed .
 As long as nuclear weapons exist, the world will be at risk of nuclear conflict with global ramifications . The world will never be able to rely on nuclear weapons as long as they exist .