 Khrushchev assured Kennedy that the Soviet Union had no intention of ""disrupting the relationship of our two countries"" despite the photo evidence presented before President Kennedy . President Kennedy meets with General Curtis LeMay and the reconnaissance pilots who found the missile sites in Cuba .
 By October 19, frequent U-2 spy flights showed four operational sites . Two Operational Plans were considered for the mission .
 OPLAN 312, primarily an Air Force and Navy carrier operation, was designed with enough flexibility to do anything from engaging individual missile sites to providing air support for ground forces .
 President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office on October 23, 1962 . The U.S. could find itself bombing operational missiles if the blockade did not force Khrushchev to remove missiles already on the island .
 On October 22 at 7:00 pm EDT, Kennedy delivered a nationwide televised address on all of the major networks announcing the discovery of the missiles . The two also anticipated that Khrushchev would respond to the Western world in a manner similar to his response during the Suez Crisis and possibly
 Communications between the two super-powers entered into a unique and revolutionary period . The newly developed threat of mutual destruction through the deployment of nuclear weapons, diplomacy now demonstrated how power and coercion could dominate negotiations .
 The next day, reports showed more ships originally bound for Cuba had altered their course . Kennedy told the EXCOMM that only an invasion would remove the missiles from Cuba .
 ABC News reporter had lunch with Alexander Feklisov, the KGB station chief in Washington, at Fomin's request . This allowed the United States to largely dominate negotiations in late October .
 Khrushchev wrote a message to Castro that the U.S. would be ""unlikely to invade"" if the missiles were removed . The United States responded by asking the Brazilian government to pass on a message .
 Direct aggression against Cuba would mean nuclear war . Additional study of the letter ordered and continued into the night .
 Emissaries sent by both Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to meet at the Yenching Palace Chinese restaurant in the Cleveland Park neighbourhood of Washington, DC .
 The Soviets responded by scrambling MiG fighters from Wrangel Island . The Americans launched F-102 fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles over the Bering Sea . Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in Turkey and possibly southern Italy, the former on the border of the
 The worldwide U.S. Forces DEFCON 3 status was returned to DeFCON 4 on November 20, 1962 . This convinced the American administration of Bucharest's intentions of detaching itself from Moscow .
 Robert F Kennedy's memoir of the crisis became the basis for numerous films and documentaries . One contradiction pervaded the Soviet media campaign .