 President John F Kennedy was shot and killed in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . It will be half a century since the president was assassinated in Dallas .
 Almost from that terrible day, the greatest cover up in the history of the U.S. began to be implemented . The greatest cover-up in the United States began from the beginning of the day .
 A falsified version of the assassination of President Kennedy emerged from Operation Dragon . Operation Dragon was a disinformation masterpiece orchestrated by the KGB from Moscow and aided by the Cuban DGI . Combined with what was called Operation Dragon, Operation Dragon emerged .
 It's time to offer an alternate version of what most probably really happened in Dallas, 1963 . It is time to give an alternate account of the Dallas shooting .
 The KGB launched Operation Dragon, designed to exculpate the KGB and place the blame for the assassination on the CIA . Operation Dragon began with two simultaneous, well orchestrated “shows”, one in the Soviet Union, the other one in Cuba, on the afternoon of the assassination
 The first was held in one of Fidel Castro’s houses in the famous Cuban beach resort of Varadero . The second was held at one of the houses in which Fidel Castro lived .
 The guest of honor was the well known French writer Jean Daniel, invited to interview Castro a few days before . Jean Daniel was invited to speak to Castro .
 Around 2pm, the telephone rang and Castro, uncharacteristically, rose up to answer it . Castro: "I don't know why I'm going to answer that phone call" Castro: The phone rang around 2pm and he answered it .
 Weeks later, Daniel published all of the above in a long article in The New Republic . “They will try to blame us”
 Party hack burst into office and excitedly told Ponomarev, in Russian, that Kennedy had been shot . Suddenly, a party hack burst in the office and told him Kennedy was shot, he said .
 Childs spoke Russian, unknown to the Soviets, so Ponomarev translated into English . He assuring Childs that neither the Soviet Union nor the KGB had anything to do with the assassination .
 Childs passed the information later on to FBI Director J Edgard Hoover, who accepted it as fact . Childs later passed on the information to Hoover . Hoover accepted the information as fact.
 A Soviet deserter asked for political asylum in Geneva, Switzerland, in January, 1964 . Two months later, a Russian deserater asked for asylum in Switzerland .
 Nosenko was later interviewed by FBI agents in Washington, although William Sullivan, the FBI’s Intelligence chief, always had his doubts . Most everyone else, including Director Hoover, including Hoover, believed Nosenkos .
 Operation Dragon is a masterful disinformation campaign known as Operation Dragon . That was the last piece of the masterful . disinformation campaign . Operation Dragon was masterful. Operation Dragon.
 Operation Dragon had deflected any guilt from either the Soviet Union or Cuba . Even before the preliminary conclusions of the Warren Commission were published a few weeks after the assassination, Operation Dragon was deflected from any guilt .
 The almost universally accepted version of what happened in Dallas was that it was the CIA who was responsible . The CIA was responsible for the shooting .
 The Mafia and Texas oil millionaires had financed the entire operation . The Mafia financed the operation, according to investigators .
 By the time the Warren Commission Repot was published in September, 1964, most people in the U.S. believed the above version . The Warren Commission was published by September 1964 .
 There is an alternate version of the events that shook the world that morning of November 22, 1963 in Dallas, Texas . The Dallas massacre was the Dallas massacre of 9/11, 1963 .
 One or two of the three men shot at Kennedy from behind the infamous grassy knoll . The three men made their way separately to Dallas and on the morning of November 22, one or two shot at JFK .
 All shots, including Oswald’s, hit the president almost simultaneously . The president was hit almost simultaneously by Oswald's shots .
 A Cubana de Aviación passenger plane waited five hours in the tarmac until Casas arrived . From there, he was flown in a small private plane to Mexico City, where he was taken to Mexico .
 Lopez stayed in Dallas to make sure that Jack Ruby, another DGI agent, shot Oswald two days later . Lopez stayed behind to ensure Ruby shot Oswald, who was killed in Dallas .
 Lopez then made his way to Laredo, Texas, where he crossed over to Mexico by car . Lopez then also crossed into Mexico by driving to the border .
 He then flew to Mexico City, via Tijuana and then left for Cuba on a Cubana flight on November 27 .
 Escalante flew into Dallas on the morning of November 22 in a private plane from Mexico and left the same way in the evening of the murder . Escalantes flew into the city from Mexico on the same day as the murder, authorities say .
 Angleton's entire 20 year counterintelligence archive was destroyed by orders given by CIA Director William Colby in 1975, two years after Colby fired Angleton . Angleton was fired by Colby two years later .
 This alternate version of the assassination is the most reasonable and credible of all that have been proposed in half a century, it cannot be proven empirically . But although this alternate version is most reasonable, credible, it is not proven scientifically .
 Until and unless the KGB archives in Russia and the DGI archives in Cuba are open, the truth will probably never be known . The truth is probably never known, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was stationed in the Atsugi Marine Air Base, 35 miles south of Tokyo . At that time, 18 year-old Marine was stationed at the base . Oswald was 18 years old when he was killed .
 Atsugi was one of the two bases from which American U-2 spy planes flew over the Soviet Union and China in the late 1950s . U.S. U.2 planes flew from Atsugugai in Japan in the 1950s to spy over China .
 The U-2 flights provided up to 90% of the hard information on the Soviet Union's and China’s military and industrial installations . The U.2 flights were used to provide information on Soviet and Chinese military installations .
 Oswald, who was highly intelligent and had good mathematical skills, was assigned to the U-2 radar operations office . Oswald was assigned with the U.2 radar operation office .
 Soviet intelligence knew of the U-2s over-flights and had been tracking them for months . U.2s were tracked by Soviet intelligence for months, according to U.S. reports .
 Neither its SAM missiles nor its MiG fighter planes could reach the U-2s . The U.2s were hit by both SAM missiles and MiG fighters .
 Marine recruits at Atsugi base usually went to Tokyo on their leave and while there, visited many of Tokyo’s prostitute bars . Recruits at the base usually visited prostitutes .
 Oswald visited the Queen Bee bar, which catered to a higher clientele of officers, including U-2 pilots and KGB agents . Oswald went along, but he visited one bar in particular, which was frequented by U.2 pilots .
 Some Queen Bee prostitutes worked for the KGB and that is probably how Oswald was recruited and able to afford their services . Oswald was able to pay for his services .
 Soviet technology allowed Soviet technology to develop high interceptors called Su-9s . This knowledge allowed the Soviets to develop Su-8s .
 One of these Su-9s downed Francis Gary Powers’s U-2 when it flew close to its fragile wings . One of the planes was shot down by a Soviet jetliner . The pilot was killed by the U-9 when it came close to Powers' fragile wings
 The air current caused one of the wings to crack and the U-2 went down . The plane went down after being hit by a strong air current .
 It was not a Soviet SAM, as it was believed for many years, that was responsible for the U-2 downed on May 1, 1960 . The plane was shot down by a U.2 missile fired from the Soviet Union in May 1960 .
 Oswald’s trajectory since he defected to the Soviet Union in 1959 is well known, so it will not be covered in detail . Oswald's trajectory since his defection to Russia is well-known, but it is not covered here .
 Since he was 12 years old, he was attracted to ‘progressive” causes . He was well read in Communist literature, describing himself as a Marxist Marxist .
 He also taught himself enough Russian to live for three years in the Soviet Union, mostly in Minsk . He spent most of his time in the USSR .
 While he lived there, he was trained by the KGB in espionage and marksmanship . He was also trained in marksmanship and espionage .
 He probably met Fabian Escalante, who was also being trained by the KGB in Minsk at the time . He was probably also training with the KGB when he was in the city .
 Ramiro Valdés and José Abrantes, who later headed the Cuban Interior Ministry security apparatus for years, were also at the KGB school for spies in Minsk .
 Oswald was considered too unstable to be used as an assassin, but he remained in the U.S. as a “sleeper agent’s” agent . Oswald and his wife Marina probably did so as a "sleeper’ agent"
 He certainly helped both financially and introduced them to Dallas friends during most of 1963 . He also introduced the couple to friends in Dallas .
 Oswald and Castro may have abandoned the idea of killing Kennedy . However, neither Oswald nor Fidel Castro did . The KGB and the KGB were behind the assassination of Kennedy .
 Castro never forgave Khrushchev for withdrawing Soviet missiles from Cuba . Castro was angered by the decision to pull missiles from the country .
 He urged Khrushchev to launch a missile against the U.S. in case of an invasion of Cuba in October, 1962 . Indeed, he said he wanted a missile launch against the United States .
 Castro also knew of the many assassination attempts against him made by the CIA, on Kennedy’s orders, since 1961 . Castro knew of many attempts made against him by CIA, including assassination attempts made by Kennedy's orders .
 He hated Kennedy with a passion and he now saw an opportunity to get even . He now saw it as a way of getting even with Kennedy .
 Since Oswald was bent on killing Kennedy, the KGB informed the Cuban DGI and requested that someone be sent to Dallas to kill Oswald afterwards . The KGB requested that the assassin be killed in Dallas, Texas .
 DGI instead made plans for Oswald to shoot the president, not Oswald . DGI also planned for DGI agents to shoot at Kennedy at the same time . Oswald was not aware of DGI's plans for the shooting .
 Both services intended for Oswald to be the escape goat, for him to be held responsible for the assassination afterwards . Both services always intended to be Oswald's escape goat . Oswald's assassination was the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 Khrushchev did not give the order to shoot Kennedy and may not even have known of the operation . Khruschev may not have given the order of shooting Kennedy .
 He and the president had, after all, grown closer since the end of the Missile Crisis . The president had grown closer with President Barack Obama .
 By the time he was deposed less than a year after Kennedy was killed, almost all the Politburo members and most of the military and KGB were against him . Most of the country's military and military was against him.
 It is entirely possible that secret KGB/DGI plans to kill Kennedy were withheld from his knowledge . Kennedy may have been unaware of the plans he was about to kill .
 Khrushchev's assurances of Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba as a result of their secret agreement in exchange for the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba and Turkey . Castro may have been mollified by the assurances .
 There never really was a binding promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba, as the Soviets did not comply with the conditions of on site inspection in Cuba . However, there was no binding promise .
 Khrushchev made Castro believe the terms of the agreement were firm . But Castro did not know that and Khruschev made him believe it was firm . Castro was not aware of the deal .
 Three Cuban ‘diplomats’ at the UN mission and two members of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee were arrested . The plot was discovered by the FBI just in time and on November 17, three Cuban “diplomat’s” arrested .
 More than 1000 pounds of TNT, detonators, grenades and incendiary devices were found in a jewelry store owned by FPCC member José García . The FPCC found explosives in the back of the jewelry store .
 If the plot had succeeded, it would have been more devastating than the attack on the Twin Towers of 9/11 . The plot would have left the world's tallest building more vulnerable than the twin Towers .
 The Cuban ‘diplomats’ were held for five months, then exchanged for CIA operatives imprisoned in Cuba since the Bay of Pigs invasion . CIA operatives were imprisoned since the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Castro found out that the Kennedys were still trying to kill him this late in 1963 . But now Castro finds out that he was still being targeted . Castro had already found out he was being targeted by the family .
 Former Cuban Army Major Rolando Cubela had been working with the CIA since 1961 . He knew this because he had worked with CIA to that effect since 1961.
 Cubela was probably discovered by the DGI sometime in 1962 and became a double agent . Cubela is believed to have been an agent for the CIA in the 1960s .
 He was keeping Castro informed of the CIA plans, which he knew were ordered by the President and his brother Robert . Robert was in charge of Operation Mongoose up to the time his brother was killed .
 CIA agent Desmond FitzGerald was meeting with Cubela in Paris to finalize the details of Cubela’s attempt on Castro . Almost at the time Oswald was shooting at President Kennedy in Dallas in Dallas, CIA agent was meeting Cubela . Oswald was shot by Oswald in Dallas
 It is not known when Castro decided to go ahead with the DGI plan to murder President Kennedy . Castro's plan to kill Kennedy was not known until after the assassination .
 Oswald's assassination was probably in early October, 1963, after he returned from Mexico to Dallas . It is not known when Oswald decided to go ahead with the assassination on his own . Oswald is believed to have killed President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Oswald had become disillusioned with the Soviet system after living there for three years . Oswald had lived in the Soviet Union after living in the country .
 He became convinced that the Soviet Union had become a bureaucratized society which was not very different from the United States . He still considered himself a Marxist, but he became convinced of Soviet society .
 He had been following the Cuban revolution since 1959 and was an admirer of American William Morgan . Morgan fought for Castro against the Batista dictatorship and became a Cuban Army Major after the revolution .
 Oswald became obsessed with establishing his bona fides with Cuba so that he could become a revolutionary just like his new hero Morgan . Since he came back to the U.S. in 1962, Oswald became fascinated with Cuba . Oswald was fascinated by Morgan's exploits .
 Oswald tried to kill retired Army General Edwin Walker in April, 1963 . Oswald was behind the wheel of Oswald's motorcade in 1963 .
 He barely missed, but documented his attempt with photographic evidence and may have escaped with the help of Cuban DGI agents . The Cuban government may have helped him escape .
 Oswald moved to New Orleans, then a focus of anti-Castro activities by Cuban exiles . Several months later, Oswald moved in New Orleans . Oswald had been involved in anti Castro activities in the city .
 Oswald tried to organize a chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans . He also tried to infiltrate anti-Castro organizations .
 He had a run-in with Cuban exile Carlos Bringuier which resulted in the arrest of both men .
 Oswald later appeared in a radio program with Bringuier and others and expounded his pro Castro views . Oswald appeared in the show and later appeared on the radio program .
 Oswald traveled from New Orleans to Mexico City by bus in late September . He made a stop in Dallas, Texas, where he visited the Odio sisters with two Cubans . Oswald was killed in Mexico City .
 Sylvia Odio tried to get information about anti Castro activities . They all presented themselves as enemies of the Castro regime and tried to be enemies of Castro regime .
 Sylvia's father was imprisoned in Havana as a result of his involvement in a plot to assassinate Castro . Sylvia’s father and Cuban Army Major Rolando Cubela were imprisoned in Cuba in the 1960s .
 Sylvia and her sister became suspicious and told Oswald and the Cubans nothing . Sylvia became suspicious of Oswald's actions and told him nothing .
 Oswald and his companions were DGI agents . Oswald's companions were also agents . Much later, they found out the truth about Oswald .
 Oswald arrived in Mexico City on the morning of September 27 . Oswald checked into the Hotel del Comercio, a few blocks from both the Cuban and Soviets embassies . Oswald was the only person to die in the Cuban or Soviet Union .
 The Hotel del Comercio was a notorious meeting place for Cuban intelligence agencies . Oswald probably met with some of them while in Mexico . Oswald was likely to meet some of the Cuban intelligence agents .
 He went to the Cuban embassy later in the morning to get a visa and travel to Cuba . The Cuban embassy is located in Havana, Cuba .
 He had a lengthy conversation with Silvia Tirado de Durán, who worked as a receptionist but may have been a DGI agent .
 Durán explained that he needed a visa from the Soviet embassy to get a Cuban visa . Durán said that he was able to get the visa from a Soviet embassy .
 Oswald, who expected to travel to Cuba in a few days, became agitated and argumentative . Oswald was agitated, argumentative, and became agitated during his trip to Cuba .
 The Cuban Consul, Eusebio Azcue was called by Durán and convinced Oswald to go to the Soviet embassy, which he did . Azcue convinced Oswald that he was going to the embassy .
 Oswald walked over to the Soviet embassy and was directed to a consular officer named Valery Kostikov . Oswald walked into the Soviet Embassy in Moscow . Oswald was directed by Valery Kostikova .
 Oswald was told he could not get a Soviet visa, that it would take months to get one from the embassy in Washington . Kostikov called in two other KGB officers, but Oswald was eventually told he couldn't get one .
 Oswald then went back to the Cuban embassy, where he had another heated argument with Durán and Azcue . A dejected Oswald then returned to the embassy to confront Durán, Azcue.
 He finally left, after shouting that he intended to kill President Kennedy . He shouted that he wanted to kill Kennedy .
 Oswald went to a party with Silvia Durán and met other prominent Mexican society members who were sympathizers of the Cuban revolution . Oswald was in Mexico City that weekend to meet with other sympathizers .
 Oswald probably met again with Kostikov and Cuban DGI agents, including Rolando Cubela . Oswald was likely to meet again with the agents of DGI .
 Oswald was told by Cubela in detail of the latest Kennedy-ordered, CIA plan to kill Castro, the one involving Cubela . Final plans for the Kennedy assassination were then likely finalized between Oswald and DGI agents .
 Oswald truly wanted to go to Cuba, Oswald said, but it must be pointed out that what he really wanted was to go there . Oswald wanted to be in Cuba, but was not interested in going to Cuba .
 Fidel Castro apparently decided to kill Kennedy as a final “proof” of his devotion to Fidel Castro and the Cuban revolution . When he found out he could not kill Kennedy, he decided to do so .
 His visa to travel to Cuba was approved, contingent on getting a Soviet visa . That same day, his visa was approved . He was able to get a visa to Cuba .
 Marina and their daughters stayed with Ruth Paine at her house in Irving, a Dallas suburb . He was living in a rooming house in Dallas while Marina was in a Dallas rooming .
 It was announced in September and the itinerary was released to the public around November 18 . The itinerary is expected to be announced in November .
 Oswald therefore knew well in advance that the president would be traveling through downtown Dallas . Oswald knew of the president's visit to downtown Dallas, Texas . Oswald also knew that Oswald knew the president was traveling through Dallas .
 When the itinerary was announced on November 18, all he had to do was to bring his rifle into the building and wait for the presidential caravan to pass by .
 A second stage of the assassination was being planned in Havana under the direction of Fabian Escalante, the head of Cuban counterintelligence and a close confidant of Raul Castro . The second stage was also being planned by FabianEscalante . The assassination was planned under the
 It is possible that Escalante, Casas and Lopez only provided logistical support and did not shoot at Kennedy . It's possible that the two DGI agents were only providing logistical support for the shooting .
 Oswald had made plans to escape to Cuba after the killing, according to reports . Oswald is believed to have had plans to flee to Cuba .
 Tippit as he was trying to escape after the assassination, he shot and killed him . The assassination was the first assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 Fabián Escalante left Dallas and the final plan to silence Oswald was implemented . Jack Ruby, a DGI agent, killed Oswald two days later . Ruby's death was the last of the plan .
 The great disinformation campaign of Operation Dragon began in the afternoon of November 22 . Operation Dragon was launched on November 22, 2014 . The disinformation campaign began on November 23 .
 The great cover-up of the assassination would begin in full by the new Johnson administration . Shortly afterwards, the great cover up would begin under Johnson .
 James Angleton’s theory implicating the Cuban DGI in the Kennedy assassination has a critical flaw and another very difficult obstacle to overcome . Angleton's theory implicates the Cuban government in the assassination has been a problem for Angleton .
 Angleton unfortunately never gave details of the operation to investigative writer Joseph J Trento . Angleton never told Trento about the operation, he says . Trento says Angleton gave details to Trento but never gave them details of operation .
 All ‘experts’ agree that only Oswald shot at Kennedy and the bullets that struck the president ALL came from Oswald’s rifle . That is a major problem .
 Cuban DGI agents were in Dallas on November 22 and escaped to Mexico in the following days . However, there is plenty of evidence—including photographic evidence—that the agents were there in Dallas .
 The second obstacle, that Oswald was the only shooter, is not insurmountable, it can be overcome . Oswald was not only Oswald, but he was the sole shooter, the second obstacle is that he was not .
 Evidence, including forensic and ballistic evidence, can be altered and falsified . It can be created as well as created as it can be destroyed, experts say . Forensic evidence can also be altered, falsified, altered or destroyed .
 Cuban DGI agents did the shooting, but it's not that important whether they did it, says CNN's John Sutter . "It's not important whether the Cuban government agents did it," Sutter says .
 The operation was planned and carried out by the DGI under orders from Fidel Castro . What matters is that they were in Dallas and that the entire operation was carried out in Dallas .
 The main sources for the above reconstruction of President Kennedy’s death in 1963 come from a handful of relatively recent books .
 Disinformation, by General Ion Mihai Pacepa and historian Ronald J Ryslack, provides all the information on Operation Dragon . Disinformation by general Ion M. Pacepe and historian Ronny Ryssack .
 General Pacepa defected from Rumania in 1978 was the head of Rumanian intelligence . He personally knew all the highest members of Warsaw Pact intelligence services, including the KGB . His information must be given credibility .
 He still lives under a secret identity and under U.S. government protection after all these years .
 No one alive today probably knows more about communist dezinformatsiya than General Pacepa . General Pacipa was a Soviet leader in the 1930s and early 1940s .
 General Pacepa believes that Khrushchev did not want to risk another such spectacular assassination at the time . General PacEPa believes the assassination would have been a repeat of the assassination of the late Soviet leader .
 If it failed and was discovered, it would provoke another nuclear confrontation .
 General Pacepa's analysis of Cuban DGI involvement in the Kennedy assassination provides strong support for Angleton’s theory, although he doesn’t say they were directly involved in the assassination .
 Jack Ruby identifies Jack Ruby as a DGI agent . He also explains how the KGB was deeply involved in the planning along with the Cuban DGI .
 Disinformation is invaluable to understand what happened in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . Disinformation was crucial to understand the events in Dallas 1963 .
 After General Pacepa reads this article, I hope that he can provide me with additional information . I hope he will provide me additional information about the situation in the future .
 J Trento is a long time investigative reporter and author of several books on U.S. intelligence . Trento has been a long-time intelligence expert for decades .
 In The Secret History of the CIA, Trento reveals Angleton’s theory of DGI involvement in the Kennedy assassination . Trento: Angleton's theory is that DGI was involved in the JFK assassination .
 Angleton’s evidence of his theory was ordered destroyed by CIA Director William Colby in 1975, after he had fired Angleton the year before . Colby ordered Angleton's evidence destroyed in 1975 .
 Angleton, because of his 20 years as CIA Director of Counterintelligence, probably knew more than anyone else about the Kennedy assassination . Angleton's 20 years in charge of counterintelligence, is known for his role in the assassination of Kennedy .
 Trento interviewed him for many hours and was his close friend for eleven years . Trento was a close friend of Trento, who was his closest friend for 11 years. Trento said he interviewed him many hours .
 Trento interviewed hundreds of other top CIA agents, including John Sherwood and Robert Crowley .
 William Corson worked as an advisor for four different presidents . Corson is a former advisor to four presidents and served as a vice president .
 The book is a treasure trove of information about the CIA . It explains the controversy within U.S. intelligence agencies about defectors Nosenko and Golitsyn . It also explains how that affected the investigation into Kennedy's murder .
 Nosenko was a KGB disinformation agent; Golitsyn was legitimate, but he was avaricious and amoral . Golitsysyn was a legitimate, and the information he provided was of little value, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This book offers a very disturbing and depressing overview of the espionage and counterintelligence world . It offers a depressing and disturbing look at the espionage world .
 It leaves the reader shaken and feeling that there was not much difference between the KGB and the CIA top personnel . The book was published by the CIA, CIA and KGB .
 In a recent telephone conversation, he assured me that Angleton’s version of the assassination is correct . He said he is satisfied Angleton was right in his theory .
 He also told me that the truth about Kennedy’s death will probably never be known . Kennedy's death is probably never known, he said .
 Hopefully, he will also offer some comments when he reads this article . Hopefully he will offer some suggestions .
 Justice Warren refused to accept such evidence and nothing was included in the final report . Justice Warren said no evidence would be accepted in the report .
 Oswald visited the Odio sister in Dallas in September, 1963, on his way to Mexico . Epstein offers details of Oswald’s visit to Dallas in 1963 .
 According to Sylvia Odio, the Cubans who were with Oswald in Dallas when they visited her home were DGI agents . She told him that according to her father , her father said they were Cubans with Oswald . He interviewed her 15 years later .
 Mr Epstein will also review this article and hopefully provide some new inputs . Mr Epstein has also reviewed the article and will provide some more information .
 Cuban Intelligence, the CIA and the Assassination of John F Kennedy in 2012 in 2012 . Cuban Intelligence and the CIA have been involved in the assassination of JFK .
 In a newly published paperback edition this year, Brian has added a long, 8,000 word introduction which includes some extraordinary recent research by him .
 The paperback edition includes new information on the informal investigation conducted in Mexico after Kennedy’s death by United States ambassador Thomas Mann . Perhaps the most important new information provided in the paperback edition is the investigation conducted by the ambassador .
 Oswald stayed in the Hotel del Comercio where Oswald stayed during his week in Mexico City was “headquarters for pro Castro activities” and that the DGI used the hotel for intelligence purposes . Mann uncovered evidence that the hotel was used for intelligence .
 Mann also had some evidence that Oswald had received money at the Cuban embassy, perhaps from DGI agent Luisa Calderón . Mann had also some evidence of Oswald receiving money from the Cuban Embassy .
 Mann wanted Calderón and the Cuban consul, Azcue, arrested by Mexican authorities for complicity in the plot . Mann also wanted Calderon and Azcue arrested for complicity .
 Mann was ordered to stop any further investigations of Oswald’s activities in Mexico by new president Lyndon Johnson, a close friend of Johnson, who was himself under pressure from FBI Director Hoover, Robert Kennedy and Robert Kennedy .
 Latell also provides important evidence from former North Carolina Senator Robert B Morgan . Morgan was a member of the Church Senate investigative subcommittee on assassinations in 1975 .
 Senator Morgan said he would have convicted Castro of complicity in Kennedy's death . Morgan was a prosecutor in North Carolina before he was elected Senator . He was convinced of Castro's involvement in the assassination .
 Morgan's views were not included in the final report of the Church Committee . Morgan’s views are not included .
 Two books by Gus Russo, Live by the Sword and Brothers in Arms, are extremely important . Gus Russo is the author of several important books, including one of the world's most important .
 They offer a great deal of information on the assassination, especially on Oswald's stay in Mexico prior to the attempt on the president’s life . The book is published by the Library of American History .
 The books also provide hard evidence of the DGI agents escape from Dallas . Escalante’s deep involvement in the execution of the plan, the books say .
 Russo does not accept that DGI agents were directly involved in the shooting . He firmly believes that it was impossible for anyone else to shoot at Kennedy from the grassy knoll or any other spot in front of the caravan . Russo believes that anyone else could have shot Kennedy from any other
 Forensic evidence shows only two bullets fired from behind struck Kennedy . Kennedy was hit by two bullets from behind, says his father . He believes this is because he believes the evidence is consistent with his father's death .
 Russo is one of the few authors who is convinced that Castro was responsible for Kennedy’s death . Russo argues that the Kennedys brought it upon themselves what happened in Dallas .
 Russo believes because the Kennedys had been trying to kill Castro for years, Castro finally retaliated and struck before Robert’s final plan to kill him, could be implemented . Russo believes that because the Kennedy family had been . trying to . kill Castro, by using Rolando
 Russo provides a devastating indictment on the DGI’s record of assassinations . Escalona was involved in many of those murders, Russo says . Russo also provides an indictment on Escalón's participation .
 As of 2005, according to Russo, 67 foreign nationals have been killed by the Castro regime . 25 have been assassinated, including 14 Americans on U.S. soil .
 A CIA agent was meeting with Cubela in Paris, France, right at the time Oswald was killing Kennedy . In a final ironic twist on the final attempt against Castro’s life by Cubela, a CIA agent met with him in Paris at the same time .
 Cubela requested proof that Kennedy was behind the assassination plot on Castro . Cubela had requested direct proof of Kennedy's involvement in the plot .
 Desmond Fitzgerald of the CIA was dispatched to Paris on orders from Robert Kennedy to provide proof . Desmond Fitzgerald was dispatched by the CIA to provide Cubela’s proof .
 The Warren Commission Report was rushed to publication in late September, 1963, because Lyndon Johnson wanted the findings to be known before the 1964 presidential election . The Warren Report is basically useless .
 Two other Congressional Reports, by the Senate in 1975 and by the House of representatives in 1978-79, have useful information .
 The Senate Report includes much evidence from forensic and ballistic “experts” and tries to re-establish the ‘fact” that Oswald was the only assassin and there was no conspiracy . The Senate report includes much of the evidence .
 The Senate investigation was more concerned with revealing some of the CIA’s past misdeeds, which it did . Besides, the probe was more interested in exposing some of those misadventures, which they did .
 Other scientific evidence does not preclude the possibility of two gunmen firing at the President . The President is believed to have been shot at by two gunmen .
 The committee believes, on the basis of the evidence available to it, that President John F Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy .
 The Committee found evidence to conclude that there was more than one shooter and that there WAS a conspiracy to kill the president . It is to be noted that the Committee DID find evidence that .
 Those who read it probably decided it was old news because it did say there was a conspiracy, but not who was involved in it . Those who have read it likely decided it's old news .
 The evidentiary evidence that still exists can be found in the Mitrokhin and Vassiliev archives . The evidence is still available in the archives of both Mitrokins and the archives .
 Original KGB documents brought out of the USSR by two KGB defectors, Vasili Mitrokhin y Alexander Vassiliev . These contain copies of original KGB documents .
 Mitrokhin hand-copied thousands of secret documents and smuggled them out during 10 years . He smuggled out thousands of documents during his 10 years in prison .
 In 1999, part of the archive was published in the book The Sword and the Shield, by Mitrokhin and British historian Christopher Andrew .
 A second book by the same authors was published in 2005, The World Was Going Our Way . The World was Going Our way is published by the authors .
 KGB documents show KGB dealings with Third World nations . KGB documents include documents about KGB dealings in Third World countries .
 The Vassiliev archive consists of a number of notebooks and lots of unbound pages copied from original KGB documents . The archive was created in 1993 by Alexander Vassilliev, who was a KGB agent in 1987-90 .
 Although the Soviet Union had disintegrated by then, its archives were still secret . The archives were kept secret until the end of the 1980s .
 Two great books about Operation Venona, the secret intercept program by the U.S. Army during the Second World War, are essential to understand Soviet espionage . The books deal with the Kennedy assassination and with Soviet penetration of American society .
 Decoding Soviet Espionage in America, by John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr, is a book published by the CIA and State Department .
 Exposing Soviet Espionage and America’s Traitors, by Herbert Romerstein and Eric Breindel. Exposing the Soviet espionage and America's Traitors . Exposing Soviets Espionage . and America . Traitors: America's Secret War of the Cold War. Ex
 A large segment of American society was preconditioned to accept Operation Dragon and blame the assassination on the CIA and ‘conservative” elements, rather than on the responsible party, Lee Harvey Oswald, a committed communist . How the Assassination of John F Kennedy Shattered American Liberalism
 The book also illustrates how the myth of “Camelot” was created almost singlehandedly by Jacqueline Kennedy . The book is also a look at how the president became a “martyr” of civil rights .
 Oswald went from an unbalanced but convinced anti American and Kennedy hater, to a “nut”, a CIA “puppet” or an inconsequential “silly little communist” in the words of Jacqueline Kennedy . It has many fascinating details
 Seymour M Hersh’s book The Dark Side of Camelot is worth reading because it has most of the well-known conspiracy theories and numerous anecdotes about the reaction to the assassination by notable Washington insiders .
 Additional material on the U-2 piloted by Francis Gary Powers is Powers’s own memoirs, Operation Overflight . Powers accuses Oswald of revealing secrets to Oswald in his memoirs . Powers also accuses Khrushchev's son Sergey in American Heritage magazine . Two more recent articles
 Mentyukov broke 36 years of silence when he revealed the truth in 1996 . He broke his silence in 1996 when he first broke the silence .
 The Su-9 was ordered to ram the U-2, but Captain Mentyukov lost the plane in space . The air current created by the Su-8 broke the wing and it came down . The U2 was destroyed by the air current .
 As part of the cover-up, the CIA gave the Warren Commission a memorandum stating that Oswald knew nothing about the U-2’s operations and provided no information about it to the KGB in 1958-59 .
 He was present at the radar shack when pilots routinely asked about ‘winds aloft at 90,000”, a clear mention of the plane’s altitude . He says he was present when pilots asked about winds aloft in the air .
 General Pacepa is the main source as to the Soviet leader’s intentions and change of mind . General PacEPa is a main source of information as to what happened to Soviet leader .
 The Man and His Era, by William Taubman, does not mention anything about Khrushchev’s possible ill will against Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Three other books are better to illustrate Khrushchev’s personality . However, three other books were better to show the personality .
 The Fifty Year Wound, by Derek Leebaert, is excellent in its objective but highly critical treatment of the Soviet Premier . It is one of the best books on the Cold War .
 All the minutes and shorthand notes of the deliberations inside the Kremlin during the Missile Crisis are there . The minutes of the discussions are there. All the shorthand notes from the Kremlin are available .
 Nothing illustrates better Khrushchev’s motivations and reactions during the Crisis than what the authors reveal in their great book . Nothing illustrates more than what they reveal in this great book.
 The chapter about Khrushchev in The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Empire, by the renowned Russian historian General Dmitri Volkogonov, is without compare . And the chapter about the Khrushvich chapter about him in the book is also without compare.
 Lyndon Johnson always suspected, but did not know, about the Kennedy brothers multiple plans to kill Fidel Castro since before the Bay of Pigs invasion . Kennedy brothers planned to kill Castro before the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 He was, however, quite sure, that Castro was involved in the president’s assassination . He was also certain that Castro had been involved .
 Kennedy’s fine biography by Robert Dallek, An Unfinished Life, is one of them . Kennedy's fine biography is published in New York City .
 Johnson shared his suspicions about Castro with many friends and advisors, such as his Chief of Staff Joseph Califano and the powerful Georgia Senator Richard Russell, who also agreed with Castro’s guilt . Johnson also agreed to Castro's guilt .
 Johnson said that in a telephone call to his aide Bill Moyers, minutes after being told of the shooting . Johnson said he called Moyers minutes after the shooting minutes after he was told .
 Johnson was not just convinced of Castro’s involvement in the assassination . But Johnson was convinced that Castro was behind the assassination, he was also convinced .
 He endeavored to send a number of messages to Cuba that he was stopping all further attempts against Castro’s life, he said . To that effect, he endeavoured to send .
 He also dismantled all anti Castro activities, including Operation Mongoose, and stopped all CIA aid to anti Castro exiles within a few months .
 Robert Kennedy was more convinced of Castro's involvement than anyone else . He died convinced that Castro was responsible for Kennedy’s death . Robert Kennedy died convinced .
 He was, after all, in charge of Operation Mongoose since after the Bay of Pigs invasion . He was responsible for the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 He told his brother, in a memorandum written April 20, that Castro must be eliminated . He told brother, "It's time for Castro to be eliminated"
 Robert considered Castro’s Cuba by far the most pressing matter for the administration, and Castro the most dangerous man in the world . The administration considered Castro's Cuba to be the most important issue for Obama administration .
 He was convinced of Castro's intervention on his brother’s death, that he was the first to propose to Johnson an independent investigation .
 Robert convinced him that an independent investigation could immediately stop the dangerous rumors that either the Soviet Union or Cuba was involved in the assassination . Robert convinced Robert that the investigation would immediately stop rumors of either Soviet or Cuban involvement .
 Rumors could bring a new nuclear confrontation with the USSR and calls for an immediate invasion of Cuba . If not stopped, indeed, if confirmed, those rumors could bring new nuclear confrontations .
 If Castro’s involvement was proven, all the attempts to kill him by the Kennedy administration since 1961 would be known . The Kennedy administration has been trying to kill Castro since 1961 .
 Castro’s role in the assassination had to be suppressed, covered up . That would stain his brother's reputation and his legacy forever, so Castro had to hide his role . Castro's brother was killed in the death of Fidel Castro in 1968 .
 Robert could hardly hide his grief and regret for his responsibility in the plots to kill Castro . Robert was not able to hide his sadness and regret in the plot .
 Ambassador Mann was heard to exclaim, “I have killed my brother” when an especially compromising report came in from Ambassador Mann in Mexico . Ambassador Mann is heard to have exclaimed, ‘I have . killed my . brother’ He was heard exclaiming, ”I
 He was dramatically changed, realizing the consequences of the administration’s ‘assassination politics’ and accepting that it was wrong, he said . He said he was changed and accepted that it brought fatal results to him and his brother .
 National security considerations prevailed and the great cover-up was implemented . National security prevailed and national security prevailed, the author says .
 There are three upcoming events that may shed some new light on the assassination . The events are scheduled to take place in New York City .
 Brian Latell, Miami Herald writer Glenn Garvin and others will participate . The Miami Herald will participate in the Miami Marathon Marathon .
 I expect to be able to express my views and an alternate version at the conference . I expect the same things to be discussed at this conference as the conference.
 Perhaps, at least, a new discussion of the Kennedy assassination will ensue . Perhaps, perhaps, an even more serious discussion of JFK's assassination may ensue.
 The documentary will be shown by NBC on November 22, the 50th anniversary of Kennedy’s death . The second is a documentary to be shown on November 25 .
 Carlos Bringuier was interviewed for the program . Perhaps something different, if not new, will come out from the interview .
 Carlos Bringuier's new book will be published in December of this year . Carlos is the author of a new book that will be released in December .
 Fabián Escalante waited for Oswald to take him to Cuba at an airport in Dallas, Texas . Oswald was the Cuban president of the Cuban government in 1961 . Oswald had been captured in Cuba by Cuban President Salvador Salvador Salvador Dício Castro .
 Oswald thought he would be received in Cuba as a hero, but he might have been dumped in the Gulf of Mexico on the way to Cuba . He thought he was a hero but he was dumped there on his way to the island .
 Members of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee from Tampa were involved . Other members of the committee were also involved .
 Santos Trafficante was released from jail in Havana in 1959 by Cubela . He became a Castro agent and used his friend Jack Ruby to silence Oswald . Trafficante used Jack Ruby as a cover-up .
 The CIA was infiltrated to the highest levels by pro communist Castro sympathizers . The CIA is said to have been infiltrated by pro-Castro sympathizers in Cuba .
 Crime Without Punishment: How Fidel Castro Assassinated President Kennedy and Got Away With It . Crime Without Punishment: Fidel Castro assassinated President Kennedy . Fidel Castro assassinated JFK in the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963 .
 When I first wrote this article in Spanish a month ago, one of my purposes was to stimulate a new discussion on a matter shamefully covered up for half a century by the U.S. government . One of the reasons for this article is to stimulate new discussion about the cover-
 Cuban exiles were unjustly saddled with at least some of the responsibility for Kennedy’s murder . My other purpose was to try to cleanse the reputation of Cuban exile, he says . He says .
 I was never particularly interested in the subject and have never read any of the multiple ‘conspiracy books’ on the assassination . But I must admit I was . never particularly . interested in . the subject of conspiracy books .
 I generally believed there was a conspiracy to kill the president and it was made up of the CIA, the Mafia, some Cuban exiles and some Texas oilmen . Until I read General Pacepa's and Joseph Trento’s books a few months ago, I thought there
 "That research has helped enormously in my new understanding of what happened and why," she says . "I'm not going to be surprised at what happened to me," she adds .
 "I hope I can do something to correct the historical record and help some others to change their minds," he says . "I want to see different, alternate aspects of the assassination," he writes .
 The final truth may never be known, but the truth is definitely NOT what we have been led to believe for half a century . The truth may not be known - but it's definitely NOT the truth .
 Babalú is social, never socialist founding editorValentín ""El Machete" de la Cruz .