 The Soviets seemed intent on testing the quarantine line that Saturday . The Soviets were testing the quarantines that day .
 A United States ship dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine in the Caribbean . A U.S. submarine was sunk by a U.K. ship in the early 1950s .
 An American spy plane on a mission over Cuba fell off the radar over Cuba . The plane was a U.S. spy plane that was flying over the Cuban border .
 We have said that if Russia shoots down one of our U-2 reconnaissance planes, we will immediately retaliate . Russia has said it will retaliate if it shoots down a reconnaissance plane . The U.2 reconnaissance plane was shot down by Russia in 2009 .
 "We'll immediately bomb that missile site that took out the plane," Obama says . "Then we will prepare for an all-out invasion," he says . Obama: "We will be prepared for an invasion"
 Kennedy pulls back from the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Time and again, when the hawks in that room are insisting on invading, Kennedy pulls them back .
 Kennedy could see the chance for a peaceful solution was slipping away, so he chose the person he most trusted, Bobby, to take an urgent message to the Soviet Ambassador in Washington . Bobby's brother Bobby took the message to Washington, D.C.
 He was proposing a way out, which involved the United States giving up a set of redundant weapons . The newly installed Jupiter missiles in Turkey were installed in the country .
 Kennedy repeats his demand for Khrushchev to pull out of Turkey . U.S. will pull its missiles out of Cuba over the next few weeks, Kennedy says .
 The President was willing to back down, pull out the American missiles from Turkey, but only if that was kept secret . The President said he would back down if the missiles were pulled out of Turkey . He said the missiles would be pulled out if they were kept secret from Turkey .
 Strategic Air Command bombers circling over the Arctic waiting for the 'go' signals . The bombers are circling the Arctic, waiting for a signal .
 Other bombers, in the United States, they're being handed their target packets to bomb Russia the next day . The U.S. is being given the target packets .
 In Florida, the Fifth Marine Expeditionary Force is readying for the invasion - an invasion, war . The Fifth Marines are readying to prepare for an invasion .
 If Russia's drawn into it -and it will be, these are Russians on Cuba -nuclear war . Russia's on Cuba could lead to nuclear war if Russia is drawn in .
 William Mulholland ensured growth of Los Angeles by bringing water to the city via aqueduct . A colossal engineering failure, the dam was built by the architect of the Los Angeles Dam .
 Flood in the Desert Explore the derrumbe de la represa in 1928 and las secuelas del seguelas de California . Explore the aftermath of the deadly 1928 flood in California .
 Explore the derrumbe de la represa en 1928 and las secuelas del seguelas más mortal en California . Explore how much of California was hit by the Great Depression in 1928 . Explore the history of the California state of California .
 Explore the lives and legacies of three African American ambassadors who broke racial barriers to reach high-ranking appointments in the Truman, Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations . The American Diplomat explores the lives of three of the three ambassadors .
 Japanese destroyer split his PT-109 boat in half when it was split in half . Kennedy felt it was his duty to rescue his men from a Japanese destroyer .
 Jackie Kennedy created a new culture of elegance in the White House . JFK's Culture of Elegance was created in the 1960s .
 Jackie Kennedy set out to restore the White House and make it a center of art and culture . JFK was assassinated in 1968 . Jackie Kennedy was assassinated at the age of 50 .
 Get the latest on new films and digital content, learn about events in your area, and get your weekly fix of American history .