 John Kennedy saw this as a threat to his Country and stated he will create a naval blockage around Cuba and use military force if the Soviet Union did not remove the missiles . John Kennedy said he would create naval blockages around Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev decided to remove the missiles to avoid Cuba getting invaded by the U.S., thus avoiding a nuclear war . Eventually Soviet Union leader, Nikita . decided to opt out of the missiles .
 Fidel Castro was in very bad terms with America during this time . The reason why there were missiles in Cuba in the first was because he was in a bad relationship with the U.S.
 Castro wanted any American owned territory in Cuba removed; he would use force if necessary . Castro said he wanted to remove any American territory from Cuba .
 John Kennedy saw this as a threat to him and it caused the relationship that America had with Cuba to become hostile . The relationship between Cuba and the U.S. became hostile and became hostile .
 Soviet Union saw this as an opportunity to gain more power against America . Cuba benefited from this because they now had protection from the Soviet Union .
 Fulgencia Batista was a dictator who was later overthrown by Fidel Castro . He was overthrown in Cuba in 1959 . Fidel Castro overthrew the Batista .
 During Batista time he would consistently steal from his own people . He used severe harshness on opponents . Batista would steal from the own people and used harsh language .
 Cuba had a major impact on Cuba economically and it has yet to improve . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the fall of communism . Cuba is still struggling to cope with the effects of the collapse .
 I was in 5th grade during the Missile Crisis . I remember us all sitting tensely in the classroom as the Russian ships neared the blockade . I was a student at the time and remember sitting tense as the ships approached .
 Much later on it was revealed that a Russian submarine commander was within seconds of launching a middle at an American ship . Much later it was later revealed that the Russian sub was within . seconds of . launching a . middle at American ship.
 While writing this blog post it was very difficult to find accounts of people’s experience during this event . The event took place in the middle of the summer .
 Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Share a photo of your favorite news stories with us at iReport.com . Submit a photo to share your own .