 Today, however, one finds a certain generational divide as perhaps the salient characteristic of the enterprise . Today, it is perhaps the most significant feature of the company's success . The company is based in New York City .
 Young scholars have pioneered integration of sources from the "other side" of the Cold War into a nuanced, contextual, and truly international version of our recent past . They include James Hershberg, Vladislav Zubok, Chen Jian, Kathryn Weathersby, Mark Kramer, C
 Young historians avoid entanglement with old, ideologically divided schools of Cold War history . Acutely aware of the contingent nature of the new sources, these young historians avoid .
 The orthodox school of Herbert Feis and Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., blamed the Cold War on the Soviet Union . To oversimplify drastically, the orthodox school blames the Soviet Soviet Union for the conflict .
 The revisionist school of William Appleman Williams blamed American economic expansion for frightening the Soviets . Williams blamed U.S. economic expansion on frightening Soviet Russia .
 A few senior scholars already established in these debates have also dared to grapple with the new evidence—none to greater effect than the leading owl himself .
 The work is endearing because, in exposing the errors of past histories, Gaddis focuses frequently on his own . "Gaddis' work is very endearing," he says .
 Hardly anyone in either the older or younger generation of Cold War scholars will agree with all of Gaddis's judgments . Hardly everyone in either of the older . or younger generations will agree .
 The myth of calibrated brinkmanship was born of the belief that if you stand tough you win, you win . The belief that nuclear superiority makes the difference in moments of crisis was born in the myth .
 This myth, midwifed by the Kennedy family and its hagiographers, had untold consequences for the planning of the Vietnam War and the nuclear arms race . The Kennedy family's hagiography, including its own family members, led to the Kennedy myth .
 The terms, according to the memoir, were that this could not be an explicit quid pro quo and that the deal would never be publicly acknowledged by the United States . The terms of the deal were not publicly acknowledged, the memoir says .
 U.S. government documents declassified in the mid-1980s, including notes and transcripts from meetings of John F Kennedy's top advisers . The president appears not as the fastest draw at the OK Corral but as a peacenik .
 Rusk himself revealed JFK's willingness, had the crisis persisted much longer, to propose a public Turkey-Cuba trade through the U.N. In 1987 Rusk said JFK was willing to blink .
 Since then, the revisions have mounted as the documents have flooded out . The documents have been published on the internet .
 Theodore Sorenson cut references in RFK's diary to an explicit Turkey-Cuba deal . RFK was assassinated in November 1968 . Sorentson has admitted to cutting references to the deal .
 On the Soviet side, the Blight-Lang sessions were forced to rely on the largely uncorroborated memories of aging veterans and their children . Khrushchev's son was among those who participated in the sessions .
 It is a treasure-trove of a book, studded with quotations and citations from still-secret archives in Moscow, woven together with the new U.S. documentation .
 It is also a dramatic and highly readable narrative, the most authoritative to date, of the six-year period from the Cuban Revolution through the aftermath of President Kennedy's assassination and the 1964 coup that ousted Khrushchev .
 Soviet intelligence and embassy reporting from Havana to Moscow . A similar flow from Soviet agents and officials in Washington, and internal Politburo records .
 The first category alone makes this book essential reading of any serious analyst of U.S.-Cuban relations . The book is essential reading for all serious analysts of the relationship between the two countries .
 It yields extraordinary insights into the personalities of Castro, his brother Raúl, Che Guevara, and other leaders, as well as abundant information about Cuban military and intelligence capabilities, it says .
 Cuba feared a U.S. invasion was imminent before and after the Bay of Pigs landing in 1961 . The document shows the Cuban government's fear of an invasion of the United States .
 Khrushchev claimed that the missiles were there to defend the Cuban Revolution, he was not just scoring a propaganda point . The authors' evocative rendering of the resulting paranoia suggests that the authors' renderings of the situation are evocative .
 Soviet reporting from Washington.com is fascinating, but it's also fascinating .
 Russian intelligence officer Georgi Bolshakov met with RFK on a backchannel basis 51 times during 1961-62 . RFK met with him some 51 times between 1961 and 1962 .
 During the October crisis the KGB fell back on invasion tips from a bartender at the National Press Club . Yet despite these alleged penetrations, the KGB still relied on the advice of a bartender .
 Perhaps most astonishing is the degree of the Soviet premier acted as his own intelligence analyst . The Soviet premier's intelligence analyst was his own .
 Khrushchev's inner circle rarely consulted with the KGB about U.S. decisions regarding the United States . He rarely consulted with KGB about decisions regarding U.K. policy .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin would summon U.S. officials in Moscow to meet with him . Putin said he would summon whatever prominent Americans happened to be in the country .
 As with all such exclusive scholarly arrangements, the strength of Fursenko and Naftali's book is also its weakness . The strength of the book is both its strength and weakness, as with all of its scholarly arrangements .
 The authors' acknowledgments and source notes give little indication of what sorts of conditions were attached to their exclusive access . A discouraging omission, indeed, is a discouraging omission .
 Our understanding of the Cold War would be demonstrably the poorer, the authors say . That said, if the authors had not pushed for access they obtained, our understanding of it would be poorer .
 President Kennedy estimated the odds of nuclear war during the missile crisis as having been one in three . President Kennedy later estimated odds of war during crisis as one in 3 .