 Washington Post columnist Anne Applebaum concluded that it’s questionable whether foreign policy experience is essential for anyone aspiring to the presidency . Applebaum: Foreign policy experience isn’t an essential foreign policy qualification .
 Lyndon B Johnson had held national office for years before becoming president, but he still couldn't cope with Vietnam . He still couldn’t cope with the war .
 The Cuban missile crisis occurred during President Kennedy’s watch 45 years ago . Applebaum's implication was that Johnson did not absorb the right lessons while serving as JFK's vice president .
 The tapes are sketchy on the subject of the missile crisis, but enough can be gleaned from them to confirm that Johnson was never privy to the true history of the crisis .
 False history led to mistaken lessons, including belief in the efficacy of calibrated force, which helped prevent Johnson from seriously entertaining the concessions necessary for a negotiated political solution to the Vietnam War .
 The conscious exclusion of Johnson from the truth goes far beyond the superficially parallel situation that occurred when Harry Truman succeeded Franklin D Roosevelt . Harry Truman replaced Franklin D. Roosevelt with Harry Harry .
 Truman’s ignorance of the Manhattan Project, and of the mounting problems with the Soviet Union, was not at all purposeful . In that case, it was not all clear that he was unaware of the problems .
 Roosevelt’s conduct of foreign policy was shambolic by nature, and excluding Truman from important knowledge was not calculated . Roosevelt's conduct of . foreign policy . by nature . The president was excluded from important . knowledge, not calculated.
 Top presidential advisers are generally loath to share secrets of one administration with another administration, even of the same political party . Top advisers generally don't share secrets with other administrations .
 The shadow of Robert F Kennedy over the entire Johnson presidency was also a powerful reason for keeping Johnson ignorant of the Kennedy shadow .
 Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy were already considered insufficiently loyal to LBJ . LBJ's brother said they were not loyal enough to serve LBJ as they had served JFK .
 Had one of them shared JFK's biggest secret with Johnson, the leaker surely would have been fingered and his indiscretion regarded as unpardonable .
 Out of the 12 regular members of the fabled ExComm, four were not privy to the secret codicil that helped end the October 1962 missile crisis . The explicit guarantee that America’s Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be quietly removed following a Soviet withdrawal from Cuba .
 ExComm members denied this knowledge were General Maxwell Taylor, C Douglas Dillon, John McCone, and Lyndon Johnson . The ExComm also denied it were .
 President Kennedy presumably excluded Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, because the chiefs had expressed unwavering opposition to any link between the missiles, surreptitiously emplaced in Cuba, and the Jupiters, openly sited in Turkey .
 Treasury Secretary Dillon was also denied knowledge of the settlement terms, probably because he was a prominent Republican . Dillon had argued vigorously against a deal involving the Jupiters .
 Director of Central Intelligence and energetically supported withdrawal of the obsolete Jupiters, if it facilitated getting the Soviet missiles out of Cuba . Not even the fact that he was director of central intelligence was sufficient for his admittance into the president’s inner circle .
 President Kennedy was intent on keeping every Republican, from Dwight Eisenhower on down, in the dark about the true terms of the missile crisis settlement . He could hardly confide in McCone, who regularly briefed the former president on national security matters .
 John Kennedy shut out Lyndon Johnson, a Democrat and the second-highest officeholder in the land . Kennedy also decided, quite deliberately, to shut out LBJ, who was a Democrat .
 Johnson valued loyalty above all else, and since he expected it, he gave it in return . Like any consummate politician, he valued loyalty, loyalty .
 Johnson had been a team player since January 1961 . Though bitterly disappointed at the meager responsibilities given him by the Kennedy White House, Johnson was bitterly disappointed .
 In word, deed, and appearance, he had been completely loyal to the president . He had aired all of his private differences over policy (and he had some) with the president alone .
 Hardened Washington columnists, some of whom had known Johnson for decades, were keenly aware of the indignities and humiliations he suffered as vice president . Hardened D.C. columnists recall Johnson's humiliation and humiliation .
 Johnson was the uncouth Texan who simply didn’t fit, ridiculed behind his back as ‘Uncle Cornpone” for his accent and manner . Johnson was ridiculed for his manner and his accent .
 LBJ refused to be a source of political dirt or information about the administration’s internal machinations . Yet LBJ amazed columnists with his self-discipline, for refusing to reveal secrets .
 The Kennedys' distrust of LBJ had been enough to overcome their distrust of Johnson . Still, not even LBJ’s repeated demonstrations of fidelity had been sufficient to overcome the distrust . Robert Kennedy's dislike for LBJ was ineradicable .
 In the days following the discovery of the Soviet missiles on October 15, Johnson had played an ambiguous, even contradictory, role at the ExComm meetings . When he chose to speak at all, which was not often, he chose not often .
 JFK specifically solicited Johnson’s opinion on October 16, the first day of deliberations . The vice president expressed the view that the offensive elements of the Soviet buildup were intolerable for domestic political reasons .
 The administration simply had to remove the threat by force, by force if necessary, and regardless of whether America’s allies approved . The administration had to do so, regardless of allies' approval .
 LBJ went missing in action, albeit through no fault of his own, during the ExComm’s discussions turned to the crucial question of whether to impose a blockade or take more violent action .
 The impending off-year election meant Johnson had to make a long campaign swing . Johnson had been booked to make the trip to London ahead of the general election .
 The administration did not want to signal Moscow that its missiles had been sighted in Cuba . It was decided to keep LBJ on the political hustings as if nothing were untoward . LBJ was on the campaign trail when the missiles were sighted .
 The president directed DCI McCone to brief the vice president on everything that had transpired, including the decision to impose a blockade . On the evening of October 21, Johnson finally made it back to Washington .
 Johnson initially expressed disagreement with the policy that had been developed in his absence . Johnson initially said he was unhappy with the new policy .
 Johnson reluctantly changed his position to favor quarantine . Eisenhower had also briefed Dwight Eisenhower that morning . The former president opposed a surprise attack .
 Eisenhower exercised as much influence on Johnson’s judgment as Eisenhower did when it came to matters of national security . Few people exercised more influence than Johnson on national security matters .
 Johnson attended every ExComm session thereafter, though his return hardly seemed to matter . Once the crisis became public on October 22, Johnson attended all ExComm sessions thereafter .
 Johnson may have been sticking to his “general policy of never speaking unless the president asked ,” and behaving as he thought a vice president should, Washington Decoded .
 JFK specifically asked LBJ for his opinion, but he chose to remain silent and withdrawn . LBJ chose not to respond to JFK's request . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 LBJ repeatedly declined to offer a strong opinion during several meetings, particularly when the president was in attendance . LBJ was uncomfortable with all the ‘Harvards’ in JFK’s inner circle .
 Johnson only began to assert himself during the critical ExComm meeting on Saturday, October 27, which began at 4 PM and lasted for more than three hours . Johnson said the meeting was critical and that he will continue to push back .
 Johnson insinuated that unless there was a firm response, the public would soon perceive the administration as backing away from Kennedy’s October 22 speech to the nation . The president said the U-2 had been downed by a Soviet surface-toair missile .
 LBJ seemed to favor a negotiated solution to the crisis, though he also came down on both sides of the key issue of linkage . Overall, LBJ favored negotiated solutions to the problem .
 At one point he criticized Robert McNamara’s stiff opposition to a missile swap, arguing that the Jupiter missiles were “not worth a damn” anyway . At another point, he said the Jupiter missile was “a waste of time” and that it was �
 Minutes later, LBJ likened an outright trade to appeasement . He said it would be tantamount to dismantling the containment edifice Washington had painstakingly built over the past 15 years . LBJ: An outright trade would dismantle the containment .
 The president convened a rump ExComm session on October 27, after the regular one broke up and just before the evening meeting with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Johnson was purposefully excluded from the trusted inner circle .
 Johnson was unaware of the genuine settlement terms which were offered that Saturday night, and hastily accepted by Nikita Khrushchev the next day . Johnson was left unaware .
 Perhaps it was feared Johnson might be incapable of ‘disinforming’ the Georgian, who was critical of the administration’s handling of Cuba . Johnson was still very close to Richard B Russell, his Senate mentor, before he died .
 The notion that LBJ would have to contend with the legacy of the missile crisis appeared very unlikely, for LBJ . LBJ seemed like a relic from a by-gone political age .
 Johnson himself was practically the only person who believed he might be a viable candidate for the 1968 Democratic nomination . Johnson was a candidate for President of the United States .
 In two months’s time, The Saturday Evening Post would publish an ‘exclusive’ account of the missile crisis . In that article, LBJ would not be mentioned in the article at all .
 In little more than a year, LBJ became the first president forced to grapple with JFK's storied handling of the missile crisis .
 Khrushchev's "eyeball to eyeball" confrontation with Moscow ended abruptly in 1962 . Saturday Evening Post article published in December 1962 had become quickly encrusted with legend and lore . The article was published by the Post in New York City in December .
 According to this Hollywoodized version, Kennedy’s resoluteness, restraint, and controlled escalation of force prompted Moscow to capitulate . No one demonstrated more wisdom and foresight than Robert F. Kennedy, it is claimed .
 Adlai Stevenson was the standardbearer of liberal Democrats, but was depicted as an appeaser . Meanwhile, the standard bearer of the liberal Democrats was portrayed as a appeaser, and Lyndon Johnson, of course, was nowhere to be found .
 This vigorously propagated image, of “wonderfully coordinated and error-free ‘crisis management,’’, was generally swallowed by the media . The image of the crisis management was vigorously defended by the White House .
 The president’s 1963 assassination added the luster of martyrdom to the narrative, making it all the more difficult, if not almost blasphemous, to discern the truth .
 The myth of the missile crisis settlement created an enormous burden of expectation for Lyndon Johnson, one that could never be actually met . As a leading missile crisis scholar, Barton Bernstein was the first to point out in 1992, in 1992 .
 Johnson was peculiarly ill-suited to shoulder, given his deep-seated insecurity and the barely concealed attitude of many Kennedy loyalists, most notably the attorney general . This burden, it must be pointed out, was also one that Johnson was unique to shoulder . The burden was
 Their view was that Johnson was an undeserving successor, even a usurper, who occupied the White House temporarily, and only because of a terrible accident . The White House was briefly occupied by Johnson, but only because he was killed in an accident .
 Johnson knew that several elements of Kennedy's "finest hour" were sheer puffery, if not downright wrong . Of course, as he succeeded Kennedy in office, he knew that some elements of his ‘finest moment’ were puffery . Johnson: "I'm not
 LBJ well knew that deliberations had not been coolly analytical, closely argued, and rational at all times . LBJ knew deliberations had been “desultory, spastic, and often inchoate,” in Bernstein’s words .
 LBJ recognized that Adlai Stevenson had been unfairly and maliciously depicted as advocating a ‘Munich” Stevenson had dared to be the Washington Decoded first adviser to suggest a missile swap . Stevenson's only sin was that he had dared .
 Johnson, lastly, was also cognizant of Operation MONGOOSE, and surely realized the instrumental role that provocative covert action had played in precipitating the crisis . Johnson's actions were likely to have precipitated the crisis.
 Johnson believed some elements that he believed were true were, in fact, false . Yet unbeknownst to Johnson, other elements of Johnson's story were true .
 The most critical fact about the missile crisis settlement was not beyond Johnson’s ken, because such deal-making was hardly foreign to him . Kennedy had claimed toughness, but cut a private deal, but not a deal .
 LBJ labored under the false impression that American power could force a Communist leader bent on “nuclear blackmail” to back down and become pragmatic, he says . LBJ: "American power, when expertly applied, could force [Chinese] leader [to] back down
 Johnson's false narrative was doubly crippling for his own tendencies . What made this false narrative doubliveive for Johnson were some of his tendencies .
 LBJ was an overbearing, controlling personality in the first place . He was prone to micro-managing a war if he had the misfortune of getting involved in one . LBJ has been a controlling personality since his presidency began .
 Johnson kept intact the national security team assembled by Kennedy, so as to prove continuity with JFK’s policies, also exacerbated matters . The fact that Johnson kept . intact the team assembled . by Kennedy also exacerbates matters .
 It has long been known that Johnson was unduly awed by Kennedy’s brainy advisers . It has been known for years that the President was impressed by his advisers .
 LBJ's unspoken presumption was that the same men who were at Kennedy’s side in October 1962 would surely see Johnson through to a similar, unmitigated victory, regardless of the differences .
 Johnson may have been too reluctant to buck the counsel of the holdovers even when his gut instinct told him to do so . In a similar vein, Johnson could have bucked the advice of holdovers in the Senate .
 Kennedy was guided by the same men who guided Kennedy to his spectacular victory . After all, these were the same people who had helped Kennedy to victory .
 Johnson had a more accurate understanding of the missile crisis’ true history, he still would have had to contend with the false analogies and “lessons” that were rife in public .
 The explicit and implicit comparisons with his predecessor’s success in Cuba began with the Gulf of Tonkin incidents in the late summer of 1964, and grew in intensity as Vietnam began to overshadow everything else .
 The inevitable juxtaposition was seldom put as crudely, however, as it was in December 1964 . It was in the midst of a war of words .
 Washington Post columnist Joseph Alsop directly raises the missile crisis analogy . Vietnam's situation is rapidly deteriorating following President Ngo Dinh Diem’s violent ouster .
 Vietnam is what the second Cuban crisis was for John F Kennedy, Alsop wrote . For Lyndon B Johnson, Vietnam was the second Cuba crisis for Kennedy . Vietnam is the second crisis for JFK, he wrote .
 If Mr Johnson ducks the challenge, we shall learn by experience about what would have been like if Kennedy had ducked the challenge in October, 1962 . Mr Johnson will be the next president of the United States .
 Washington Decoded Alsop’s remark sparked outrage in Johnson, whereas if he had been privy to the truth, the column might have been received with a shrug, or a caustic remark .
 Bill Moyers suggested to LBJ that he reconstitute ExComm, or something very much like it, in 1965 . Moyers: ExComm was the first crossroads with respect to Vietnam, whether to send in ground forces or not . ExComm: "ExComm" is
 President Johnson was tested by the Communist powers during the Cold War . The president's resolve was tested at the height of the crisis .
 Johnson articulated his reluctance to commit U.S. troops to a Southeast Asian sinkhole .
 LBJ apparently felt a deep obligation to re-stabilize South Vietnam . Washington had connived in Diem’s overthrow in November 1963, a decision with which he had vehemently disagreed .
 By early 1966, it was apparent that U.S. power was not having the desired affect . But accurate knowledge of the missile crisis end-game might have persuaded Johnson to be more ruthless or cynical .
 The literature on LBJ’s peace feelers suggests that he was not really prepared to concede South Vietnam after a decent interval, unlike his successor in the White House . LBJ's predecessor might have done, had he lived to deal with the consequences of his policy .
 References below are a sobering reminder about the pitfalls of drawing the wrong lessons from history . The references below are brief, but are sobering .
 LBJ discussed stump strategy with his long-time chief of staff, Walter Jenkins . With just weeks to go in the campaign that would elect LBJ president, LBJ discusses stump strategy .
 A key plank in Barry Goldwater’s platform was that the Democrats were failing to hold the line against Moscow and its Communist allies . The party was founded in 1964, and Goldwater ran for the presidency .
 The morning this conversation occurred, Goldwater was quoted in the major newspapers as criticizing Kennedy’s handling of Cuba . Goldwater had criticized Kennedy's handling of the situation in the morning .
 In 1962, Goldwater said the assassinated president had “stopped short” in Cuba, thereby allowing the Communist menace in Cuba to grow . During a campaign stop in L.A. Goldwater asserted that the Cuban threat in Cuba had been allowed to grow.
 Johnson’s powerful rebuttal was to frame his GOP opponent as an unsuitable choice for a nation that had to be poised for war at a moment of notice . Johnson: “I’m not a war-ready candidate for president. I'm a war veteran.
 There was some criticism that Johnson was going overboard in that regard, because of some of the imagery used to suggest that Goldwater was dangerously unstable . Johnson was criticized for using imagery suggesting that he was unstable .
 The implication, of course, was that Johnson was the only candidate with the experience and wisdom to carry on Kennedy’s unique blend of restraint and resolve . Not the genuine version of Kennedy, but the one deemed suitable for Johnson and public consumption .
 I want Quayle to submit the same thing, and submit ‘em and have ‘them ready for me on Monday. And then I want ‘one, and one, for me, to submit them, and have them ready for him on Monday . And then he
 I know we oughta have one on foreign policy, foreign policy and waste in government, cuttin’ taxes, and stuff like that. And I know . I know one on waste and government waste, cutin’s like that,’I know . And
 When I came in 11 months ago . . . I said to ‘em, ‘God help me,” and they would pray for me . Why, I’d just do the best I could, that’s all I could promise. That’
 "If they wanna throw me out after 11 months, they can do it. Ah . . Now if they want to throw them out after . 11 months they can . do it."
 "I sat there in that Security Council for 37 days and I had 37 meetin’s," says President Obama . "I had 37 meetings in 37 days," says Obama. "I was there for 37 meetings. I sat there there."
 "I never left in the mornin' knowin’ know’s whether I’d see my family that night or not," he says . "I’m not going to leave in the morning knowing if I was going to be able to see my
 He had a eyeball to eyeball with Khrushchev, and had a confrontation, he said . Both of ‘em decided we couldn’t destroy the world. Both of 'em decided 'they couldn't destroy 'the world. He said .
 "It's one of the greatest, courageous acts any leader ever performed," he says . "I say shame on you. For anybody now to say, at this late date, that there’s somethin’ wrong with that," he said .
 "That’s the only thing that really makes ‘em pee in their britches. Now we oughta have a 15 minute speech like it," she said .
 You be your own judge. Who do you want to answer that phone, and who do you . want to put that thumb on the . . . who’ll have that thumb there on the table close to that button. And I’m not gonna recommend him not recommend
 Washington Decoded is a weekly English language language produced by CNN iReport.com . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Follow us on Twitter @CNNLiving .
 They build up a straw man to get me to say that my opponent does this or that – I’m just not gonna do it – that’s a matter for you to decide, he says . The fight will be the first time the U.S. has seen
 There was increasing discomfort in Washington about the marked lack of progress in Vietnam . It raised basic questions about U.S. assumptions and expectations .
 Disturbing indicators suggested Communist forces were adapting to the influx of troops, and even taking advantage of United States weaknesses and constraints . The U.S. has been in the grip of the Communist Party in Vietnam since April 1968 .
 McNamara returned from Vietnam with “grave doubts,” convinced that it would be “a long war” and that as many as 600,000 U.S. ground troops might be needed . McNamara had been overflowing with confidence .
 This grim reality led to a series of meetings that involved Johnson’s top advisers on national security, many of them unchanged from Kennedy's ExComm . The grim realities led to meetings that included Johnson's top advisers .
 LBJ’s advisers had a consensus that because the United States could not withdraw, a massive infusion of troops was the only choice which might result in an acceptable outcome . As the deliberations over escalation began, there was already a consensus among advisers .
 Johnson was at his Texas ranch while his advisers were meeting daily in Washington . He harked back to his first-hand knowledge of how policy had been hammered out during missile crisis .
 In effect, Johnson was asking the men who had served Kennedy so well to do the same for him . Johnson was asked to ask Kennedy's men to step up and serve him .
 "You ought to get Rusk and Ball and McNamara, McNamara and maybe Clifford yourself in a room and pick all the proposals to pieces," he says .
 Our original judgment on Cuban missile crisis was—what we wanted to do the first hour, and what ultimately was done—was quite different . And we observed, from the past, that . . . our original judgment was quite different, says President Obama . Obama: "What we wanted
 "Yes, I got his thinking, which I think was very good, but—on a good many things," he says . "I think he's right, but he's wrong on a lot of things. Yes, he says, but on many things."
 "Now, here are the pros and cons," he says . "And then summarize it, and say, “Now, there are the positives and cons. And then summary it,” he writes .
 Mr President. And you can take the red candy or the vanilla, whichever you want, Mr President .
 President Johnson had declared a temporary lull in the bombing of North Vietnam on December 22, hoping the gesture would lure Hanoi to the negotiating table on Washington’s terms .
 The pause was then extended repeatedly in January, to see if the administration’s ‘peace offensive’ elicited a response . The pause has been extended repeatedly since January, with the pause extended in January .
 By January 27, Johnson was resigned to ending the bombing pause, and in a series of intensive sessions not unlike ExComm meetings, he was consulting with his key advisers .
 Vice President Hubert Humphrey called the president after the end of one session on January 28 . Humphrey was out of town when the call was made . The vice president was in the middle of the session .
 Johnson hoped against hope for Washington Decoded some slight movement on Hanoi’s part, anything that might give him a pretext to extend the peace offensive . But in the conversation with Humphrey, Johnson revealed that he was still hoping against hope that Washington Decode would happen .
 Johnson says there was a basis for him continuing to have a sliver of hope . Johnson: "There is still a chance" for him .
 Johnson had been left out of the loop with respect to the Cuba-Turkey linkage . Johnson had manufactured his own speculative understanding of what, at that final moment, made Khrushchev retreat .
 LBJ believed word of an imminent U.S. attack on Cuba leaked to Khrushchev in October 1962 . The Soviet premier accepted the United States' offer with alacrity .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff wrote a letter to Kennedy recommending that he bomb . . He let ‘em have it, and that he let them have it . The Joint chiefs of Staff said that he bombed .
 By early 1966, public criticism of the Johnson administration’s conduct of the war was increasingly under attack, exacerbated by his decision to resume bombing North Vietnam on January 31 .
 The early consensus in Congress over the war was breaking down, and, still worse, members of Johnson’s own party were leading the charge . Members of Johnson's own party led the charge against the war .
 Beginning on January 28, Fulbright had initiated a series of hearings, some of which would be televised “gavel-to-gavel” over the three national networks .
 The sessions exposed the administration’s leading figures, namely Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, to withering and sustained criticism, mostly from moderate and liberal Democrats .
 Fulbright hearings were making dissent as legitimate and mainstream as support for the war . In effect, the hearings made dissent as mainstream and legitimate, as was support for war . The hearings were in effect, making dissent legitimate, mainstream as mainstream .
 The elephant in the room was one particular Democrat not even among the “problem senators” on the Foreign Relations committee . Johnson: “I'm not a problem senator. I'm a problem. I don't like it. It's a problem,” he said .
 Two days before this conversation, Kennedy had issued a statement that cautiously, but unmistakably, distanced himself from the administration’s prosecution of the war . Kennedy was under great pressure from those seeking a restoration of Camelot .
 RFK argued for a negotiated political settlement, which would invite the Viet Cong to share power . He insinuated Johnson was bent on achieving a simple military victory he insinuated .
 The president made several allusions to the missile crisis in a conversation with Bundy . Bundy said the U.S. is interested in negotiating with Hanoi, Vietnam . Bundy also made several references to the crisis .
 He recalled how Fulbright, a dove with respect to the Vietnam War, had been a leading hawk in October 1962 . Fulbright was a leading dove in Vietnam War .
 Johnson suggested bombing North Vietnam was a way of pressing Ho Chi Minh to negotiate . John Kennedy’s supposedly unyielding stance had forced Khrushchev to bargain, he said .
 The parallel Johnson drew between the bombing resumption, and President Kennedy’s resolve, was not apt . President Kennedy's resolve was not as strong as President Johnson's .
 It again betrayed a lack of understanding about what had happened in October 1962, specifically, and the lengths JFK did and was prepared to go to avoid a conflict that might spiral out of control .
 Johnson also repeated the claim made during his February conversation with Humphrey . He said that a leak about imminent military action galvanized Khrushchev into action .
 In other words, a Kennedy twist on Eisenhower’s 1950s policy of brinkmanship had caused the Soviets to beat a hasty retreat . In other . words, the Soviets had been forced to withdraw from the Soviet Union .
 Bundy did nothing to correct Johnson’s understanding, content to leave him in his state of his mistaken belief . Bundy did not correct Johnson's understanding . Bundy left the president in a state of confusion .
 All we ask you to do is just Washington Decoded proudly—if you want to—walk into a meeting hall with us, and to reason, and talk, and be prepared to give and take, and we’ll try to do the same thing .
 "You just got to know, that we're not goin’ get out, and, ah, we . . We don’t think that you . goin' take it over, and we think if you’re willin' to let them decide it
 "These, I think, are the places where the needle goes in . . in terms of people's fears," she says . "And these, I . think, is the places people fear," she adds .
 Yes, I think everything we’ve ever had . . . We have had that. Yes, he says . We've had that, he adds . We’s had that .
 They were certainly . . . They certainly were air strike plus invasion, really, really . They were . certainly were . air strike . and invasion . It was air strike, invasion .
 I was told by my military aide that he was told that he had been told that they had signed it . That Taylor was on board, that he signed it, he said . He was told .
 President Obama said he was going to take over the White House, but backed away from it at the very moment .
 A good many people over there—who were gossipers and who are still gossipers—were of the opinion that, ah . . the Commies knew about that, and that’s why Khrushchev came in . when he did. And a good many . people over
 Being privy to the truth about the missile crisis settlement might not have altered materially Johnson’s decisions about Vietnam . The settlement settlement may not have changed the course of the war .
 Max Holland is the editor of Washington DeCoded, and Tara Marie Egan is the editorial assistant . More knowledge would have served him better than what he was allowed to know . But more knowledge would've indisputably served him .
 Anne Applebaum, “What Presidents Don’t Know,” Washington Post, 21 August 2007 . She says Obama’s lack of knowledge about foreign policy is “a mistake”
 Information from the Soviet Union surfaced to suggest that Khrushchev was shaken by the unauthorized downing of a U-2 aircraft on October 27, and Castro's endorsement of a conflict involving nuclear weapons .
 Administration officials in 1962 would have had no way of knowing this was the case, or for decades afterwards . That may have been true .
 "Secret trade clinched the settlement. Thus, it was natural to assume it clinched," he said . "I'm not surprised," he added .
 Bundy was even more precise, telling Bernstein that Johnson did not know . Bundy told Bernstein Johnson didn't know. Bundy said Johnson did know .
 Johnson’s advisers did not tell him about the secret assurance because they themselves did not want to give LBJ any reason for departing from a hawkish policy . It may also have been the case that apart from being under the watchful eye of President Kennedy's brother, .
 Rusk knew better than anyone that it was a misleading comparison . In November 1964, for example, Rusk directly juxtaposed the deteriorating situation in Vietnam with the missile crisis .
 ExComm was formally constituted on October 22, but effectively existed as of October 16 . The ExComm is formally constituted but formally existed on October 16, 2013 .
 The only explanation for the exclusion of Dillon and McCone was party affiliation . Other ExComm members opposed to linkage were allowed into the inner circle . The exclusion was likely due to party affiliation, since other Excomm members were allowed in .
 It was largely because of McCone, a notorious and stubborn hard-liner, that the ExComm had the luxury of several days to debate a U.S. response in the first place .
 McCone was the only senior adviser who consistently warned the Soviets were bound to include offensive nuclear weapons as part of their military build-up .
 He pressed the White House into keeping up U-2 surveillance of Cuba at a time when virtually everyone in the administration believed that Khrushchev wouldn’t dare . He then pressed for the U.S. to keep up U.2 surveillance .
 On October 15, McCone had been proven right and everyone else wrong; but more importantly, since the missiles were still discovered before they were operational, it gave the administration precious time to collect itself . The administration has been given time to assess the situation .
 McCone had served as chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission during Eisenhower’s second term . McCone was close to the former president and close to his wife .
 McCone was considered a likely candidate for secretary of defense had Richard Nixon, Eisenhower’s vice president, won the 1960 election . He was considered to be a possible candidate for defense secretary .
 Johnson attended 37 of the 42 ExComm meetings, although those sums are somewhat misleading . In all, Johnson attended the 42 meetings, including 37 meetings .
 The sessions include sessions that stretched until March 1963, long after critical phase of the missile crisis was over . In addition, they include the sessions between March 1963 and March 1963 .
 It is worth noting that Johnson’s attendance is not accurately rendered in the relevant Miller Center of Public Affairs volume of Kennedy tapes .
 President Kennedy also had political speaking engagements lined up, but they were not as distant from Washington . The president was often able to return to Washington on the same day .
 According to Baker, Johnson was called back from his campaign tour, but this claim could not be confirmed by us .
 Dallek Washington Decoded suggested in his LBJ biography that since Johnson’s first impulse was to launch an attack against the sites rather than impose a blockade, that his confidence in his own judgment was subsequently undermined .
 This ignores the fact that after McCone told Johnson about Eisenhower’s reaction, the vice president assented to the blockade . The vice president told Eisenhower about the blockade, and the blockade was approved .
 If the standard were one’s initial thoughts, virtually every member of ExComm would have had reason to doubt their own judgment . Moreover, if the standard had been one, the standard would have been one of the worst .
 Johnson strongly supported a compromise involving the Jupiters on October 27, when it mattered . Johnson was hardly alone in switching positions, and strongly supported the compromise . Johnson: "I'm not sure what I think about the compromise."
 George Reedy, who served as LBJ’s press secretary in the Senate and the White House, once told historian Sheldon Stern that LBJ and Kennedy were the two most charismatic men he had ever known .
 LBJ seemed to turn off his own charisma in JFK's presence, Reedy says . LBJ was vice president, but JFK seemed to have turned off his charisma in his presence .
 One possible explanation for why Johnson suddenly seemed to find his voice on October 27 was that he feared the administration was about to take a step that would be as disastrous for it as the Bay of Pigs had been .
 In that case, Johnson’s ambition to run in 1968 as the natural successor to a successful president would be severely damaged . Johnson would have been severely damaged if he ran for president in 1968 .
 The precise details of how four ExComm members were disinvited from the gathering in the Oval Office remain murky . Four members of the ExComm were invited to the White House by the president .
 Bundy, who was the first to reveal the inner circle meeting, described it in a passive manner, as if it were an organic development . Bundy described it as an 'organic development' Bundy described the meeting as 'a passive manner' Bundy said it was 'an organic development'
 RFK’s animus toward LBJ may have been instrumental in the vice president being excluded . RFK's animus for LBJ is shown to have been a factor in his exclusion .
 Senator Russell was easily the most vocal critic of the president’s decision to impose a blockade . Russell was almost incredulous that Kennedy had not already ordered up an invasion .
 Baker, Johnson Eclipse, 123; Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett, “In Time of Crisis,” Saturday Evening Post, 8 December 1962 . Baker, Baker, and Bartlett wrote the book, "Johnson Eclipse"
 Bartlett was JFK’s personal friend, dating back to the 1950s, and Alsop was known for having top sources of information . The article was thought to reflect the D.C. Decoded administration's preferred account of Bartlett .
 The article openly claimed to have privileged access to unimpeachable sources . In addition to the article, the article claimed to be able to access unimpeached sources .
 Johnson was omitted altogether from the article, although LBJ surely realized it . As Baker points out, in the uproar over the unfair depiction of Stevenson, the fact that LBJ was omitted from the piece escaped notice .
 The insult was perpetuated in Robert F Kennedy’s edited memoir, Thirteen Days, which suggested that Johnson was an intermittent ExComm attendee . Johnson had been designated a regular member in the memo establishing the ad hoc group, and missed meetings only because the White House wanted to
 After Bernstein raised the issue, many scholars have weighed in on the question of how the missile crisis influenced LBJ's decision-making on Vietnam .
 Even Theodore Sorensen, one of the chief myth-makers, began to have reservations about its impact . Washington Decoded looks at the “eyeball-to-eyebal” mythology .
 Sorensen, as one of the secret-keepers of the explicit deal, would not be inclined to admit to another outcome . Of course, he would not admit another outcome.
 McNamara wrote in 1995 that JFK's willingness to trade the Jupiters meant it was “highly probable” he would have reversed course in Vietnam . McNamara, writing in 1995, argued that JFK’s willingness to . trade the . Jupeters meant
 Robert E Thompson, “Goldwater Hits United States ‘Retreat’ before Reds,” Los Angeles Times, 10 October 1964 . Thompson: "Goldwater hits United States 'Retreat' before Reds"
 LBJ was referring to news reports about Goldwater’s October 9 luncheon address in Los Angeles . LBJ said Goldwater's October 9 address was a mistake .
 In earlier campaign remarks, Goldwater had also impugned Kennedy by suggesting he timed the missile crisis for political gain in the 1962 elections .
 Johnson was justifiably defensive about the instantly infamous ‘daisy petal’ TV ad . The ad depicted a young girl picking daisies in a field . Johnson was the subject of the ad, which depicted a girl picking flowers .
 When the ad first aired in September, the GOP had vehemently denounced it as perpetrating “a violent political lie” for insinuating that Goldwater was likely to set off a nuclear holocaust on a whim .
 Susanna McBee, “Chairman Clash Over Fairness Pledge,” Washington Post, 12 September 1964 . McBee: ‘Chairman clash over fairness Pledge .
 Clifford, the archetypal Washington lawyer and Democratic fixer, had no official position in the government, apart from being chairman of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board . Clifford was chairman of President Barack Obama's foreign intelligence advisory board .
 Robert E Thompson, “Bob Kennedy Urges Share for Reds in Saigon Regime,” Los Angeles Times, 20 February 1966; “Excerpts From R Kennedy’s Statement,’ Washington Post, 20 Feb. 1966 . Robert E. Thompson,
 President Kennedy intended to put into motion if Moscow turned down his initial October 27 offer . President Johnson was also in the dark about the “Cordier ploy,” a gambit which he intended to use .
 On Washington’s behalf, Andrew Cordier, a former UN official, was to approach Secretary General U Thant and get him to propose an exchange of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 A public proposal from the secretary general, it was thought, would presumably allow Moscow to save face . Moscow was thought to be considering a public proposal for the proposal .
 The only other administration official who knew about the Cordier ploy was Secretary of State Rusk . Rusk was the only other official to know about the ploy .
 Johnson was referring to abiding by the results of a free election in South Vietnam under international supervision . Both Hanoi and Washington claimed to espouse the position . Johnson's comments were meant in reference to international supervision of the election .
 Bundy appeared on “Meet the Press,” a Sunday interview program on the NBC television network . Bundy appeared the day after Kennedy’s statement, Bundy had appeared .
 Bundy had attempted to rebut Senator Kennedy by quoting President Kennedy on the dangers of a coalition government that shared power with Communists . Bundy had been trying to rebort Senator Kennedy's remarks .
 RFK had specifically mentioned the possibility of a wider war that would involve China . RFK said the war would involve a wider conflict with China .
 To every American who remembered the price paid after the Chinese intervened in the Korean War, this was a worrisome thought . The price paid was a price paid by the Chinese in Korea, which led to a war in Korea .
 Senator Fulbright denounced the blockade as the “worst alternative” and advocated an immediate invasion . When the Congressional leadership was briefed on October 22, just before Kennedy’s nationwide address, Sen. Fulbright called the blockade the ‘worst alternative .
 Johnson seemed to be referring to the so-called “madman theory,” a tactic first attributed to the Eisenhower administration . The tactic was a tactic attributed to Eisenhower administration.
 The idea was to leak the notion that Washington was willing to use excessive force unless a Communist power cooperated with the U.S. government . The plan was to show that Washington would use force against China unless it cooperated .
 Supposedly, such coercive brinkmanship had persuaded North Korea to agree to an armistice in 1953 . Max Holland is the editor of Washington DeCoded and Tara Marie Egan is the editorial assistant of the magazine .