 Plesetsk was a base north of Moscow in the Soviet Union built to launch Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles over the Arctic Circle and target U.S. cities . The base was built in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Using a map of the Northern Hemisphere, a ruler, and a scale; decide if the missile could hit the following U.S. cities . Using a ruler and a ruler to check out the size of the missile .
 U.S. spy planes discovered the Soviet R-14 with a range of 3,100 miles . Shortly after the R-12s were discovered, the Soviet aircraft were discovered . The R-13s were the first to be discovered in the Soviet Union .
 Using the map of North America, a ruler, and the scale decide which cities the Soviet Union could now target in the United States . Put an X on the line if the city is within range of the missile .
 Use diplomatic pressure to get the Soviet Union to remove the missiles . Use diplomacy to get them removed from the USSR .
 Use the navy to prevent any more missiles from entering Cuba . Include reasons to explain your choice. Include reasons for why you chose not to do so .
 Write True or False on the line provided to answer the question . Name is the name of the person who answers the question. Name is your name and the date of the assessment .
 When launching missiles from the Soviet Union, they could not reach the city of Los Angeles . The missiles could not be launched at Los Angeles, California, in the 1960s .
 When launching missiles from Cuba, they could reach every city in the U.S. The missiles could be launched from Cuba . They could also reach the United States .
 In response to the buildup of weapons on Cuba, the United States issued air strikes to take out the missile sites . The U.S. has been responding to the build-up of weapons in Cuba .
 In order to make the Soviet Union remove the missiles, the United States removed missiles from Turkey . The U.S. removed the missiles in order to force the Soviet Russia to remove them from Turkey.
 Final Assessment Answer Key Mapping a Crisis . Write True or False on the line provided to answer the question . Final Assessment: Mapping the Crisis .
 If the U.S. does nothing the Soviet Union gains more prestige around the globe . The United States does nothing . If the United States . does nothing, the Soviet . Union gains . more prestige . around the . globe .
 China and the Soviet Union become closer allies--giving the communist bloc countries more prestige in world . China and Soviet Union became closer allies -- giving them more prestige .
 Use diplomatic pressure to get the Soviet Union to remove the missiles . Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev not wanting to appear weak, does not remove missiles from Cuba .
 The United Nations reprimands the Soviet Union but fails to do much else . The U.N. reprimanded the Soviets but failed to do anything else .
 Some U.S. planes are successful in their mission, while others are shot down . An air attack on the missile sites is often unsuccessful .
 These actions prompt a battle in Europe between United Nations and Warsaw Pact troops, dragging the world into a new World War . U.N. troops, Warsaw Pact forces clash in Europe as U.S. troops clash with Warsaw Pact .
 The United States launches an attack on Cuban soil . A full military invasion of Cuba would be a military invasion . The U.S. launches a full military attack on Cuba .
 Cuban field generals with prior orders, use nuclear weapons against the United States. U.S. field generals had prior orders to do so, according to U.N. State Department .
 The United States launches an attack on Soviet soil . A full military invasion of the Soviet Union is a military invasion . The U.S. launched a full invasion of Soviet Union .
 Use the navy to prevent any more missiles to enter the U.S. This is the actual choice made by President Kennedy . President Kennedy made the decision to use the navy instead of the Navy .
 Kennedy issues a quarantine stopping ships that may contain nuclear cargo . Realizing that a blockade is an act of war, Kennedy issues quarantine .
 The Soviet Union publicly announces they are going to remove the missiles from Cuba . End Game ends with the Soviet Union's decision to pull the missiles .
 Khrushchev seems to have gotten nothing from the Americans and is embarrassed at home; he is eventually removed from power .