 In the summer of that year, the U.S. government discovered that the Soviets were in the process of deploying nuclear missiles in Communist Cuba . The United States government discovered the Soviet Union was deploying missiles in Cuba .
 In October, the United States moved to block Soviet ships carrying missiles to Cuba . The U.S. has been trying to block ships carrying Soviet missiles to the island nation .
 The resulting standoff was that the world stood seemingly on the brink of ultimate disaster and nuclear war . It was the resulting standoff that left the world at risk of nuclear war.
 The crisis began when the U.S. discovered that Cuba had secretly installed Soviet missiles able to carry nuclear weapons . The crisis was regarded by many, as the world's closest approach to nuclear war .
 The missiles were capable of hitting targets across most of the U.S. The missiles are capable of attacking targets across the United States .
 The discovery led to a tense standoff of several days as the United States imposed a naval blockade of Cuba . The U.S. demanded that the USSR remove the missiles from Cuba .
 The revolution ousted Cuba's dictator, Fulgencio Batista and brought to power a government headed by Cuban revolutionary leader Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro's government was overthrown by the Batista government in 1959 .
 The building and meaning of the Great Pyramids were built hundreds of years ago . The construction began on one of the seven wonders of the world .
 Today they are looked upon as not only a tomb for the dead, but also an artistic masterpiece inside and out . They are now considered a modern art masterpiece inside .
 All over the world remain fantastic objects, vestiges of people or forces which the theories of archaeology, history, and religion cannot explain . Archaeological, history and religion can't explain .
 The rest of the police troops were immediately transferred to Norway after the German capitulation in May 1945 . Police troops were transferred to the Norwegian capital after the war .