 P*kT Shreveport L«u Pirmll No, 1134 Vol. No. 1134 . ALMAGEST Non-Profit U S P o*1 tg .
 Several faculty and staff members have been contacted for their comments on the petition and rumors of faculty divisiveness should a selection be made .
 There lias also been criticism of the work done by the cliancellor Search Committee . I feel that the group that is conducting the search is sincere in its efforts .
 It is not an easy tiling to select a cliancellor, he said . These people have to solicit and study applications, he added . It's not easy to choose a candidate for the job .
 If asked, people would have different preferences, he said, but he hoped Uiey would be able to work with the one chosen .
 Thompson said there is a need for confidentiality for committee members . Thompson said committee secrecy goes into committee secrecy .
 THOMPSON feels the committee is composed fairly in terms of representation from all four colleges, the community and the administration . The committee is comprised of representatives from all of the colleges and the community .
 Thompson said he is not aware of wliat other institutions do concerning student input in these matters . Thompson: "I'm not sure what other institutions are doing regarding these matters"
 Thompson feels the best person should be named to the job regardless of geographic considerations . Thompson did not sign the petition to name the new president .
 Professor Wilfred L, Guerin, professor and chairman of the English department, thinks there is bound to be some feeling of being left out if the chancellor is chosen from LSUS because of human nature .
 “When we divide, 1 like to believe it is on honest, professional opinion,” he said . “I would like to think that it was on honest and professional opinion. When we divide we would rather than believe it”
 The committee is not taking an unusually long time to fill tlie vacant position, Guerin said . Guerin: The committee not taking too long to fill the vacant position .
 The psychology of it makes the time elapsed seem longer by contrast, he said . At first, it seemed the spot would be filled fast, so the psychology makes it seem longer, he added .
 GUERIN feels ti*e committee has been very cautious in releasing any information . Guerin feels the committee is very cautious about releasing any info .
 Guerin: Delay in selecting tlie chancellor means committee is working very liard . Guerin says he lias no reason to believe they are doing anything against any set regulations . Guierin: If anything, if anything, tliat tlie committee is doing anything wrong .
 Guerin feels students would have a disadvantage on such a committee because their views on LSUS are only sliort-range as a result of their brief time on campus . Guerin would like to liave student input in many areas on campus, lie feels tliat possibly students
 Guerin did not sign tlie petition because “it said the obvious, and to my mind, local candidates are still being given consideration/' John Tabor, director of alumni affairs and assistant professor of communications, said Uie people lie has talked to favor a local candidate .
 The length of time taken by the committee in making their selection is the norm at other campuses, Tabor said .
 If the committee is being secretive, Tabor said, maybe it's for good reason . Tabor: Maybe it’s for a good reason.
 Tabor feels it would be good to liave some student representation on the committee . Tabor: "I would like to see some of the committee members as students."
 Professor says there would be no divisiveness among faculty members should a selection be made from among die LSUS applicants . Professor says a selection would be made of die LSU applicants .
 He said he lias not been in enough school systems to be an authority on how long such a committee should take in making a selection . But he said he feels the elapsed time has not been too long .
 Confidentiality is needed because of Uie job situations of the applicants, he said . Maybe there should be more discussions of things that wouldn't matter, like statistics, but not names .
 Goerner hopes the length of time Uie committee is taking is a result of Uie care needed in making a selection . Uie hopes the time it takes is the result of the care needed .
 Lie feels the committee should contain more faculty members with a more even distribution of rank . Lie says committee should be more even-ranks .
 He also feels the interim cliancellor should not liave been on the committee . The interim cliantllor should also not have been on committee .
 LSUS community willing to cooperate with Uie Chancellor Search Committee . LSUS faculty and staff would appear to be willing to be patient with committee's final selection of chancellor .
 The LSUS committee will select an LSUS faculty member . There are no feelings of divisiveness likely to occur . The committee is expected to select a new faculty member at LSUS .
 LSUS yearbook has officially changed its name from Bagatelle to Manifest . LSUS members promoted Manifest yearbook ’s new name . F acuity members promoted the new name of Manifest .
 Manifest, wliich means a list of passengers and cargo on a overheat, was chosen after two polls seeking student opinions were taken . Manifest means passengers, cargo and passengers on a heat-up .
 Manifest is thought to be better suited to LSUS, whose mascot is a riverboai pilot, than Bagatelle, which means a th in g of little value . LSUS mascot is the riverboat pilot, whose name is 'Manifesto'
 Promotions for 16 members of the LSUS faculty were approved by the Board of Supervisors at their April 11 meeting on campus on campus . Nancy Griswold will be in the yearbook office from 2-3m., Monday through Friday .
 Jolm A Marts, from assistant to associate professor in accounting; and Dr. Jolm J Marts from assistant . Dr. J. Marts was promoted to assistant in accounting at the University of Columbia University .
 Paul E Merkle, from assistant to associate professor in economics and finance, is an associate professor at the University of Columbia University . He is the author of the book "MMerkle" and "Merkle"
 In the College of Education, those promoted from assistant professors to associate professors were Dr. Dr. John Deutsch . Dr. Deutsch was promoted to an associate professor .
 Promotions in the College of Liberal Arts were Dr. John B Powell III, education, and Dr. William Powell III . Dr. Powell III was education advisor .
 Dr. Zeak M Buckner Jr. Jr., from associate professor to professor in English, was promoted to English professor . Dr. Buckner was previously an associate professor at the University of Cambridge .
 Dr. Lillian J Hall, from associate professor to professor in communications; Dr, Kenneth E Hinze, from assistant to associate professor in social sciences; Doris L Lynch, from instructor to assistant professor in the social sciences . Dr, Alice A Morgan, from . assistant to .
 Dr. Norman W Provizer, from assistant to associate professor in social sciences; Dr. Marvin Stottlemire, from . assistant to . associate professor, Dr. Norma Provizer and Dr, Marvin Stotlemire . Dr. Provizer has been promoted to assistant to
 Alan S Thompson was assistant to assistant to associate professor in social sciences . Alan Thompson is now an associate professor at the University of Cambridge . Thompson is also an assistant professor in the social sciences.
 Dr. Anita L Hark* ness was promoted from instructor to assistant professor . Dr. Dr. Hark*. ness has been promoted to an assistant professor at the University of Minnesota .
 SGA to consider day care center by Cathy Raranik Die Senate’s approval of new legislative proposals recently resulted in Uie passing of Uiree resolutions . SGA voted to consider a daycare center .
 One resolution provided a committee that will investigate the need for a campus day care center facility . The committee will assist in the implementation of the facility .
 Cliairman of tlie committee, Liz Diompson, said all persons who would patronize such a facility should contact lier as soon as possible .
 Thompson said the service would be available to both students and faculty members . Thompson said this service would not only be available for students but for faculty and staff . Thompson: "This is a service that will be available only to students"
 Other resolutions providing for the installation of a pay pfwne in the lobby of tlie library and emergency communication equipment or alarms in buildings and parking lots were also approved .
 Jeff Lanius and David Finck, Hie two presiden* tial candidates on Uie ballot, cancels candidate’s forum . Also, tlie candidate's forum, scheduled for Monday, cancelled by mutual agreement .
 The Board is trying to hold at least one meeting on every campus in the LSU system . The board is currently trying to meet with students at every LSU campus .
 The board members discussed the appointment of former Governor Edwin Edwards to a post at LSU Law School . The board also discussed other matters . Edwards was appointed to a law school post at the end of his term .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev waged a tense war of nerves over the presence of the weapons so close to the U.S.
 Khrushchev finally backed down and removed the missiles, leading to his downfall in the Soviet hierarchy . The act eventually led to the Soviet leader's downfall .
 In November 1979, militant students in Iran imprisoned 50 Americans in the U.S. embassy . The students demanded the return of the deposed Shah of Iran as ransom for their release .
 As of April 1980, President Jimmy Carter and Iranian revolutionary leader, Ayatollah Khomeini, were still waging a tense war of nerves over the hostages .
 Both situations involved young, relatively inexperienced Democratic presidents . Both situations involve young and relatively inexperienced young presidents .
 Both situations came at a time when the foreign policy of both men were under severe attack for not being tough with Russia .
 The Cuban crisis was, for all intents and purposes, over in thirteen days . The Iranian situation has dragged on for nearly six months . The most important distinction is the fact that while the Cuban crisis .
 Many commentators have ceased to use the word '‘crisis” when writing of Iran . In fact, many commentators have stopped using the word crisis .
 They contend that a crisis is a sharp turning point, not an embarrassment that continues forever . They say they contend that the crisis is not a crisis that will last forever .
 The answer lies in the vast changes that have taken place since the Kennedy administration, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The world of 1980 is a different place altogether from the world of 1962 . The 1980s are the first time the world has seen a film like this has been released in 30 years .
 Both situations involved the threat of Soviet involvement . Both situations involve the presence of the Soviet Union .
 The Russian bear that JFK baited was a much weaker animal overall than the one Carter is facing today . The bear was a weaker animal than the bear he baited that day .
 In 1962, the United States had a much larger and better-trained land army than the Soviet Union . The U.S. also had a vastly superior navy .
 In terms of nuclear weapons, the so-called ‘missile gap” did not, in fact, exist, says Putin . "We were well prepared to blow Russia to smithereens if it came to that," he says .
 Today, the Soviets outnumber us in almost every category of conventional weaponry and in nuclear warheads as well . The Soviets are now outnumbering the U.S. in most of the world's conventional weaponry .
 Khomeini and Iranian Defense Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh have been linked, at least circumstantially, with the Soviets . Khomeinini and Ghotzadehr have been tied to the Soviets at the time .
 Some people believe they are operatives of the KGB, the Russian secret police . Some people even believe that they are KGB operatives .
 The changes in relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union since the early '60s have led to Carter's ineffectiveness . Another reason for Carter’s failure is the changes in Soviet relations since the ‘60s .
 Carter must deal with Henry Kissinger’s policy of detente as well as his own bungled dealings with the Soviets . Kissinger must also deal with his own rather bungled handling of the Soviet Union . Carter must now deal with Kissinger's detente policy as well .
 The Strategic Arms Limitations Treaties have hampered any get-tough stance with the Soviets, or with any other nation . Treaties hampered any attempt to get tough on the Soviets .
 Kennedy and Carter were presidents of the United States . Kennedy was president of the White House, Carter was president . Carter was President of the U.S. in the early 1960s .
 Jimmy Carter has been cast as a white-hatted good guy in the international scene . Because of his “human-rights” foreign policy, Jimmy Carter was cast as an international good guy . Jimmy Carter’s ‘human rights’ foreign policy has been a
 "Everything he does, he feels, must fit in with that humanitarian image. Everything he does must fit into that image," he says .
 Humanitarians are not well-respected by aggressor nations . Unfortunately, humanitarians aren't well respected by aggressors . Humanitarianians should be treated with respect, not respect, says President Obama .
 Kennedy had made his pisition clear — the United States would not bother any country that chose Communism from within . The U.S. would resist the imposition of Communist governments by acts of foreign aggression, Kennedy said .
 This is not to say that Carter could have gotten the hostages out of Iran in two weeks . Carter was able to get them out in less than two weeks, but not two weeks.
 Possibly the era has ended when the U.S. can face down an aggressor without firing a shot . Possibly the end of the era of American aggression is over .
 We don't need a John Kennedy now, nor do we need a Harry Truman or a Teddy Roosevelt . We need John Kennedy and Harry Truman, but we need Teddy Roosevelt now, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Our present chief executive, hamstrung by his own policies, has shown he can’t do the job . Our present Chief Executive has shown that he can't do it .
 All editorial niews expressed herein are the opinion of the writer end should not be construed to represent administrative policy . The writer end of this article does not represent administration policy .
 Almagest is published weekly except for summer school semesters end except holidays, examination end special periods . Almagests are published weekly .
 Almagest welcomes contributions from readers but reserves the right to edit correspondence received and reject any and all contribu Ilona, Ilona . One WS*k for Midfs master One week tor Thanksgiving, six weeks tor Christmas and semester breaks .
 I'm writing this letter in response to the newspaper we so fondly call the Almagest . I am writing a letter in . response to a letter written by the newspaper .
 "I have never seen a newspaper that acts so irresponsible, so idiotic, so self-serving and so antifunctional in my life," says author . He says he has never seen the newspaper act so irresponsible in his life .
 Tile Almagest staff should publish and print only 19 copies of their rag . The newspaper only serves 19 people at L3U, the 19 on the staff . Tile magazine staff should print just 19 copies .
 This semester I have seen inaccurate reporting, personal vendettas and inexcusable propaganda in the Almagest . This semester, I have been forced to take to Twitter to voice my opinion .
 Many examples of personal vendettas can be found following your letters to the editor . I liave never seen nor worked for a campus newspaper that comments after each editorial the way you people do .
 No student on this campus lias been able to gripe or state an opinion without your comments following . No student will be able to say anything without your comment following .
 This is a very poor practice tliat must be stopped immediately, if you are a newspaper Umt concerns itself with its readers . Umt must stop this practice immediately .
 The last edition of your rag iiad an interesting commentary that was biased, even though you stated tliat you supported no candidate. It was biased . The last time I wrote that I supported a candidate, I said I supported no candidates. I'm glad you support no candidate,
 You failed to mention tliat the writer of the article was past president of Phi Delta Theta . The writer of this article is a member of the Phi Delta theta .
 The Mail on Sunday has been criticised for overstepping the boundary of a responsible newspaper . Whichever position you choose best be prepared to explain .
 Do not feel that this letter is all against the Almagest . It is a sliame tliat your best and most useful newspaper this semester was the Almajoke . Do not think that this is all about the newspaper .
 If the truth of the matter be known, you should call your Almagest the Alma joke, and the Almajoke should have been called the AlMagest .
 Carter received the bachelor of general studies degree in criminal justice in 1979 . Carter has done work toward her master's degree .
 All currently enrolled sophomores, juniors and seniors are eligible for awards . All current students are currently enrolled in the program .
 LSUS grade point average, total LSUS hours pursued, level of transfer work and achievement and leadership in each student’s field . LSUS grades are based on LSUS points and hours pursued .
 Scholarships include the Selber Bros. Sachs English Scholarship, the Society of Louisiana Certified Public Accountants, the Bingham-Willame tie Scholarship, National Association of Accountants Award, Melton Truck Lines Scholarship .
 Mutual Benefit Club Scholarship in Marketing and Office Administration, Uie Wall Street Journal Award, the Accounting Faculty Award, and the National Collegiate Association for Secretaries Chapter Scholarship .
 Edward Jenkins, Edward Jenkins and Melanie McKnight, Melanie J McKnight and Nancy W. Hutson, assistant professor of English and Dr. Nancy W, Hutson .
 A reception honoring the students and their families will follow the program . The public is invited to attend .
 First, the government must eventually balance tile federal budget, he said* It should not be done over ni gilt because the shock of an immediate “belt tightening’s” process could be more damaging than helpful .
 An immediate balancing of the budget could be the catalyst to send the economy into a recession, Tillman said . Tillman explained tliat an immediate balancing would be too abrupt, too quick .
 Another problem is finding a politician who will take the necessary action to ‘settle’ the economy . The economy is in need of a politician to take necessary action .
 It collects money from one source and gives to another In equal amounts . People want to “have/’’ he said, but do not want to give* This “free ride’s attitude will have to change if we are to remain economically sound .
 HE thinks grades are important, but are not the deciding factor in getting a job . He says grades are an important part of the job, but not the most important part in life .
 A student with a 2.2. grade point average may be more well-rounded than a 4.4. grade average, lie said . Students with 4.3 grade point averages may be better rounded than those with 2.0 .
 GPA may have proven to himself to himself tliat he can “take Uie bad as well as the good . “The C's and maybe an occasional D t along with the A's and B's” lie .
 GPA lias never had to “pick himself up,” and a company may not know what to expect from him, Grout said . Grout: "GPS lias has never been able to pick himself up from a problem"
 Many prospective employers pay the most attention to grades earned in the student's major . Many employers pay more attention to the grades of students in their chosen major .
 It is extremely important that a student's electives are consistent with his short-term and long-term goals* he said . It is also important that students' electives should be consistent with their goals, he added .
 Tlie choice of electives and extracurricular activities tells the interviewer something about the student's personality that he may not be able to determine from the interview . Tlie chose electives, activities that may tell the interviewer more about his personality than he can determine from interview .
 One aid in landing a good permanent job after graduation is to get a summer job related to the student's field of interest . Summer jobs can be related to a student's interest .
 For many students, this may not be possible until the summer before graduation . It is a great opportunity to get to know the practical aspects of their chosen work, Grout said .
 How well the students are prepared for an interview is directly related to the effectiveness of Uie school's placement office* lie lie said .
 Good grammar and the ability to communicate well with others is also very important in the business world, he said . Good grammar is also important in business world .
 The lack of either shows up almost immediately during Uie interview, he said .
 Department of Labor reports there will be 61,000 new jobs in accounting in 1980 . Department of Labour: There will be more than 60,000 accounting jobs in the 1980s .
 The trend is towards specialization, although many companies are relying on ‘on-the-job training” more tlianever .
 Capt. Grout said students should begin planning their futures now . The placement office, located in the science building, is a good place to start .
 Stu* dents also receive a certificate and patch from the state of Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries Commission certifying them as safe hunters . The state also certifies them as a safe hunter .
 Moore served as a pilot and test pilot and aircraft maintenance officer with over 6,000 flying hours . Moore is a professional gunsmith residing in Shreveport, Louisiana . Moore was a pilot, test pilot, and aircraft repair officer .
 Last week, Moore discussed the effects of different ammunition for rifles and shotguns . Moore also discussed the safety of hunting with a hunter .
 LSUS choir, directed by Norma Jean Locke, will Iiave its annual spring program on April 23 and 24 in the UC theatre . Chorale to give concerts by Karen Rosen grant .
 The college has gained national attention for its ability to attract and recruit foreign language students . The college is known for being able to recruit and teach foreign languages .
 Williams attributes tliis partly to the fact that “they are very vigorous, adroit recruiters/ 1’s . Williams attributes the recruitment to the nature of the town .
 It is a large metropolitan area with an international airport, so naturally there is more interest in foreign languages, he said . It is the largest metropolitan area in the world with international airport .
 Williams was impressed wiUi is the option of one-hour credit courses that the college offers beyond the foundation level . Williams: "I'm impressed with the college's ability to offer one hour credit courses"
 Tliis permits the department to “handmake"" language courses for students in biology, history and other subjects . Students can do specialized readings and work in a specific area .
 The ONE-HOUR courses are also structured in tiers of difficulty, so they can be used in conjunction with the regular tliree-hour courses .
 Tliis would allow students to review tiie basics as they learn new material . Students would be able to use the system to review basics .
 Williams was not sold on everything at the Tarrant County Community College . Williams: "I'm not sure what I'm going to say about the college. It's a great place to go to college," he says .
 The foundation grammar courses are covered in four semesters instead of two, as most colleges do . Most colleges do not cover grammar courses as much as two .
 The LSUS foreign language department is considering implementing the one-hour courses . Williams said the courses would be probably starting at the sophomore level .
 He said they are most beneficial after a student has learned basic grammar .
 The wood carvings of the late Charles C Canterbury, a 96year resident of the Ark-La-Tex, are currently on display for everyone’s enjoyment in the lobby of the Library Building .
 Justin Kidd, assistant professor of English at LSUS, created the carvings of Canterbury . They represent the people who comprised Canterbury's environment . Red River County residents, politicians, television actors and occasionally, imaginary citizens .
 Canterbury's technique incorporates the artist’s personal touch, Kidd said . Kidd also said it also includes primitive and non-Westem art styles . Kidd said that while it incorporates personal touch with the artist, it also incorporates primitive styles .
 The artist carved works from the raw materials he found instead of purcing those materials . He allowed the shape of the wood’s grain to dictate the subject matter, Kidd said .
 "Plasmapheresis" removes from whole blood the only element it needs — the plasma . The donation process is called "plasapheresi"
 It pays to help . . . and your donation will give others . Shreveport, Louisiana, is a great place to donate .
 Cubby was sitting by the magazine rack in the Library when I caught up with him . Cubby is sitting in front of a magazine rack by the Library .
 He was focusing on a rather salient young coed who looked as though she had been poured into her jeans . He was looking at the young woman who looked like she'd been poured in her jeans.
 You could mistake her for a seven, but notice that she is dressed to the max . She could be mistaken for a nine-year-old .
 She's obviously just had her hair done and that’s a new outfit she's wearing . She’d obviously had hair done .
 Successful advertising agent says ‘well-rounded education’ necessary to students . Without advertising, TV and radio would not exist today as we know it .
 Millions of dollars are spent every year in the SlireveportBossier area on advertising . The area is only the 72nd largest U.S. market in the United States .
 Jack Hodges III Communications advertising and public relations agency of Shreveport and Baton Rouge is the largest and best-known agency in this area . The agency is located in Louisiana and Louisiana .
 If you watch TV and listen to radio, chances are you will hear or see one of the agency’s commercials . The agency is known for its commercials and commercials .
 Some of its clients are McDonald’s, SWEPCO and Louisiana Bank and Trust . Some of the clients of the firm include McDonald's and SWEpcO .
 ONE must be able to write and have some training in advertising, according to Jack Hodges . One must also have some skills in advertising .
 He also said that knowledge of demographics is important in the advertising business .
 Without it, it would be hard to make the most effective use of his client’s budget, he said . Without it he would not be able to use the budget effectively, he says .
 Hodges stressed that a good, well rounded education is important . But somehow, some way, you must be able to sell yourself, he said . Hodges: "You must sell yourself"
 Hodges feels advertising is a tough business, but one that ultimately has its rewards . Hodges: "Advertising is a great business. It's a great place to invest in," he says .
 Willie Nile's debut album shows promise by Joey Tabarlet . Willie Nile’s debut album is Willie Nile .
 Willie Nile has just released his first album . Willie Nile is a singer-songwriter named Willie Nile . Nile is going places .
 Next semester, find yourself in the woods Orienteering. Listen to Nile’s songs, orae .
 It's also adventure training, where you learn to lead in an environment that challenges both your physical and mental skills . But, it’s also adventure .
 It will help you develop your confidence and stamina in the classroom or out . And it will also help you learn more about the classroom and out of school .
 Add Army ROTC to your prgoram to your campus life . Add a new dimension of excitement to your college life . Army Rotters are required to be involved in the military .
 Nile is firmly rooted in the blues-based rock favored by so many other performers . Nile adds touches of folk, country and basic blues to create his sound .
 This blend creates a clean, pure artistic statement, wonderfully free from the pop-star ego claptrap that ruins too many albums these days . This blend of music is a clean and pure statement, and it's wonderfully free .
 Nile chooses to present it in a laid-back, tongue-in-cheek manner instead of trying to be Steve Martin . The film is reminiscent of Janis Joplin’s “Lord, Wontcha Buy Me a Mercedes Benz”
 Nile owes a debt to the Byrds, and he pays it back to great effect in the guitar intro to “Vagabond Moon’s” one of the most engaging and catchy tunes of the album . Nile owes it back, and it's not the first
 Most of the songs, though, don’t sound like anything so much as they just sound good . The album was released in November .
 What Nile says here is not so important as what he doesn’t say, which is, of course, what makes the song so appealing .
 Willie Nile is a wimpy folk-rocker who longs for the lost ’60s . But don’t assume that Willie Nile . Nile is not an old-fashioned folk singer, but a modernist folk singer .
 Willie Nile has a debut album under his belt and a planned tour this summer . Willie Nile should get plenty of exposure with his debut album .
 Anyone who can write intelligent, distinctive rock ’n roll these days is a rare treasure indeed . He deserves success; anyone who writes intelligent rock 'n' roll is rare .
 Show her you appreciate the job she does for you with a thoughtful gift of flowers . Show her how much she loves her job as a nurse .
 KATHERIN AULDS COUNTRY FLORIST 7847 E Kings Hwy Shreveport, la 71115 . Helping you say it right .
 Epsilon Tau Chapter of Alpha Phi was both busy and successful this past week . Alpha Phi is a chapter of the Alpha Phi Phi Phi fraternity .
 Alpha Phis won the pyramid contest during the Spring Fling activities . Alpha Phi won a pyramid contest in the competition .
 Teri Penfield and Bryan Germany won the kissing contest . Teri won the kiss contest . Our pledges had a very successful bake sale .
 The Greek Formal was a lot of fun and we appreciate Panhellenic for all their efforts . The Greek dance was a great success for the Greek community . The event was a big success for many of us .
 A pre-party was held for Alpha Phi at Teri Penfieid's house* The friendship and fun shared by all was just the beginning of a very enjoyable evening .
 KAPPA ALPHA — Congratulations to the winners of the KA Arm Wrestling Tournament . KA won the tournament in the first place .
 A quick look at the death of the CBS hit ""Dukes of Hazzard"" will reveal a lot about the problems with TV today* I know tile show has been riding high in the ratings .
 I was a ‘Dukes of Hazzard’ fan from the very beginning when I did not know anyone else who had even heard of it . I was also a fan of the show from the beginning, when I didn't know any of the other fans had heard of
 The first shows did a good job of blending car chases and good oY boy humor into an entertaining, if light-weight* program . The show was the only show concerning the South that really looked Southern .
 Production was moved to California in order to cut costs . Production moved to Los Angeles to reduce production costs .
 Most of the car chases now take place in wliat appears to be an orchard with a dirt road running through the middle of it .
 Story elements deemed most popular by those in cliarge are so emphasized that the show no longer exists . Instead of stories written to achieve the goal of entertainment, a viewer finds stories written for the sole purpose of including some built-in elements such as a car jump .
 The same mentality is at work thinking up new reasons for Charlie's angels to work as hookers and new ways for Pondi and Jon of ""CHiPs" to wreck their Harleys* Another growing problem in television which is very evident in the California-produced ""Dukes"
 When the position of cars, characters, etc., changes from one scene to another the viewer lias to wonder if anyone from the studio ever looks at the finished product, or if they really care about it .
 Problems like these make me wander if even a little common sense is just too much to ask for anymore . Problems such as this make me wonder if common sense just is too much of a question anymore .
 Lou Grant is the last living relative of the old Mary Tyler Moore Show . Lou Grant was the star of the show's first series of episodes .
 Ed Asner's Lou Grant character lias grown a great deal from MTM's gruff boss . Lou Grant has grown a lot from his gruff Lou Grant .
 The new Lou Grant is a more well-rounded character tlian his predecessor . He is easier for the audience to identify with; he is real. He is real, he is a lie .
 "Lou Grant" is one of the few show's on TV today to acknowledge these facts and build its scripts around them . In the real world, life's problems cannot be worked out in an hour between commercials, people do not change overnight .
 The show has a habit of presenting the audience with a problem, examining the different viewpoints involved and then leaving the viewer's feet with no neat, tidy solutions and Imppily-everafters .
 A recent episode dealing with Grant's relationship with an alcoholic staff member (Allen Williams) ended without a miracle turn around to sobriety . Instead, Grant's declaration that lie would no longer cover up for what was the man's own problem ended with a lie .
 One show dealt only with Uie marathon coverage of a mine cave-in as the passing hours were sliown in the corner of the screen from scene to scene .
 Another episode had the reporters solving an extremely old murder case much in the tradition of a Sam Spade detective mystery . Another episode saw the reporters solve a murder case in an old case .
 Either of these shows could iiave turned out trite or mawkish, but were pulled off with good writing and fine acting . The actors can always be counted on to turn in strong performances .
 The show’s casting is another example of the ensemble-type cast tliat make such shows as M WKRP In Cincinnati"" and ""M-A-S-H" such a joy to watch .
 THE course emphasizes furthering would-be teachers' understanding of the prophecies and inquiries of science .
 It also provides students with a background in experimental science and teaches them to hypothesize, speculate and test theories, he said .
 Massey and Slaughter’s experiment tested the effectiveness of over-the-counter antacid drugs by weight, price and dose .
 The experiment proved tliat Alka-2 is more effective than Rolaids, Turns, Di-Gel or Maaiox* Slaughter said the subject matter of the experiment was not all that important .
 Massey is a junior education major and Slaughter is a biology education major . Slaughter participated in a field experiment where lie taught a unit in biology to a Captain Shreve High School class . Massey and Slaughter are junior education majors .
 We would like to thank everyone who attended the crawfish boil . The city of Philadelphia thanked everyone for attending the event . The event was held in honor of the mayor of Philadelphia .
 "Even though we had to substitute shrimp for the crawfish, it was a big success and a lot of fun," the author says .
 If you enjoyed the sauce and the plates, thank Dan Lawson in the cafeteria . Dan Lawson is the author of "The Daily Sentinel"
 Most importantly, thank you, UCPC for such a fun week. Also, we would like to thank the Tri Delts for helping us with the Cokes*
 Tomorrow is La Grande Fete featuring Southpaw, Otis Wheat and Expresso . The band will perform at the festival in New Jersey .
 For a mere admission charge of $5 ($6 day of show) you can enjoy all the beer and crawfish you can handle . For $5, enjoy the beer, crawfish and beer at the show .
 Nominees for the chapter's Zeta Lady Award are Ellen Davis, Nancy Griswold and Mari Luce . Get your tickets from any Phi Delt or Stan's* ZETA TAU ALPHA — Nomineees for chapter's .
 A retreat for Eta Omega has been tentatively scheduled for May 16, 17 and 18 . The retreat will be held in May .
 Zeta faculty advisor Dr* Lillian Hall has been promoted to full professor status . Dr* Hall is a member of the Zeta staff at the University of Cambridge .
 ‘Beautiful but dumb’ theory may be true, but proof exists also of the ‘handsome idiot’ by Sharon Robinson .
 It's long been ignored that the same assumption can, and should, apply to attractive men . And while some may be there may be a grain of truth in this, there may also be truth in some cases .
 I have known several quite handsome idiots, but one particular stands out in ray memory . I've known several very handsome idiots but one of them is a very handsome idiot .
 He was the original tall, dark and handsome — big brown eyes, athletic build and a voice like a southern gentleman . "Big brown eyes and athletic build," he said. "big brown eyes"
 A friend managed to get me a date with this man of my dreams, but my bubble was quickly burst, as the southern gentleman became just an or country boy before my very eyes .
 WE HAD decided to have a nice dinner somewhere somewhere and then take in a movie . We had decided to go out for dinner and then go to a movie. We had dinner, then a movie, then dinner, and then dinner again. We were supposed to go to dinner and
 John ordered a double cheeseburger with extra catsup and a chocolate malt at one of the finest restaurants in town . I first began to wonder about John's actions when he ordered a burger with a special treat .
 A cheeseburger of sorts was produced, but the waiter said he'd have to forego the malt and order something else to drink . The waiter said it was not possible to make the malt available, but instead he ordered a beer .
 This prompted angry remarks from an indignant companion that an expensive place like tliat ought to liave something as popular as chocolate malts . This prompted an angry response from an angry companion .
 UC Theater at 7:30 & 9.30 p.m. UC Theater . TechN1C0L0H PAKAVISJON 1 from Warner Brothers .
 Admission $1, invisible, I nibbled my Quiche Lorraine, sipped my wine and said nothing . I nibble my Quicke Lorraine and sipped a wine .
 As we ate dessert, John was again outraged there was no banana split to be had . We began discussing the racial problems at the local high school .
 John declared that pretty soon they'd be calling in the MWACP . That s double A/ I corrected. John declared he'd be called in to replace John .
 On the way to the theater I mentioned that I had gone to visit friends in Baton Rouge the previous weekend . I was surprised to discover that he had visited friends in the city the previous week .
 Lie began talking about his roommate who had just returned from a fishing trip . Then lie began to talk about his roommates' fishing trips . Lie began to tell the story of his roommate, who had returned from fishing trip.
 John is an extreme example of a handsome idiot, but lie is living proof that attractive men can be just as stupid as attractive women liave always been thought to be . John is a rather extreme example .
 This man that I wouldn't trust with a slingshot had actually been issued a revolver to use as he saw fit . This man was issued with a revolver and was allowed to use it as he chose .
 Site becomes liberated and decides to no longer center her life around fighting cavities, being fussy about peanut butter, passing her paper towel test and worrying if her hands look as young as her married daughter's . Site decides to become liberated and no longer worry about cavities and passing her
 Bom beck struggles to become the sexiest, smartest, happiest, healthiest and thinnest . Bom beck struggle to be sexiest and smartest, smartest and happiest in the world. Bom beck also struggles to be healthy and happy .
 Aunt Erma's self-help book is for anyone who can't seem to make it from Monday to Friday in 12 days or less . The book is available now on sale for $99.99 .
 Stimson portrays a little girl whose father give& her to Matthau, a bookie, as collateral for a gambling debt . Stimson's film is set in New York City, New York, at the end of October .
 The development of the plot stems from the fact that the girl's father never shows up again . The plot is based on the fact the father never appears again .
 BOB NEWHART plays Matthau's sidekick and seems to be mainly a stock character .
 "I wondered why Newhart would play such a trivial role. As a matter of fact, I wondered why he was playing such a minor role," he said .
 Matthau had a woman in every aspect of his life, i.e. of course .
 Julie Andrews, who also forms an affectionate relationship with the child, forms affectionate relationships with the baby .
 Curtis blackmails Matthau into letting him in on a partnersliip in ownerslup of a gambling casino . Before the movie ends, he informs the police that Matthau is liarboring the child .
 In fact, when die plot is finally revealed, I wondered why Uie writer took such a round-about way to get there . Uie is set to be released on Friday .
 The movie doesn't develop comically until the second half . The movie is billed as a comedy .
 The humor is light, not Uie ""rolling in Uie aisles"" type that many people who attend comedy movies expect . Even then, the humor is not light-hearted .
 It isn't long before she becomes overshadowed by the other characters, namely Matthau and Andrews . But it isn't soon before she is overshadowed by Matthau or Andrews .
 Her acting seems to consist mainly of facial expressions, displays of affection and walking . Her acting appears to be mainly facial expressions .
 "Little Miss Marker" may be considered in U*e vein its title suggests, as a marker for something more entertaining next time . However, I recommend that it be considered .
 Phi Delta Theta Fraternity was the big winner in the Spring Fling track events . Phi Delts win Fling events .
 Holiday in Dixie annually commemorates the anniversary of the signing of the Louisiana purchase on April 30, 1803, in Paris . Originally the festival commemorated the lowering of the Confederate Flag for the last time in Shreveport on May 26, 1865, which occurred six weeks after Lee
 Some of the highlights of Holiday in Dixie include the carnival at the Louisiana State Fairgrounds, the $1,000 treasure hunt and the Classic parade April 26 at 4:30m.
 The carnival will be open from 3 m, until midnight each weekday, and from noon until midnight every Saturday and Sunday of the festival .
 The Holiday in Dixie treasure will be hidden somewhere in Caddo or Bossier parishes . Clues will be provided throughout the festival throughout .
 Other exhibitions include a display of children's art at the Louisiana State Exhibit Museum on the fairgrounds . A junior and senior high school art show at Mali St. St. is also featured .
 IBM working models of Leonardo da Vinci inventions circulated by IBM at Meadow Museum of Art at Centenary . IBM's working models are on display at the Centenary museum of art in Centenary, California .
 A handmade miniature figure contest is held at the Hobby Hut at 1744 E, 70th St. College . The event is part of a series of mini-figure contests held at Hobby Hut in New York .
 A kite fly-in is scheduled for 2 m. next Saturday in the LSUS parking area . The LSUS Parking Area will be open to the public for free .
 Prizes will be awarded to the biggest, smallest, smallest and most original kite . The kite with the longest string will be given to the winner .
 Sports events include the annual Red River Run scheduled for 8m. tomorrow on the Clyde Fant Parkway . Sports events are also scheduled for tomorrow night .
 Holiday in Dixie pirogue races are scheduled for tomorrow at 8 am. and will last until 5m. Pirogue racing will take place at 8 a.m. and 5m .
 The crawfish eating contest and crawfish races are also scheduled for Bayou Park tomorrow from noon until 3:30m. Tomorrow's events are scheduled for noon to 3,30m .
 Holiday in Dixie public ball will feature the big band sound of the Sandy Sandifer Orchestra from Dallas . The ball will be held next Saturday from 8 m. to lm. in the Convention Center .
 Barksdale Air Force Base will hold its annual open house next Sunday from 9a.m. until 5m. The open house will include displays of military aircraft and equipment .
 Holiday in Dixie is sponsoring such programs as golf turnaments, antique and model car contests, flower shows, a Frisbee tournament, baton twirling competition, photography contest, bowling tournaments, bike races and more .
 Rowe and Cascio won the men's gorgeous legs contest . Rowe and Rowe each contributed a leg . Rowe: "It's a good thing that you can do this year's challenge"
 Bryan Germany and Teri Penfield were the winners of the kiss -a -U ion . Bryan Germany won the kiss-a-U ion with a kiss on the lips of a woman .
 The women's gorgeous legs contest was won by Colleen Lynch . Aipha Plii Sorority won pyramid building .
 Jimbo, a dog with eyes of different colors, won tile ugly pet contest . Vicky Slay is the animal's owner . Jimbo has eyes with different colors .
 Pierre Marques features golf and lenms facilities and lour pools . Prerre Marques is located to downtown and is located near the city centre .
 We are interested in your opinion of LSUS’ paper . Although it is difficult for a reader to compare the Almagest with other college papers, we are happy to hear your opinion .
 Moa Afrika is sponsoring an end-of-semester dance at Little Joe and Stroud’s Thursday, from 9 p.m. The LSUS organization held a benefit dance to raise the money for the foundation .
 Tickets are $1 in advance, $1.50 at the door and can be purchased from any dub member . The organization is also selling T-shirts priced at $10* For more information contact Gabe Sims or Gloria Douglas .
 All books checked out and not returned by Tuesday, May 6, will be overdue and, if not returned* will be considered lost . If not returned, they'll be considered "lost"
 Applications are now being accepted for positions during the fall 1980 semester on the Almagest staff . The charge for lost books includes the cost of the book plus a $3 fee* For further information regarding the library’s book circulation policy consult the ‘Library Handbook’
 The pregram allows students to enroll in selected freshman classes and earn credits . Credits can be used to satisfy degree requirements when they are admitted as freshmen . Students can also earn credits to meet degree requirements .
 Friday, April 18 Movie — ""Camelot"" at 2 and 7:30m. in the UC Theater . The UC Theater is located in New York .
 Michael Oliva won a full Graduate Fellowship for 1980-81 which pays $4,500 for the nine-month period with no teaching responsibilities . Oliva was awarded the fellowship for the same period of nine months .
 Scholarships are limited to those young men and women whose roots lie in the South . Scholarships will only be available to those who have roots in the region .
 Applicants must convince the awards committee that they firmly intend to pursue a career in daily or weekly ■ newspapering and that their interests and apj titudes are such that they are likely to become I leaders in this field . Applicants need to convince the . committee that . they
 Condemned buildings and rundown shotgun houses draw the lines of demarcation for what can only be described as a battleground, a combat zone if you will . The area is described as 'a combat zone'
 This is the part of -town where fine Victorian homes have fallen to the status of one-room boarding houses . Children play in trash and garbage-filled lots, once the setting of many a Sunday picnic on soft green grass long since gone .
 The dogs run the streets and alleys in packs, no longer pets, but scavengers on the prowl . Here the dogs are scavengers, not pets, and instead scavengers scavengers . The dogs are not pets anymore, they're scavengers in packs .
 Drunks and junkies wander aimlessly through the streets, like the wounded and the shell shocked across a battlefield . The old men sit on the porches like refugees, watching, waiting and remembering . Drunks, junkies and addicts roam aimlessly around the streets .
 This is where hopes, ambitions, and dreams are frustrated to the point of extinction . This is the place where hopes and ambitions are frustrated, and hopes are frustrated .
 Good and evil have no form, no meaning; they weave together in a fabric so tight that one corrupts the other and they become inseparable . In all combat zones, good and evil do not have any form or meaning, says the author .
 Taken separately these photographs are little more than pictures of people we don’t want to know . Taken separately, these photographs show people who by birth or choice live in a place we refuse to acknowledge .
 The emotions they evoke in us range from pity to sympathy to contempt and disgust . The emotions we feel about them range from contempt to contempt for their actions .
 Taken as a whole these photographs depict a way of life . The meaning of life is often sought in a bottle of wine, a roll of the dice, or a squeezing of the trigger .
 They seem to mingle together to form a portrait, a portrait of life in a combat zone . The book is based on the experiences of soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The arrival of spring is heralded by the blossoming of flowers, the budding of tiny, bright green leaves, the arrival of mild weather . Friday, April 18, is the day of the first day of spring in the United States .
 The most obvious indications that spring, along with the end of this semester, has arrived are the crooked smiles of dazed, work-weary students who are looking forward to the final week of classes .
 The end of the semester lias almost been as reluctant to get here as spring as spring . Final exams are less than two weeks away from the end of this semester .
 One drawback to the pleasant weather is the temptation to toss homework aside and head for the frisbee golf course, the bike trail or the lake .
 On campus, there also seems to be more people “hanging around” (in true “Joe Cool"" form) outside or just any place where a class is being held .
 Proper first lowers rate of accidental deaths Dlin to study in Jerusalem by Melanie Stone . Lias created a system of laws, law enforcement officers and formal courts .
 Society has done very little to prevent anoUier burden— accidental death or injury . However, society has done little to stop anoOier burden, accidental death .
 Accidents are the leading cause of death among persons from the ages of one to 38 . Accidents caused by human carelessness can usually be avoided, says the Red Cross .
 For instance, a person should never be intoxicated or drowsy while operating an automobile or machine . For example, a driver should not be drowed or intoxicated while driving .
 There is a solution tliat can be applied to decrease the liig.li rate of accidental death and injury . First aid is the key to reducing the death rate by first aid .
 A person who possesses first aid knowledge and skill often makes the difference between life and death for the victim or victims involved in an emergency situation . A person with first aid skills can make a difference in life .
 The trained person can also mean the difference between temporary versus permanent disabilitv, and rapid recovery versus iong hospitalization .
 Even the person who has little or no formal first-aid training can save a life or lessen the severity of an injury if lie follows some basic guidelines .
 First, telephone or have someone else contact the appropriate authorities . First, call the police or call the National Suicide Prevention Hotline at 1-800-273-8255 .
 At LSUS, campus police sliould be contacted immediately if there are injured or ill persons on campus .
 At home or elsewhere, consider the circumstances surrounding the accident and then determine wlK) should be summoned . Their office is located on the first floor of Bronson Hail .
 If a list of emergency numbers is not readily available, call the telephone operator for assistance . Call the emergency number at 1-800-273-8255 .
 Give the location of the accident, the number of persons involved, your name and the telephone number where you can be reached . Finally, give the name of the person involved in the accident . Name the person who is injured or is in a car accident .
 Do not hang up until after die other party liangs up— he may wish to confirm some of Uie informa lion. Do not wait until after the other party members have finished talking .
 When a person applies the basic guidelines to society, he performs a valuable service to society . When applying these basic guidelines, a person performs a useful service, he says .
 One example of die effective application erf basic first aid occurred on campus last year . One example was an example of how effective it was to apply to students .
 A FEMALE sophomore, who was approaching the rear exit of Bronson Hall, tripped and fell into the glass door . A sophomore was approached by the door at the end of the hallway .
 He summoned campus police, who notified the proper authorities . Quickly, he summoned the campus police .
 She was taken to LSU Medical Center, where she was treated for injuries . She was treated and released .
 Even though it took more tlian 70 stitches to close die cuts, she survived die serious accident .
 Tliis is a good example of how basic first aid can mean the difference between temporary versus permanent disability, and rapid recovery versus long hospitalization . Basic first aid is a vital first step in the life of a patient .
 Dlin plans to spend about seven mondis studying the El Lahamm soullam which dates back to die days of Charlemagne and is located in old horse stalls left from the days of the Crusaders . Dlin says he plans to study the ancient site for seven years
 The activity in such a market place should provide a “good window into the socioeconomic and religious life of Jerusalem, 1 * said Dlin . He plans to use his research to prepare a paper to be presented at regional and national meetings .
 The trip will be his first to Jerusalem since 1976 when he traveled as part of a fact finding mission for the American Professors for Peace in the Middle East in the Mideast .
 Dlin hopes to travel throughout the countryside to see what dianges have taken place since his last visit . Dlin says he hopes to visit the countryside again in the future .
 He is especially interested in changes in the beef cattle industry and trends in the Kibbutzs (communal type farms) which he believes may be turning more toward industrialization . $70 PER DAY possible in just 3 hrs.
 Service keyed to your ''on-the-go' lifestyle . And this ones specially designed for service key to your 'on the go' lifestyle'
 Six lanes of drive-in service and a Keybanker 24-hour automatic banking center . KeyBanker also offers drive in and out of the city .
 Services such as checking, savings, travelers checks, money orders, collections, collections and time deposits are available at the lobby teller windows .
 CNB Branches open your account now, so you'll be ready to go when we are . Stop by any of the CNB branches and open your accounts now .