 The confrontation is often considered the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war . The confrontation occurred in response to the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961 .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter future invasions . The Soviet leader agreed to the request to put the missiles in place .
 The failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 was launched by CIA-trained forces of Cuban exiles . The U.S. had been embarrassed publicly by the failed invasion .
 Khrushchev's impression of Kennedy's weakness was confirmed by the President's response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961 . U.S. covert operations against Cuba continued in 1961 with the similarly unsuccessful Operation Mongoose .
 Specialists in missile construction under the guise of ""machine operators,"" ""irrigation specialists"" and ""agricultural specialists"" arrived in July .
 The Cuban leadership was further upset when in September the United States Congress approved United States Joint Resolution 230 . The resolution expressed Congress's resolve to prevent the creation of an externally supported military establishment . Khrushchev said the missiles would be camouflaged by palm trees .
 On August 10, he wrote a memo to President Kennedy in which he guessed that the Soviets were preparing to introduce ballistic missiles into Cuba . The Crisis became enmeshed in American politics with important Congressional elections scheduled for November .
 Analysts noticed Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases . DIA lobbied for the resumption of U-2 flights over the island .
 The CIA notified the Department of State and at 8:30 pm EDT, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy chose to wait until the next morning to tell the President .
 By October 19, frequent U-2 spy flights showed four operational sites . Not wanting to expose what he already knew, the President did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile build-up .
 At 5:00 pm EDT on October 25, William Clements announced that the missiles in Cuba were still actively being worked on . The next day, the Marucla was cleared through the blockade after its cargo was checked .
 At 9:00 am EDT on October 27, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev . The Cuban military continued to organize for action, although they were under order not to attack .
 The two went their separate ways, and Scali immediately typed out a memo for the EXCOMM . Khrushchev was well understood that ignoring the second offer and returning to the first put him in a terrible position . The two left the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 At 8:05 p.m. EDT, the letter drafted earlier in the day was delivered . It was delivered to the editor of this article .
 The Soviets scrambled MiG fighters from Wrangel Island; in turn the Americans launched F-102 fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles over the Bering Sea . Khrushchev also received a letter from Castro – what is now known as the Armageddon Letter – interpreted as urging
 There is some dispute as to whether removing the missiles from Italy was part of the secret agreement . Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that it was . When the crisis had ended McNamara gave the order to dismantle the missiles in both Italy and Turkey .
 Khrushchev determined that because the Americans had not listed the missiles on their list of demands, keeping them in Cuba would be in the Soviet Union's interests . Anastas Mikoyan was tasked with negotiations with Castro over the missile transfer deal .
 McNamara mistakenly dates the shooting down of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 on October 26 . The incident occurred on the same date as the shooting of a U.2 in the U.S. in Cuba .