 Teachers Start Here Register Educator Account Lesson Plans Newsletter Calendar Calendar .
 Download our Annual Report for more detailed information about our daily operations. Download our annual report to see how well we run our operations .
 IMPACT: Blog to see how teachers and visitors around the world are using MY HERO to affect positive changes in the world .
 Yasmine Sherif leads Education Cannot Wait, a UN-hosted, global fund for education in emergencies . Yasmine is a member of the board of directors of the organisation .
 Pashtana Durrani received the Malala Fund Education Champion Award . She received the award for her work at the center of the campaign .
 MY HERO collects all kinds of stories, from inspirational essays about a close friend to important issues .
 All artworks in our commercial free, age-appropriate Gallery are contributed by professional and student artists as well as curated from art institutions around the world . All art works in the commercial free-association Gallery are .
 MY HERO Project seeks unique works of art by professional and student artists . Project celebrates the lives and courageous acts of heroes who work to promote change .
 Completed artwork should reflect thoughtful ideas to show how the selected hero demonstrates heroic action and creates positive social change . Completed artwork must reflect thoughtful idea of how the hero creates positive change .
 Learn more about select judges in the MY HERO International Film Festival . The MY HERO international film festival will be held in New York City, New York .
 Nancy Caruso founded the Kelp Fest in 2009 in order to help local communities better understand and appreciate the kelp forest . Nancy founded the event in 2009 .
 Heroic audio is all around us . From the spoken words of influential leaders, to emotionally powerful lyrics in a song, heroic audio is everywhere . Hero audio is often heard in the world .
 Please take 30 seconds to fill out a survey form then click back on your browser and click on “Continue to printing” to print this page . Donations of any size are needed and appreciated .
 MY HERO is a weekly feature on CNN iReport . Please visit CNN.com/Heroes for more information about MY Heroism .
 Thousands of Cubans have died trying to flee their island nation . Cuba's economic collapse of Cuba, national poverty, became a dictator while fighting against dictatorship .
 Fidel Castro grew up in the Cuban province of Oriente . He was the son of a wealthy Spanish landowner . Fidel Castro was a hero of the day .
 He attended Catholic school in Havana and excelled in sports, particularly baseball . He was born in Havana, Cuba, and is a native of Havana .
 In 1952 Castro wanted to run for a parliamentary seat but a coup d'etat led by General Fulgencio Batista cancelled the elections and short-circuited his plans . In 1952 he wanted to be a member of parliament, but the election was cancelled .
 Castro sued the dictator for violating the constitution, but the court rejected his petition, leaving him no other recourse than armed insurrection . Outraged, Castro sued . The court rejected Castro's petition, forcing him to take his own action .
 In July 26, 1953, Castro launched an attack on the Moncada Barracks that was a complete failure, landing him in prison for treason . Castro was imprisoned for treason after the attack, which was a failure .
 In his trial, he gave the famous five-hour speech, ""History Will Absolve Me,"" in which he condemned the dictatorship of Batista . In no uncertain terms, he condemned Batista's dictatorship of Cuba .
 Sentenced to 15 years in prison, he was released two years later -on May 15, 1955 -in a general amnesty . He was released from prison two years after .
 Castro went on a fund-raising tour in the United States and met Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara in Mexico . After his release Castro visited the U.S. and met the Argentine revolutionary Ernesto "Che"
 He returned to Cuba from Mexico on a fishing vessel called the ""Gramna" with 82 men to start the revolution . He returned from Mexico to Cuba on a boat called the "Gramnna"
 The rebels established a parallel state in the Sierra Maestra mountains with a system of education and schools in the surrounding rural areas which made them popular with the poor and disenfranchised .
 For many Cubans ""Fidel"" -as he is universally known - represented hope, glamour, pride, youth and a bright future . For many Cuban people, 'Fidel' represented hope and glamour .
 Batista fled the country on New Year's Day 1959 . Batista, seeing his days in power dwindling, fled in 1959 .
 Castro and his long-haired revolutionary ""army"" made their victorious entry into Havana heralding the dawn of a new era of equality and justice for Cuba . Cuba had been besieged by dictatorships since the inception of its independence in 1902 .
 On April 17, 1961, a CIA-led force of 1,300 exiled Cubans launched an attack on a southern coastal area of Cuba known as the Bay of Pigs . The attack took place on the southern coast of Cuba .
 The counter-revolutionaries forces were quickly fought off, scoring a huge moral and military victory for the emergent revolutionary government . The government was defeated by the rebels in a huge military victory .
 The assumption by the exile force and the CIA was that the invasion would inspire the Cuban population to rise up and overthrow Castro never materialized . The invasion failed to materialize and Castro was overthrown .
 As the relationship with the U.S. soured, the Soviet Union provided money and military equipment to Castro . The Soviet Union brought him closer to their Communist ideals, which brought him to their ideals .
 Soviet aid fueled many of Castro's social programs, such as his war on illiteracy and free universal health care . This Soviet aid funded many of his social programs such as literacy programs .
 The United States kept exploring ways -from exploding cigars to deadly flowers -to depose him from power . Meanwhile the U.S. kept looking for ways to depose the former president .
 Castro nationalized industry, confiscated property owned by non-Cubans and Cubans, collectivized agriculture, and enacted policies to benefit laborers and peasants . As a socialist leader Castro also nationalized property and agricultural property .
 In an attempt to export his revolutionary goals, he supported a number of other revolutionary movements in Latin America and Africa .
 Castro, emboldened by the economic support of the Soviets, became an icon of the struggle against American Imperialism throughout the world . Castro was an icon in the 70s and 80s when he was in power .
 Cuba is a model of a successful revolutionary society, says President Castro . Castro turned Cuba into a model for a successful revolution, says Castro .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1990 and the loss of all economic support from his former allies, Castro has been able to repeatedly -much to the chagrin of his enemies -buckle the odds against his survival in power .
 Fidel has been able to surf the adversities befallen on him and his revolution with surprising ease, grace and agility . While the exile community in Miami and politicians in Washington keep predicting his imminent downfall, Fidel has had surprising ease .
 U.S. government plotted his fall from power 40 years ago . Cubans remain independent and are proud of his survival tactics and remarkable political acumen .
 With every defeat, Fidel has been able to flip it and turn it into a victory, says Fidel Castro . "With every defeat you have to flip the victory," he says .
 Castro managed to empty his jails of violent criminals and send them to the U.S. where they were welcomed with open arms . For example, the 1980 Mariel boatlift in which Castro emptied his jails and sent criminals to the United States .
 A master of seizing the moment, in 2000 he scored perhaps his greatest victory when he turned a young boy called Elian into a symbol of the desperate, money-hungry community of Cuban exiles .
 "Fidelismo" still holds great sway over many of his people, especially those who remember how it used to be and fear what it could turn into .
 Fidel betrayed the very foundations of his education when he became a revolutionary . Fidel betrayed his education to become a revolutionary, according to Fidel Castro .
 Two years later Batista decided the young rebel was no longer a threat to his government and freed him in a general amnesty . Batista later decided he was not a threat and freed in an amnesty .
 Castro and his brother travelled to Mexico to organize the Cuban exiles into another fighting force called the 26th of July Revolutionary Movement . Castro travelled with his brother and brother in Mexico to organise the group .
 On December 2, 1956, a group of 82 men launched an attack on the north coast of Oriente province . Only 12 of the attackers survived, with only 12 surviving .
 The survivors retreated to the Sierra Maestra mountains from which they waged a guerrilla war against the government . The survivors were forced to flee the government and fought for their lives in the mountains .
 Without having engaged in any kind of battle Fidel and his rebels rode into Havana victorious but with hardly a clue of how to run a country . The rebels had no idea how to deal with Cuba .
 Castro nationalized all U.S. properties and made an oil deal with the Soviet Union . By 1960, relations with the United States took a turn to the worse as Castro made oil deals with the Soviets .
 Castro's true colors as a Marxist-Leninist became evident leading to the 1961 Trade Embargo imposed by the U.S. and the subsequent failed Bay of Pigs invasion . Castro was the leader of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Castro became autocratic, oppressive and dictatorial, paving the way to the present police state in which Cuba has existed for the past 40 years . Betraying the ideals of his revolution, Castro became an autocratic and oppressive leader .
 Kennedy instituted a naval blockade of Cuba when he discovered the Soviet Union was setting up long-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . The blockade lasted until Khrushchev agreed to back down and remove the missiles from Cuba .
 Castro became more closely aligned with the Soviets who supported him financially by purchasing the sugar crop at inflated prices . The Soviets supplied oil and military equipment to keep the economy running . Thereafter, U.S.-Cuban relations remained mutually hostile and relations remained hostile .
 With the full backing of the Soviets Castro became a committed Marxist-Leninist . Castro ruled Cuba with an iron fist as he ruled with the iron fist . He ruled Cuba for more than a decade .
 Cuba's prison population swelled with dissidents, artist, fellow revolutionaries, religious leaders, intellectuals and religious leaders . Not allowing any room for dissention, Cuba's president imprisoned dissidents, artists and intellectuals .
 As Communism engulfed the island, Castro adopted the repressive system favored by the Soviets and the German Stassi in which every citizen acted as a watchdog for the state . Castro adopted a repressive system in which all citizens were a watchdog .
 By setting up citizen committees he ennacted the perfect police state in which everyone acted simultaneously as the guard and the guarded . The police state was set up by the president of the United States in 1953 .
 Thousands of Cubans tried to leave the island whatever way they could . Not surprisingly, thousands of Cuban citizens tried to escape .
 Many left for the Florida Keys in inner tubes or homemade boats . More than a quarter of them perished to the sea, the sun and sharks .
 A large and vocal anti-Castro community established itself in Miami, Florida, attacking the excesses of power demonstrated by Fidel and his cohorts . Throughout the years, the anti-Fidel Castro community has emerged .
 Castro and his revolution have again found themselves playing the role of orphans . But with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1990 and the failure of Communist regimes around the globe, they have found themselves again playing orphans .
 Castro once again called on the Cuban citizenry to bare the brunt of his failing policies . With no financial support from his former allies, Castro calls on the citizens of Cuba to bear the brunt .
 Communist government implemented a series of changes that would have been unthinkable during its revolutionary heyday . The Communist government accepted dollars as legal tender to build tourist-only resorts .
 After 40 years of revolution the Cuban people find themselves worse off than what they were when they overthrew Batista . The Cuban people are still struggling to find a way to cope with the crisis .
 Cubans are fearful, hungry, oppressed, living like second-class citizens in their own country . Cubans prostituting themselves to foreigners for a few dollars, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Castro arrogantly holds onto absolute power, disregarding any plans for the future of Cuba and ignoring all calls for the democratization of the island . And still, still, Castro arrogates to absolute power .
 Most Cuban refugees and some U.S. politicians believe that a hard-line stance towards Cuba will finally break Castro's grip of power . But other moderate voices believe a dialogue with the Cuban government and lifting of the Trade Embargo that was imposed in 1961 is the best way to deal
 My parents, who left Cuba in 1959, are deeply entrenched in the anti-Castro camp . My parents are deeply committed to the Castro regime, but they are not .
 As far as they are concerned Fidel is the devil, and nothing less than his fall from power, arrest and eventual execution is what he deserves . Nothing less than this is what the Cuban government deserves, says Fidel Castro .
 "There was no poverty in Cuba before Castro," says Castro's mother . "My mother, bless her soul, thinks that there was no . poverty before Castro, and that the poverty now . came with Communism," she says .
 My father left Cuba through the Mexican embassy after he was labelled a traitor and counter-revolutionary . He was sentenced to death in absentia for his role in the Cuban revolution .
 At home feelings about Castro and the Cuban revolution were always less than positive . Needless to say, at home feelings were always negative .
 Being of Cuban descent, I've always wanted to visit the island and see for myself what life was really like thered. I've also wanted to see the island .
 In July 2000, after my father's death, after his death, I spent a week in Havana which was an eye-opening experience . I spent the same week in Cuba as my father, who died in July 2000 .
 I traced several of the homes of my parents which I found mostly in ruinous disrepair . I found them mostly in ruined disrepair. I traced them back to the homes I found .
 The Commodore Hotel - which now is a tourist-only development - is now a luxury development . I also found the hotel were parents met - the Commodore Hotel .
 Like the divided opinions of Castro and his revolution, Cuba itself exist in a state of constant contradiction . Cuba itself exists in a constant state of contradiction, with many contradictions .
 Cubans are genuinely happy people who are proud of their accomplishments . Meanwhile one cannot help see the utter poverty people live in, one can also not help notice that the Cubans .
 Although one can sense that it is a totalitarian state with policemen at ever corner, these policemen are unarmed and friendly, and there is no violence or street crime whatsoever . Police are unarmed, friendly and there are no violence and street crimes whatsoever .
 People are poor and rich, they are oppressed and free, they say . They love their island and want to escape it, they love their country . People love their own island and escape it .
 When I told my relatives in Miami I thought the people there were happy, they assured me it was because they were scared of being turned in to the police . They assured me that they would not turn themselves in to police .
 When I said they spoke freely about their feelings, they answered that it was because they feared I would denounce them as traitors . They answered that they feared that they would denounce me as a traitor . They said they would speak freely about the feelings, but they would not denounce themselves as
 When I said they liked living there, they said they were lying because they thought I was a spy . When I told them they liked it, they thought it was a lie, he said they thought he was spying .
 When I said many did not want to go to Miami, they answered it was because they were already planning their escape . When asked why they wanted to go there, they said they were planning to escape, they replied yes .
 If you are writting more than one paragraph, be sure to include the HTML code <p> for each paragraph break . Use this article to help you understand today's featured articles .
 You give My Hero the right to include your comments in the My Hero Forum as well as all other media on a non exclusive, perpetual basis .
 Few figures in the world are as polarizing as Cuban revolutionary leader, Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro is a polarizing figure in Cuba .
 Some see him as a merciless despot who has oppressed his people for more than 40 years . Others say he has oppressed them for 40 years and is a ruthless dictator .
 Others see him as a charismatic leader who has resisted the might of the U.S. in favor of revolutionary ideals .