 The “Careers in International Relations” feature at the beginning of the book helps students think about job possibilities in the field . Finally, the "Careers In International Relations" feature is designed to help students understand job possibilities .
 Many people find information, especially abstract concepts, easier to grasp when linked with pictures . Images are often used to help people understand abstract concepts .
 The book uses color photographs extensively to illustrate important points . The book was published in 1998 .
 Photo captions reinforce main themes from each section of the text and link them with the scenes pictured . This edition includes many of the 2012 and 2013 photos .
 Traditional MBA and business school programs will be helpful for all three types of jobs . For jobs based abroad, employers often also look for a broader set of skills taught in economics, political science and communications .
 Whether one wants to pursue an adsearch university, is intellectual freedom . One advantage of an academic and research career, whether at a teaching-oriented institution or a large re«L I ON: Academic freedom .
 Charleston Dallas Jaenuiiiu Ei fas® 0 deans Hcrmosllla BAHAMAS Cflihuahua Torracm. Charleston Dallas .
 International relations is a fascinating topic because it concerns peoples and cultures throughout the world . Watch the video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction"" at MyPoliSciLab Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life .
 In general, collective goods are easier to provide in small groups than in large ones . Collective goods are hard to provide to small groups, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Leaders of the major industrial countries announced in 2009 that the G20 would replace the G8 as the key group coordinating global financial matters . The G20 is now a key financial group coordinating financial matters in the world .
 The principal actors in IR are the world’s governments . J Watch the Video ""Conflict Diamonds and the Kimberley Process"" at MyPoliSciLab . J
 Nonstate actors participate in IR alongside states, although generally in less central roles . Greenpeace can travel to remote locations and then beam video of its environmental actions there to the world . Al Qaeda can place suicide bombers in world cities, coordinate their operations and finances through the Internet .
 For instance, democracies and dictatorships may act differently from one another, and democracies act differently in an election year z Singer, J David.
 Actors and Influences 19 at the global level that reach down to influence international relations . Actors have influence on international relations at the level of global politics .
 Levels of analysis offer different sorts of explanations for international events . Levels of analyses offer different kinds of analysis to explain the events .
 Many possible explanations exist for the 2003 U.S.-led war against Iraq . For example, many could be possible explanations for the war .
 A third school of thought sees globalization as more profound than skeptics believe, yet more uncertain than the view of supporters of liberal economics . The view of the skeptics is uncertain, but more uncertain, according to some .
 These “transformationalists” see state sovereignty as being eroded by the EU, the WTO, and other new institutions . They see sovereignty as one of a spectrum of bargaining leverages held by states . sovereignty is no longer an absolute but just one of the bargaining levers .
 As the world economy becomes more integrated, markets and production are becoming global in scope . Popular debates focus on the growing power of large corporations operating globally, the disruptive costs associated with joining world markets .
 Nine Regions of the World North merica The North The South Latin merica Europe & Russia /CIS China Japan / Pacific South Asia 2000 Kilometers Global Geography 23 geographical element at the global level of analysis .
 For many people, World War I symbolizes the tragic irrationality of war . With perhaps just two other cases in history, the two world wars were global or hegemonic wars in which almost all major states participated in an all-out struggle over the future of the international system/
 Niall Ferguson: It fascinates scholars of IR because it was a catastrophic war that seems unnecessary and perhaps even unnecessary . Ferguson, Niall. Ferguson . Ferguson: "It fascinates scholar of IR ... because of the catastrophic war"
 Hitler signed a nonaggression pact with his archenemy, Joseph Stalin of the z Van Evera, Stephen. Stephen. Hitler signed the pact with Stalin of Germany .
 The pass-the-hat financing for this war was an innovation, one that worked fairly well . The 15 republics of the Soviet Union had begun taking power from a weakened central government, declaring themselves sovereign states . 'l Q'
 Many Iraqis welcomed the end of a dictatorial regime, as had most Afghans in late 2001 . But the war in Afghanistan was not over, and the war was over .
 Latin America and Russia/CIS have nearly extinguished wars in their regions, joining a zone of peace already encompassing North America, Europe, Japan/Pacific, and China .
 The Prisoner's Dilemma J Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab . The International System, 1500-2000 Alliances, NATO, NATO and other alliances .
 Theories of IR Individual Domestic Levels of Analysis: Interstate Realism Neorealism Global Liberal Theories Democratic Liberal Institutionalism Peace CjOCAW-"" . Constructivist Theories Postmodernist Theories Peace Studies .
 Realists believe that the international system exists in a state of anarchy . The term implies not complete chaos or absence of structure and rules, but rather the lack of a central government that can enforce rules .
 In domestic society within states, governments can enforce contracts, deter citizens from breaking rules, and use their monopoly on legally sanctioned violence to enforce a system of law . Governments can use the monopoly of violence to deter citizens breaking rules in domestic society .
 Middle powers have not received as much attention in IR as have great powers . Middle powers are not seen as much of the attention given to the world's most powerful powers .
 Power transition theory holds that the largest wars result from challenges to the top position in the status hierarchy, when a rising power is surpassing (or threatening to suro i pass) the most powerful state .
 A nuclear-powered submarine sails near China's coast, 2009 .
 U.S. foreign policy has alternated between internationalist and isolationist moods . It was founded as a breakaway from the European-based international system .
 The Great Power System, 1500-2000 o> o> IS5 Wars Spain conquers Portugal Spanish Armada War Si Nc War of the 7 Years' Spanish War iccession ipoleonic Wars FrancoPrussian War World War 1 World War II Cold War Cold War Major Alliances
 Two countries may create the practical equivalent of an alliance without a formal treaty . Or, two countries could create the equivalent of a treaty without a treaty .
 The Czech Republic, Czech Republic and Hungary joined the NATO expansion alliance . NATO Expansion Alliances were formed in 2009 .
 Turkey refused to let U.S. ground forces cross into Iraq . France and Germany strongly opposed the war, and Turkey did not participate .
 U.S. leaders shifted some operations (and money) to new members in Eastern Europe such as Romania . While drawing down forces based in Germany, the United States shifted operations .
 NATO has been the world's strongest military force since 1949 . Its mission in the post-Cold War era is somewhat uncertain . The NATO alliance has been NATO's most powerful since 1949.
 Japan pays the U.S. several billion dollars annually to offset about half the cost of maintaining these troops . The United States pays the United States about half of the cost .
 In 2009, Georgia withdrew from the CIS, due to its 2008 military conflict with Russia . Georgia withdrew due to the war’s growing unpopularity, budget pressures due to global recession, and uncertain prospects for victory .
 Funeral of two Spanish soldiers killed in Afghanistan, 2010, 2010. around underlings . Being on top of a dominance hierarchy does not just mean ordering Funeral . of two . Spanish soldiers died in Afghanistan in 2010 .
 The United States had very hostile relations with Iraq before . The U.S. had a very hostile relationship with Iraq prior to the invasion .
 Explore the Simulation ""You are the Prime Minister of India"" at PoliSciLab Strategy 73 Statecraft . Classical realists emphasize statecraft —the art of managing state affairs and effectively maneuvering in a world of power politics .
 1 Domestic Uncertainty and Institutions in International Relations . 1. Optimal Imperfection. 1. International Uncertainties. 1 .
 Reciprocity governs UN dues in principle, since all countries contribute according to a formula based on each individual economy’s size . Kant proposed that the majority of states could unite to punish any one state that committed aggression, safeguarding the collective interests of all the nations .
 Democracy has become more widespread as a form of government in the past two centuries . This trend is changing the nature of the foreign policy process worldwide . Democracy is becoming more widespread in the U.S.
 Existing democracies are imperfect in various ways, from political apathy in the U.S. and corruption in Japan to autocratic traditions in Russia . And existing democracies have imperfections, such as apathy, corruption and apathy .
 The trend is toward democratization in most of the world’s regions . Nonetheless, the trend is to be seen as a positive for democracy .
 Upsurges of democratic movements throughout the world testify to the power of the idea of democracy . Upsurge in recent years testify to power of democracy in the world .
 A period of transition to democracy may be more prone to war than a stable democracy or a stable authoritarian government . mature democracies almost never fight each other, although mature democracies never do so . Transition to democracy is more likely to be a period of war .
 The process of democratization does not necessarily bode well for peace in the short term . Therefore, the process of democraticization is not necessarily good for peace, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Mansfield, Edward D., and Jack Snyder. These theories contrast with the assumption of fixed, timeless preferences in most theories .
 One prominent line examines how states’ interests and identities are intertwined, as well as how those identities are shaped by interactions with other states . Another line examines the role of other states in shaping their identities .
 European identities are now intertwined with the European Union, not with violent nationalism that led to two world wars . European identity is intertwined with EU, not violent nationalism, says David Cameron .
 Iran's morals police close a barber shop in Iran for giving Western-style haircuts in 2008 .
 Switzerland values its role as a neutral, though the pirates had no political goals in their violence . Switzerland, for example, values its neutrality .
 Jeffrey Checkel: Even if not terrorism, no one would doubt the costs associated with 1 c c . Jeffrey Chekkel: The costs of 1 c are likely to be much higher than terrorism .
 Scholars have examined the role of the European Union in socializing elites in new member states 01 as well as the United Nations in conferring legitimacy on a 'j force'
 Others have investigated how international organizations 'i 1 1 'Finnemore, Martha. Martha. 'i1 '
 None of these is an objective reality, and all are filtered through an interpretive process that distorts the ■j o J Barnett, Michael, and Martha Finnemore . Barnett, Barnock, Farnemore, and farnham, say they are
 The hidden meanings not explicitly addressed in the text are often called the subtext . Omissions are an aspect of subtext, as when realist theories of IR omit women and gender, for example .
 Shapiro, Shapiro, Michael J Textualizing Global Politics. We will discuss Marxist Marxist Marxist ideas . Shapiro and Shapiro will be discussing Marxist ideas at MyPoliSciLab .
 Disparity of wealth is a central aspect of global North-South relations, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com . The world's most populous countries are divided by wealth inequality .
 Proletarian workers in industrialized countries enjoyed rising standards of living and did not . Moore, Barrington. Moore: Proletarians in industrialized . countries enjoyed . rising living standards of . living and not living in industrialized nations .
 Peace Studies challenges fundamental concepts behind both realism and neoliberal ism. Peace studies challenges the concept of realism . Peace studies is a philosophy of peace and peace .
 Chester A. z Crocker, Chester A., Fen Osier Hampson, and Pamela Aall. Aall, were the authors of the book, "Pamela Aall," published in 1989 at Johns Hopkins .
 Some feminist scholars find in realism a hidden assumption of masculinity . Thus, some feminist scholars say realism is a secret assumption of male masculinity .
 Realists draw a sharp distinction between international politics and domestic politics . The distinction parallels the distinction in gender roles between the public and private spheres . Realists also draw a distinction between the international and domestic spheres .
 Feminist scholars emphasize the importance of gender roles in IR, especially the traditional distinction between males in the political-military roles and females in the domestic-family roles .
 Difference feminists find evidence to support the idea of war as a masculine pursuit . Difference feminists have found evidence that war is not a manly pursuit .
 U.S. women military police have acquitted themselves well in numerous firefights in Iraq . During the subsequent years of war in Iraq, the women have performed well .
 Women in nontraditional gender roles may well perform better than their male counterparts, says Katzenstein, Mary Fainsod, and Judith Reppy .
 Legislative Quotas Are Important for Equal Representation and Development . Equal representation is important for democratic government, says Julian Zelizer .
 Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab . Figure 4: Making Foreign Policy ■ Models of Decision Making . Figure 5: Decision Makers, Group Psychology, Interest Groups, The Military-Industrial Complex and Interest Groups . Figure 6: Making
 Soviet leaders in 1941 and Israeli leaders in 1973 ignored evidence of pending invasions of their countries. undermined by emotions that decision makers feel while thinking about the consequences of their actions . The effect is referred to as affective bias. It is also known as 'affective bias'
 Foreign policies often deviate from rationality as a result of the misperceptions and biases of decision makers and populations . Foreign policy often deviates from rationality due to a misperception and biases . Foreign policies are often more difficult to predict than they are to predict .
 Misperceptions can affect implementation of policy by lowlevel officials as well as its formulation by high-level officials . Misperception can affect the implementation of policies by low level officials .
 Second, the rationality of individual cost-benefit calculations is rational in making a decision . The decision-making process is bound to be influenced by strong feelings held about the person or state toward which a decision is directed .
 When five of the people are secretly instructed to say that line A is longer, even though anyone can see that line B is actually longer, the sixth person is likely to agree with the group . z Simon, Herbert A Models of Bounded Rationality .
 Because of the domestic political clout of these actors, the z z Smith, Tony. Smith is the subject of a new book . The book will be published in October .
 In many countries, the state owns or controls major mass media such as television and newspapers, mediating the flow of information to citizens . New information technologies with multiple channels make this harder to do .
 National leaders traditionally have additional latitude to make decisions . President Barack Obama is expected to make a decision in the coming weeks .
 Public opinion polls show that elite opinions sometimes differ considerably from those of the gen'l eral population . Governments sometimes adopt foreign policies to generate public approval and hence gain domestic legitimacy .
 In 2006, President Bush’s popularity, which had soared early in the Iraq War, deflated as the war dragged on 1 A . rage, Benjamin I., and Marshall M Bouton .
 State legislatures hold the “purse strings’ - they have the ability to stop a war in its 1 Q 0 Milner, Helen Milner .
 1 Q ^Howell, Will, and Jon C Pevehouse. For example, both capitalist and capitalist. 1 QHowell and 1 QQHowell .
 Legislatures Should Play a Role in Deciding Whether to Use Mil tary Force . More input regarding military force leads to more careful policy, says John McCain .
 Civil war refers to war between factions within a state trying to create, or prevent, a new government for the entire state or some territorial part of it . Civil war is a state's attempt to create a new state .
 Conventional armies fighting against guerrillas often cannot distinguish them from civilians and punish both together . The situation is doubly painful because conventional armies cannot distinguish the guerillas from civilians .
 J Collier, Paul, and Nicholas Sambanis, eds. You Are a Strategic Analyst"" at MyPoliSciLab . You Are A Strategic Analyst? You Are an Analyst? Please submit .
 Political scientists do not agree on a theory of why great wars like World War II occur and cannot predict whether they could happen again . Political scientists say they can't predict whether the next war will be similar .
 Ernest. Gellner, Ernest. Ernest. Errol . Ernest . Ernest Ernest. "Gellner" was born in Germany and died in 1946 .
 The Netherlands helped establish the principle of self-determination when it broke free of Spanish ownership around 1600 and set up a self-governing Dutch republic . Today such conflicts are widespread—in Northern Ireland, Quebec, Israel-Palestine, India-Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet, Tibet
 In the 1990s, rival Kurdish guerrilla armies fought both sides of the border .
 If killings based on age-old hatreds are inevitable, then inaction by the rest of the world might help . 1 Q Krause, jiii, and Neil Renwick, eds.
 In the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia—multinational states—the existence of a single strong state (willing to Q y Power, Samantha) was a strong state .
 Violent conflicts are being prosecuted in the name of all the world’s major religions . Violence is being prosecuted against all religions, including Islam . Islamist Movements are among the most violent groups in the world .
 Religious intolerance can exacerbate tensions between groups, sometimes increasing violence, with international implications . Religious intolerance has international implications, including international tensions .
 Serbia/Kosovo 4, Turkey 5 Cyprus 6 Georgia 7 Southern Russia/Chechnya 10 Tajikistan 11 Western China 12 Philippines 13 East Timor/Indonesia 14 India 17 Israel/Palestine 18 Egypt 19 Algeria 20 Sudan 21 Nigeria 21 Nigeria .
 Anti-Western feelings in Islamic countries came to a boil in 2006 after a Danish newspaper published offensive cartoons depicting 'i/i'
 Muslims think non-Muslims are: Fanatical Not respectful of women . Muslims think Muslims are fanatical not respectful of non-Muslim women . Pew Global Attitudes Survey, 2005 and 2010, shows Muslims think they're fanatical .
 Iran strongly supports—with money, arms, and training—the Hezbollah militia in Lebanon and the government in Syria . Hezbollah runs hundreds of schools, hospitals, and other charities, but is also included on U.S. list of terrorist organizations .
 Efforts by a region to secede from a state are a frequent source of international conflict . International norms generally treat such conflicts as internal matters unless they spill over borders .
 No New Cold War will emerge between the U.S. and Russ a Russia depends on Western aid and acceptance . ARGUMENT 2: No new Cold War Will Emerge Between the United States and Russia .
 By 2009, more than 44 million land mines had been destroyed under the treaty, with 86 countries eliminating stockpiles . 86 countries eliminated their stockpiles of land mines .
 A new norm seems to be emerging, but its effect on actual military practice is not yet clear . "A new norm" is emerging but it's not clear how it will affect actual military practices .
 China has spent large sums in the past ten years rejuvenating its aging air force capabilities . The country's air force has spent the past decade rejuvenating it .
 U.S. Department of Defense: Bases Abroad: The Global Foreign Military Presence . Harkavy, Robert E. 'Harkavy' says .
 Terrorism is a shadowy world of faceless enemies and irregular tac1 'l tics marked by extreme brutality . More than guerrilla warfare, terrorism is the shadowy world . The U.S. government has been accused of terrorism in the past .
 Chechen radicals seized a school in Beslan, a small city in the Caucasus region in 2004, in 2004 . For example, Chechen militants seized a Beslan school .
 For three days, they held nearly 1,200 children, parents, and teachers without food or water . The children were held without water or food .
 As of 2011, the United States has accused four states of supporting international terrorism . Iran, Syria, Sudan, Cuba, and Cuba have been on the list for more than a decade . All have been listed as supporting terrorism .
 The United States government has barred United States companies from doing business in those states . The U.S. government barred companies from entering those states in 2010 .
 North Korea, Iran, Iraq, and Libya all built the infrastructure to do so in recent years . Libya, North Korea and Iran all built infrastructure to build the infrastructure .
 A plutonium bomb is more difficult to build than a uranium one, another obstacle to proliferation . But a plutonium bomb can be built more easily than uranium one .
 Nuclear weapons were invented during World War II and used on two Japanese cities in 1945 . Fusion weapons are extremely expensive and technically demand .
 In 1999, a United States congressman displays a mock-up of the Soviet-built nuclear ""suitcase bomb"" that, in the wrong hands, could kill hundreds of thousands of people .
 Chemical weapons can be produced using processes similar to those for pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and other civilian products, which makes it difficult to find i n . u Mistry .
 Several states (including India, China, South Korea, France, and Britain) admitted to having secret chemical weapons programs . The programs are now being dismantled under international oversight .
 In 2001, the United States pulled out of talks to strengthen the 1972 treaty . The United States declared the proposed modifications unworkable . The U.S. pulled out in 2001 .
 Civilians are more vulnerable to chemical weapons than soldiers are, say experts . Civilians more vulnerable than soldiers, they are, they say .
 As political unrest occurs in other nuclear states, thoughts often turn 9 A toward the safety of nuclear weapons and materials .
 An attack intended to destroy—largely or entirely—a state’s nuclear weapons before they can’t be used is called a first strike . First strike is a strike that destroys a state's nuclear weapons .
 It aims to impede the development of new types 'j r 'r ' 3 Adler, Emanuel, ed. Adler: 'It aims to . impede the . development of . new types of . types of 'jr '
 Choices about military forces depend on the connection between a state’s military spending and its economic health . Military Economics 22 Watch the Video ""Civil-Military Relations and Revolution in Egypt"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 Q Forsberg, Randall, Robert Elias, and Matthew Goodman. Princeton, 1996. Forsberg . Goodman . Forsberg. Goodman. Goodman, Goodman, Elias, Goodman .
 North Korea clearly possesses the knowledge, resources, and ability to produce nuclear weapons . Although the test had only a small yield, it shows North Korea has the ability to make a nuclear weapon .
 International norms are evolving in such areas as humanitarian intervention and human rights . This weaving together of people across national boundaries through specialized groups reflects interdependence / —*■-l3 .
 Greenpeace attends UN meetings about the global environment . Greenpeace often attends the UN meetings on environmental issues .
 The UN and other international organizations have both strengths and weaknesses in the anarchic international system . At the center of that web of connection stands the most important international organization today .
 East Timor, operate under their national flags but their missions are authorized by UN resolution . East Timors operate under national flags under the UN flag .
 The structure of the Security Council is not without problems . Proposed changes to the council's structure have been proposed by the United States .
 Japan and Germany contribute substantial UN dues (based on economic size) and make large contributions to UN programs and peacekeeping operations . Germany and Japan are great powers that contribute substantial contributions to the UN .
 In 2005 the UN created a Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate reconstruction, institution building, and economic recovery efforts after peacekeeping missions end . The UN created the commission in 2005 to coordinate rebuilding efforts .
 The Assembly has met in emergency session only nine times in the past to deal with an immediate threat to international peace and security . This has now become uncommon and has become uncommon, with only nine such meetings happening .
 The universal membership of the United Nations is one of its strengths . Its regional commissions look at how UN programs work together in a particular region . Its functional commissions deal with global topics such as population growth and narcotics trafficking .
 UN General Assembly maintains formal ties with about 20 autonomous international agencies not under its control . Autonomous agencies are not under the UN's control . UN has programs to help people in need of assistance .
 An array of UN programs, operating under the General Assembly, aim to help countries in the global South to overcome social and economic problems . UN programs operate under the name of the UN General Assembly .
 Although revolution does not free a state from its obligations, some treaties have built-in escape clauses . Some treaties are built-insane, such as the U.S. Constitution .
 Uruguay brings in foreign companies to build 2 pulp mills across the river from a major Argentine tourist resort . Uruguay is seeking to build pulp mills in the country's capital, Buenos Aires .
 Under the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, citizens arrested in a foreign country must be advised of their right to meet with their home country’s representatives . Citizens arrested in foreign countries must also be advised they can meet with home country's representatives .
 The bedrock of international law is respect for the rights of diplomats . Q Watch the video ""The Uncertain Status of Enemy Combatants"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 Aggression refers to a state’s use of force, or an imminent threat to do so, against another state's territory or sovereignty . Aggression is not in response to aggression, unless the use is in response . Aggressive is a state of intent to use force against another
 One of the newest areas of international law concerns human rights . Rights of human 9 1 being against certain abuses of their own governments . Human 9 1 beings are protected by their governments .
 A consensus on what are the most important human rights is difficult to reach . A consensus is hard to reach on what is important to human rights in the U.S.
 The concept of human rights arises 'l ^ , from at least three sources . The first is religion, the first is religious .
 These two covenants, along with the UDHR, are often referred to as 'l Q the International Bill of Human Rights/ The remaining treaties each deal with a particular group that the international community considers vulnerable .
 Free trade agreements frequently contain provisions that condition trade benefits on respect for human rights, especially workers’ rights . Because these treaties provide policies beneficial to developing states, they create a ready mechanism to punish countries who abuse citizens .
 z Hopgood, Stephen. Risse, Ropp, and Sikkink, The Power of Human Rights . zhopgood: Human Rights in the United States is a violation of freedom of expression . zHopgood: The power of human rights in the U.S.
 Enforcing norms of human rights is difficult because it involves interfering in a state’s internal affairs . Enforcing human rights involves interfering with a state's internal affairs, says Amnesty International . It is difficult to enforce human rights norms because of the nature of the state, it says .
 A major summit of world leaders in 2005 enshrined the concept of the responsibility to protect . It holds that governments worldwide must act to save civilians from genocide or crimes against humanity perpetrated by their own governments .
 In states where abuses are severe or becoming worse, U.S. foreign aid has been withheld . The United States has withheld foreign aid to those countries .
 In wartime, international law is especially difficult to enforce . International norms of conduct in war as well as international treaties are widely followed .
 U.S. leaders are concerned that American soldiers, rather than under the American military’s own justice system, are being treated differently . United States leaders are also concerned that soldiers are not being dealt with justice under their own military justice system .
 The Arab League has condemned the indictment of al-Bashir . The AU Explore the Simulation ""You are Egypt's Representative to the UN"" at PoliSciLab .
 This is about 12 times the world’s military spending, for example . This is a very large number of people, including many of the world's largest countries .
 In the short term, a state can trade for a few years at a deficit and then a surplus, state officials say . In the long-term, the state will be at a surplus for a couple of years, they say .
 The overall success of liberal economics is due to the substantial gains that can be realized through trade . Comparative Advantage. Comparative advantage .
 Albania is the latest state of the small state of Albania in southeast Europe . Albania was once one of the most isolated countries in Europe .
 As technology links the world across space, a global integration process based on free trade is shaping the international economic agenda . Watch the video ""IMF Conditionality and the Irish Bailout"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 At 2003 meeting in Cancun, Mexico, states from the global South walked out after industrialized countries would not agree to lift their agricultural subsidies, which were shutting out poor countries’ agricultural exports .
 The main obstacle remains the resistance of the industrialized West to cut agricultural subsidies as demanded by countries in the global South . The world's main obstacle is the resistance to cutting agricultural subsidies in the world .
 Game theorists might look to the game of Chicken as an explanatory model . The Doha Round is a major trade agreement such as the Doha round .
 Until the participants find agreement on these pesky remaining issues, nobody can enjoy the economic boost that a new WTO agreement will bring . The agreement is expected to be signed by the end of the year .
 The group, unlike some other Asia-Pacific IGOs, does not include the United States . It does include half the world’s population and some of its most dynamic economies .
 The International Trade Commission can punish the use of violence and can punish violence, says Wendy Hansen . Hansen: It can punish people who use violence and punish violence .
 In this period of mechanization, conditions were extremely harsh for women and children operating machines .
 U.S. dollar as world currency shall United States drops Russia an gold joins IMF —^ standard IMF etton Woods debt crises . Internet fax, modem, cellular, etc. etc. led to the Internet faxing, modem and cellular networks .
 The U.S. government used deficit spending to stimulate the economy, paying itself back from new wealth generated by economic recovery . Adopting the principles of Keynesian economics, the United States government spent more than $1.4 billion on deficit spending .
 The Soviet Union launched the world’s first satellite in 1957, and in the early 1960s its leaders launched the first satellite .
 The economies of the industrialized West contain some government control and some private ownership . Because of this, they are often called mixed economies, they contain some of the country's most significant parts of the economy .
 Today there is a single integrated world economy that almost no country can resist joining . Almost no country will resist joining the globalised globalised economy . The globalised world economy is now an integrated globalised one .
 Tokyo brokerage, 2010. I j r • / ff f l t l tL t J 1 J J f, is a Tokyo brokerage firm .
 Nearly every state prints its own money . The ability to print one’s own currency is one of the hallmarks of state sovereignty . Yet, in a globalized system of trade and finance, businesses and individuals often need other states’ currencies .
 The markets are private markets, not as strongly regulated by governments as are stock markets . They are private, not strongly regulated, as are the stock market .
 The U.S. has blamed the undervalued yuan for costing $1.1 million jobs . The 2012 American presidential election featured recurrent ""China bashing,"" further exacerbating political tensions .
 If not, it will have to begin selling off part of its standing wealth . 9 Kindleberger, Charles P International Capital Movements.
 Failure to make payments on international debt, called a default, is a very serious action . It can cut off a country's access to future investment and loans . Failure to pay international debt is a serious action because it could cut off future investment .
 By 2013, stock markets had fully recovered from the 2008 crash, but a new European recession threatened to hurt U.S. exports .
 In a more decentralized, more privatized world economy with an uncertain U.S. role, collective goods problems would be harder to solve and free trade harder to achieve . The United States has an uncertain role in the world economy .
 Internal power struggles created political instability in Russia, discouraging foreign investment . But internal power struggles have created instability in the country, discouraging investment .
 Foreign direct investment is often sought by host governments because it stimulates employment and economic growth, though at wages that home countries would not tolerate . A foreign MNC selling an imported product in the host .
 Watch the video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction"" at MyPoliSciLab Globalization and Integration . Common to most discussions of globalization is a sense that there are forces in the world bringing us all together .
 Such a shift in sovereignty to the supranational level would probably entail some version of federalism, in which states recognize the sovereignty of a central government while retaining certain powers .
 Tour de France crossed into Germany in 2006, passing only a road sign . The route is only a few miles from where great armies faced off across massive fortifications .
 As states increasingly fear transnational terrorism, the prospects of open borders can give state leaders pause, says David Mitrany .
 Slovenia adopted the euro in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, and Estonia in 2011 . Members Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands, Lux., Ireland, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Austria, Finland Poland, Czech Rep., Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia,
 The European Union added 12 members, mostly from Eastern Europe, in 2004 and 2007 . The EU is now the world's most powerful and most successful union .
 Turkish membership in the EU is not popular domestically . Turkish membership is not widely accepted in the country . The country has a history of anti-Turkish sentiment .
 The reality is that most poor villages cannot afford the Internet, cannot read the language of most Web 9 n sites, and cannot maintain computers and Web sites without extensive training .
 Data on information access are from the International Telecommunication Union unless otherwise noted . Zi The computers, designed 19 years ago, were designed for the U.S. Computers were designed to be the world's first computers . Zi Zi is designed to make computers look more like computers .
 Information is a major factor in both international and domestic politics and may even be laying technological foundations for a global identity . Recall that new “smart weapons” technologies empower foot soldiers .
 Troubles with the proposed Constitution and new Lisbon Treaty prove there are difficulties . The EU integration process is still ongoing .
 The Atmosphere, Biodiversity and Forests and Oceans are key to managing the environment . Managing the environment is key to sustainable development and sustainable development . The Demographic Transition and Population Policies will be discussed .
 In global environmental politics, it is hard to manage collective goods problems because of the large number of actors, says David Cameron . In global . politics, he says, it's hard to managed collective goods .
 Growing evidence shows that global warming is a real problem, that it is caused by the emission of carbon dioxide and other gases, and that it will get much worse in the future . Growing and compelling evidence .
 Western Europe and Japan have been more willing to regulate greenhouse emissions than the United States . The U.S. burns more fossil fuel per person than any other country .
 International treaties have been much more successful at addressing ozone depletion than global warming, mostly because of costs . The cost of the treaties is much higher than the cost of global warming .
 Territorial waters have expanded to hundreds of miles off the coast . State sovereignty encloses substantial resources such as fisheries and offshore oil and fisheries .
 New data in 2002 showed that higher women’s status and literacy are reducing population growth more than expected . New data also showed that . higher women's status and . literacy are cutting population growth . More than expected.
 In the industrialized countries, the death rate bottomed out around 10 per thousand by 1960, and now stands around 7 in 'X i . z . Anderson, John Ward. Anderson: The death rate in industrialized countries is now around 7 per thousand .
 In 2007, UNAIDS corrected earlier estimates, resulting in a significant drop in infection rates .
 Even moderate deficiencies in fetuses can lower intelligence by 10 to 15 I.Q. points . Serious deficiencies can stunt growth and cause mental 'J rn .
 Only Developed countries should pay to stop warm weather in developing countries . The costs to developing countries will undermine development, argues the U.S. government .
 Most Middle Eastern states are around 50 percent urbanized, and South American ones are 70 to 85 percent urban . Most South American states are about 50 to 85% urbanized .
 Economic development in poor countries is closely tied to the status of women in those societies . This is a relatively recent revelation . Most attention for decades had focused on men as supposedly the main generators of capital .
 Oxford, 2003. z Boserup, Ester, Nazneed Kanji, Su Fei Tan, and Camilla Toulmin. Tan .
 Discrimination against girls is widespread in education and literacy . Worldwide, nearly twice as many women as men are illiterate as men .
 In the slums of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, women heads of household with no land for subsistence farming had been forced into begging and prostitution . Women have organized cooperatives throughout the global South .
 Zimbabwe's health care system would be overtaxed by refugees streaming in from Zimbabwe infected with cholera . Explore the Simulation ""You are Zimbabwe's Minister of Agriculture"
 Perhaps 20,000 of these people are trafficked to 1Q Singer, David A Migrant Remittances and Exchange Rate Regimes in the Developing World .
 In 2010, the U.S. State Department listed 13 countries making insufficient efforts to stop human trafficking . Kuwait, Malay'l O sia, and Saudi Arabia/ 1 Q United States Department of State.
 The global system of regional class divisions has been seen by some IR scholars as a world-system or a capitalist world economy . The World-System is the result of a global class division in the global economy .
 Regions in the global South mostly extract from the regions of the global south .
 O c European -§ colonialism . S Asia Emergence of Hinduism, Buddhism; Ancient India; Arab conquest Turkish period Taj Mahal Europear built o o_ o Z5_ CD c/T 3 1 independence Africa .
 Europe colonized most of the world’s territory at one time or another . -1 Q _ y Howard, Michael. Howard . Howard: "Europe colonized the world's territory at once or another."
 S Slave trade Q O LU Angola, |p ortU g U ese) Mozambique Scramb for coloni (Brit., Fr. f C Middle East flttnman Fmniro British & French mandates A| 9 erian independence U LLU II
 European colonialism worldwide promoted values and norms implying that the colonizer's culture was superior to the indigenous culture . For instance, a GM factory in Brazil was built in the 1930s .
 The new government usually discovers that, once it holds power, it has the same interest as other states in promoting national sovereignty and territorial integrity . But, once in power, they usually discover that they have the same interests as other countries .
 Their state also has the same geographical location as before, the same historical conflicts with its neighbors, and the same ethnic ties . Their state is still in the same place as before .
 It's not unusual over time to find similar foreign policies emanating from a revolutionary government as from its predecessor . So it is not unusual to find a similar foreign policy emanating from the revolutionary government .
 Over the longer term the rules of international relations have tended to triumph over revolutionary challenges, writes David Frum . He says revolutions create short-term shifts in foreign policy .
 Chapter 13 turns in depth to the question of how economies in the South can develop the accumulation process and what role the North can play in that process . Chapter 13 focuses on how the North plays a role in developing its own economies .
 He had the advantage of coming to power nonviolently (relatively speaking) and enjoying tremendous world respect, and leading a country that is relatively prosperous in a very poor continent .
 Chapter 12 discussed the situation in the global South and how it came to be . This chapter takes up the question of what to do about it . Economic development refers to the combined processes of capital accumulation, rising per capita incomes (with consequent falling birthrates) and increasing skills in the
 Before China took off, a handful of poor states—called the newly industrializing countries —achieved self-sustaining capital accumulation, with impressive economic growth . These semiperiphery states, which export light manufactured light manufactured products, export light manufacturing .
 China ended doubts that the success of the NICs could be replicated elsewhere and on a larger scale, China .
 Despite efforts to clamp down on political expression, many Chinese citizens expressed their views not only in strikes and demonstrations but also on wildly popular microblogging sites, China’s version of Twitter .
 China's rapid economic growth has raised incomes dramatically, especially for a growing middle class . Growing middle class is a key part of China's economic growth .
 The small countries with large oil exports have done well economically . Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates are among the small countries .
 Oil-rich nations are in a special class of nations without oil oil . But they are not one that others without oil can follow, says CNN's John Sutter . He says they're in a 'special class' with their experience .
 Iran began to grow robustly and to attract foreign investment after the Iran-Iraq War ended in 1988 . Iran's economy has grown robustly since the war ended in Iran's favor .
 Islamic radicalism creates frictions with Western powers and makes investors wary . In addition, Islamic radicals also make investors wary of investing in the region .
 Turkey was somewhat successful in developing its economy without oil revenues . Turkey's economy has been hit hard by a lack of oil revenues in recent years . The country's oil wealth has been a key source of growth .
 Turkey was an authoritarian state for many years but has allowed political liberalization since the 1990s . Like South Korea and Taiwan, Turkey was once authoritarian state . Turkey was a state of state of authoritarian state but has been liberalized in recent years .
 A woman in Recife, Brazil, runs her own convenience store in 2010 with help from a microloan . The woman is now living in the country's second largest city .
 The United States has barred U.S. companies from making corrupt deals abroad . But other countries of the North had not done so until recently .
 Germany and Canada even allowed their companies to deduct foreign bribes on their taxes . Canada and Germany even allowed foreign bribes to be deducted .
 Capital from the global North moves to the South and potentially spurs growth there in several forms . Foreign investment, debt, and foreign aid could spur growth in the South .
 Democracy Assistance and Politi cal Conditionality. A Comparative Analysis of Democracy Assistance. Assistance and Politics Assistance and . Conditionality . The United States has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Japan’s Foreign Aid Program. Princeton, 1993 . Princeton University, 1993.
 Grants are funds given free to a recipient state, usually for some stated purpose . Technical cooperation refers to grants in the form of expert assistance in some project rather than just money or goods .
 Disaster relief is something of a collective good because the states of the North do not benefit individually by contributing, yet they benefit in the long run from greater stability in the South .
 20,000 herders who had been brought to the lake to learn fishing were left in an overcrowded, overgrazed environment in which every tree was cut for firewood and 1 'Z J Pelling'
 Many scholars have undertaken research to understand whether foreign aid is effective at creating economic growth and alleviating poverty in the global South . Instead of becoming self-sufficient, the Turkana people became totally dependent on outside aid .
 J Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab r 3 Harden, Blaine, 3 Harden . Study and review the post-test and chapter exam .
 2 DAC countries should not significantly increase foreign aid . Large amounts of foreign aid are wasted or stolen . The U.S. should not significantly increase its foreign aid budget .
 Critics call it an expensive failure that will likely be ineffective . See also AntibalHstic Missile Treaty . Rural communities growing food mainly for their own consumption rather than for sale in local markets .