 Noam Chomsky’s October 15 TomDispatch article on the Cuban missile crisis quotes extensively from my work . White House.
 The author distorts the historical record and decontextualizes my conclusions . Unfortunately, he also distorts historical record . He also decontextues his conclusions .
 His insistence that the crisis was actually about U.S. “ownership of the world” tell us little or nothing about how real people behaved in real circumstances in October 1962 . The crisis was about the United States, not about the crisis, it's about the U.
 Even in his most vivid imagination, he could not have conceived of the possibility that we, the public, would ever hear these tapes . The tapes were taped in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Kennedy could have picked and chosen freely from the tapes when he wrote his memoirs . Kennedy's memoirs will be released in October .
 JFK and the other missile crisis participants, we should never forget, did not know the outcome of the crisis when they were in the middle of dealing with it . JFK and other . participants, including the other . members of the . missile crisis .
 Historians today would still be listening to the same tapes, but with a radically different outlook . Historians would still listen to the tapes today, but listen to them with radically different views .
 JFK could not have manipulated his image on the tapes simply because he did not know what was going to happen the next day or the next hour . If the outcome had been different, the tapes could then be interpreted to make Kennedy look appallingly negligent rather than diplomatically cautious and reasonable
 He was eventually persuaded to use so-called “practice depth charges’ only after he was assured that they would not damage the submarines .
 Soviet and U.S. navies nearly set off a nuclear exchange between the Soviet and United States navies . In fact, they did cause damage .
 JFK and his administration did bear significant responsibility for precipitating the crisis . That was the only time during those 13 days that the president accepted such provocative and dangerous advice .
 President Kennedy consistently resisted pressure to bomb or invade Cuba . The ExComm tapes prove conclusively that President Kennedy resisted pressure from the White House .
 President Kennedy often stood virtually alone against warlike counsel from the ExComm, the JCS and the leaders of Congress during those historic thirteen days . President Kennedy was often alone during that period .
 He never abandoned his commitment to undermine the Cuban revolution and get rid of Fidel Castro . Nonetheless, he never gave up his commitment, even after the missile crisis .
 It was one thing to support efforts to eliminate the Cuban leader, but another to recklessly risk unleashing a global nuclear holocaust . It's one thing, however, to back efforts to kill Cuban leader .
 Chomsky’s assertion that JFK ""took stunning risks to impose American hegemony"" is an ideologically-driven fantasy refuted by the indisputable evidence on the ExComm tapes .
 Kennedy argued persistently that nuclear weapons were militarily useless . No rational person would really use them, he told members of the JCS on October 29 .
 JFK was prepared to publicly accept the trade regardless of the domestic political risks if that was the price that had to be paid to avert nuclear war . He does not mention the fact that if the Soviets had turned down the secret missile trade, JFK prepared to accept it .
 His facts are selective and decontextualized, used consistently to promote his own ideological agenda . His facts were selective and used consistently, he said .
 In his whole essay, there is only one tangential reference to the existence of the Cold War . In his entire essay, he mentions only one mention of Cold War in the whole thing .
 The Soviet Union and its allies were, of course, just as blinded by ideological dogma as those in West . "The Soviet Union was just as blind to ideological dogma" as the West .