 Come on down and add your voice to the weekly Newsquiz .
 Qatar and Mauritania join countries that severed diplomatic ties with Israel . Turkey's prime minister calls for Israel to be kicked out of the United Nations . Human rights group B'Tselem tells of testimony that three Palestinians in a group ordered out of their homes, then targeted and shot dead
 Yet another UN school hit by Israeli forces, 2 dead . UN school in Northern Gaza was hit by shells from a tank .
 UN Relief and Works Agency said Israel's actions in Gaza should be investigated as possible war crimes . UN High Commissioner for Human Rights said some Israeli actions reported in Gaza might warrant prosecutions .
 Bolivian President Evo Morales declared this country the third in Latin America to be free of illiteracy . The statement was made in early January .
 Fidel Castro Ruz affirmed to the people that, although the Revolution had been victorious, nobody should think that everything would be easier in the future, but that everything might be more difficult in future .
 The idea warned: ""The dictatorship has been defeated. That idea warned," says the former President of Columbia .
 With the first measures taken in defense of the Revolution, the capture and trial of the worst killers and torturers of the dictatorship, a confrontation began with the media in the hands of the dominant forces on the continent and the planet .
 On May 17, after four-and-a-half months, Fidel approved the first Agrarian Reform Act in the La Plata command headquarters in the Sierra Maestra, the location of the Council of Ministers .
 The law affected many U.S. interests, given that they owned the best land . It was the advantage of the United States occupation of the country at the end of the 19th century and the early 20th .
 Cuba recovered that fundamental wealth which is land . Logically, that was the first serious affect on U.S. interests .
 The Rubicon was a river that delineated the border between Italy and the Roman province of Gaul . It was the border of Italy and Gaul in Roman times .
 Julius Caesar decided to cross the Rubicon after the Roman Senate prohibited him from entering Italy with his army . The phrase ""He crossed Rubicon"" became famous after Julius Caesar crossed it . Caesar took an irreversible decision .
 Lenin: Nationalization of all those large U.S. companies was an important step in the revolution . "We could not halt or the Revolution would be defeated," he says .
 The former Cerro stadium is now the Latin American Baseball Stadium in Havana . It is the site of a Latin American Youth Congress in Havana, Cuba .
 "Small, if we compare it to the reach and profundity of ours," he says . "That was sufficient for his revolutionary process to be sentenced to death," he adds .
 It was a smaller invasion than that of the Bay of Pigs, it was a land one, there was no resistance . President Arbenz vacillated; he did not arm the people, who were determined to fight . Eisenhower, John Foster Dulles, his secretary of state,
 Eisenhower’s Republican mandate ended and the Democrat John F Kennedy assumed the presidency on January 20, 1961 . That is why they were planning the aforementioned operation in 1960 and brought it forward .
 Foster Dulles Eisenhower’s secretary of state was an attorney for the United Fruit Company . The company owned large banana plantations and other properties in that country .
 The same people and the same interests organized the Bay of Pigs aggression, long before there was any talk of socialism here . Their adventure in Guatemala in 1954 produced the desired results and they tried to do the same things in 1954 .
 The aggression of our country was decided before the proclamation of the socialist nature of the Cuban Revolution, which, as you know, was on April 16, 1961 . Cuban President Kennedy launched the Bay of Pigs invasion, which began with the bombardments of April 15 . The aggression began before the
 "There is only one party in the United States. That is one example one of many why I say that there are only one parties in the U.S. That's one example of many," she says .
 On that occasion, the invasion was planned by the Republicans and executed by the Democrats . The Democrats executed the invasion of the U.S. on that occasion .
 George W. Bush was president of the U.S. when he was a young official . He later became director of the CIA and later still, president of America .
 When the Bay of Pigs took place, we were making the country literate, says George H. H Bush . H Bush is the father of the current leader George W Bush .
 Fidel foresaw, with much lucidity, that if we didn’t do that, once the beachhead had been consolidated, they would have transported to it their puppet government, already formed and headed by Miró Cardona, waiting in a United States military base in Florida .
 The U.S. broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1962 under the dictates of the United States government . All Latin American countries with the exception of Mexico, with the honorable exception, broke off relations with Mexico . Cuba was expelled from the OAS in 1962 .
 The expulsion from the OAS was to create conditions for the U.S. to be expelled from the world's most powerful body . The U.K. was defeated at the Bay of Pigs and that the system could not take that affront, that humiliation .
 The objective was a direct invasion, probably in 1962 itself, says Castro . Only prevented by presence of Soviet nuclear rockets in Cuba, he says . Castro: "We would have been invaded. We would have invaded"
 The declassification of secret documents made it evident that the aggression was already being prepared . If anyone had any doubts as to if that was the case, those doubts were dispelled years later .
 These played a very important role given that the Revolution was able to survive and resist . These played an important role in the success of the Revolution in Russia .
 The Revolution gradually strengthened, there were the campesino militias, highland companies . It was only in the Escambray that they became a strength . The revolution was only when it was in Escambambay that it became stronger .
 "That’s the confidence he had concerning the strength of Oriente," he said . "That confidence that we have always had, in its tradition of struggle," he added. "That's the confidence that I’ve always had"
 10 years later, Fidel described that era as the most glorious in 50 years of Revolution . The economy went through a special period, why this term is used .
 We cannot overlook the terrorist attacks and crimes such as the passenger plane blown up off the coast of Barbados . We cannot forget our young people who were working as literacy teachers in the mountains and were killed by those bands that were operating during those first years . Because of the resistance of the
 After 50 years, the number of fatal victims after 50 years stands at 3,478 . Those who have been permanently disabled, who number 2,099 . And so on and so forth; we cannot forget the numbers of fatal .
 According to international health organizations, what occurred in Cuba could no have been the result of natural causes . International health organizations say what happened could not have been natural causes.
 Record of 11,400 new patients reported in just one day, July 6, 1981 . 344,203 people had to be admitted to hospital in just a few hours .
 No more and no less than the Mambí army; it took up the arms of the army once again . No more than the Mambí armour once again. It took up its arms once again.
 Lenin described the Spanish-Cuban United States war as the first imperialist war . The Mambises were disarmed by imperialism, by a nascent imperialism that was beginning to gather strength . Lenin described that Spanish-U.S. war as 'first imperialist war'
 The world had already been divided by the great powers during a meeting in Berlin in the last quarter of the 19th century . In order to obtain new land, the world had to take it from other colonial powers .
 Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Philippines were used as pretexts to hold onto Cuba and Puerto Rico . That was the pretext they used to keep control of the Philippines, Cuba and the rest of the world .
 The first United States soldier entered Havana on January 1, 1899 . Realistically, the first U.S. soldier into Havana was in Havana on New Year's Day .
 The first guerrilla columns of the Revolution sent by Fidel those of Che and Camilo also entered Havana on January 1, 1959 . That war was fought in Oriente and they entered Havana once the Spanish troops had surrendered .
 The U.S. control of this country lasted exactly 60 years . That is to say that absolute United States control of the country last 60 years. That's the same amount of time .
 U.S. imperialism in Cuba lasted 60 years, from one January 1 to another . It is a fact that some United States capital had already entered Cuba prior to that . And those 60 years had their ups and downs; they left the country with in great complexity .
 From the ashes of those events, popular movements began to reemerge . Until, from the ashes, popular . movements reemerged . Until the . ashes of the . events began to . reemerging .
 The imperialists who controlled the country installed the Machado dictatorship and made the revolution that defeated it fail . Batista emerged, a general staff sergeant who knew all about the inner world of the Army, and with a group of sergeants, carried out a coup d’ét
 He was the next instrument of imperialism as the power behind the throne from 1933 until the 1940 elections . A few days later, he was awarded the rank of colonel .
 He was president until 1944, then went to live abroad . Grau San Martín and Prío Socarrás, until 1952, were presidents until 1952 .
 On March 10 that same year, Batista once again emerged, as always, adopted by the U.S. government . Batista was ousted from Cuba in 1959 .
 Latin America was plagued by dictatorships in the style of Batista, which was the method used by the U.S. to gain total control of the continent, and also the Caribbean . This time, the dictatorship would last seven years .
 There were still British colonies in the English-speaking Caribbean, but the Dominican Republic and Haiti the island called La Española . The second largest in the Greater Antilles had the dictatorships of both Trujillo and Duvalier .
 That was the situation on the continent. That was when the struggle of Moncada began, which is well-known by our people. That’s when it began, and is well known by the Spanish people. It was the struggle for the people of the continent, says
 The Moncada assault took place 55 years ago today . So many things, sentiments, sensations and experiences have occurred during those 55 years since the attack .
 We have had the opportunity to live through this era, the most glorious years in the history of this nation, one of tremendous tension, and today we are respected . We are respected today, says President Obama .
 You have spoken on reiterated occasions on the U.S. economic blockade of Cuba, which has lasted for almost 50 years . You have also spoken on the complex international panorama of wars, disunity and natural disasters .
 Fidel Castro: "We need to base ourselves on our own work. First and foremost, basing ourselves on ourselves" Castro says .
 One vital issue is the development of internal production, increasing exports, producing all the food that can be produced in this country, and saving. Fidel already said that in his magnificent definition of the concept of ""Revolution"" on May 1, 2000 .
 Nobody, no individual or state, can spend more than what is produced, that would be to leave a vast debt for our children and grandchildren . That is not ethical, we have no right to do that . Development itself entails other new ones .
 By the end of this year it has increased to a certain extent, the total exceeds that of last year by 10,000 births, but it is still small . Life expectancy has increased by a certain amount this year .
 "We have thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of elderly people," says President Obama . "I have thousands of people in need of care," says Obama .
 There are not enough day care centers for children which, as you know, there is not enough of, many have closed, others have been affected . Equally necessary is to create day care centres for children, as well as creating more .
 At a certain age, it is necessary to build homes for senior citizens . Senior citizens can spend the day in these homes and go to their own home at night . But there are cases in which they will not be able to do that on account of their advanced age .
 At present they have to be with their family and it is difficult for these families when they have reached a certain age, we will have to create more old people’s homes . A high life expectancy is a great advantage for people with a long life expectancy .
 When we assaulted the Moncada garrison, the life expectancy rate was only 59 years while today it is 77.97 years . Life expectancy rates were 59 years ago .
 We have not had peace, we have had tranquility. Infant mortality is reducing. Infants are reducing. These are many positive things that bring with them new problems that we have to face. We are not going to have tranquility, they say .
 Cuba would be equals, soldier against soldier; that is a different situation, he says . Cuba would not like to see, not even in a laboratory, what would be a U.S. aggression against Cuba .
 Although Marti stated it; freedom is very costly and one has to resign oneself to living without it, or be ready to pay the necessary price . Marti said: "One must resign one day to live without it or be prepared to pay it."
 If we want to balance wages in the just role that they should play, we must, little by little, or simultaneously, set about eliminating unjustified incentives, that emerged her and there and there .
 There must always be subsidies for one thing or another, but it shouldn’t be abused . The state always has a need to keep providing subsidies in order to create balance, helping those of lower income .
 Nobody remembers what they receive in subsidies and work incentives . They only calculate their monthly wage and that calculation is a bad one, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We need to learn that two plus two equals four, not five; sometimes, maybe within socialism, two plus three equals three . Sometimes, maybe in socialism, maybe even within socialism it equals three, not four . We must learn that 2 plus 2 equals 4, not 5 .
 We need to know that we have been living and will have to continue living in a tense and difficult situation . These are fundamental issues. We have to know we have to live with a tense, difficult situation,’s David Cameron says .
 A turbulent world is going to befall us, is already here, says Julian Zelizer . The world with an economic and financial crisis whose origins are known, but not how or when it will end, he says . The crisis is much worse and more serious than the one of 80
 It is going to affect everyone and, as is natural, the poorest countries and, within the rich countries, their poorest citizens . It will affect everyone, including the poorest people in the world, says the BBC's John Defterios .
 We have a trained population, more than 70% of the population was born under blockade conditions, it is ours . We have to give true value to work and we might well become hoarse talking and preaching that concept, but if we don’t take measures so that people feel
 We have to work, we have to dedicate ourselves to that concept which is working, creating and saving . We need to dedicate themselves to the concept of working and creating, saving and saving. We must work, they say .
 We used reserves that we had to feed the population; there are no complaints in that respect . We used the reserves that were needed to feed our population, he says .
 We cannot solve, in the short term, the housing debt that we have from earlier hurricanes in 2002, 2005, plus the new homes destroyed, we have . We have decided that in many coastal areas, above all on the southern coast, where hurricanes are continuous and repetitive or where there
 The population wants them rebuilt where they were, but if another phenomenon of this type hits, we’ll be in the same situation again. We’re not going to rebuild them, but they’ve been rebuilt,’s spokesman says .
 In Cuba, anything can serve as a home on account of the climate, but not everything can resist hurricanes . The island nation has been hit hard by hurricanes in recent years, but it's not safe .
 He was always the same, finding strength where it seemed that there was no possibility of even surviving or of continuing to advance, he said . "He found strength where he found strength," he said. "He always found strength when he was at his lowest point, even when there was
 Since the recent result of the presidential election in the United Status, various analysts in the international press have speculated that there are expectations of change with Barack Obama's rise to the White House .
 President Obama has aroused hopes in many parts of the world, but I think excessive hopes . One man cannot change the destiny of a country, and far less I mean one man alone in the U.S., he says .
 He can do a lot, he can take positive steps . He can curb the tendency, almost uninterrupted since the emergence of the United States, of almost all presidents to have had their wars .
 Alexander the Great entered that country and returned unscathed, maybe because he married an Afghani princess, but, above all, because he left quickly . Alexander left quickly, perhaps because he was married to an Afghan princess .
 The British suffered a defeat there in the 19th century; in the 20th century the Soviets suffered another defeat, which we all experienced . In the 21st century the United States and other forces remaining in Afghanistan will also suffer a defeat, writes Peter Bergen .
 "I do not know the huge quantity it must be two or three times greater of those disabled, wounded, mutilated," he said . "I'm not sure how many of the wounded, wounded or mutilated. I do know a huge quantity"
 I hope that I am wrong in my appraisal. They have made us stronger, we feel prouder, our resistance, we are stronger . We are stronger and more confident. We are proud of our resistance. I hope we are not wrong in our appraisal of them .
 We are disposed to talk whenever they decide, without intermediaries, directly, directly . And we are prepared to talk when they decide to do so, directly.
 U.S. has done everything possible to isolate Cuba from the world . Cuba has been isolated from the rest of the world for 50 years . The Cuban government has been trying to keep the country isolated .
 Russia has broken its isolation of regional integration mechanisms with its entry into the Rio Group . The country has broken that isolation of the regional integration mechanism .
 It was very emotional when, in the state of Bahia, Brazil, where three of the summits that I have participated in took place, took place . For the first time in history meeting without the presence of the extra-regional powers let’s say Canada, the
 Life is a permanent battle, it’s an eternal fight, and there are those who tire and then renege on what they have done; thankfully, they are few . And of course, we have to be prepared to resist for half a century more .
 Cuban Revolution 50th anniversary of the triumph of the Cuban Revolution . Cuban Revolution is 50 years old today . Fidel Castro Castro was killed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 I will be at the Mausoleum of the comrades from the Second Front who died or were subsequently buried there after the triumph of the Revolution . I will also be in the Mausesoleum . I'll be in honour of those who died, or were buried there .
 I want to place flowers for them, for Vilma too, to listen with them to the cannon firing for the 50th anniversary of the great dawn and the national anthem . I want them to be able to hear the cannon fire for the first time .
 Early tomorrow, in the name of Fidel, I want to place some flowers for Marti, to those who fell in the assault on the Moncada and those who fought in the underground struggle, for Frank País .
 Remembering Renato Guttuso J Boyden . Yesterday, January 18 th . was the 24 th anniversary of the death of the Italian politician .