 Khrushchev decided to deploy Soviet medium-range missiles with nuclear warheads on the island of Cuba . The missiles were deployed in Cuba in 1960s .
 His main goal was to protect the young Cuban revolution from the threat of a U.S. invasion . He said he wanted to protect his country from the U.K. invasion of Cuba .
 The agency was financing, training, and arming detachments of Cuban exiles to invade the island, carrying out terrorist acts, and sabotaging Cuba’s economic development, infrastructure, and educational system . The agency also set fire to plantations of sugar cane, the country's main export
 In April 1961 a large-scale operation had been carried out, aimed at overthrowing Castro, in which about fourteen hundred Cubans, recruited and trained at a camp in Guatemala, landed in Cuba .
 Aircraft with Cuban identification marks, based in Nicaragua, bombed the island’s airfields to eliminate the not-so-numerous Cuban air force . Aircraft with Cuba identification marks based in . Nicaragua .
 The CIA had planned this operation incompetently, without giving it serious thought . But the CIA planned it incompetently . The operation was a mistake, the CIA had not given serious thought.
 His father, Anastas Mikoyan, was special ambassador to Cuba in November 1962 . His father was a Soviet politician who served as special ambassador .
 In the Cuban case, the planners relied on false information about the willingness of the Cuban population to join the rebels, the author says . The planners used false information to get the rebels to join, he says .
 Such an uprising would have created a staging area for resistance in which a “provisional government” could arrive from Florida and request military aid from the U.S. Such a government would have been possible, a spokesman says .
 People’s militia detachments kept twenty-four-hour watch around the perimeter of the island . Militia detachments were kept 24 hours-a-day watch .
 The invasion at Playa Giron [the actual site of the landing, right next to the Bay of Pigs—Ed.], began on 11 April, and was over in seventy-two hours . The invasion was over within two hours .
 The Pentagon developed military plans and conducted exercises on the Puerto Rican island of Vieques, next to Cuba . The Pentagon also conducted exercises in Vieques .
 Marshal Sergei Biriuzov, commander of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces, visited Cuba with the assignment of sounding out the Cuban leader .
 Fidel Castro and his comrades-in-arms thought that it was the Soviet Union that needed to deploy missiles to strengthen its position in case of a strategic nuclear confrontation with the U.S. Fidel Castro thought it was Soviet Union needed to strengthen position . The Cuban government thought that the Soviet
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of your favorite destinations .
 USSR Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky and Marshal Biriuzov regarded it as the main reason . It is not impossible that USSR defense minister and Marshal Malinov considered it a main reason for the collapse .
 Biriuzov assured the Presidium of the CPSU that the Cuban palm trees would create a reliable barrier to aerial photography . S-75 ground-to-air missiles could prevent any flights by United States reconnaissance aircraft over the island .
 In those days, only Anastas Mikoyan voiced objections among the Kremlin leaders . In the 1980s, only Mikoyans voiced objections .
 Andrei Gromyko expressed serious doubts on behalf of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Andrei said he had serious doubts about the situation in Ukraine .
 The U.S. brought warheads for the intermediaterange R-14s, which could threaten the entire continental territory of the United States, but these were not delivered in a timely manner . They even brought warheads that could threaten to the entire American territory .
 Only in the assembly of the missile launchers did the visiting generals Issa Pliev, N Grechko, Igor’ Statsenko, and Anatolii Gribko, as well as lower-ranking officers, display a lack of concern .
 They did not think it necessary to ask Castro for assistance in this regard, they said . They said they didn't want to ask him for assistance .
 In all other respects, there was a full mutual exchange between the Soviet and Cuban armies . The Soviet-Cuban exchange was a success .
 For reasons that are not clear, the S-75 antiaircraft missiles were not used . Nothing but the weather hindered the flights of the U.S. reconnaissance planes .
 President Kennedy publicly announced in his address to the nation on 22 October that the U.S. had aerial photographs with indisputable proof of what was going on . Efforts at serious camouflage began when it was already too late, after President Kennedy .
 CIA pilot Richard Heyser took several hundred pictures of a complex of R-12 missile launchers being built in the area of San Cristóbal west of Havana .
 Whether nuclear warheads were present there continued to baffle the United States for the next twenty-five years . The U.S. continued to search for the site for decades .
 For a week, an executive committee set up by the U.S. president secretly discussed the problem . The committee was trying to find an appropriate response to Moscow’s actions .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy showed President Kennedy enlarged photographs of missile complexes in Cuba that were close to completion . Bewilderment in the ExCom in October 1962 .
 CIA’s expert on decoding aerial photography, Lansdale, was called in to provide commentary . Lansdale was called into the CIA to help decode aerial photographs .
 Kennedy immediately ordered complete secrecy and that all questions be discussed by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The Executive Committee was created to deal with the emerging Cuban missile crisis .
 The president called the first meeting at 11:45 that morning . The first meeting was held at the president's request .
 Because Kennedy’s young daughter, Caroline, was engaged in a conversation with her father, the meeting began at 11:50. The meeting was delayed until 11.50 because of Caroline's engagement .
 To facilitate the potential for absolutely freewheeling discussion, Kennedy 28 RUSSIAN POLITICS and Law sometimes stepped out of the office .
 When he had to fly to Chicago to support his party’s candidates for the elections that were to take place three weeks later (to avoid arousing suspicion that something was going on in the White House) meetings were transferred to the State Department .
 The secrecy was also necessary to prevent Moscow from learning what they knew and undertaking new steps that could further complicate the situation, officials say .
 McGeorge Bundy was the first to receive “veiled” information from CIA Deputy Director Ray Cline over the phone as early as the day before—late on 15 October . Bundy was given the information by Cline, a CIA official, on the phone late on October 15
 The CIA subdivision in charge of aerial photography needed the entire day of the fifteenth to interpret the results obtained on 14 October to identify the sites . This was because the CIA needed an entire day to interpret results obtained from 14 October and precisely identify sites .
 It could produce considerably enlarged pictures only by the morning of the sixteenth . It could not be enlarged by the night of the day .
 Bundy decided not to inform Kennedy as he believed that there would be no point in himself, McNamara, and Rusk rushing to the White House . Bundy decided to keep quiet, as he thought there would not be a good way to tell Kennedy .
 At the time, they were all, except the president, at dinner in other people's homes, where such an unusual call was likely to attract attention . The president was in the midst of a dinner at the time of the call .
 The president had just come back and was tired after his public appearances in Indiana . Besides, the president himself had just returned .
 In any case, a night meeting without any opportunity to study the photographs confirming the information and hear the experts would not have been useful in any way . The meeting would have been a waste of time, with no chance to study photos confirming information .
 Bundy took it upon NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 29 himself to make the decision, and Kennedy did not reprimand him . Bundy was not reprimanded by Kennedy . Bundy took the decision himself .
 Bundy entered Kennedy’s bedroom, where the president was looking through the morning newspapers, and broke the news . Only after the pictures were received and the head of the aerial photography department, Brigadier General Lansdale, arrived at 9 A.M. Bundy entered the president’
 Kennedy lists who was to take part in the discussion and instructs Bundy to call them all to the White House, to the Cabinet Room, by 11:45 . Kennedy got down to business with his customary self-restraint, listing the list of participants .
 There was a large table in the Cabinet Room, and all those present sat around it .
 Robert Kennedy took a small chair that stood a little to one side. True, Robert Kennedy sat in a chair . Robert Kennedy was not in the chair, but he was in a wheelchair .
 Robert Kennedy had the gift of persuasion and knew how to argue effectively . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was assassinated at the age of 50 .
 Under Secretary of State George Ball admitted that he had previously seen Robert Kennedy as a man of simplistic views . Ball said he became convinced that the younger Kennedy was a thoughtful analyst . Ball: "Robert Kennedy is a thoughtful and thoughtful analyst"
 It was Robert Kennedy’s speech that turned Ball from a “hawk,” a supporter of an air strike and an invasion, into a ‘dove” Ball says . It was that speech that made possible a peaceful settlement, he says .
 When Robert Kennedy said, “my brother cannot become the Admiral Tojo of the 1960s,”5 he was not understood by Dean Acheson . Robert Kennedy simply did not get the analogy . Dean Achetson simply didn't get it .
 From his seat, the president could secretly press a button that turned on the microphones hidden in the table and tape-record on a Norwegian-made Tandberg in the basement of the White House .
 The Secret Service, the president’s personal bodyguards, had recently installed the system . Kennedy's personal security system was installed at Kennedy's request . Secret Service had been installing the system at Kennedy’ request .
 President wanted a safeguard against differing interpretations, even alterations, of his words and those uttered by people who met with him in the Oval Office or other official places .
 As the Playa Giron experience had shown, such a thing could be quite possible . As a result, it is possible to win the title in Spain .
 The tapes were published in full only at the end of the century . The recordings have proved priceless for scholars .
 In a book published long before the tapes were released to the public, Special Counsel to the President Theodore Sorensen listed the various causes for missile deployment .
 Khrushchev believes that, having been forced to face reality, we will not be able to do anything except protest . We will be forced to do nothing except protest, he says . We are not able to say what to do, he writes .
 If the “test of strength” leads to a win for Moscow, the USSR will try something in Berlin or against U.S. bases throughout the world . If the test of strength is successful, Moscow may try something against the United States bases .
 The UN will be terrified, and our allies will disagree strongly among themselves, while Khrushchev makes a push against West Berlin . The UN is terrified, while the U.S. is terrified of its own actions .
 Having a satellite in the Western Hemisphere is so valuable to the Soviet Union, both for reasons of expansion and in its competition with China . The USSR cannot afford to let Cuba fall through either internal or external factors, says the author .
 Khrushchev could be convinced that external factors pose a credible threat by the brothers Castro . The brothers Castro, statements made by Cuban exiles in Florida, speeches in the U.S. Congress, and the Playa Giron invasion, could pose a threat .
 The USSR could use Cuba as a bargaining chip in negotiations over the status of Berlin or the abandonment of U.S. military bases overseas . The USSR may use it as a negotiating chip in its negotiations with the United States .
 The USSR could easily increase the number of missiles aimed at the U.S. simply by installing mediumand intermediate-range missiles in Cuba . The USSR can no longer bluff about the size of its missiles, the author says .
 Sorensen: President Obama leans toward scenario 1 . He says there are certain grounds for scenarios 3 and 5, but said they were insufficiently convincing .
 Putin says it's a mystery to him why such a risky decision had been made in Moscow . He repeated several times in the first days of discussion that it was a mystery . Putin: "It is a mystery" to him as to why the decision was made .
 The correct understanding of the motives behind the missile deployment had a direct bearing on the choice of the response, the author says .
 Moscow might have deliberately not tried to hide the construction of the launchers . ExCom members suggested that Moscow might not have deliberately tried to hid the site .
 The ExCom did not attribute much importance to the possibility that the missiles had been deployed there for the defense of Cuba .
 It is revealing that, like later scholars, all the ExCom members mainly concentrated on the balance of forces and the emerging threat to U.S. territory . The ExCom was formed in the early 1930s and 1940s .
 It did not occur to anyone how the Soviet Union must feel, finding itself in close proximity to U.S. missiles deployed in the European NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] countries .
 Only on 25 October, after Khrushchev had literally flooded the White House with telegrams about the defensive purpose of the missiles, did President Kennedy first express the idea, as food for thought .
 President Kennedy and his team were convinced that the USSR was either correcting a strategic imbalance or preparing a strike against Berlin, while Cuba had nothing to do with the situation . Unfortunately, at first that idea went nowhere, because it was already convinced that Russia was either preparing to strike Berlin or correcting
 Kennedy and Thompson did not yet understand the driving motive behind deployment of the missiles . Khrushchev and Kennedy considered exchanging a guarantee of nonaggression against Cuba for the dismantling of the missile .
 Khrushchev’s letter of 27 October was perceived as an appeal for help . They perceived it as an attempt to help the Soviet Union in the wake of the fall .
 The senior American diplomat Averill Harriman, whom Kennedy sometimes consulted, saw the situation as the same way . The senior U.S. diplomat, who often consulted with Kennedy, said the situation was different .
 "Berlin issue" had been seriously worrying Khrushchev long before the construction of the ill-fated wall in that city . I personally believe that the “Berlin Issue” had been serious worrying . The wall in Berlin was built before the wall was built .
 Until the wall was built, there was a continuous outflow of young Germans who had received an excellent and free education [in East Germany] to West Germany . After all, until the wall built, until East Germany's education was free, he says .
 The population of the German Democratic Republic was shrinking rapidly . The population in the country was growing rapidly .
 I well remember my father saying categorically that they could not cut the city in two . But he well remembers his father saying 'categorically' that the city could not be cut in two.
 Igor’ objected, saying that in that case soon there would be no educated young people left in the GDR to work in industry and technology . Igor' objected to the move, saying it would leave the country's young people out of work .
 Old people, too, had the right to leave to stay with relatives . Old people too, as well as well known, were allowed to leave for relatives .
 A month and a half before the Berlin Wall was built on 13 August 1961 . That conversation took place about a month after the Berlin wall was built in 1961 . It was a month before it was built .
 33 who unscrewed bolts from some railway tracks but did it ‘cleverly’ to avoid causing the rails to come loose . Apparently this was at the same time as his references to a peasant from a Chekhov story .
 The problem had become much less urgent, he said . That is, from his perspective, the problem had not become much urgent . He said: "That's not the problem anymore. That's the problem."
 The idea that the missile deployment in Cuba would necessarily “bridge the gap” between China and the USSR would invalidate Mao Zedong’s accusations of a “Soviet–American conspiracy” or convince China not to develop its own nuclear program by showing how easily Moscow
 This assumption seems so ridiculous to me that I need not comment on it. This assumption is so ridiculous it seems like it's so ridiculous that I'm not commenting on it, I don't need to comment .
 The Kremlin was not a center of geniuses, but neither was an assembly of semiliterate teenagers . The Kremlin did not have a center for geniuses but neither did a group of semi-literate teens .
 It was clear to everybody that China was about to develop its own nuclear program, and nothing would stop it . The USSR had given it considerable assistance until the Kremlin came to its senses . Nothing would stop China from developing nuclear weapons .
 The White House was focused on Cuba's security during those ten days . But in the White House they were thinking about anything but Cuba's safety .
 Of course, Kennedy was indignant at Moscow’s deception . Kennedy was also indignant about the deception .
 Eisenhower's response to the first Soviet satellite launched in October 1957 . That had been Eisenhower’s response to Soviet satellite launch . Eisenhower had been responding to the launch of the first satellite .
 The United States then began to look for a NATO country that would show an interest in mis34 Russia . The U.S. then looked to find a NATO partner to show interest .
 It was suggested not to deploy them at all and to replace them with submarines carrying Polaris missiles .
 Agreement on deployment of 15 missiles under joint control (the missiles under Turkish control, and nuclear warheads under U.S. control) was signed on 28 October 1959 .
 Nothing happened under Eisenhower, however, because of the experts objected . The experts objected to Eisenhower's actions, but nothing happened .
 It was not recommended to start construction of the launchers . Therefore, it is not recommended that it be started construction .
 President Kennedy proposed to set up a group under the auspices of the State Department, including the Defense Department and the CIA . The group would come up with recommendations to revise the previous decision .
 McGee, a State Department adviser, made the report on 22 June 1961 . The report was made by McGee, an adviser to the State Department .
 The previous decision was left in effect, even though McNamara assumed that the Jupiter missiles were useless, while Kennedy showed a strange indecisiveness . The decision was kept in effect .
 Rusk discussed it with the Turkish minister of foreign affairs, promising to replace the obsolete weapons with Polaris missiles . Polaris missiles would be deployed on submarines near the Turkish coast to defend Turkey .
 The talks took place in the spring of 1961, before NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 35 work began on the sites in Cuba .
 In April 1962, Khrushchev was becoming more bitter as he looked at the Black Sea . Kennedy had asked several times when that issue would be put to rest .
 At the end of the summer, as the Soviet R-12 missiles were being loaded on ships for transport to Cuba, Kennedy talked to Ball, whom he trusted more than Rusk . Ball was a trusted confidante of the president .
 Kennedy insisted that the issue be resolved even at some political cost— that is, that is the displeasure of the Turkish military . Kennedy insisted on the resolution even at the cost of the military .
 Ball and Under Secretary of Defense Nitze tried to persuade the Turkish ambassador in Washington but could not get anywhere with him . Ball and Nitze could not persuade the ambassador in D.C.
 Turkish ambassador prevailed over opinion of U.S. president . Turkish ambassador's opinion prevailed over the opinion of the United States president .
 Kennedy understood intuitively that the presence of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey weakened the U.S. position . The presence of Jupiter missiles weakened the United States position and contributed to the potential threat of similar actions by the USSR in Cuba .
 The State Department has been conducting fruitless negotiations for over a year, says President Obama . He ordered the issue handed over to the Defense Department, he says . The issue has been turned over to Defense Department .
 The Turkish ambassador had proven more influential than the commander in chief of the U.S. Armed Forces . Nitze was the one who handled the problem on behalf of the Defense Department .
 Robert Kennedy, in his Thirteen Days, noted indignantly that somebody had sabotaged the solution to that problem . It is clear now why Robert Kennedy wrote that someone sabotaged that solution to it .
 The Jupiter missiles remained a thorn in the side of the Kremlin leadership, providing an excuse for it to respond, or to do its best to embarrass the U.S. Thus, throughout the summer and fall of 1962, the Jupiter missiles .
 Kennedy believed that the Turks’ pride was less important than the threat of war and a strike against the Turks themselves . Kennedy reasonably believed that . The Turks' pride was not important, and Kennedy believed .
 Khrushchev jumped at the opportunity of a missile exchange, based on information supplied by the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs . He initiated something like a panic in the ExCom .
 The threat of war emerged because of the proposal to exchange the missiles in Cuba for the Jupiter missiles in Turkey . One could almost conclude that the proposal emerged from the proposal .
 The “hawks” argued that after the U-2 spy plane was shot down over Soviet territory in May 1960, they had no way out other than through a powerful strike against Cuba and the Soviet missiles . The ‘hawks’ argued after the issue of the Jupiter missiles
 The issue was those very Jupiter missiles whose removal had been predetermined long before . Jupiter missiles were removed from Jupiter missiles long before, as was the Jumbo missiles .
 Kennedy had forgotten about them until Bundy reminded him of their existence . Kennedy had quite forgotten about the existence of them . Bundy was the only person to ask Kennedy to ask about them .
 He said Khrushchev’s demand was quite reasonable and fair . But when he remembered them, he said he said it was quite fair .
 Bundy tried to convince Bundy Bundy that NATO would not be pleased with his decision . Bundy said NATO would be unhappy with Bundy's decision to withdraw from the U.S. Bundy said the decision was a mistake . Bundy was disappointed with the decision, Bundy said .
 In rereading the transcripts, one gets an impression that President Kennedy was not only the most reasonable participant in the discussion but sometimes the only reasonable person present . Kennedy was often the only person present at the White House during the debate .
 Everyone else, except Robert Kennedy, continued to insist on the “double standard” that Soviet missiles in Cuba were not acceptable, while U.S. missiles in Turkey were just fine . Robert Kennedy: “Double standard’
 The number of Soviet troops in Cuba was even larger, but we should not forget that there is no dry land between Cuba and the U.S. There was also a large Soviet presence in Cuba .
 Graham Allison distinguishes potential responses that Kennedy could have taken that were considered by the ExCom . Allison identifies potential responses to Kennedy's actions that could have been considered . Allison: Kennedy's response would have been different from that considered by ExCom. Allison: "It's a good thing that
 The three participants in the crisis demonstrate the extent of mutual misunderstanding among the three participants . It seems fitting to mention them because they reveal the mode of thought and the process of decision making in Washington .
 Theodore Sorensen identified these scenarios in his Kennedy-era book . That lack of understanding was visible even earlier, in the proposed scenarios as Theodore Soresen .
 McNamara assumed that from the technical standpoint the missile deployment had not changed anything significant . This scenario, based on McNamara’s original assess, was based on a scenario .
 A first strike against the U.S. from Cuba was so improbable it could be ignored . A strike against Cuba from Cuba is so improbable that it could not be ignored. A strike was so unlikely it could have been ignored.
 The missiles were a means of applying pressure rather than a threat of war . Any aggressive U.S. action could make them more dangerous, CNN says .
 McNamara’s view was purely technical (and correct in the narrow technical sense), and for this reason was soon withdrawn by McNamara himself . McNamara's view was eventually withdrawn by the former secretary of state of state .
 It was obvious that the issue was not so much military or technical as it was political . The secretary of defense himself admitted a day later that he had no idea what happened .
 This is precisely what my father had had in mind when he told Khrushchev that no president would tolerate such a situation . This is exactly what he had said, his father had said when he spoke of the situation .
 Kennedy could tolerate it even less than most, since he had the experience of the failed Playa Giron invasion in 1961 behind him and the Republicans constantly accusing him of being young and indecisive .
 Of course, this was purely partisan criticism; it had no factual basis except for the comments about his youth . This is one of those shortcomings that soon disappear, he says, but they soon disappear .
 Kennedy did nothing about Soviet missiles that had shown up in Cuba under cover of deceit . But the congressional elections were coming up, and the Democrats would probably have lost them if Kennedy hadn't done so .
 If they had won those elections, the Republicans would have had their crack at the president, up to and including impeachment . And if they'd won, they would have been able to have their own crack at Obama .
 Sorensen maintained that if the Soviet Union and Cuba had signed an agreement and made it public, the U.S. would have had no legal grounds to protest . The United States itself had a similar agreement with Turkey, which was an absolutely equivalent case .
 The administration could have taken a different position when it learned that, in accordance with such an agreement, forty-two missiles were being brought in . It could have tried instead to limit the number of missiles .
 Two former ambassadors to Moscow, Llewellyn Thompson and Charles Bohlen, suggested sending Khrushchev a secret ultimatum, demanding he dismantle the missiles and warning him otherwise he would face the threat of a military solution .
 In exchange for the USSR dismantling its missiles, the United States could give up its military base in Guantánamo Bay and remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. could also remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Kennedy decided that to engage in that type of diplomacy at such a pressing moment would put Washington in a defensive position, whereas the guilty party was the Soviet Union . Kennedy decided to avoid engaging in that kind of diplomacy .
 The United States allies in NATO would regard such a step as justification of their suspicion that their overseas ally was ready to sacrifice their security for the sake of a region that was foreign to their interests .
 Summit meeting or conference would overly resemble the Munich Pact with Hitler . Finally, a summit meeting would be overly similar to the Munich pact with Hitler.
 Diplomatic diplomacy would have played into Moscow’s hands, giving it an opportunity to bring up many other questions regarding bases around the Soviet Union . Russia would have had a chance to widen the bargaining process as much as possible in order to obtain more concessions in exchange for abandoning its risky
 Rusk thought that there was one chance in a hundred that Castro would prefer to break with the Soviet Union if faced with the threat of a violent overthrow of his regime . Rusk: "There is one chance that there is one hundred of a hundred"
 This suggestion indicated a complete failure to understand the nature of Castro himself and of the Cuban leadership as a whole . Castro was a leader of Cuba in the 1960s and '60s, he said .
 Without its alliance with the USSR, Cuba would have been at the mercy of the U.S. The Cuban government was at the heart of the Soviet Union's success .
 The ExCom rejected that scenario not for any of those reasons, but because of the delay negotiations would cause, especially since the talks would not be conducted with the actual owners of the missiles .
 General Maxwell Taylor reported that military plans for an invasion had long been ready and had even been rehearsed . Taylor: Plans for the invasion had been long ready and even rehearsed for years .
 Taylor himself, his chiefs of staff, Dean Acheson, and Douglas Dillon, agreed that this was an extreme measure . But almost everyone agreed that Taylor's extreme measure was extreme, including himself .
 That meant running the risk of starting World War III or provoking a response in Berlin . That would risk starting World World War II or provoking response in Germany .
 Whatever happened, they could not let the missiles and their nuclear warheads fall into American hands . The U.S. must not let them fall into their hands, they said .
 The Soviet troops knew that under no conditions could they allow the enemy to capture the warheads . Under no conditions, they knew they would not let the enemy capture them .
 Moscow’s order not to use the missiles without permission could be considered obsolete . At the moment of invasion, the order could have been considered obsolete.
 It could be ignored, and the nuclear warheads set to explode not under the feet of the Soviet troops but rather on the territory at which the missiles were aimed . The warheads could explode under the foot of Soviet troops .
 The decision not to use the R-12 missiles would have meant surrendering the warheads to the Americans . The decision was ultimately doomed to fail, the author says . In a defensive battle, the decision would mean surrendering warheads to Americans .
 All launchers that survived the preparatory air strikes would have been used to strike the enemy’s ships as they approached the Cuban coast . All the launchers survived the air strikes were used in the attack .
 Moscow's ExCom discussed neutralization of missiles in Turkey . Anyone doubts that troops disobeyed the order not to use nuclear weapons without Moscow’s permission should consider the ExCom discussion .
 Nitze tried to assure Kennedy that U.S. commanders in Turkey already had an order prohibiting them to fire without a directive from Washington . Nitze told Kennedy that the order was already issued by the U.N. President Barack Obama .
 They, too, knew the code and what they were supposed to do if that happened . They also knew what they would do if they were attacked .
 Moscow, for its part, could not have stood idly by while its powerful troop deployment was defeated in this way . Moscow would not have been idyllic by sitting back and watching, it was said .
 The defeat itself would have taken not a few days, as General Taylor calculated, but rather a few weeks . General Taylor's defeat would have been a long way from being defeated .
 Taylor planned only five days of air strikes to prepare the way for a landing . Taylor planned to only have five days to prepare for landing .
 Experience has shown that the United States Air Force typically overestimates its strength . The U.S. Air Force has a history of overestimating its strength in the air force .
 The Cuban and Soviet troops were expecting an attack, so they would have tried to minimize their losses . The Cuban, Soviet troops would have been trying to minimize losses, according to sources .
 The example of the Yugoslav army, which sustained hardly any losses after months of bombardment in 1999, is revealing in this respect . The Yugoslav army suffered hardly any casualties after months being bombed in 1999 .
 During that period, Soviet missiles and planes would have destroyed Jupiter missiles in Turkey, while troops deployed in Germany, Poland, and Hungary might have seized Berlin and advanced into West Germany, Belgium, and France .
 My brother Aleksei commanded the Air Corps of our troops stationed in East Germany . If there was a war, they were supposed to reach the Atlantic Ocean in a few days, he says .
 He explained to me that this was the only way to prevent or to minimize the enemy’s nuclear strikes against the army . He said it was a way to avoid the enemy's nuclear strikes on the army.
 The Kremlin still thought it possible that the war would not go nuclear, as all the actions mentioned above could be performed by the regular service arms with conventional weapons . U.S. strategic doctrine envisaged the use of nuclear weapons against the superior conventional forces of its enemy .
 Garthoff refers to Khrushchev’s radio address of 28 October, which mentioned only the military participation of troops staNOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 41 tioned .
 At that moment, Khrushchev could not foresee everything, especially the escalation that might follow the beginning of a military action, which is very difficult to control, says historian . At that time, Khrisschev couldn't foresee everything .
 "Intimidation was more than abundantly present in the messages from 22 October on, any event. Intimidation is more than a form of intimidation . Intimidated was more evident in messages from the messages .
 At the time Garthoff and the intelligence community were not basing their optimistic estimates on an understanding of the psyche of the Kremlin leaders, or the army elite, or of public sentiment and public opinion .
 "The United States intelligence community made one mistake after another. In those areas, the U.S. intelligence community has made mistakes after another," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The generals from the Pentagon were invited to the White House only once, when Kennedy wanted to consult them directly . Taylor was then replacing Lemnitzer as acting chairman of the JCS . Taylor said Kennedy wanted them to consult directly .
 At the beginning of the meeting, Taylor "prepared" the president for the necessity of choosing one of the scenarios the generals would suggest .
 Taylor warned that even the first scenario did not guarantee that all missiles and other means of delivering a responsive strike against the U.S. would be destroyed .
 The president asked General Lemnitzer what he thought he thought the Russians would do . The president said he thought it would be the first time he'd heard from the Russians .
 The president set out for the Pentagon generals all the dangers of enemy action associated with that choice in different regions . He then asked them what they could suggest .
 General Wheeler said that the path of “an unexpected air strike—a blockade—an invasion” was optimal from the standpoint of securing U.S. territory . General Wheeler: “Unnexpected air strike, a blockade, an invasion’ was optimal .
 General Shoup agreed that the USSR had much better ways to deliver a strike against the United States than from Cuba . Shoup admitted that he agreed, although he admitted that Cuba had better ways of delivering a strike .
 All the generals were considering various aspects of military action in Cuba . All of the generals are considering various ways of dealing with the situation .
 Kennedy tried to impress upon them that “the problem was not waging a war against Cuba’s Cuba” Kennedy said . Kennedy said the problem was “waging a war on Cuba"
 In one year the USSR could develop enough intercontinental missiles to threaten from eighty to a hundred U.S. cities, he said . He reminded the generals that in one year it could threaten to threaten to eighty-to-a-100 cities .
 Khrushchev was less dependent than Kennedy on the opinions of those outside the Kremlin . Kennedy was much less dependent on those outside of the Kremlin, or at least outside the Central Committee, he says .
 He had to be aware that inaction on his part after the defeat of troops he himself had sent to Cuba could have had quite unpleasant consequences for him personally .
 As for the Soviet leader himself, with his ‘explosive’ and unpredictable temperament, there was no telling what he might do . The Soviet leader was known for his “explosives and unpredictable” temperament .
 Everyone in the conference room felt a chill in the air . Listening to his reasoning, everyone in the room felt like it was a chill .
 Sorensen did not write “we felt the chill of the grave,” but it is easy to add that on his behalf . Sorennsen didn’t write ‘we felt . The chill of . the grave” is easy on his
 The tendency to wishful thinking has brought downfall to many in the history of international relations . The tenders to think about the future of the U.S. President Barack Obama have been wronged .
 The Caribbean crisis was the result of such a tendency in the USSR, but our opponents were guilty of the same habit, writes David Frum . Frum says .
 Russian forces would not have been able to resist Soviet troops for more than a week, says historian . They did not take into account the real balance of forces in Europe, he says .
 There were plenty of mediumand intermediate-range R-12 and R-14 missiles in Europe .
 We can assume that the U.S. would not have wanted its most important NATO allies in Europe to cease to exist . Great Britain or Norway, an inseparable part of the West and its civilization, may have been at risk of losing them .
 France and West Germany as well as Continental West Europe would have been a site for Soviet ground and air forces if there was a war .
 This scenario was advocated by, among others, Dillon, Senator Russell, and Generals Taylor, LeMay, and Lemnitzer . This scenario would be the first time the U.S. military has been allowed to withdraw from the military .
 Of course, they all understood that after the completion of the five-day bombing, the logic of war would lead them to an invasion . Of course they all fundamentally understood .
 Fulbright believed that bombing Cuba meant a strike not against Soviet troops but against Cuba alone . The blockade carried the risk of a confrontation with Soviet ships, which should be avoided .
 President Kennedy was constantly mulling over the extreme scenario that was left among the possible solutions . President Kennedy, meanwhile, was constantly pondering the extreme scenarios .
 The generals explained that that would mean the simultaneous destruction of twenty-five Il-28 bombers and forty-one MiG-21 fighters, which also had the capability to deliver nuclear warheads . The generals, however, explained that the generals said that that . would mean . the simultaneous .
 Such a strike would require hundreds of planes and many sorties for each one . The U.S. military says it has no plans to use the military to carry out a strike .
 The Pentagon then began to increase the number of strikes . Even Taylor restrained the Air Force, telling them that air strikes would be ruled out if they continued .
 Bundy and Acheson advocated a “surgical strike” against the missiles . Kennedy leaned toward the same scenario . Bundy and Kennedy were in favor of the same strategy .
 He wanted to avoid mass casualties among Soviet troops because he thought that if he did not, military action by the Soviet Union in Berlin or Turkey was inevitable, he said .
 Raymond Garthoff: Kennedy held the same viewpoint now being expressed by me . That is, Kennedy held a similar viewpoint now, rather than by Raymond Garhoff . That's the same view as that of Raymond Kennedy, who held a different viewpoint .
 A seizure of West Berlin was fraught with nuclear war, while Kennedy’s goal was to minimize the risk of nuclear war . Kennedy's goal: To minimize risk of war, Kennedy wanted to avoid nuclear war.
 The United States would have found itself in a state no better than that of an international criminal, Japan’s admiral Tojo . This was beneath United States dignity, because the U.S. would have been no better .
 To overcome the ‘Pearl Harbor complex, leaflets could be distributed in Russian and Spanish, warning soldiers and civilians to stay away from military installations .
 Alternatively, they could shell our strategic missiles with buckshot, to render them inoperable without causing mass casualties among the Soviet troops . Alternatively, the Soviets could use buckshot to render the missiles inoperative without causing casualties among their troops .
 Admittedly, Acheson categorically denied any analogy with Pearl Harbor . Admitted that he had no analogy with the Japanese attack .
 John Kennedy always kept in mind that the situation might force him to give the order to invade . Kennedy did all in his power to avoid such a situation, he says .
 As early as during the war against Japan , he had objected to those who would play casually with human life . He had objected as early as in the war .
 People are so used to talking about billions of dollars and millions of soldiers that the phrase ‘thousands of casualties’ sounds like a drop in NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 . ‘Thousands’ of casualties is a drop of a bucket .
 Sorensen wrote on 20 October 1962, at the height of the missile crisis, during discussion of the choice between surprise strike and a blockade .
 In the depths of his soul, Kennedy agonized over the search for a peaceful solution . Kennedy agonizes over the loss of his son, John .
 He was reminding his entourage about relatively recent lessons of history . Besides, he was reminding them about recent lessons in history .
 A full-scale nuclear exchange, lasting less than sixty minutes, could wipe out more than three hundred million Americans, Europeans, and Russians, as well as untold millions elsewhere .
 There is no mention of von Bülow or Bethmann Hollweg in this speech or in other 1963 speeches by Kennedy available online . Kennedy's 1963 speech is available online in the U.S.
 They considered the United States an “evil empire” from which they could expect any immoral action . The U.S. considered the U.K. an ‘evil empire,’ they said .
 This is another example of complete failure to understand an adversary. This is a complete failure, he says .
 McNamara put forward by McNamara on the first day of discussion, after the photographs of missile launchers were placed on Kennedy’s desk on 16 October . Two days later the idea had won the support of Ambassador Thompson, Robert Kennedy, Sorensen, and Rusk .
 According to international law, a “blockade’s itself implied an act of war . According to the law, such a ‘blockade' is considered a war-like act of action .
 The United States could avoid declaring war if two-thirds of the OAS supported a blockade, but there is no guarantee that they would . The U.S. could avoid war with the blockade if the U.K. sided with the O.S., but there was no guarantee
 There was also no time to twist the arms of large countries like Mexico, Brazil, and Argentina, like Mexico and Brazil .
 A blockade of Cuba would give the USSR a pretext to declare a blockade of Berlin . A blockade would be a pretext for Berlin, says historian John Avlon .
 It was decided not to go beyond the word “quarantine” because nobody knew what that meant according to international law . For this reason, Rusk said, it was decided to not go beyond that word .
 As noted above, the Pentagon was opposed to a blockade unless it was accompanied by a military air strike and then by an invasion . The Pentagon was also opposed to the blockade .
 The main point of the blockade’s supporters is to relieve the administration of making a decision on military action, they say . From the point of view of the supporters, the blockade's supporters, however, the main point was that the administration would not be able to make a decision
 Kennedy’s television and radio address to the nation [on 22 October 1962—Ed.] contained demagoguery and a certain distortion of the facts . Kennedy's television and . radio address was broadcast on October 22, 1962, in New York City .
 The missiles in Cuba were declared extremely dangerous, as they could hit U.S. territory too quickly . The missiles could hit the United States territory .
 The nature of such weapons was well known; and as a result, both the Soviet Union and the United States, recognizing this fact, have deployed strategic nuclear weapons with great care, never upsetting the status quo .
 The United States always operated under the slogan of “containing Communism,” but that explanation does not change anything fundamental . Of course, the U.S. always operated with the slogan ‘containing Communism”
 As for Soviet submarines with nuclear missiles, they were few and far between . The Soviet Union had nuclear missiles in the 1960s .
 Some passages of Kennedy’s speech are full of the double standard so typical of U.S. political thinking . Kennedy's speech is full of a double standard typical of American political thinking.
 As a beginning, it was decided to limit the quarantine to offensive weapons, while all other cargoes, including conventional arms, would be allowed to pass .
 The stopping of Soviet ships also carried a risk of military action, which could be quite brusque and unceremonious, such as U.S. warships firing at unarmed Soviet cargo vessels .
 The president believed that the inspections would set a precedent, warning Moscow not to let extreme cases occur . The inspections will set precedent, he said .
 McNamara claimed that he later had to remind the admiral firmly that no ship could be sunk for any reason without the president’s personal approval delivered by the secretary of defense .
 The admiral grumbled that he had the Naval Regulations, which stipulates the actions of ships under his command, but a reference to the commander in chief proved effective . He grumbled about the regulations, but the admiral proved to be effective .
 At first, Khrushchev sent a threatening letter accusing the United States of piracy and making any consequences a United States responsibility . At first the letter was sent accusing the U.S. of piracy, but it was made clear that any consequences were a U.K. responsibility .
 He maintained that he would not order his captains to go along with the inspections . He said he wouldn't order captains to comply .
 "In general, his first letter of 26 October bears obvious signs of haste and lack of basic editing," he wrote .
 The same phrases are repeated twice in different sections of the letter . The letters are repeated in the same sections of each letter .
 The staff was probably moving two or three phrases around and did not have the time to cross out the repetition . The staff were probably moving around the phrases around .
 Khrushchev’s other letters as well can be said to some extent, as well . To some extent the same can't be said about the letters .
 In essence, nobody edited them, not only from the standpoint of meaning but also in the purely technical sense . "Nobody edited them," says the author of the book, "in essence"
 Khrushchev’s previous and subsequent approaches to nuclear missiles as weapons capable of deciding the outcome of any war—as they are, as they are . This idea, correct for World War I or World War II, ran contrary to all Khrushches' previous . Khrush
 He himself had threatened the U.S. with missiles deployed in Siberia and the Urals, without even bothering to mention infantry .
 The blockade/quarantine did not seem to be solving the problem of the missiles that had already been delivered to Cuba . The blockade and quarantine did not solve the problem with the missiles .
 Work continued around the clock and would be completed in a few days, Moscow says . In line with Moscow’s directives, work continued round the clock . Work was expected to be completed within days .
 49 U-2 spy planes were captured by U.S. spy planes in 2004 . This was clear from the continuous aerial photography .
 If they had not yet delivered, the quarantine would keep them out . If they were not delivered, they would be quarantined .
 When some vessels turned back, it raised hopes that these were the ships that had warheads on board . When some ships turned back they raised hopes they were the ones with warheads .
 There was no way to hide all those preparations from Soviet and Cuban intelligence . The sword of Damocles, in the form of an air strike and subsequent invasion, gave the United States a trump card .
 The sword of Damocles proved decisive in pushing Khrushchev to compromise . It was this that ultimately proved decisive for Khrushchevich to compromise.
 When Kennedy declared a blockade and presented his demand to dismantle and remove the missiles, Khrushchev started to bluster . But soon, like the rest of us, he understood that there was no other way out .
 At the same time, we had information that in the southeastern ports and military bases of the United States, not only were carrying out intensive military preparations for an invasion of Cuba but almost everything was ready for a strike . The U.S. was preparing for a possible invasion, the Cuban
 "If we can believe our intelligence, we could have decided everything," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Even though our intelligence overdid it and created a false alarm, it is better to have it that way than the other way around . Even though it was an overreaction, it was better than having it all wrong, says CNN.com .
 Almost forty-two thousand of our troops were deployed on the island to defend our missiles and construction groups . Of course, almost 40,000 of our soldiers were deployed to defend ourselves .
 "We had very limited air power there -- Il-28 bombers, which were not well-suited for defense against a strike because they were vulnerable to the enemy fighters," he says . "Il-28s are not well suited for defense," he adds .
 We also had MIG-21s, but not enough of them to challenge the supremacy of the U.S. Air Force . The Air Force also had some MIGs .
 We had antiaircraft missiles on the island, but, of course, their location was not a secret to the Americans . "We had our anti-aircraft missiles in the Philippines, but ... their location wasn't a secret," she says .
 Cubans had less sophisticated antiaircraft weapons, but at least they were easier to camouflage and move . The Cubans also had a less sophisticated anti-aircraft weapons, though they were less sophisticated .
 The Americans would have had obvious air superiority while landing their available forces . Therefore, the Americans had overwhelming air superiority in landing their forces .
 At the time, after all, they were not yet waging a war in Vietnam and could therefore unleash their entire military machine against Cuba . The U.S. was not yet fighting Vietnam but could unleash its entire military .
 Of course, we meant to ask Fidel’s opinion about the decision to remove the missiles, explain the reasons to him, and so on. Of course . Of course. We meant to . ask Fidel's opinion .
 Khrushchev had not yet raised the point in his correspondence with Washington, even though it was increasingly clear to us that we would have to make concessions . The Soviet Union did not yet raise the issue in its negotiations with Washington .
 "We were engaged, so to speak, in squabbling, mutual recrimination, and explanations," she said . "We're engaged, ... in squabbling, mutual . recrimination and explanations"
 In those days, nobody could seriously get involved while he was dictating his letters to Kennedy, except for introducing minor corrections in his texts . Nobody could get involved except to introduce minor corrections .
 "I should have interfered to finalize our decision, which was already inevitable, and to inform Fidel," says President Obama . But I should have intervened, he says .
 "Everybody was caught up in the correspondence with Washington. In the last two days, when a draft agreement was definitely emerging, everybody is caught up with it," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Khrushchev’s letters were long, verbose, and full of repetition, digression, and general remarks; and they took up a great deal of time . The letters are long and verbose; they were long and full .
 Nobody dared to suggest asking Fidel’s opinion and taking into account his inevitable corrections or additions . Nobody dared . suggest asking . Fidel's opinion . Nobody dare to suggest . asking Fidel .
 Havana should have sent copies or abstracts of our telegrams to Washington, says U.S. State Dept. of Cuba .
 At least, on Saturday, 27 October, we should have sent Havana a copy of our telegram of 26 October to President Kennedy, the one in which the missiles in Turkey came up . That would have been very unpleasant for Fidel, but at least it mentioned that the Cuban government would
 "We did not demand one. But that was the message that did not receive an answer, and we did not ask one," says CNN.com.com .
 In our telegram to Kennedy on 27 October we should have emphasized that inspection of the territory was under Cuban jurisia . Even more, in our . telegram . should have . emphasized inspection of . the . territory was . under Cuban law, and only the Cuban government could consent
 Khrushchev had to be reminded about such things; he used to get carried away with general remarks . He used to have to remind him of the lessons he learned from his mistakes .
 I did not always participate in the writing because sometimes he went into another room, so that the noise of other people talking did not distract the typist . But I did always participate . Sometimes he went to another room to write because he would not be distracted by other people .
 Later, when the document was being read, again there was a sense of haste, and everybody’s anxiety was taking its toll . The document was read by a group of people who were anxious and anxious .
 In essence, the quarantine gave us the time we needed; we could have discussed everything calmly and have taken into account the subtleties contained in Alekseev’s telegrams on the opinions of the Cuban leadership .
 Khrushchev’s state of mind was close to panic; that is why we were all unable to discuss things calmly, writes David Frum . Frum says Khrushchevitch was unable to talk calmly about the situation .
 On 27 October it would have been quite possible to inform him of our decision, to send him a copy of our message to Kennedy and to request his opinion .
 Even on Sunday, 28 October, while Khrushchev’s radio address was being prepared, even if it was not quite ready, a brief telegram could have been sent to Havana for comments .
 Khrushchev’s statement, which he was polishing together with Gromyko and Il’ichev, should have underlined Cuba's right to consent to inspections, says historian . Also, the statement should have pointed out Cuba’d consent to inspection .
 Cuba says only the Cuban government can decide what to do about UN inspections on site . It did not clearly state that only the government could decide what it wanted .
 If we had done both these things, at least it would have looked like a consultation, he says . Fidel would have learned about our decision from us rather than over the radio, he adds .
 If the statement had stipulated that inspections depended on the decision of the Cuban government, Fidel, the leadership, Cuba as a whole, Cuba would have seen that we respected the opinion of his country, the government said .
 Gromyko and Il’ichev withdrew to the other room where the typists were sitting . Later, especially in Havana, I often reproached myself for not introducing such suggestions before Khrushchev .
 Il’ichev read aloud to Khrushchev the pages as they were ready, and so on on. Il'ichev then read the pages again, and again, until Khrushchev was ready .
 Khrushchev himself had no corrections, the text remained unchanged . The text of this article was published in Moscow, Russia, on July 4, 1962 .
 Il’ichev volunteered to take the text to the radio committee himself . The text was sent to a radio committee .
 We did not know that the alarming information that Kennedy was about to declare the beginning of military action against Cuba would not be confirmed . Of course, we did know that .
 "Since we had agreed to remove the missiles, the danger of a United States attack was over," he says . "All the same, since we had . agreed to . remove the . missiles, since . agreeing to remove them, the risk of a U.S. attack was
 Khrushchev said in his memoirs, which he dictated and taped, that Castro had recommended a preemptive nuclear strike against the U.S. He also said in memoirs that Castro recommended preemptive strike against U.K.
 Sergei Khrushchev supports this story, even noting that after that, his father lost all doubts as to whether he should remove the missiles . He admits that it is up to historians to judge whether his father interpreted the letter correctly or misunderstood some point .
 Sergei Khrushchev: "The words of [Soviet diplomat Aleksandr] Troianovskii stuck forever" in his father’s memory . In addition, it should be kept in mind that ‘the words of Aleksandra’t stuck forever’
 Many historians, as Khrushchev’s son foresaw, disagree about the meaning of Castro's letter . Many historians disagree about what Castro wrote in the letter .
 Castro recalled Richard Sorge, the Soviet spy whose warnings of Hitler’s planned attack were dismissed by Stalin . Castro even recalled the warnings he sent to the Kremlin . In a 1992 speech, Castro recalled Sorge's warnings .
 He figured out that the message to Kennedy had been sent before Khrushchev had a chance to read his letter . Besides, he figured out he was not going to have to read the letter .
 President Obama has expressed his personal opinion with regard to the current events . He said he would like to express in a few words my personal opinion .
 I say this because I think that the imperialists’ aggressiveness is becoming extremely dangerous. I say that I think this is becoming very dangerous . The imperialists' aggressiveness has become extremely dangerous, he says .
 "We will do everything in our power to achieve that. Until the very last minute, however, we will hope that peace will be preserved," he said .
 "At the same time, we evaluate the situation realistically and are full of determination to face any test," says coach . "We are full-determined and full-of-determination," he says .
 Castro was proceeding from the assumption that after a massive strike against the forty-two thousand Soviet troops and their military equipment, including nuclear missiles, would have no option except a full-scale nuclear strike . NATO military doctrine required a nuclear response anyway .
 Castro was not familiar with NATO doctrine, but his intuition did not let him down . Castro: "I'm not sure what NATO doctrine means, but my intuition did let me down"
 It was a convenient excuse and the right moment to inform Fidel of the compromise that was necessary to prevent a third, nuclear world war .
 As early as 23 October, the day after Kennedy’s televised address, after all, Khrushchev was still pretending in his telegram to Castro that he was not afraid and did not drop the slightest hint that we were searching for a compromise . After all, he was still
 It was clear to all of us after the declaration of the blockade that a compromise had become inevitable . Meanwhile, it was clear that all the parties had agreed to a compromise, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Washington might see any delay in our answer as an attempt to play for time so to complete the assembly of the remaining launchers . Washington may see delay in response as a bid to complete assembly of remaining launchers.
 "Many of the launchers were already operable, because during our correspondence with Washington, assembly had been going on at an accelerated rate," says Pentagon spokesman .
 "Apparently, he did not really understand that we had no way out except by removing the missiles. Apparently, he didn't really understand," he said .
 In a sense, one could have understood if the Americans, not receiving an immediate answer, had then started something . The U.S. has not received an immediate response from Russia .
 "We had precise information from various sources that it was exactly how matters stood. And we had precise sources," she said . "We were able to get precise information," she added .
 "To make a long story short, we had to give them an immediate answer," the author says . "We did. We had to answer them," she says of the story .
 Khrushchev agreed to on-site inspections in Cuban territory, which he could not guarantee . He agreed to inspections in Cuba's territory, but was unable to guarantee the inspections . The inspections were never completed .
 Fidel Castro's presence as part of the conflict seemed to have been forgotten by everybody at that moment . Consent to that had to come from Fidel Castro, from the sovereign state of Cuba, from Cuba .
 Everybody was sure that Fidel would agree to the UN inspections or to inspections by a neutral country of his choice . Fidel was sure to agree to UN inspections, or to an inspection by neutral country .
 U Thant himself made this suggestion, but Fidel, both in his public statements and during his talks with 54 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW Alekseev, categorically rejected any inspections other than mutual ones .
 "No president could have agreed to such a loss of political prestige for the U.S. right after having been deceived before the entire world," he says . The president says he was deceived by the world .
 Fidel Castro argued mutual inspections were necessary to ensure that the U.S. was not preparing a new invasion of Cuba . In his conversations with McCloy and Stevenson I supported Fidel Castro .
 The most militant members of the leadership could use Fidel’s refusal to agree to ground and aerial inspections and even inspections of the Cuban ports as an excuse to overturn the agreement .
 Cuba had already begun to dismantle its missiles and prepare them to be moved to the ports . In the meantime, our people in Cuba had begun dismantling our missiles .
 The threat of our missiles being fired from Cuba had already ceased to exist, while they could draw back—not formally but by expressing so many reservations and imposing so many conditions that they would in effect refuse . That is, in fact, they had already made us fulfill our obligations .
 "The conditions for negotiation were extremely unfavorable and difficult," he says . "That is, that is, the conditions for negotiations were extremely favorable and difficult. That is, according to the conditions," he said .
 Raymond Garthoff: Even after the issues of monitoring had been formally settled with the United States, not all the conditions of the agreement had been fulfilled . It is interesting to note that even after the agreement was formally settled, Americans still heard from Americans that not all of the conditions had
 One of Reagan’s political comrades suggested that they should launch a strike against Cuba because they could prove that the obligation not to attack Cuba did not legally exist . The conditions placed on the inspections had not been fulfilled, he says .
 I have no doubt that American lawyers can prove the unprovable . Personally, I'm not sure if they can, but I think they can .
 Mikoyan’s trip to the U.S. and Cuba in the fall of 1962 had been the agreement he won from those two countries to forms of inspection other than those on site .
 McCloy suggested inspections on board Soviet ships by United States warships . McCloy himself suggested inspections by U.S. warships . On 2 November McCloy proposed inspections by the United States .
 Mikoyan won the official agreement of the United States NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 55 that on-site inspections and low-altitude flights by reconnaissance planes would be replaced by high-altitudes flights29 and other forms of monitoring .
 Mikoyan’s negotiations with President Kennedy and Rusk were recorded in his negotiations with Rusk and McCloy . That was recorded in the negotiations .
 They all confirmed that they were actually replacing on-site inspections with aerial photography . They were replaced with aerial photographs .
 Cuba refused to give up the U-2 flights, which were not visible from the ground . They were detectable only by Cuban radar, so did not impugn Cuban honor . That is precisely why they refused .
 The inspection of missiles did not reflect on Cuba in any way, as it was a bilateral agreement between the USSR and the U.S. As for the inspection, the inspection of Soviet ships from the United States vessels in the open sea was not a Cuban missile inspection .
 The formula of “adequate inspection,” Kennedy had insisted in his telegrams to Khrushchev, was found . The formula was found in the formula Kennedy insisted on .
 If we return to Khrushchev and his consenting to points on which he had no legal right to agree without having tried to inform Castro in advance about the terms . Castro's actions were dictated by two circumstances, including the circumstances of the war .
 "Everybody decided that he would announce a strike against Cuba and our missiles," says Obama . Obama's decision to strike Cuba was made by the U.S. president, Obama says .
 Robert Kennedy disseminated that piece of misinformation during his meeting with Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy said that Robert Kennedy's father had been in the process of persuading Dobrynins to meet with him .
 Secret agents from all over were telling us about an unprecedented massing of the U.S. military around Cuba . In addition, secret agents told us that the United States military is massing in Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy did not tell Dobrynin, that the president had not yet made and would not soon make his political decision, regardless of all the efforts of his chiefs of staff . But the agents simply did not know, and the president did not .
 McNamara confirmed this at a conference in Havana in 1992, when he said that Kennedy was not about to order an air strike and invasion .
 He was about to announce a tightening of the blockade, a ban on delivering fuel and lubricants, then on something else, and so on. That does not mean that he could not have given such an order later, but he could have given it later .
 Kennedy wanted to give Moscow more time to cool down and recover its common sense . That is, Kennedy said, to give Russia more time . Kennedy: "I want to give the Russians time to recover their common sense"
 Moscow, solely on the basis of the unconfirmed rumor about the televised address and Robert Kennedy’s words, was thrown into a state of feverish haste . 56 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW .
 Kremlin leaders were in a hurry to save humanity, which they themselves had brought to the brink of extinction . The Kremlin leaders had brought the world to the verge of extinction, but they themselves brought it to an end .
 There was neither time nor inclination to consider the subtle nuances of diplomacy, respect the sovereignty of small nations, or support the prestige of Cuba .
 Kremlin boss always had a slightly disdainful attitude toward friends . Kremlin bosses showed greater respect for their adversaries, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The events in Poland and Hungary in 1956 showed that friends could be subjected to treatment that was by no means friendly . "The events in 1956 [that is] the Soviet response to rebellions in those countries—Ed.] showed .
 The White House was very nervous, something the White House did not understand . "That meant that he was nervous," White House said. "That means that he is very nervous," he said .
 He instructed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to prepare the first letter, and it was sent . The first letter was sent, and the first was sent to the Foreign Office .
 President Obama dictated his own letter, which was full of generalities but not the necessary words . Then he decided to dictate his own version of the letter .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs mentioned that Cuba and Turkey would have to agree to inspections of missile removal . Cuba's Foreign Ministry said that the two countries would have agreed to inspections . The Ministry also mentioned that Turkey and Cuba would have had to agree on inspections of missiles .
 Khrushchev’s self-assurance in diplomacy was lost because of his self-confidence in diplomacy . Unfortunately, a convenient opportunity to insist on Cuba's rights was lost, he says .
 His letter arrived before the one from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . For technical reasons, his letter arrived ahead of the one sent by the ministry .
 Thompson and Kennedy suggested that the second letter containing the phrase on the necessity of getting Cuba’s consent simply be ignored . As a result, in the ExCom Thompson and Robert Kennedy suggested the letter was ignored . The letter was rejected .
 If Khrushchev had had a similar team to the one President Kennedy had, using the same guidelines, somebody would undoubtedly have noticed the mixup . Castro had written about mutual oversight, and stated that Cuba could not agree to unilateral monitoring .
 Kennedy understood that departmental interests could devalue the advice of people from the same department . That is why he needed personal advisers who could question everything, he said . Kennedy understood how to deal with the issues of national security .
 His last letters to Khrushchev were endlessly polished by all the members of the ExCom . ExCom members polished his letters to the Soviet leader .
 Kennedy edited his own televised address on 22 October, together with Sorensen and Robert Kennedy, many times, even at the last moment . Kennedy edited the address, including the last minute, to ensure that it was aired .
 Every word -- even a nuance of some term -- could be significant . Every word, even a synonym, could be a significant word .
 He began to read the address before the last pages of it were even typed . The address was read out before it was even typed out .
 He was not happy even with Anastas Mikoyan, because he did not agree with him, he said . He was unhappy with the Armenian leader, even though he had a good relationship with him . He said he was happy with the president, even if he disagreed with him
 Khrushchev snubbed foreign minister Vasilii Kuznetsov when he asked just one question or suggestion . He did not utter another word, and the diplomat did not speak again .
 Gromyko knew his boss’s temperament, so he was ready to agree to everything in advance . He knew he was going to be the target of his boss's temper .
 Even in May, in passing, in the corridor, Khrushchev shared his doubts with regard to the risk of deploying missiles in Cuba . Even in . passing, he had shared with Khrushvic his doubts .
 Troianovskii calmly voiced his apprehensions, the way only he could, but that, too, had no effect . "I'm not going to let it go," he said, but it didn't stop .
 Khrushchev simply could not tolerate a frank, freewheeling discussion of every phrase that was dictated, every word or connotations of related words, let alone ideas, he said . As for a frank and frank discussion of ideas, the Soviet leader would not tolerate that .
 As for the text of his Sunday address to Kennedy, it badly needed thorough editing and consideration of key definitions . The text of the speech to Kennedy needs to be considered carefully .
 "It was wrong to agree to everything right away without proposing any conditions," he said . "I'm not happy with this. It's not the first time I've been in charge of a project," he added .
 First, the issue of international monitoring over the dismantling of the launchers should have been made contingent on the agreement of the Cuban government . The Cuban government should have made the decision to dismantle the launchers .
 The Kremlin should have suggested that Kennedy either conduct negotiations independently or give Moscow time to conduct them . Kennedy should have been given more time to prepare for negotiations .
 Moscow should not have said that all measures to protect Cuba were no longer necessary . Moscow should have insisted that the presence of all military advisers was still necessary . Russia should not say that all necessary measures are no longer needed .
 Moscow should not have limited itself in terms of the principle of military advisers, who had nothing to do with the emergence of the crisis . Russia should not limit itself to the principle that military advisers were not involved in the crisis, says Russian diplomat .
 Third, we should have linked the dismantling of the missiles to a simultaneous documentation in the UN of the U.S. commitment not to attack Cuba . We should have also linked dismantling of missiles to the United States commitment not attacking Cuba .
 The U.S. sabotaged that process of documentation, citing various pretexts, the U.N. says . Because that was not done, after the missiles were dismantled, the United States. "The United States clearly sabotaged" that process, he says .
 An initial agreement was reached with the United States and with then UN Secretary General U Thant . And it has never been completed, even though an initial agreement with the U.S. was reached .
 We should have specified which missiles were meant and which the USSR agreed to remove, which weapons it did not agree to remove . Instead, we should have been able to specify which weapons were not even an object of discussion . We need to know what weapons were meant, and which were not
 "Nothing like that was done because one person imagined himself capable of everything," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Nothing like that is done because of one person, he says .
 A retreat really was necessary, but it should have been done without panic, after careful consideration, and with foresight regarding all possible connotations and consequences of the retreat . The retreat was necessary but it was not done with panic, as well as foresight, the author says .
 Khrushchev, meanwhile, never planned even one move ahead . He had no plan from the beginning, from May through November 1962 . He never planned a single move ahead of the fall of Soviet Union .
 He could not afford to risk a nuclear war, even if it were the fault of the Soviet premier . The Soviet premier's obstinacy reached the level of stupor, writes David Cameron .
 Kennedy’s last-ditch scenario is also mentioned in On the Brink, a book about the history of the missile crisis . Kennedy's scenario is mentioned in the book On The Brink . The book also includes a book on the conferences on the history .
 This detail testifies to the real greatness of John Kennedy as a world political leader, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The absence of a specific agreement with Cuba after Khrushchev’s radio message to Kennedy of 28 October 1962 could be used to continue calling for a strike against the island . The Cuban aspect of the crisis was the Cuban aspect, writes David Perry .
 The removal of Soviet missile launchers was facilitated by the removal of the missile launchers . Of course, morality and politics no longer favored such an action, but from the military standpoint the goal had been facilitated by removing them .
 The most important point was that its absence would have apparently invalidated the guarantees of nonaggression against Cuba . The absence of the guarantee would have appeared invalidate the guarantees, he said .
 On-site inspections would not have been effective, since it was rumored that the missiles had been hidden in caves . The missiles were rumored to be in caves, according to a report .
 Some went so far as to suggest inspecting Soviet ports, not only Cuban ones . Some even suggested inspecting ports in Soviet ports .
 If the issue involved an indeterminate future, that meant that inspectors would have to remain in place for decades . But if the issue was to be resolved, that would mean inspectors would need to stay in place . If that happened, inspectors would be required to remain at the site for
 The idea of mutual oversight linked to a promise to close the training camps used to prepare for invasion was rejected outright . The idea was also rejected outright by the UN .
 One had to assume that the United States would do this, with help from the voting machine in the OAS, which it controlled . The U.S. controlled the vote, which is controlled by the U.N.
 The largest countries did not support the anti-Cuban line, but there were enough “banana republics” republics, which in those days were dominated by military dictatorships supported by the United States, to win the vote .
 The United States could always ignore the OAS and rely only on CIA data . In any case, the U.S. could always rely on the CIA data.
 In general, Cuba might behave ‘badly’—that is to contradict U.S. interests, as defined by the United States, in one way or another . Cuba might contradict United States interests, but that doesn't happen in Cuba .
 We had to fly to Fidel immediately to discuss the situation with him and to clarify with the U.S. side other scenarios for monitoring the missile removal .
 I had decided in advance, and the Central Committee agreed, to try to get both sides to make concessions—to consolidate the situation, he says . The Central Party agreed, and I had planned to try, to get the situation to consolidate, he adds .
 The missiles had not been loaded on the ships yet, so I still had some time at my disposal . The missiles were not loaded yet, but I had time to think about them .
 Fidel Castro 'would never agree' with Fidel Castro's views, says Fidel Castro . "I understood that there were points to which Fidel would never agree," he says . "But I also understood that . There were points of which Fidel never agreed"
 He learned about the missile removal from a U.S. radio broadcast obviously worsened the conditions under which we would talk . In addition, that he had learned . from a . United States radio broadcast, he said .
 I was extremely concerned about Cuba and very much wanted to visit it at this dangerous time in its history. I was very concerned about the country's future . I was able to visit Cuba, and I wanted to see it again, but it was very dangerous .
 As far back as April 1961, I had NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 61 succeeded in being included in a group of journalists that was supposed to fly to Cuba to cover the battles against the invaders at Playa Giron .
 Playa Giron was believed to be only the beginning of the Spanish invasion of Spain . After all, it was believed that there would be landings and prolonged battles in other places as well .
 Cuba’s ambassador to Moscow, Faure Chomon, and I looked at a map of Cuba, decided that Playa Giron was a feint, and tried to figure out where the main landing was likely to be . Playa . Giron is a main landing point
 Main operations are to be expected on the northern coast of the island, says Chomon . The choice of marshy sites for a landing seemed strange, he adds .
 Laguna del Tesoro is not far from the Bahía Cochinos— the Bay of Pigs, as it is known in U.S. sources . It's known in United States sources, but it's also known in the region as the "Bay of Pigs" The Bay of
 The group of journalists in which I was included left for Cuba won a complete victory . But no sooner had the group of reporters left for the country than the Revolutionary Army won a victory, he says .
 Although somewhat alarmed, my mother was also glad that I would accompany my father, she was glad that she would accompany him .
 "Last time you left the United States, it was thanks to your presence that tragedy did not happen," says President Obama .
 She was confined to bed at our summer cottage after another heart attack . She had to be confined in bed at her summer cottage at her family's cottage .
 Doctors believed heart-attack patients should stay in bed almost all the time for a long period . Unfortunately, in those days, doctors believed heart attack patients should be in bed .
 As a result, she had become weak, and walking was too much of an effort for her . She had become so weak that she was unable to walk again .
 Sometimes she felt as though she did not have enough air, even when the window was completely open . She felt as if she didn't have enough space, even though she felt like she had enough air .
 In the summer my brothers and I used to lift her chair from both sides and take it out to the garden . I remember how in the summer we lifted her chair out of the garden and took her out of bed .
 My brother attached wheels to her chair, because Mama refused to use a wheelchair for the disabled . My brother Vano, an aviation engineer working for the MiG company, attached wheels . Mama categorically refused to use a wheelchair for disabled .
 I am sure that with the current approaches to treating heart-attack patients, say nothing of contemporary medicines, she could have lived much longer . I'm sure that . with the . current approaches . to treat heart attack patients, to say . nothing of modern medicines, could have saved her
 The ineptitude and the obsolete thinking of our doctors 62 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW was further aggravated by the excessive caution traditional of the Kremlin Hospital . The ineptitudes and the outdated thinking of the doctors were further aggravated .
 After the ‘doctors’ plot’ and Stalin’s arrest of those who treated Kremlin patients in 1952, excessive caution became even more typical . Of course, after the “doctors' plot” and Stalin's arrest of . those who . treated Kremlin
 Sergei Khrushchev wrote that Mikoyan’s wife was in the hospital, near death, and her doctors were saying that she had only a few days to live . That was why Mikoyans hesitated to fly to Cuba to see his wife .
 Khrushchev nudged Mikoyan and said that nothing could help Ashkhen Lazarevna . After a prolonged pause ‘Khrushchev . nudged’an and told him that it would be difficult to succeed in Cuba without him .
 The artistic details produced by his creative imagination are sometimes quite picturesque, so we have to give credit to his ability as a writer . The creative details of this book are sometimes very picturesque .
 "I always prefer to know where the facts end and the artistic fantasy begins," says author . " Nevertheless, I always prefer the facts . Nevertheless, it's important to know the facts and artistic fantasy," she says .
 My mother was not in the hospital; she was at home, at the Gorky-2 dacha beyond the Usovo Station in Odintsovo Raion . She was on the train line right after the village of Kalchuga .
 The dacha has been known as Zubalovo-1 since Svetlana Stalina-Alliluyeva’s memoirs were published . The dachas have been known since the memoirs of the author were published in Russia . The village is located in
 Her condition had already been poor for two or three months, but they did not see any dramatic deterioration in her condition . Her condition was already already poor, they say .
 "Neither my father nor myself thought that we would never see her again," she said . "Neither of my parents nor myself ever thought that she would never be seen again," said her father .
 Attempts to persuade Mikoyan at the meeting of the Central Committee Presidium simply could not have taken place . That is why such attempts would not have been successful .
 By the fall, my mother was very pale and weak, and she rarely left her bed . She rarely left the hospital bed . By the end of the year, she had barely survived .
 A nurse was on duty at our house to render all kinds of assistance and monitor the timely administering of medication . A nurse had to be on duty to render assistance to the family .
 Her brother, Gai Lazarevich, used to come every evening and stay overnight . Her brother used to stay overnight with her .
 Some days, I did not leave the house at all, as my institute, IMEMO AN SSSR, had certain days when we did not have to come to the office . Some days we didn't have to go to work, as our institute had some days off .
 We wanted to stay close to her; and she was pleased to see us, not only the nurse and our household help . We wanted her to stay near to her, not just her nurse and her household help, but also her nurse .
 "Of course, we were all alarmed, but we did not lose hope that the doctors and medicines would help her," says her mother .
 On 31 October, we departed for Cuba on board an Il-18—a specialedition turboprop passenger plane . The plane is a special edition of the Russian-built Russian-made plane .
 These planes were at the disposal of a special detachment of civil aviation for flights of high government officials inside and outside of the country .
 They had compartment where two people could sleep and another compartment for work and negotiations in the tail section . They had a compartment for two people sleeping and another for work .
 In the main compartment there are regular seats for those accompanying top officials . Finally, in the main . compartment there were regular seats .
 By the way, as we left for the airport, we had not received our Canadian transit visas . By the time we were leaving, we hadn't received our transit visas from Canada .
 U.S. visas had been granted within minutes, but the Canadian embassy decided to send an inquiry to Ottawa . The Canadian embassy sent an inquiry, and the visa was granted .
 By the time we land at Gander, the Canadian government will have no option but to give us the visas . By the end of the day, we will be flying to Gander to get the visas.
 Mikoyan’s aide, V Chistov, V Kriukov, his personal bodyguard who was also in charge of security, was in attendance . The bodyguard took care of my father as instructed by my mother and had already acquired some experience of his own
 Roman Carmen visited every dangerous site where a Soviet cameraman could set foot, beginning with republican Spain in 1936–38 . The outstanding Soviet documentary filmmaker had visited, it seemed to seem to be, all dangerous sites where he could .
 He was a cheerful and energetic elderly man, although no one saw him as old . He was cheerful, energetic and energetic, although he was not considered old .
 64 years ago, I called him Rima, as all his friends did, and sat next to him the whole way . We had been friends for a long time, and called him 'Rima' as all the friends did .
 The Canadians issued our visas after all, so at Gander we spent about forty minutes in the waiting area while our plane was refueled . The Canadian government issued us a visa after all .
 Ottawa was very nice of Ottawa, as it was more pleasant to spend forty to forty-five minutes in an airport than shivering on board a plane . That's more pleasant than being shivering in Ottawa .
 Amazasp Arutiunian, Soviet ambassador to Canada, came to meet his father . He was previously in charge of the Economic Development Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Arutiuni was a highly educated and intelligent man .
 It was a luxurious mansion in a luxurious neighborhood, as I remembered from our trip in 1959 . The mansion was a luxury mansion in the luxurious neighborhood .
 Mission staff pleaded in vain with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to persuade the government not to sell the mansion . The Ministry of Finance prevailed .
 Gromyko was not yet a member of the Politburo in those days and could not exercise decisive influence . He was not . yet a . member of . the PolitBuro in that days .
 A few years later, they already had to pay more for our consulate to buy an unattractive mansion not far from the Metropolitan Museum . It's a few years after, the city's consulate was forced to buy a mansion .
 An important UN staff member invited us to a jazz club where Peggy Lee was performing . Peggy Lee performed at the jazz club in Cuba .
 I had heard a recording of her singing, but there, hearing her sing, I was stunned . I had never heard her sing before, but she was stunned to hear her voice .
 We had probably not slept for more than twenty-four hours since leaving Moscow . Jet lag was taking its toll, and jet lag had probably taken its toll .
 Igor’ suggested we go and rest. but since he had promised earlier to introduce us to Peggy Lee after the performance, I would not agree . Peggy Lee was introduced to the audience at the end of the performance . Igor suggested that he should retire after the show .
 "She sang one beautiful song after another, and they have stayed in my memory for the rest of my life," she says .
 We were forced to give in after Chechetkin promised to bring us to another Peggy Lee concert when we came back . Chechekin promised us that he would bring us back to Peggy Lee .
 The most important were his talks with United States Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson and with President Kennedy’s personal representative in charge of the crisis settlement, John McCloy .
 My father had known them both since his visit to the U.S. in January 1959 . The two men had known each other since their visits to the United States .
 At that time, Stevenson and his father spoke before an audience of almost a thousand people at the Lawyer’s Club of Chicago, where their jokes made their listeners laugh almost nonstop . Stevenson and my father's jokes made them laugh nonstop, Stevenson says .
 The serious topic of Soviet– U.S. relations was presented in an atmosphere of brilliant humor and universal satisfaction . The serious topics were presented in a brilliant humor .
 Troianovskii interpreted well and conveyed my father’s humor to the audience, says father-in-law . He says he hopes the audience will be able to hear his father's jokes .
 The pair's relationship was special, even better than mine with Stevenson, although his relationship with Stevenson was also very good . So our relationship was very special, and I was very good with Stevenson . The pair were very close friends and friends .
 Stevenson conducted himself well, although sometimes he did something unacceptable and tried to exercise special pressure . On the whole, Stevenson did well, but sometimes he tried to do something unacceptable .
 The former UN ambassador says he was forced to resign from his post as ambassador to the U.N. He says it was his post that forced him to do so .
 The UN ambassador must follow the orders of the State Department, even if he is Stevenson . The State Department must follow its orders even if it is Stevenson, it says .
 Officials sent him their instructions, and there was nothing else he could do . So the officials sent him his instructions, he could only wait for them .
 "I had been thinking nonstop about means to achieve a mutual agreement on monitoring the removal of the missiles," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Fidel Castro had already announced to the media and to U Thant that he would not allow any monitoring on Cuban territory, or even in Cuban territorial waters . Fidel Castro has already said he will not allow monitoring in Cuban territory .
 If the Cubans would not allow American inspectors in their 66 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW territory, we could not allow them to set foot on our ships either, while the Americans were demanding both . Meanwhile, if the U.S. refused to allow inspectors into their 66
 The Central Committee40 authorized me to try to persuade Fidel to agree to on-site inspections . The Central Party40 was authorized to try and persuade Fidel Castro to allow inspections .
 Knowing Fidel, I had a very good idea of how difficult, practically impossible, that would be . Knowing Fidel would be difficult, he had a good idea, he said .
 McCloy: McCloy understood that our most important goal was to find a compromise solution . McCloy said: "McCloy, of course, understood that we needed to find the compromise solution"
 "I grasped immediately but pretended not to notice. And lo, lo . behold, during our conversation he casually mentioned a very important idea, which I grasped immediately . He casually mentioned the idea, but pretended to not notice it .
 This was because it was possible that he had let the cat out of the bag accidentally . This is because it is possible that it could have been a mistake .
 In that case, he would immediately deny the idea and say that he had been misunderstood . He would then say he had misunderstood the idea, he said .
 "I believed that he had intentionally suggested a possible solution. But taking into account his experience and intellect, I believed that . He had intended to suggest a solution to the problem, he said .
 I wanted him to bring it up again, to avoid a situation in which it would seem as though I had asked him to agree to a scenario that, in fact, he himself had brought up, he said . I wanted to avoid the situation as though he had asked me to agree
 President Kennedy had a permanent connection with President Kennedy, which meant that our consent would immediately have the force of a bilateral agreement . Since he had the . consent, that meant that his consent would have the . force of an agreement, he said .
 The removal of the missiles could be subject to visual inspection by U.S. ships, he said . He repeated that if the worst came to the worst, the removal of missiles could also be subject .
 This phrase offered a real way out from a situation that had seemed hopeless, in which the U.S. had a pretext to attack Cuba . This phrase, or to be more precise, conveyed, the idea it conveyed, offered a way out of the situation .
 Moscow told him to try to persuade Fidel Castro to agree to on-site inspections of Cuba . He was supposed to be accompanied by UN observers, Red Cross, Latin American countries that were not hostile to Cuba .
 U.S. and Cuba could have submitted a joint document on behalf of each of the two powers . That would have accelerated the preparation and submission to the UN of an appropriate document .
 Havana would not agree to any type of on-site inspection unless inspections were also conducted in the U.S. to ensure the dismantling of the exile camps that were preparing to invade Cuba . The U.N. should also conduct the inspections in the United States, he says .
 It goes without saying that the United States would have categorically rejected such NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 67 mutual inspections, and that would have brought us to an impasse .
 If he got his own way in one respect, it would be psychologically easier for him to make concessions somewhere else . It would be easier for Mr Obama to get a deal with the media if he got it his way .
 It was not in his character to make concessions in every case, just as it was in the character of Ernesto Che Guevara, whom I also knew quite well .
 The opinions of Fidel and Che Guevara were especially likely to sway them . The opinion of Fidel is likely to be swayed by the opinions of Che and Fidel Castro .
 In Armenian che means “no,” in Che, Che's name Che means ‘no” Che . Che was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s and '70s .
 He was a man with a fine sense of humor, so he didn’t take offense but laughed merrily instead . ‘He was a great man,’ he said .
 Sometimes, it is only by demanding the maximum that you can achieve the minimum . Sometimes, you can't always get the maximum out of work .
 Fidel wanted to tell me in advance where he stood, because he made that speech on the morning of the day he was expecting me to arrive in Havana, Cuba . Fidel wanted me to tell him in advance, and I'm not surprised, he says .
 The Cuban leader changed the mood of the Cuban leadership, says President Obama . Obama's visit to Havana changed the tone of the country's relationship with Cuba, he says .
 It was a piece of sheer insolence, dictated by the State Department, of course . The State Department has been in the spotlight for months .
 "I made it clear that their demands were out of the question. In this way, I made this clear," he said . "In this way I made it . clear that they were out the question," he added .
 The talks took place at the Soviet Mission, although I was not present during the talks . So did the meetings at the Russian Mission, which took place in the 1980s .
 Only in the corridors of the corridors did I have a chance to meet McCloy and greet Stevenson as an old acquaintance . McCloy is a well-known figure in the film industry .
 Khrushchev and President Kennedy allegedly involved the Il-28 planes as well as the nuclear warheads and missiles . The planes were allegedly involved in the assassination of the Soviet Union's President Kennedy . The plane was allegedly used to carry out the assassination .
 Kennedy’s letter of 27 October mentions both “offensive missile bases” and “all systems that can be used for offensive purposes,” which, they argue, implies jet bombers as well .
 The Americans said they regarded both missiles and jet bombers as offensive weapons . The U.S. government said it regarded missiles and jets as an offensive weapon .
 Stevenson and McCloy insisted no agreement could be reached unless the issue of the removal of the Il-28 bombers from Cuba was resolved . The two sides insisted no deal was reached until the issue was resolved, but it was never resolved .
 It is clear that all the tactical advantage in the negotiations was on the United States side . The United States won the World Cup in Brazil in 2010 .
 The USSR had already dismantled its missiles, and the threat of a retaliatory strike from the island no longer existed . The threat of an attack on the island was no longer a threat .
 Extending the conflict in this way only played into Washington’s hands by giving it an opportunity to present new demands and abandon its previous concessions, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 McCloy suggested that missile removal could be visually confirmed on board Soviet ships by U.S. vessels . Mikoyan had told me of McCloy’s suggestion at a crucial moment in the crisis that the missile removal .
 There was a one-on-one between Kuznetsov and McCloy at McCloy’s summer house . McCloy: "There is a lot of respect for each other"
 McCloy told Kuznetsov that he had met with President Kennedy the day before in Washington . McCloy said he met with Kennedy the previous day in Washington, Washington .
 The latter was alarmed by an intelligence report that new Il-28 bombers were being assembled . The Soviet Union was worried by the intelligence report .
 McCloy says the U.S. government had paid attention to the submarines . McCloy: "The United States government has paid attention" McCloy said .
 Even if they had been spotted, they were in international waters, where vessels of any country had the right to be . I told him I knew nothing about submarines, but even if they were spotted, it was international waters .
 In accordance with your 1290 and 1306, I said we had no objections to letting the Americans see pictures of the dismantled missiles and those loaded on ships . I said that we had . no objections . We had no objection to letting them see pictures .
 I also said that we also would not object to U.S. vessels taking a close-range look at missiles transported on Soviet ships in the open sea .
 McCloy could not have forgotten that this was the solution he himself had proposed to Mikoyan . McCloy had proposed the solution to the problem of the problem .
 Most probably the issue of monitoring had already been discussed with Kennedy and his approval secured . Most probably, the issue was already discussed with . Kennedy .
 McCloy’s common sense did not appeal to somebody in Washington . It seems, however, as though McCloy's common sense didn't appeal .
 McCloy cleared all issues with McCloy, McCloy says . Probably this was not the president, since McCloy clears all issues . McCloy: "I'm not sure what happened to McCloy."
 McCloy was silent about any document that would have guaranteed nonaggression against Cuba . The next day McCloy said he was already silent about the document .
 Our ambassador to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseev, said later that Fidel had not planned to go to the airport .
 Fidel came to the airport with Che Guevara, Dorticós, and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez . Che died at the age of 71 .
 Mikoyan managed to weaken considerably Fidel's impression that there was a conspiracy of great powers at Cuba’s expense . By making such a statement, Mikoyans managed to weakened considerably Fidel .
 Fidel felt better because Moscow had openly supported his demands against the United States . Of course, that impression was not gone—and it was justified—and that's not gone .
 Moscow did not even know that it had supported Mikoyan's demands . In fact, at the time Moscow didn't even know it had backed his demands . The Kremlin later informed the Kremlin somewhat later .
 Khrushchev had set off on the path of concessions . When that demand was transmitted to Moscow, Washington apparently understood that .
 Kennedy made lifting the blockade against Cuba contingent on the USSR’s commitment to withdraw the Il-28 bombers . Kennedy lifted the blockade on Cuba in order to lift the Soviet Union's commitment .
 Bargain made it possible to withdraw the bombers within a month instead of right away . "Bargain worked in our favor. Admittedly, bargaining made it . It worked in the best way to get the bombers out of the U.S. right away, but not right away
 If we had reminded the Americans at the beginning, before the missiles were dismantled, that there was no agreement on withdrawing anything except the missiles, they probably would not have tried to extend the list by adding bombers and cutters to it .
 "We could have told them, firmly and immediately, that we would not allow them to add things to the agreement as their appetite grew. We could have said that we wouldn't let them add things," says David Cameron . "We would not have added things as they grew," says
 The bombers, though theoretically capable of carrying nuclear weapons, were not only classified as “light” but were also obsolete . After all, from a military standpoint the bombers were . considered ‘light’ and ‘obsolete”
 They could not have any apprehensions in this regard—to say nothing of the Komar cutters, they said . The Komar Cutters could not be apprehensions of this regard, they added .
 Kennedy needed all that to show the ‘domestic market’ how tough his stand was on Cuba and the Soviet Union . Kennedy needed to show that he was tough on Cuba .
 Of course, he must have been pressured by the hawks in government and military circles, he says . "Of course, [Obama] must have had to be pressured," he adds .
 "It created a new and significant obstacle to our talks with the Cubans," he says . "In my view, it created an obstacle to the negotiations," he adds . "It was the very moment when a breakthrough was possible"
 Usually, if the negotiators for the opposing side sense such a psychological nuance, they take advantage of it by all means available . Usually, they use the psychological nuance of the negotiation to gain leverage .
 Kennedy imposed a condition, the extension of the blockade, that Cuba would not have survived . Kennedy imposed the blockade as a condition that the Cuban government would not survive .
 The U.S. agreed in its radio address to the conditions stated in Khrushchev’s statement . And the United States agreed to the terms stated in the statement, the statement said .
 If the Soviet leader had insisted that was out of the question, Kennedy would probably not have pushed him that hard . If he had insisted, Kennedy probably would probably have not pushed him hard .
 He might have said something—for example, made a joke of those apologies for bombers, which indeed they were . But he might have made something, including a joke about those apologies .
 "We had no other way out. But when he raised the possibility of extending the blockade, we had no way out," he says .
 A misunderstanding developed concerning the Il-28 light bombers and the Komar cutters because of the stupid decision made by the Kremlin and our entire propaganda machine to use only expressions that had been approved and widely used rather than call a spade a .
 The expression “the weapons that you call offensive” was introduced . Instead of “offensive” the expression was introduced as “weapons that are offensive’
 The Kremlin had promised not to deliver surface-to-surface missiles . Such word play was pointless, since in a number of documents the Kremlin had said it would not deliver missiles in 2004 .
 The whole point of our tricks was to prove that the missiles had been delivered to defend Cuba and were, therefore, a ‘defensive weapon”— was lost . So the point of the tricks was lost, he says, to prove the missiles were delivered .
 Khrushchev would not abandon these positions even on the brink, when the entire world knew what had caused the crisis . Even so, Khrrushchev wouldn't abandon his positions even if the crisis was over, he says .
 In his telegrams and in his last radio message, he still did not use the word “missile” even though there precise definitions were necessary . In his final radio message he still didn't use the term "missile" in his final message .
 Sometimes the Ministry of Foreign Affairs prepared a basic document later “massaged” by Khrushchev himself and by other members of the Presidium . Sometimes the basic document was later "massaged" by the Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev dictated a text from scratch and gave it to those around him for discussion . The text was often shared with those around the Soviet leader .
 He did not attach much importance to such discussion; at best, he might grasp that a certain amount of stylistic editing was necessary . But he did attach little importance to the discussion .
 After the purge of the Presidium carried out by Khrushchev in June 1957, the new Presidium could not ensure a thorough and multifaceted discussion of everything Khrushvich wrote or said .
 In that sense, the Washington ExCom was an incomparably more effective and productive collective body . The Washington exCom was a more effective body than any other body .
 The inertia of agreeing with the first secretary that became traditional under Stalin in the middle of the 1930s was still a factor . Above all, the inertia of agreed with first secretary was still an important factor in Stalin .
 Debates took place only during the period of ‘collective leadership’ from March 1953 to June 1957 . Debates only took place between March 1953 and June 1957. Debates were held during that period .
 Mikoyan was the only person who continued to argue with Khrushchev both in private and at meetings of the Presidium, even after the ‘cult of personality’ was established .
 Khrushchev even writes, with obvious irritation, that Anastas Ivanovich always had his own opinion on every issue . Sergei Khrushvich even writes that he always had an opinion on all issues .
 The other members of the Presidium either did not have their own opinions or lacked courage to express their opinions in case they differed from those of their leader . Unfortunately, in reality, the other . members of . the Pres. Pres. either lacked courage or lacked sufficient courage . to express
 Khrushchev is unsparing in his description of the determination and strong will of Nikita Sergeevich Mikoyan . He says he lacked enough determination and firmness to suppress the Hungarian rebellion with one blow . He also notes that Mikoyans had no equal as a diplomat
 Khrushchev’s willpower was remarkable during the struggle for de-Stalinization and, thank God, he had it . He had it, and it was a good thing for him to have it .
 The virgin soil campaign, the imposition of maize production, the struggle against architectural excesses to promote mass housing construction . It gave rise to absurdity, however, when ordinary issues came up .
 It was ill-suited to handling extraordinary problems, like the missiles in Cuba, which required truly collective, calm, and thorough discussion . It was also ill-equipped to handle extraordinary problems like that in Cuba .
 Of course, I am using the term ‘Khrushchev’s personality cult’ with reservations here . Of course I am . using the . term “Khrushedchev” with reservations .
 Khrushchev’s intolerance of criticism in any shape or form . Except for Mikoyan, members of the Presidium preferred to say ‘yes” to say .
 Still, under Khrushchev the fear of repression characteristic of Stalin’s ‘cult of personality’ was gone . Still, there were still fears of repression in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev stopped the ‘Great Terror,’ and for that alone we should build him a monument in one of the main squares of our capital city . For that alone, he should be given a monument .
 The threat, if no longer deadly, was still very effective among those in power . The threat was still deadly among those who were still powerful .
 Kirichenko, Furtseva, Ignatov, and others were dropped from the list . "Unexpectedly,” they were dropped, “unexpectedly’s”
 Mikoyan was the only person to whom Khrushchev sometimes showed the list and asked for advice about it . He was only one of the only people to whom the list was shown to .
 Khrushchev read the list of Presidium members at the plenary session of the Central Committee . He had handwritten the names on a sheet of paper . The list was handwritten on a piece of paper by the Soviet leader .
 It turned out that he had merely forgotten to write down Kirilenko’s name . ‘I’m sorry,’ he said. ‘It was a mistake. It was just a mistake, he said .
 I cannot say that Kirilenko was a giant, indispensable to the high council, says Putin . Putin's deputy prime minister says he will always remember his predecessor as a giant .
 It is merely a detail that shows the degree of independence to which people at that level could aspire . It shows the level of independence that people could aspire to, says the author .
 Khrushchev’s American biographer wrote, “According to Adzhubei [a Soviet journalist] had a deciding vote in determining the makeup of the Central Committee and other leading bodies.” “Krushchev's son-in-law—Trans.
 Khrushchev’s one-man control of the Presidium membership was the main argument in favor of agreeing with everything the first secretary said . Khrushchevitch was the only reason to agree with everything he said .
 From my perspective, Khrushchev’s dismissal marked a big loss for the development of our society, but for the party elite it meant emancipation . From my . perspective, it marked a . big loss . for the . development of the . society, he said .
 In fairness, we should mention that even in the later years of Stalin, there were individual cases in which someone from the Politburo expressed disagreement or doubts . Even in Stalin's later years, there was individual cases of dissent .
 All those who ‘doubted’ sat in silence as the leader presented a proposal . The leader presented the proposal at the end of his speech .
 Of course, if Stalin continued to insist, everybody would have had to agree, but whether that happened depended on the issue and the leader’s mood . Whether that happened depends on the leader's mood .
 In other cases where he was insisting on an obviously absurd proposal, members of the Politburo would agree to set up a commission, which would meet once and then die quietly if no forceful reminder followed .
 Vasilii Stalin’s behavior reflected badly on his father, Stalin's son says . Stalin was dismissed as supreme air force commander because of his father's behavior . Stalin's behavior reflected bad on his dad, Stalin says .
 Stalin could appear to demonstrate even greater tolerance of the opinions of Politburo members than Khrushchev . Sometimes Stalin appeared to be more tolerant of the opinion of the members .
 Sometimes Stalin suggested an issue for genuine discussion, intending to test his ideas without disclosing them first . Sometimes Stalin wanted to test ideas without revealing them first, he said . Sometimes he suggested an idea for discussion without disclosing it .
 Khrushchev preferred to speak first, and in so doing he put paid to all discussion . He preferred not to speak, and put paid paid to discussion .
 "To put it simply, he usually had no doubt that his own ideas and decisions were correct," he says .
 In discussing the missile crisis, however, a freewheeling discussion was essential, as it had been when the decision was made to deliver the missiles to Cuba .
 The issue should have been discussed by experts, diplomats, consultants from the Central Committee, and KGB representatives, it has been said . The issue was discussed on an equal footing, the author says .
 Khrushchev’s personality and Kremlin traditions made freewheeling discussions practically impossible . Khrushchevitch's personality and . Kremlin traditions . made discussions impossible .
 The heads of such government agencies as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Committee of State Security, and even the apparatus of the CPSU Central Committee felt they had little freedom to express their opinions .
 Few of them were admitted to the meetings, and those who were admitted were there to provide information when asked . Few of the meetings were attended by police officers .
 There was no detailed, thorough discussion of texts as took place, for example, at the White House .
 Nobody could question the standard phrasing and clichés used in our propaganda or in the statements made by the leadership . This is why nobody could question any of these clichés . Nobody would question the standards used in the propaganda or statements made .
 Khrushchev’s own flights of imagination did not extend beyond the framework of accepted phrases . Unfortunately, he was not able to expand his imagination beyond the confines of the accepted phrases, writes David Perry .
 In countries with highly developed political systems and time-honored traditions, discussions take a different form . In countries such as Russia, Russia's relationship with the U.S. has been strained for years .
 Political leaders in the upper ranks of the apparatus are joined by those in charge of the largest organizations . These form the circle of main actors—main in terms of a specific decision or result that an analyst is trying to explain .
 Some are required to participate, while others may be invited or get there through their own efforts . Some may be required or invited to participate .
 The central arena is surrounded by concentric circles that embrace lower ranks of officials in the executive branch of government, the media, nongovernmental organizations, and the public . The circles are then surrounded by circles of circles that, respectively, embrace officials in government, media and nongo
 The struggle in the outer circles helps create the atmosphere in which decisions are made by players capable of influencing the government and the actions taken in regard to the issue that is on the agenda .
 It is clear that in the secret stages of a discussion the “concentric circles” are narrower . The author's view of the world's most powerful institutions is that of the United States .
 Moscow-Washington talks took place in May 1962 and October 1962 . The discussions were held in Moscow from May to October 1962 and in Washington from 16 to 22 October .
 Kennedy gave instructions to tape discussions secretly . Historians and historians are lucky that Kennedy taped the discussions secretly, he says .
 Nobody suspected Malin of leaking information, but nobody suspected him of leaking it . Malin was not suspected of leaking anything, but of being a journalist .
 The text of the agreement should not have included the clichés of earlier public and private statements, which bore the stamp of inertia typical of standard propaganda devices . The text should have been more careful to avoid using clichés, the author says .
 It is amazing that they did not also demand the removal of the tanks or the Kalashnikov rifles supplied to Cuba . It's amazing that the Cuban government did not want the tanks removed .
 A strict interpretation of the wording of Khrushchev’s letters would have allowed them to do that, since “the weapons that you call offensive” is a label that can be applied to almost anything . “The weapons that [Khrrushchev] call offensive
 Raymond Garthoff takes responsibility for the Il-28 bombers . He personally wrote a memorandum on 29 October, approved by Alexis Johnson and Dean Rusk, reiterating that Kennedy had mentioned the bombers in his address to the nation .
 Kennedy agreed with the way the question was posed at the ExCom meeting on 2 November . Earlier, on 20 October, he had said that the bombers “did not worry him” and he was not going to insist on their removal .
 He was convinced by the reminder that he had mentioned them in his address to the nation . Apparently, he was convinced that he was talking about them .
 Khrushchev had not mentioned the bombers in his telegrams of 27 October, with which Kennedy agreed, thus making a resolution possible . Kennedy agreed to a resolution, but not mention the bombers .
 The spirit of the negotiations had focused on the missiles . Although interpretations can differ, the spirit of negotiations had been focused on missiles .
 The bombers had been handed over to the Cuban air force, it is said . This had not caused any crisis, it was said .
 I think that Philip Brenner is not quite accurate when he writes that all the Il-28 bombers were included in the list of weapons that were supposed to be removed from the list . For this reason, I think this is a mistake .
 He was almost the first to call readers’ attention to Cuba as a participant in the crisis . I value his work highly, not least because he was almost first to point out Cuba .
 The initial list of weapons scheduled for removal included only missiles . Even so, the initial list had only missiles, but the initial plan was to remove missiles .
 It would be more accurate to say that the bombers came up when the American side was extending the list as part of the negotiations and was intended to make Moscow remove as much as possible . The U.S. wanted to extend the list of bombers to Moscow, but wanted to make it
 If Khrushchev had persisted in refusing to discuss the topic, Mikoyan did . Washington would most probably have swallowed the pill, he says .
 Cuba would have had to negotiate with the Cuban government, NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 79, which would in itself have been a political gain for Cuba . The Cuban government would have to negotiate a deal with the government .
 Washington knew they were taking advantage of wording that the Kremlin had produced to its own detriment . After all, those in Washington knew that the wording was taken advantage of .
 The persistence of a negotiator often rests on his own sense of being right or wrong . Ultimately, the persistence of the negotiator often depends on his self-belief, he says .
 Over the years their speed, armament, and avionics appeared to give the USSR an opportunity to supply them to its allies in the Third World instead of scrapping them . Initially, they had been designed with that goal in mind, but over the years they appeared to have been designed
 President Kennedy included the Il-28 bombers in the list of weapons mentioned in his first radio and television address . McNamara’s information was in response to the information .
 The subsequent correspondence on “weapons that you call offensive’s offensive” no longer mentioned them . The correspondence no longer mentions them .
 Idlewild Airport, later named after John F Kennedy, is a state of anxiety . Idlewild airport was named after JFK's first airport in 1961 .
 Stevenson’s letter, which Mikoyan refused to accept, was rejected . Stevenson's letter was also rejected by the senator . Stevenson wrote a letter to the senator, urging him to accept it .
 President Mikoyan had left for the airport and the president had been convinced by the ExCom . A call from Washington again raised the idea of bringing up the bombers .
 Stevenson had forgotten about the Il-28 bombers . Admittedly, Garthoff confirms that Stevenson really had forgotten them .
 Kennedy, too, probably recalled them only after he was reminded by Rusk and Thompson . Kennedy, who was in office at the time, may have been in the middle of the night .
 The U.S. had aerial photographs of both the arrival and assembly of the bombers, but no protests took place at that time . Even before 16 October the United States had aerial photos of the arrival .
 The Soviet Union supplied Il-28 bombers and Komar cutters to Indonesia, India, Egypt, and certain other countries .
 Komar cutters had missiles with a range of thirty to forty nautical miles and could be used only to guard coastlines, so their delivery to Cuba did not cause any anxiety in Washington either . Komar Cutters were delivered to Cuba with missiles with range of 30 to 40 n
 The delivery of MiG-21s did not go down because the MiGs had a short range . Nor did the delivery of modern fighterbombers capable of carrying nuclear weapons . Probably the Americans did not object because MiGs were short-range .
 Later, after the crisis ended, the U.S. began to fortify the antiaircraft defenses of its southern coast precisely because the MiG-21s were capable of carrying nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy was accused of being 'spineless' by people who insisted on a strike against Cuba even after Khrushchev had agreed to remove the missiles . Another reason that the Il-28 bombers became a matter of principle for Kennedy was the accusations of his being ‘spineless”
 I briefly mention preparations that could have led to World War III, meaning they were designed to attack the Soviet Union . The preparations could have been made in advance of a possible attack on Russia .
 50 percent of the U.S. Strategic Air Force was kept in a state of readiness at the airfields . Even during normal times, 50 percent was kept ready during the war .
 Pilots were to be ready to take their seats in the cockpits within a few minutes . Pilots will be ready for takeoff from the airfield in a matter of minutes .
 The crews of the remaining bombers were supposed to be within close . reach of their planes, so that they could take off as soon as the order was given . The crews were meant to be . within close reach of the planes .
 Powers, commander in chief of the Strategic Air Command, gave additional orders to cancel all events not associated with emergency preparedness . Powers: "Cancellations are not related to preparedness" Powers: All events are canceled .
 Khrushchev ordered B-52 bombers with nuclear payloads already patrolling the arctic waters . The night before a Soviet missile had been launched against a U-2 for the first time, a U.2 missile was launched .
 LeMay ordered F-100 fighter-bombers with Zuni missiles ready to strike S-75 antiaircraft batteries in Cuba . LeMay also ordered F.100 fighter bombers with missiles made ready to hit the S.75 anti-aircraft batteries .
 Dino Brugioni told me in June 2002 that seventy-five cities in the Soviet Union were supposed to be destroyed in the NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 81 first U.S. nuclear strike . Dino told me by telephone that 70% of Soviet Union cities would be destroyed
 General LeMay headed the Air Force in case of an attack on the Soviet Union . The plans were made in the wake of a Soviet Union invasion .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara supported a plan to strike only military installations and weapons rather than cities with civilian populations . McNamara hoped that the ‘retaliatory strike’ would also leave United States cities alone .
 Soviet missiles were also aimed not only at military installations . I am afraid that the Soviet missiles may have been aimed at military sites . I'm afraid that they were aimed at not only military installations but at other targets .
 After 22 October, the only step taken toward a “full state of alert” was to cancel all military leave . The only step to a ‘full state-of-alert’ is to cancel military leave, officials say .
 "In line with the laws of radiation, which are sufficiently well known, the rest of the world could have expected a death that would have been slower but no less agonizing," he said . "In fact, I could have been expected a slower death," he added .
 From executive committee [and given in transliterated English in the original], as ispolkom has quite different, purely Soviet connotations. From executive . committee .
 Admiral Tojo, head of Japan’s General Staff, planned the surprise attack against the United States military base at Pearl Harbor, which took place on 7 December . The attack ensured Japan's freedom of action in the Pacific Ocean .
 Garthoff has spoken and written on his views more than once, including in a speech at a conference held in Antigua, West Indies, on 3–7 January 1993 .
 Admittedly, he acknowledges that no one can be certain, and the possibility of escalation remained . The possibility of escalating remained, he says .
 Garthoff relies on the opinion of a cynic, such as Fedor Burlatskii, a political and social commentator . I am afraid that GarThoff relies upon the opinion . Fedor is a social commentator, and says he is not a fan of Garth
 Anastas Mikoyan suggested taking aerial photographs while flying along the Cuban coast, without violating its air space . The Cuban president suggested that he would fly along the coast without violating air space in Cuba .
 Kennedy agreed that would be the best option but said that contemporary photography was not yet sufficiently advanced . Kennedy said that modern photography is not sufficiently advanced to take a picture of the world .
 The advent of reconnaissance satellites automatically overcame that problem . "Satellite reconnaissance satellites" was a problem in the 1960s, but it was never solved .
 Alexander L George and William E Simons, eds., The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy , 114. Alexander L . George and . William E . Simons . eds. eds . The limits of coercive diplomacy are the limits of the limits .
 In August 1942, at the request of his son Volodia, his father interceded on his behalf, asked the air force to send him to the most dangerous front line of the day—Stalingrad . His son was a fighter pilot who had just turned eighteen and whose
 Volodia was killed there in aerial combat against overwhelmingly superior German air power . Volodya was killed in the battle, which was fought in the Battle of Stadion .
 Due to a misunderstanding, Oleg Troianovskii, the interpreter, and myself had been waiting for each other for a long time at different entrances to Macy’s (I simply did not know that there were several entrances) We arrived at the airport forty minutes later than
 My father was sitting in the airplane; he did not say anything to me, but his glance was eloquent enough enough .
 The plane sat there for another hour with the engines running, waiting for a signal that the runway was free . Plane sat there with engines running waiting for the runway to free .
 First one engine caught fire, then another caught fire over the ocean . Then, over the coast, it caught fire again .
 The extinguisher system put out the fire, but it was no longer possible to start the engines . Firefighters had to use the extinguisher to extinguish the fire .
 Anastas Mikoyan's stay in the United States and Cuba in November 1962 . I bear no responsibility for Khrushchev’s stories . I must add here that I . bear no . responsibility for Sergei Khrushvic’�s . stories .
 These stories are based on his imagination and partly on documents, but in no way on anything he may have heard from me . These stories were based on documents but not any of what I heard from him, says author .
 Both in Stalin’s day and under Khrushchev, my father used to say ‘the Central Committee’ rather than name the party leader . Both in his day and . under Khruschev, he said “the Central . Committee” rather than naming the
 The U.S. did not know for a long time whether nuclear warheads had been delivered to Cuba . It is interesting to note that the United States didn't know for years if nuclear warheads were delivered to the island .
 I knew from my father that they were and said so, without mentioning my father . "I knew from [his father that] they were," he said, "without mentioning his father," he added .
 I thought those present would understand me and accept my point of view, but that did not happen . I thought that those present were understanding me and accepting my point-pointing view, he said .
 General Gribkov set all doubts to rest at the conference in Havana in Cuba in the 1990s . Different sources presented different opinions right up to that point .
 "We were supposed to fly to Montreal and then to Havana," she says . She says she was told she was flying to Havana, Cuba, then to Montreal, then Havana .