 The archives were certain to contain some real surprises, historian says . But what this meant to a historian is that the archives were likely to contain real surprises .
 President Kennedy's closest associates were surprised-even incredulous-at the disclosure . Indeed, some of the Kennedy aides were surprised at the revelation .
 eighteen tapes, including eight tapes of official ""ExCom"" meetings, relate directly to the missile crisis . They cover the period from July 30, 1962 to November 8, 1963 . Eight of the tapes relate to the crisis .
 There is also a dictabelt containing the President's reflections on the crisis- the only known evidence of this sort of reflective diary-keeping by Kennedy .
 The first missile crisis tape- or extracts from it, together with an 87-page ""sanitized"" transcript- was released last year by the Kennedy Library . The tape was released along with a transcript .
 The transcript, sections of which are presented here, covers what was 1.5 million words . The transcript is presented here .
 International Security, Summer 1985 0162-2889/85/0164-40 $02.50/1 C 1985 .
 Two and a half hours of conversation recorded in the White House on October 16, 1962 . The conversation was recorded in 1962 .
 President Kennedy had just found out about the missiles earlier that morning . President Kennedy found out that the missiles had been launched earlier that day .
 The other documents presented here are not quite as unusual, but are still very revealing . The documents are not as unusual as the other ones .
 President Kennedy gave his famous speech on October 22 announcing the existence of the missiles and outlining the measures the United States was taking to deal with the problem . The group of advisers he had brought together at the beginning of the crisis was officially designated the ""Executive Committee of the National Security Council"
 The first major revision relates to the issue of a trade involving the American missiles in Turkey . The U.S. missile trade with Turkey is a major issue in the region .
 Many writers have assumed that President Kennedy refused to countenance a trade involving the Jupiters in Turkey . Many writers assumed, on the basis of very explicit claims by the participants, that .
 Bernstein backed away from the more extreme claims he had made in earlier articles . He still tended to minimize the degree to which the President was committed to the idea of a trade .
 He presented Kennedy as ""wavering"" on October 27 between war and peace, as ""prepared to countenance a trade"" only ""at a few points"" when ""he seemed desperate" Kennedy was presented as "wavering" between war .
 Robert Kennedy "was a dove from the start," says Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. According to Robert Kennedy, Kennedy was a dove . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 If you bomb the missile sites and airports, he said, 'you are covering most of Cuba' If you bombed missile sites, airports, you are covering 'most of Cuba', he said .
 The passage Schlesinger alludes to was introduced by Robert Kennedy raising the issue of an invasion . Robert Kennedy's comments seemed to point in that direction .
 Full transcript and audiocassette containing extracts from the original tape are available by mail from the Kennedy Library . Extracts are published below; the full transcript and audio cassette versions are available .
 His opposition to the blockade was also reflected in the ExCom minutes . His opposition was reflected in ExCom Minutes minutes .
 President Obama said in October that it was better to avoid confronting the Russians by stopping one of their ships and to react by attacking the missiles already in Cuba .
 All of this may force us to reconsider some traditional judgments about Robert Kennedy's moderation and moral sensibilities, perhaps .
 Some standard claims about his attitude during the crisis merit close examination . For this reason alone, some standard claims . should be close examination of his attitude .
 A third point has to do with the military significance of the missiles in Cuba . The missiles were launched in Cuba in the 1960s .
 McNamara "did not deny that there was military significance to the deployment,"" and that the actual impact on the military balance did not become an issue of contention . There is the claim, made most recently by Raymond Garthoff, that even .
 Robert Kennedy's moderation from the very outset was made even more strongly in the televised series based on Schlesinger's biography that was shown early in 1985 in 1985 .
 The script for the episode dealing with the Cuban missile crisis showed both of the Kennedy brothers as eager from the start for a negotiated solution . In fact the script for this episode showed both the brothers eager for a solution .
 The issue did play a certain role in the discussion. And it is clear that the issue did . And it was clear that .
 McNamara's view was the basis for his belief that the missiles posed not a ""military problem"" but simply a ""domestic, political problem"" This assumption lay at the heart of his thinking about what should be done .
 These documents force us to make specific revisions of this sort that these documents are so valuable . But it is not simply because they force us out of things like this, it's because they're so valuable. It's because of the value of these documents, the government says .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "These are fascinating because they give us such a direct and unfiltered sense for these events" He says they give a rare glimpse of the disorderly, unsystematic way in which things were worked out .
 Some of the hyperbole lavished on this episode-""this combination of toughness and restraint, of will, will, nerve and wisdom, so brilliantly controlled, so matchlessly calibrated""17- is almost embarrassing to read in the light of the evidence . Myths are easy enough to
 Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Jr., A Thousand Days, 841. This is from the concluding paragraph in the chapter on the missile crisis in A Thousand days .
 General Marshall Carter, the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, said that the CIA estimate was ""that these could be fully operational within two weeks,"" although maybe a single missile would be operational much sooner . The CIA estimate is that the missiles could be operational within weeks .
 McNamara, it seems, was uncertain about whether the crucial time constraint was six hours or two weeks . All this strikes the reader as very unclear; and even at the time, McNamara seemed uncertain about the time .
 A transcript of a free and fairly unstructured discussion can be revealing as much for what it does not contain . A document as complete as this transcript evidently is, recording a free discussion can reveal as much as what it contains .
 Everyone has heard the story about Sherlock Holmes and the significant episode of the dog in the night . Sherlock Holmes is a detective who solves the mystery of the case .
 The October 16 transcript is full of ""significant episodes"" of this sort of episodes . The transcript contains several episodes of this kind of episode .
 There is the question of what the U.S. government knew about Soviet command and control .
 McNamara's unwillingness to attack Cuba was rooted in his fear that Soviet control over the missile sites might be loose, and in the event of an attack the local commander might decide on his own initiative to launch his missiles against American cities .
 We just ""don't know"" what kinds of communication and control system the Soviets had over the missiles in Cuba scarcely seems adequate . But his comment that we just ""doesn't know" what kind of communication system was used by the Soviets in Cuba .
 One wonders whether there was any reaching down into the bureaucracy for answers to questions of this sort . One wonders if there were any reaching into bureaucracy to answer such questions .
 Historical analysis proceeds largely by focusing on these little issues, and practically any project worth doing involves scores of such second-order problems . Historical analysis in fact proceeds mostly by focusing upon little issues .
 This mode of operation reflects as much as anything else the prejudice of the professional historian-or really the intellectual style of the discipline . This mode, however, reflects the prejudices of the historian, historian says .
 A line of ellipses between sections represents material in the documents not selected for reprint here . The author of this article includes material from the U.S. government .
 Page numbers refer to pages in original transcriptions in Kennedy Library . Page numbers at end of sections refer to page numbers in transcriptions of Kennedy Library pages .
 It's one that we, all of us, had not really believed the Soviets could, uh, carry this far . It was one of many things we had not believed the Soviet Union could carry out this far.
 "We have to set in motion a chain of events that will eliminate this base. Now, uhm, I do think we have to . Set in motion, he said .
 The questioning becomes whether we do it by sudden, unannounced strike of some sort, or build up the crisis to the point where the other side has to consider very seriously about giving in, or, or even the Cubans themselves, uh, take some action .
 There is no such thing, I think, as unilateral action by the United States. The thing that I'm, of course, very conscious of is that there is no . No such thing ... unilateral action .
 Any action that we take will greatly increase the risks of direct action involving, uh, our other alliances and our other forces in other parts of the world . It's so involved with 42 allies and confrontation in many places that any action is likely to increase the risk, he says .
 Uhm, so I think we, we have to think very hard about two major, uh, courses of action as alternatives as alternatives . Uhm .
 The point where we , that is the, uh, overriding, overriding necessity to take all the risks that are involved doing that. The point . is the overwhelming, overwhelming necessity to ... do that," he says .
 "With or without such an invasion, the U.S. will eliminate this particular base or any other such base that is established," he says .
 "We ourselves are not moved to general war, we're simply doing what we said we would do if they took certain action," says President Obama . "We are not moving towards general war," says Obama .
 The other would be, if we have a few days-from the military point of view, if . we have the whole time-uh, then I would think that, uh, there would be another course of action, a combination of things that . we might wish to consider,
 OAS' procedure immediately for prompt action to make it quite clear that the entire hemisphere considers that the Rio Pact has been violated . Uhm, first, uh, that we stimulate the OAS', he says .
 The OAS could constitute itself an organ of consultation promptly, although maybe, it may take two or three days to get, uh, instructions from governments and things of that sort . It may take a couple of days for the OAS to come up with its own decision .
 The OAS could, at any moment, take action to insist to the Cubans that an OAS inspection, uh, team be permitted to come and look directly at these sites, provide assurance to the hemisphere . The team could also be allowed to inspect the sites .
 "That will undoubtedly be turned down, but it will be another step in building up the, uh, building a position," he says . "It's a step in the right direction," he adds .
 I think also that we ought to consider getting some word to Castro, perhaps through the Canadian ambassador in Havana or through, uh, his representative at the United Nations . Uh, I think perhaps the . ambassador would be the best, the better channel to get to Castro privately and tell him
 President Obama should tell Castro Castro, "This kind of a base is intolerable and not acceptable" CNN's John Sutter says Castro's "base is intolerable"
 The time has now come when he must take the interests of the Cuban people, says President Obama . He must now break clearly with the Soviet Union, he says .
 I think there are certain military actions that we might well want to take straight away, says President Obama . And I think certain military, uhm, uh, uh- uh, actions that might well be taken straight away .
 Unless we feel that it's better, more, more desirable to go to a general national emergency so that we have complete freedom of action, we will not be able to go into a general emergency. Unless we do so, we may have to go ahead with a national emergency, we
 If we announce, at the time that we announce this development-and I think we do have to announce this . Some time this week-uh, we announce that we are conducting a surveillance of Cuba, over Cuba, and we will enforce our right to do so .
 "We reinforce our forces in the southeastern part of the United States-whatever is necessary from the military point of view to be able to give, to deliver an overwhelming strike at any of these installations"
 "MIGs or bombers that might make a pass at Miami or at the United States," he says . "And, uh, also, also ... to take care of any ... MIGs ... or bombers"
 "I'll assume that we can move on this line at the same time to interrupt all air traffic from free world countries going into Cuba, insist to the Mexicans, the Dutch, that they stop their planes from coming in"
 Tell the British, who, and anyone else who's involved at this point, that, uh, if they're interested in peace, they've got to stop their ships from Cuban trade, CNN's John Sutter says .
 CNN's John Sutter says a "forceful blockade" is not possible without isolating Cuba . Sutter: A forceful blockade of Cuba would be possible . He says it's possible to isolate Cuba completely without a forceful blockade .
 I think it would be important to use the, uh, consider calling in General Eisenhower,3 giving him a full briefing before a public announcement is made as to the situation .
 Khrushchev may not himself really understand that or believe that, but he may not . Mr Khrushiev may not have himself really understood that or . believe that he did .
 "I think we'll be facing a situation that could well lead to general war," he says . "We have an obligation to do what has to be done but do it in a way that gives, uh, everybody a chance to put the down before it gets too hard"
 "I naturally need to think about this very hard for the next several hours, uh, what I and my colleagues at the State Department can do about it," he says .
 Mr President, there are a number of unknowns in this situation I want to comment upon, and, in relation to them, I would like to outline very briefly some possible military alternatives and ask General Taylor to expand upon them . Mr President .
 Before commenting on either the unknowns or outlining some military alternatives, there are two propositions I would suggest that 3.3.3 . 3.4.5.5 . 4.4 .
 If we are to conduct an air strike against these installations, or against any part of Cuba, we must agree now that we will schedule that prior to the time these missile sites become operational, says Obama .
 If they're launched there is almost certain to be chaos in part of the east coast or the area, uh, in a radius of six hundred to a thousand miles from Cuba . "I do not believe we can state we can knock them out before they can be launched," he says
 I would submit the proposition that any air strike must be directed not solely against missile sites, but against the missile sites plus the airfields, plus the aircraft which may not be on the airfield but hidden by that time . All potential nuclear storage sites must be targeted, he says .
 It is not just a strike against the missile sites; and there would be potential casualties of Cubans, not of U.S. citizens . It would be associated with it, not just with the missile strike .
 "It seems to me these two propositions, uh, should underlie our, our discussion," he says . It seems to be that the two propositions should be underlined .
 "We would be ready for the start of such an air strike within, within a matter of days," says President Vladimir Putin .
 If it were absolutely essential, it could be done almost literally within a matter of hours . But it could also be done within hours .
 I believe the chiefs would prefer that it be deferred for a matter of days, but we are prepared for that quickly . We are prepared to that quickly. I believe that it would be delayed for a few days,’s the boss .
 The air strike could continue for a matter of days following the initial day, if necessary . If necessary, the air strikes could continue following the first day of the strike .
 There would be some political discussions taking place either just before the air strike or both before and during. Uh, presumably .
 In any event, we would be prepared, following the air strike, for an air, invasion, both by air and by sea . That would be possible if the political environment made it desirable or necessary at that time .
 Associated with this air strike undoubtedly should be some degree of mobilization . The air strike is likely to be followed by some sort of mobilization.
 I would think of the mobilization coming not before the air strike but either concurrently with or somewhat following, say possibly five days afterwards, depending upon the possible invasion requirements . The mobilization would come not before an air strike, but perhaps concurrently with .
 The character of the mobilization would be such that it could be carried out in its first phase at least within the limits of the authority granted by Congress, the author says . "The character of [the mobilization would] be such ... within the . limits of Congress," he says .
 General Taylor outlines his choice for the president of the United States in a sketchly sketchy statement .
 U.S. President Barack Obama was impressed with the importance of getting a strike with all the benefit of surprise, he says . "We're impressed, Mr President, with the great importance of ... getting a, uh, a strike," he says. "Mr President"
 The other optimum would be to get every missile before it could, becomes operational, the secretary said . Uh, that, that . That desire runs counter to the strong point the secretary made if the other . point .
 The timing of the readiness is going to be so, uh, difficult that we'll never have the, the exact permanent timing . Uh, practically, I think the,   knowledge of the ... timing of ... readiness is so difficult that it's so difficult to predict .
 "What we'd like to do is to look at this new photography, I think-and take any additionaland try to get the, the layout of the targets in as near an optimum, uh, position as possible, and then take 'em out without any warning whatsoever"
 That does not preclude, I don't think, Mr Secretary, some of the things you've been talking about, says Mr Secretary . Mr Secretary says: "That doesn't preclude some of what you're talking about"
 I'm having all the responsible planners in this afternoon, Mr President, at four o'clock, to talk to 'em and get their best judgment' President Obama says he's having a meeting with the planners at 4pm .
 A naval blockade is needed to stop the flow of offensive weapons into Syria, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'Once we have destroyed as many offensive weapons as possible, we should, should prevent any more coming in'
 "I'm thinking in terms of three phases. So, really, the, in point of time, I'm, thinking in . terms of time," she says .
 "We get, get the right posture on the part of the target, so we can do the best job. One, a, an initial pause of some sort while we get completely ready," he said .
 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton: "We know of nuclear sites that we know of. Then, virtually concurrently, a air strike against, as the secretary said, a strike against missiles, airfields, uh, nuclear sites"
 I'd then start this continuous reconnaissance, the list of names you had, continue over Cuba. I would then start a continuous reconnaissance of Cuba. The list would then continue over the island .
 The decision can be made as we mobilize, uh, with the air strike as to whether we invade or not . Then, then, then the decision can't be made, he says .
 "It may be of some interest to know what he says about this, if he says anything," she says . "Uh, it may be some interest, if you know anything," he says .
 I might say incidentally, sir, that you delay anything else you have to do at this point . I might also say that you should delay any other things you've had to do with this .
 "I don't believe, myself, that the critical question is whether you get a particular missile before it goes off," he says . "If they shoot those missiles we are in general nuclear war," he adds .
 In other words, the Soviet Union has got quite a different decision to make . In other . words, it has got a different . decision to decide whether to take part in the West .
 Bob Greene: "I'm not sure that this is, uh, necessarily the precise element, Bob. So, I'm ... not sure ... that's not necessarily the ... precise element."
 Dean Obeidallah: "Our time should be based on the assumption it is, Dean. Well, I would strongly emphasize that I think our time is based on that, Dean."
 "We don't know what kinds of communications the Soviets have with those sites," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 I suggest that if we're talking about an air attack, I believe we should consider it only on the assumption that we can carry it off before these become operational . This is why I suggest we should be careful not to carry off an air strike before they become operational, he says .
 Short range missiles could be used for short range missiles against the U.S. State Department says .
 Of course, I don't see how we could prevent further ones from coming in by submarine, says David Cameron . 'I'm not sure how we can prevent further attacks by submarine,' he says .
 The only way to prevent them coming in, quite frankly, is to say you'll take them out the moment they come in. Well, I think the only way of preventing them coming into is to stop them .
 You'll take them out and carry on open surveillance and you'll have a policy to take them in if they come in . You'll carry on surveillance and carry out open surveillance, say police officers .
 If there are nuclear warheads associated with the launchers, you must assume there will be aircraft . If there is a nuclear weapon associated with aircraft, there will also be a nuclear missile launcher .
 Even if there are not nuclear warheads associated with aircraft, you must assume that those aircraft have high explosive potential . Even though there are no nuclear warheads, aircraft are thought to have potential .
 McCone5 suggested some weeks ago that one thing Mr Khrushchev may have in mind is that he knows that we have a substantial nuclear superiority . Still, about why the Soviets are doing this, uhm, Mr McCone 5 suggested some .
 Uhm, for the first time, I'm beginning really to wonder whether maybe maybe Mr Khrushchev is entirely rational about Berlin. Uhm. I'm starting to wonder if maybe maybe he's entirely rational, I think .
 They may be thinking that they can either bargain Berlin and Cuba against each other, or that they could provoke us into a kind of action in Cuba which would give them an umbrella for them to take action with respect to Berlin .
 If they could provoke us into taking the first overt action, then the world would be confused and they would have justification for making a move somewhere else .
 "I must say I don't really see the rationality of, uh, the Soviets' pushing it this far," he says . "They grossly misunderstand the importance of Cuba to this country," he adds .
 "It's important, I think, to recognize that they did make this decision, as far as our estimates now go, in early summer, and, this has been happening since August," she says . "It was important, it was important to recognize this decision," she said .
 Tass statement of September 12, which the experts attribute very strongly to Khrushchev himself, is all mixed up on this point, says CNN's John Defterios .
 It has a rather explicit statement, ""The harmless military equipment sent to Cuba designed exclusively for defense, defensive purposes," it says .
 The president of the United States and the U.S. military, the military of any country know what means of defense are. The president and the American military, he says, are responsible for protecting the nation .
 The rest, as the secretary says, has many comparisons between Cuba and Italy, Turkey and Japan . The rest of the secretary of state says, "There are many comparisons" between the two countries .
 It's conceivable the nuclear warheads for these launchers are not yet on Cuban soil . It's not likely, but it's conceivable that the warheads are on Cuba's soil .
 It's perfectly possible that this, that they are in that sense a bluff, they are bluffing . It's possible that they may be bluffing, but it's still possible they are trying to make a case .
 The only thing I'd, would say is that, uh, this alternative course of, of warning, getting public opinion and telling people in NATO and everything like that, would appear to have the danger of getting us wide out in the open and forcing the Russians to take a, uh
 "Quick action" might give them a chance to back off and not do anything. Whereas, uh, a, a quick action ... might ... give them ... back off, not doing anything," she says .
 The difficulties-I, I, share the secretary of the treasury's feeling a little bit- the difficulties of organizing the OAS and NATO . The amount of noise we would get from our allies saying that, uh, they can live with Soviet MRBMs, why can't we
 CNN.com: "I'm warning everybody. But, of course, warning them, uh, it seems to me, is warning everybody"
 President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the White House . The president says he's not going to announce that he's going to take them out of office in four days .
 "They may announce within three days they're going to have warheads on 'em," he says . "If we come and attack, they'll go and fire them," he adds . The U.S. has not responded to the threat of a possible attack .
 "Of course, we then announce, well, if they do that, then we're going to attack with nuclear weapons," says President Obama . "We then announce ... well, well then we go to attack," says Obama .
 I would think this business about the Soviet reaction, that there, that might be helpful, uh, if we could maybe take some ... war preparation type of action that would show them that we're ready if they want to start anything, without what you might, with starting anything .
 We ought to meet tonight again at six, consider these various, uh, proposals . I think we ought to, what I say is, is,  after this meeting this afternoon, we should meet again .
 "We can't wait two weeks while we're getting ready to, to roll. So it may be that we just have to, we can't . We may be ready to roll," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "We're certainly going to do number one; we're going to take out these, uh, missiles," he says . "We'll certainly go to number one," he adds .
 Questions will be whether, which, what I would describe as number two, which would be a general air strike, will be the question . Uh, the questions will be if, which ... would be the questions .
 You want to be clear, Mr President, whether we have definitely decided against a political track, says Mr President . Mr President. Mr President said: "You want to know whether we've definitely decided ... not to be ... political track"
 "You're never sure of having, absolutely of getting everything down there. You never know of having" "everything down there," says coach Mark Hughes .
 Joint Chiefs: "It would be a mistake to take this very narrow, selective target" "It invited reprisal attacks and it may be detrimental," says secretary of state .
 "There is every, just as good reason for them to give nuclear capability to these bases," he says . "Now if the, uh, Soviets have been willing to give ... warheads to these missiles, there is every ... good reason"
 We don't think we'd ever have a chance to take 'em again, so that we lose this, the first strike surprise capability . The first strike strike capability is the first surprise capability, the U.S. says .
 "If it really threatens the United States, then take it right out with one hard crack," says Obama . "Take it out with a hard crack. If it threatens the U.S. Then take it out," he says .
 The first is what I would call the political course of action, in which we, uh, follow some of the possibilities that Secretary Rusk mentioned this morning by approaching Castro, by approaching Khrushchev, by discussing with our allies . The first step is what Rusk says is to
 This seemed likely to lead to no satisfactory result, and it almost stops subsequent military action . This seemed to be likely to result in no satisfactory results, says CNN's John Defterios .
 It's not twenty sorties or fifty sorties, but probably several hundred sorties . "It's not 20 sorties ... or 50 sorties," he says. "I'm not sure what sorties are," he adds .
 It's very difficult to do so when we lack certain intelligence that we hope to have tomorrow or the next day . It's difficult to keep track of the situation when it's not clear when it comes to intelligence, police say .
 It seems to be almost certain that any one of these forms of direct military action will lead to a Soviet military response of some type some place in the world . "It seems to me almost certain" any form of direct . military action is likely to lead to the Soviet response .
 "We should recognize that possibility, and, moreover, we must recognize it in a variety of ways," he says . "But I think we should recognize it," he adds . "We must recognize that . It's a possibility, but it's also possible to recognize it, he
 We must recognize it by trying to deter it, which means we probably should alert SAC, probably put on an airborne alert, perhaps take other s-alert measures . We must also alert the U.S. Air Force, perhaps put on a airborne alert .
 "Almost certainly, we should accompany the initial air strike with at least a partial mobilization," says Peter Bergen . Bergen says. "We should accompany [the initial air strikes] with a full mobilization"
 "We should accompany an, an invasion following an air strike with a large-scale mobilization," he says . "It certainly exceeds the limits of the authority we have from Congress," he adds .
 We should be prepared, in the event of even a small air strike, for the possibility of a Cuban uprising, which would force our hand in some way, says President Obama .
 Either force u-, us to accept a, a, uh, an unsatisfactory uprising, with all of the adverse comment that result; or would, would force an invasion to support the uprising . Or would, we, would ... force an uprising to support it, he says . Or
 I think that, um, uh, any course of action involves heavy political involvement . "I think that ... any of us would be very interested in politics," she says .
 "It's going to affect all sorts of policies, positions, uh, as well as the strategic situation," he says . "It will affect all of the policies and positions"
 I think also that, um, uh, we have to consider what political preparation, if any, is to occur before an air strike or in connection with any military action . "We have also to consider ... what political ... preparation ... is to be made before any air strike," he
 "There isn't any doubt that if we announced that there were MRBM sites going up that that would change, uh, we would secure a good deal of political support," he says . "This really would put the burden on the Soviet," he adds .
 "If we announce that it's there, then it's quite obvious to them that we're gonna probably do something about it," he says . "Because of the fact that we've got to announce it, then then it will be quite obvious"
 "It seems to me, uh, my press statement was so clear about how we wouldn't do anything under these conditions," she says . "It's so clear that we would not do anything," she adds. "Under these conditions"
 His statement to Kohler6 on the subject of his visit and so forth, was completely hypocritical, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It's completely hypocritical," he says .
 The Soviets would not take the risk. That was what the estimators felt, and that the Soviets . The Soviet Union would not risk taking the risk, he says .
 McCone: What possible reason have they got for going into Cuba in the manner in which they are with surface-to-air, uh, missiles and cruise-type missile?
 He just couldn't understand while their, why the Soviets were so heavily bol- bolstering Cuba's defensive posture . Cuba's military was boosted by the Soviet Union's efforts to bolster its defenses .
 There must be something behind it, which led him then to the belief that they must be coming in with MRBMs, he said .
 CNN.com: "These are just a few more missiles, uh, targetted on the United States. You're quite right in saying that these, these are just ... targetted ... on the U.S. You are quite right"
 The Soviet Union could be an important adjunct and reinforcement to the, to the . strike capability of the Soviet Union, he says . He says .
 "To our nation it means, it means a great deal more. But more than that, these are, uh, uh- uh, to our nation," he said .
 JFK: They get these in there and then you can't, uh, they get sufficient capacity so we can't use warheads . JFK: .. . let's just say that they get, uh . they get ... they get . these into there and they get enough capacity to use warheads
 You don't want to knock 'em out, uh, there's too much of a gamble. Then you don't knock 'them out , uh- there's a gamble, he says . Then, uh-there's too little of a risk, he adds .
 "They just begin to build up those air bases there and then put more and more," he says . "They began to build them up and then they began to put them there," he adds . "Then they just begin ... then they begin to ... build up these bases there,"
 We'd have to target then with our missiles and have the same kind of, of pistol-pointed-at-the-head situation as we have in the Soviet Union at the present time .
 The missiles are in the hands of Cubans, here, and then you, say your, some problem arises in Venezuela, er, you've got Castro saying, You move troops down into that part of Venezuela, we're going to fire these missiles . And the fact that you got
 "Psychological factor that we have sat back and let 'em do it to us, that is more important than the direct threat. Well, it's a psychological factor," he said .
 "Without any say about what we're gonna do. Not that we're going to do anything, but the existence of them, without any say on what we'll do," says the mayor .
 "Let's say we, twenty-four hours ahead of our doing something about it, we make a public statement that these have been found on the island," he said .
 That would be notification in a sense that, uh, of their existence, and everybody could draw whatever conclusion they wanted to to . That would, that would ... everybody could ... draw whatever conclusions they wanted, he says .
 The existence of MRBMs presents the gravest threat to our security and that appropriate action must be taken, says CNN.com .
 "You would move in and knock, that would be the trigger that you would move your planes into and knock them out. And at the same time or simultaneously put planes over to make sure that they weren't taking any action or movement, and that you could move in if they started
 "They can pull in under trees and forest and disappear almost once, as I visualize," says author . They can pull into under trees or forest, as they disappear almost at once .
 "They can also be readied, perhaps, between the time we, in effect, say we're going to come in and the time they do come in," says President Obama .
 Their bombers take off against us, then they have made a general war against Cuba of it, which is a, it then becomes much more their decision, says President Vladimir Putin .
 The political advantages are, are very strong, it seems to me, of the small strike . The political advantage is strong, he says, of a small strike, he adds .
 "We are doing only what we warned repeatedly and publicly we would have to do. Uh, it corresponds to the, the punishment fits the crime in political terms," says President Obama .
 Mr. President, while we're considering this problem tonight, I think that we should also consider what, uh, Cuba's going to be a year from now, or two years from now. Mr President, Mr Obama, said .
 Mr President, this is why I think tonight we ought to put on paper the alternative plans and the probable, possible consequences thereof in a way that State and Defense could agree on, even if we, uh, disagree and put in both views . Mr President. Mr President .
 Because the consequences of these actions have not been thought through clearly, it's not clear what the consequences will have to be thought through . Because of the consequences, these actions were not thought through, he says . He says .
 The attorney general said the attorney general's comments were "indicative of that" The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Washington .
 "This lack of a sense of apparent urgency would seem to, to support this, that this isn't going to be discovered at the moment and that, uh, when he comes over this is something he can do, a ploy"
 Cuba is armed against the United States, or possibly use it to try to trade something in Berlin, Obama says . Obama says he'll disarm Cuba if, uh, if we'll yield some of our interests in Berlin and some arrangement for it .
 I would think one thing that I would still cling to is that Fidel Castro not likely to give Fidel Castro nuclear warheads . "I would think ... that he would not likely be giving Fidel Castro nukes," she says .
 "I'm sure his generals have been telling him for a year and a half that he had, was missing a golden opportunity to add to his strategic capability. I'm sure he had been telling me for a . year . and a . half of that year, was telling him that
 President Barack Obama is considering a bid to add to his strategic capabilities, says CNN's John Sutter . Obama says the move could be an attempt to add "strategic capabilities"
 "I think there's an enormous political advantage, myself, within these options," he says . "Taking out the thing that gives the trouble and not the thing ... that doesn't give the trouble"
 It seems to me that there are some major alternatives here that I don't think we discussed fully enough today, and I'd like to see them laid on the paper, if State agrees . "It seems to be that there is some major alternative here," he says .
 "Once you start this political approach, I don't think you're gonna have any opportunity for a military operation," he says . And he says it isn't gonna end with one because once you start political approach .
 CNN's John Sutter says he's considering a second alternative . Sutter: "I'd like to discuss just a second, because we haven't discussed it fully today"
 If Cuba should possess a capacity to carry out offensive actions against the U.S. against the United States, it would be a problem, the president says . The Cuban government says it has a right to respond to any threat posed by Cuba . President Obama: "If Cuba should have
 There's two kinds of, of blockade: a blockade which stops ships from coming in and, and simply a seizure, I mean a, simply a . simply a search . There's a blockade that stops ships coming in, and a seizure .
 U.S. says it has located offensive weapons and is maintaining constant surveillance over them . If there is ever any indication that they're to be launched against this country, we will respond not only against Cuba, but also against the Soviet Union .
 This alternative doesn't seem to be a very acceptable one, but wait until you work on the others, says CNN.com.com .
 "I tried to do was develop a little package that meets the action requirement of that paragraph I read," he says . "And really what I tried to ... develop a ... package," he adds .
 President Obama says military action means military action, period . Obama: "As far as the American people are concerned, action means ... military action"
 Secretary Rusk summarized political actions now under way . October 26, 1962, 10:00 a.m. Oct. 26: 1962 . October 25, 1962 .
 The United States quarantine would continue until a UN quarantine is in place . The U.S. would continue to quarantine until the UN quarantines are in place.
 Navy ships would stay close to all Cuban ports to ensure that there were no landings unknown to the UN inspectors . No cargoes landed anywhere which UN inspectors did not see .
 Castro agreed in general, but wanted to have another look at it . As to the message to Castro, Castro said he would have to have a second look at the message .
 He doubted that it would do any good, but it might be undertaken if done now with the greatest urgency . He said: "It might be a good thing to do now if done in the most urgency"
 Talks aimed at getting a 2448-hour standstill on the missile buildup in Cuba . Talks also aim to get a cease-fire on Cuba's missile buildup .
 He acknowledged that in these talks it would be impossible to obtain an agreement to make the weapons inoperable . He said in talks he would not be able to make an agreement .
 He wanted to know whether he should seek a standstill on all Soviet arms or only offensive weapons . He asked if he wanted to seek a halt on all Russian arms .
 He would seek to get a commitment that there be no further construction of the weapons . But it would not be possible to set up a system to ensure that the weapons were made inoperable, he said .
 In addition, he needed to know whether in return we would be prepared to suspend the quarantine, he said . "In addition to [quarantine], he needed also to know if we would also suspend our quarantine," he added .
 Ambassador Stevenson said the aim of the longer terin talks would be the withdrawal from this hemisphere of the strategic missiles and the dismantlement of existing sites . Ambassador Stevenson: The aim is the withdrawal of strategic missiles .
 He predicted that the Russians would ask us for a new guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba and the dismantlement of U.S. strategic missiles in Turkey . He also said that Russia would ask for a guarantee of Cuban territory .
 Mr McCone disagreed with Ambassador Stevenson's linking of Soviet missiles in Cuba to U.S. missiles in Turkey . He disagreed with ambassador Stevenson's link of Soviet missile missiles to Turkey .
 He said the Soviet weapons in Cuba were pointed at our heart and put us under great handicap in continuing to carry out our commitments to the free world .
 He urged that we do not drop the quarantine until the Soviet missiles are out of Cuba . The quarantine has been quarantined since 1959 .
 He believes we must keep up the momentum so far achieved by the quarantine . He said we must continue the momentum we have achieved by quarantine .
 He doubted that the quarantine alone would produce a withdrawal of the weapons, he said . The quarantine is unlikely to lead to a withdrawal, he added .
 He said our objective should be to prevent further military shipments, further construction at missile sites, and to get some means of inspection .
 Mr McCone urged that any inspectors sent to Cuba be U.S. inspectors knowledgeable about strategic missiles . He said inspectors should be knowledgeable about missiles .
 The President said he understood Ambassador Stevenson to be asking for time during which he would try to negotiate the withdrawal of missiles .
 Secretary Rusk doubted that we could get any pre-conditions to negotiation, Rusk said . Rusk doubts that he would be able to negotiate a deal with the government .
 Secretary Dillon agreed that the Soviets could not back down merely in return for dropping the quarantine . Secretary Dillon said the Soviets must back down in exchange for dropping a quarantine .
 Mr Bundy said negotiations for a standstill or a standdown were not enough for our security . He said we must press, in addition, for guaranteed inspection of Cuba .
 Secretary Dillon said we could not negotiate for two weeks under the missile threat which now exists in Cuba . Secretary Dillon: "We could not . negotiate for . two weeks [with] two weeks" under the threat of a missile threat, he said .
 The President noted that there appeared to be little support for Ambassador Stevenson's plan . The President said that the plan was not likely to be implemented .
 General Taylor urged that we increase our reconnaissance activity in order to keep informed as to what was happening in Cuba . General Taylor said that we need to increase reconnaissance activity to stay informed of Cuba .
 The President decided to delay night reconnaissance missions, at least until the Soviets turn down U. Thant's proposal .
 He also agreed that we should announce publicly that construction work at the missile sites in Cuba was going on and that, therefore, we will continue our aerial reconnaissance flights . He agreed that the government should also announce that work was being carried out on missile sites .
 The President also wanted attention called by a White House spokesman to his earlier speech which insisted that work at the missile sites in Cuba cease .
 The President decided that a presentation of the current situation should be made to the Congressional Leaders . President decided to present the situation to the congressional leaders .
 Secretary McNamara reported on the positions of Soviet Bloc ships moving toward Cuba . McNamara was secretary of state at the time of the Soviet Union invasion .
 He said we do not know yet whether any such ships will enter the interception area .
 Under Secretary Ball pointed out that the Soviets did not know the extent of our quarantine zone . Ball said that the Soviet Union did not .
 The Russians would then be in a position to decide whether to turn back their tanker or allow her to enter the quarantine zone . The Russians are expected to make a decision on whether to allow the tanker to enter quarantine zone later today .
 Secretary McNamara also recommended that a night reconnaissance mission be flown-Secretary Rusk recommended against a night flight . McNamara recommended that the mission should be flown .
 The President instructed the Defense Department to place the night reconnaissance planes on the alert and to prepare a public announcement of the mission .
 The discussion then turned to the question of United States missiles in Turkey . The U.S. missiles are believed to have been used in the region .
 Mr Nitze said it would be an anathema to the Turks to pull the missiles out of the region . He said the Turks would be 'appalled' to pull missiles out .
 He feared the next Soviet step would be a demand for the denuclearization of the entire NATO area . The next step was to denuclearize the NATO area, he said .
 President Obama urged us to focus attention on Cuba rather than on U.S. bases in other countries . He urged us not to focus .
 The partial text of a Soviet public statement was read by the President as it was received in the room . At this point in the meeting the President read the partial text . The Soviet leader was in the middle of a meeting in Moscow .
 The President commented that the statement was a very tough position and varied considerably from the tone of Khrushchev's personal letter to the President .
 The President felt that the Soviet position would get wide support, said we should consider making public the Khrushchev private letter . The letter was made public by the President of the USSR .
 Secretary Rusk returned to the question of U.S. missiles in Turkey . Rusk pointed out that this subject must be kept separate from Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The Turkish missile problem should be dealt with in the context of NATO vs. Turkey, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Mr Bundy said we could not accept the Soviet proposal on Turkish missiles because the Soviet missiles were not out of Cuba . Bundy said the proposal was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 The President recalled that he had asked that consideration be given to the withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey some days earlier .
 Under Secretary Ball replied that the Department had decided it could not raise this question with the Turks at this time for fear of a disastrous Turkish reaction . Ball said the Department of State Department has decided it cannot raise the question .
 Study is being given to work out how to reassure the Turks if we offer to withdraw the Jupiter missiles .
 Bundy said we cannot get into the position of appearing to sell out an ally,e.e. Bundy said . Bundy said he would not be comfortable with appearing to 'sell out'
 Turkey, to serve our own interests, i.e. getting the Soviet missiles out of Cuba, is a key ally in the Middle East, says President Obama . Turkey is to serve its interests, says Obama .
 The President commented that the Russians had made the Turkish missile withdrawal proposal in the most difficult possible way . The President said that the proposal was made in a difficult way .
 Turkey's proposal for missiles is public, so we have no chance to talk privately to the Turks about it, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "For a long time, we have considered the missiles to be obsolete"
 Secretary Dillon said that it was possible that the Russians had made their public statement as part of a stalling tactic to provide time for a fullfledged confrontation with us .
 Ambassador Stevenson argued for releasing his statement in an effort to keep the ""peace offensive"" from going to the Soviets . Ambassador Stevenson said the statement was released in an attempt to prevent the "peace offensive" from being given to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev private letter and Russian offer made public in Soviet statement . There ensued a discussion of how to handle the discrepancy between the two statements .
 A suggestion was made that the Russian proposals contained in the private Khrushchev letter should be made public . The proposal was made in a private letter to the Soviet Union .
 He said we must ensure that the construction work on the missile sites in Cuba be stopped at once at once .
 He suggested that we talk to the Turks about the missiles, pointing out to them the great peril facing them during the next week . The Turks are facing a great peril, he said .
 Turks are now in no position to make a statement to the effect that they would ask that the Jupiters be withdrawn, he said .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that we tell the Turks they must say that the Jupiter problem is a NATO problem and is not associated with the Cuban missile problem . The problem is NATO problem, he said .
 Secretary McNamara called attention to the fact that the missiles belonged to Turkey and that only the nuclear warheads are under our total control . The missiles belong to Turkey, which is under total control of the country .
 The President returned to a discussion of where we now find ourselves, i.e. we now have Soviet public proposals and Khrushchev's private proposals . The President .
 "What we must seek is an immediate cessation of the work on offensive missiles in Cuba," says President Vladimir Putin .
 Hard line Russians wanted to make public their preferred demands in order to make impossible progress toward the Khrushchev private offer which may have been drafted by those who are less hard-nosed . One explanation for the varying Soviet proposals is that the hard line Russian wanted to keep their demands private
 The President says the Russians are creating a kind of shield behind which work on missile sites in Cuba continued . The President noted that it appeared to him that the Russians were making various proposals so fast, one after the other, that they were creating a shield .
 He said we had a perfectly defensible position, i.e. work on the missile sites must stop . He said work on missile sites should stop .
 Secretary McNamara added the thought that these offensive weapons must be made inoperable . McNamara said the weapons were 'inoperable' in the U.S. Secretary of State McNamara also said that the weapons must also be made inaccessible .
 Mr Bundy suggested that we tell Khrushchev privately that the position in their public statement was impossible for us, but that the . position . in his private letter was different and we were studying these proposals, he said .
 Khrushchev 'attempts to limit our freedom of action' in Cuba, he says . He says he is concerned about missile bases outside of the hemisphere .
 Mr Alexis Johnson reported that he had just been informed that the Turkish Government had issued a press statement saying that the Russian proposal with respect to Jupiters in Turkey was not conceivable . Mr Johnson was informed that Turkish Government said that the proposal was not possible .
 Revisions were made in the Gilpatric draft, which was issued shortly thereafter in the form attached . The draft was published shortly thereafter .
 Attorney General said statement might make people think that if Russians stopped the missile buildup in Cuba, we would be willing to withdraw our missiles from Turkey . Attorney General says statement might lead people to believe that if Russia stopped the Cuban missile buildup, U.S. would withdraw its missiles .
 Turkish NATO missiles were one problem and that Cuba was an entirely separate problem, says President Obama . He desired that we make doubly clear that Turkey was one problem, and Cuba was another .
 Mr Gilpatric stated that it was crucial for us to stand on the position that we will not negotiate with the Russians while the Soviet missile threat is growing in Cuba . The Russian missile threat in Cuba is growing .
 The President recalled that over a year ago we wanted to get the Jupiter missiles out of Turkey because they had become obsolete and of little military value . The President said the missiles were of little value and were obsolete .
 If the missiles in Cuba added 50% to Soviet nuclear capability, then to trade these missiles for those in Turkey would be of great military value . The trade of Cuban missiles for Turkish missiles would be great value .
 We are now in the position of risking war in Cuba and in Berlin over missiles in Turkey which are of little military value . But we are now risking war with Cuba and with Berlin over Turkey over missiles .
 From the political point of view, it would be hard to get support on an airstrike against Cuba . "Many would think that we would make a good trade if we offered to take the missiles out of Turkey in the event the Russians would agree to remove the missiles from Cuba"
 We are in a bad position if we appear to be attacking Cuba for the purpose of keeping useless missiles in Turkey . We are not in a good position if it appears to be trying to keep them in Cuba .
 We cannot propose to withdraw the missiles from Turkey, but the Turks could offer to do so . The Turks could also offer to withdraw missiles from the country, the Turkish president says .
 The Turks must be informed of the great danger in which they will live during the next week . We have to face up to the possibility of some kind of a trade over missiles, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The President left the meeting to meet the State Governors who had been waiting for one-half hour to see him . The President then met the State governors .
 It was not possible to say with certainty whether the Soviet public offer included all NATO bases or referred specifically to Turkey . It is not known whether the offer included NATO bases .
 The Attorney General expressed his concern as to what our position would be if we talked to the Russians for sixty days and then the Cubans refused to permit UN 14 . The attorney general said he was concerned about what would happen if the Russians refused to allow UN 14. The U.S
 There was discussion of a second statement to be put out but this proposal was later abandoned . There was also a proposal to put out another statement but this was abandoned .
 A draft message to Khrushchev, which had been prepared by Ambassador Thompson,15, was read and a final version was to be completed for the President's consideration later in the day .
 At the meeting at the State Department, the Attorney General repeated his view that we should keep the focus on missile bases .
 He preferred to let the Soviet tankers through the quarantine line in order to avoid a confrontation with the Soviets over one of their ships .
 He urged that we buy time now in order to launch an air attack Monday or Tuesday . He urged us to buy time to launch air strikes .
 Secretary McNamara expressed his view that before we attack Cuba we must notify the Cubans . McNamara said that before attacking Cuba, the U.S. should notify the Cuban government .
 Secretary McNamara reported on today's daylight reconnaissance mission . The mission was part of a daylight reconnaissance operation .
 One mission aborted for mechanical reasons, according to preliminary reports . Another aborted mission was aborted due to mechanical reasons .
 One plane is said to be overdue and several are said to have encountered ground fire . Several planes are believed to be in trouble with the government .
 There followed a discussion of a draft letter from the President to Khrushchev .
 The President added to the draft an offer to discuss with the Russians the proposals they had made public . President added an offer of discussion with the Russian proposal .
 The formulation included a comment that Khrushchev must realize that matters relating to NATO must be discussed at a later time . The formulation was included in the formulation of the statement .
 The purpose of the message was to obtain the halting of work on the bases in Cuba as a condition to discussion of various other problems . The message was intended to obtain halting of the work on Cuba bases .
 One of our U-2 planes overflowed the Soviet Union by accident due to navigational error . Secretary Rusk reported that one of our planes had overflown by accident . The U.2 plane was a U.S. Air Force One .
 The Secretary of State thought that the Russians would make a loud fuss about this incident . The Secretary thought that . The secretary of state thought that Russians would . make a big fuss about the incident .
 The President decided not to make the incident public, but be prepared to do so as soon as the Soviets publicized it . The incident occurred in the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . President George W. Bush decided to keep the incident secret .
 President asked whether we wanted to continue to say that we would talk only about the missiles in Cuba . The President asked us whether we would continue to talk about that, but we did, he said .
 If Russia stops missile activity in Cuba we would be prepared to discuss NATO problems with the Russians, says President Obama . Obama says if Russia halts missile activity, we would discuss NATO issues with Russia .
 "He felt that we would not be in a position to offer any trade for several days," says Mourinho . "We felt we wouldn't be able to offer a deal until the end of the week"
 He did feel that if we could succeed in freezing the situation in Cuba and rendering the strategic missiles inoperable, then we would be in a position to negotiate with the Russians, he said .
 Mr Bundy pointed out that there would be a serious reaction in NATO countries if we appeared to be trading withdrawal of missiles in Turkey for withdrawal of missile from Cuba . Mr Bundy said the move would be 'serious'
 The President responded that if we refuse to discuss such a trade and then take military action in Cuba, we would also be in a difficult position, he said . The President said if we refused to discuss the trade, then military action would be difficult .
 The President left the room to talk to General Norstad16 on the KY-9 secure telephone to Paris . The President then went to the secure phone to Paris to discuss the situation .
 In the President's absence the message to U Thant was further discussed . The message was discussed further in President's presence .
 Secretary Rusk questioned whether the Russians are trying to obtain more of a quid pro quo from us or whether they are introducing new elements in the picture merely to weaken our public position .
 Secretary McNamara pointed out, in connection with the current military situation, that a limited airstrike on Cuba was now impossible because our reconnaissance planes were being fired on . McNamara: "A limited strike on Cuba is now impossible"
 He felt that we must now look to the major airstrike to be followed by an invasion of Cuba . The major airstrike was followed by a Cuban invasion of the country, he said .
 If we could do this he felt that the Soviets would not attack Turkey when we invaded Cuba, he felt they would not be attacked by Turkey, he said . "If we could . do this, we would not . attack Turkey," he said. "It would be a good thing
 Our objective should be to seek to avoid any Soviet attack in Europe as a response to our invasion of Cuba . Our objective is to avoid a Soviet attack on Europe in response to Cuba invasion of Europe .
 Ambassador Thompson commented that it was impossible to draw any conclusions from the fact that one of our reconnaissance planes over Cuba had been shot at . Ambassador Thompson said that it is impossible to take any conclusions about the shooting .
 The President returned to the meeting, accompanied by General Lemnitzer . The meeting was adjourned .
 The President approved the final revision of the statement to U Thant, which was to be phoned to U. Thant and released here publicly .
 If we reject Soviet efforts to tie in NATO problems to the Cuban situation, then we could persuade NATO to take the same position . If we rejected Soviet efforts, it would be easier to convince NATO to follow suit .
 If Russia attacks NATO countries, they will not say they were not consulted about the actions in Cuba, says Putin . Putin: "If the Russians do attack we do not want them to say that they had not been consulted"
 NATO does not realize what may be coming and the Europeans do not realize that we may face a choice of invading Cuba or taking the missiles out of Turkey . We may face an invasion of Cuba or a decision to remove missiles from Turkey .
 Secretary McNamara urged that a NATO meeting be held tomorrow only if we have decided to launch our strike tomorrow . McNamara urges that NATO meeting only if a strike is imminent .
 He repeated his hope that we can act in such a way as to reduce the pressure on Russia to hit Turkey .
 Secretary Rusk recommended that mobilization measures be authorized immediately . Minister of State Rusk said mobilization measures should be authorized .
 The President suggested that we talk immediately to the Turks, explaining to them what we were planning to do with our missiles . Then explain the entire situation to the North Atlantic Council, he said . The Turkish president suggested that he would talk to the Turkish president .
 The President said that the key to any letter to Khrushchev was the demand that work cease on the missile sites in Cuba . The key to the letter was to stop work in Cuba, he said .
 He predicted that if we make no mention of Turkey in our letter, Khrushchev will write back to us saying that if . we include Turkey, then he would be prepared to settle the Cuban situation, he said .
 The President said this would mean that we would lose twenty-four hours while they would continue to work on the bases and achieve an operational status for more of their missiles . The President says this would be a loss of twenty-eight hours .
 He suggested that we would be willing to guarantee not to invade Cuba if the Soviet missiles were taken out of Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk returned to the Stevenson draft, which the President approved as revised . The President approved the revised draft as revised.
 The phrase ""and assurance of peace in the Caribbean"" was discussed . The reference to no invasion of Cuba was omitted from the speech .
 The President also agreed not to call a meeting of the North Atlantic Council . The President has also agreed to not call the meeting .
 Attorney General says Stevenson draft letter was 'defensive' and 'deficit' Attorney General said letter was written in response to Stevenson draft . Attorney General: Stevenson letter was defensive .
 The State Department draft merely said that we accepted Khrushchev's offer . The State Dept. draft simply said that Khrushnik's offer was accepted, the draft said .
 Secretary McNamara asked what we should do about air surveillance tomorrow . Secretary of State McNamara said air surveillance should be banned in the future .
 He stated his recommendation,e.e. if our reconnaissance planes were fired on, we will attack the attackers. We will attack them, he said . He stated that if our . reconnaissance planes are fired on by the attackers, we would attack them .
 General Taylor noted that in order to be ready to invade on Monday, we must continue intensive air surveillance . General Taylor also noted that air surveillance must continue to be used to prepare for invasion .
 If our planes are fired on, we must be prepared for a general response or an attack on the SAM site which fired on our planes. We must also be prepared to attack the site where our planes were fired on .
 We will decide tomorrow how we return fire after we know if they continue their attacks on our planes and after we hear from U Thant the Russian reply to our offer . The Russian government has not yet responded to the offer .
 The President considered a draft message to the Turks about their missiles . The Turkish president is expected to make a decision on the issue .
 His objective was to persuade the Turks to suggest that we withdraw our missiles, he says . He says the Turkish president was trying to persuade him to withdraw missiles .
 He noted that negotiations with the Turks were very difficult if there was any life left in the proposal which we had asked U Thant to make to the Russians .
 General Taylor read a late report of the shooting down of the U-2 reconnaissance plane in Cuba which said that the wreckage of the plane was on the ground and that the pilot had been killed . General Taylor then read the late report that the plane had been shot down in Cuba .
 He felt that we should make an air attack tomorrow on the SAM site responsible for shooting down the U-2 plane . He said he felt that . He felt . we should . make an . air . attack tomorrow .
 If we leave U.S. missiles in Turkey, the Soviets might attack Turkey, says President Obama . "If we leave . United States missiles in . Turkey, we might be attacked by the Soviets," says Obama .
 We should make every effort to reduce the chance of a Soviet attack on Turkey . However, we should make sure we don't give up on the possibility of an attack, he says .
 Vice President asked why we were not prepared to trade withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, he said .
 Under Secretary Ball responded that last week we thought it might be acceptable to trade the withdrawal of the missiles in Turkey if such action would save Berlin . Ball said last week that the withdrawal would be acceptable if it saved Berlin .
 He felt that we could accept the Soviet offer and replace the missiles in Turkey by assigning Polaris submarines to the area . Polaris submarines were assigned to Turkey by the Soviets .