 The United States and the Soviet Union stood on the threshold of a nuclear holocaust . Fifty-seven years ago, the U.S. and the . Soviet Union were on the brink of a . nuclear war .
 In October 1962, the United States nuclear arsenal was decisively superior to Russia . The U.S. nuclear arsenal is now considered superior to the Russian nuclear arsenal .
 The delivery time from the launching site to the target was a crucial factor . Moreover, in the early 1960’s the delivery time was crucial .
 It took approximately 30 minutes for the Soviet missiles to reach the U.S. The missiles were launched by the Soviet Union .
 From Cuba, the Soviet missiles would have been able to destroy most of the United States military and urban centers in 7-10 minutes . This was enough time for the Americans to retaliate with a deadly counterstrike . The missile accuracy significantly increased with the proximity of the target .
 They where received at the airport by Marshal Rodion Malinovsky and Politburo member Anastas Mikoyan . Marshal Malinovsky and politician Mikoyans arrived at airport in Moscow .
 In mid-July 1962, Soviet cargo ships began moving out of the Black Sea for Cuba . Raúl Castro and Guevara met with Khrushchev and arranged the details of the Soviet missiles’ deployment in Cuba .
 It was to be a secret operation to allow the full deployment of the nuclear missiles before the U.S. discovered it . The operation was meant to be secret and allow it to take place before the United States discovered it.
 On September 8, the freighter Omsk brought the first shipment of the MRBM missiles . The shipment was made by a freighter from the Russian city of Ormsk .
 The first report of large containers been transported from Mariel to the Rosario mountains in Pinar del Rio was provided to Washington by the Cuban underground resistance . Seven days later the Poltava arrived at the Port of Mariel, continuing the delivery of the nuclear rockets that could destroy most
 CIA Director McCone presented circumstantial evidence that the Soviet were constructing sites platform to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara disagreed with McCone’s assessment .
 National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy waited until morning to alert President Kennedy . Bundy decided to wait until the next day to alert the president . Bundy was not in touch with the president until the morning .
 McGeorge Bundy informed President Kennedy that “hard photographic evidence” had been obtained showing Soviet nuclear sites and missiles in Cuba . Bundy informed the president that hard photographic evidence was obtained . Bundy said the evidence was proof of the existence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba.
 Kennedy immediately call an 11:45m. meeting and dictated the names of the 14 or so advisers he wanted present . Kennedy immediately called the meeting to be held at 11.45am .
 This is the group that became known as the ‘ExComm’ – the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . This is known as “ExComm – the . Executive Committee’s Executive Committee . ExComm is the Executive . Committee of National Security council .
 For five days, in absolute secrecy, the president and close advisors analyzed the available options . Photographic evidence was presented to the group, including pictures of missile sites under construction .
 Analysts believe two sites near Guanajay were intended for 2,200 mile-range nuclear missiles . At the end, it was decided to confront, head-on, the Soviet challenge .
 Analysts predict missiles could be operational in 2-6 weeks . New evidence of a nuclear warhead storage site in the area . Analysts say they have seen new evidence of the site .
 Several newspapers had, by this time, pieced together most of the details of the crisis . Despite White House secrecy precautions, several newspapers had pieced up most of it .
 The White House Press Secretary notified President Kennedy in four separate calls during the day that security was crumbling . Pierre Salinger was the Press Secretary of the White House .
 The Russian ambassador was informed by the president’s brother that the United States was ready to destroy the missile bases and launch an invasion of Cuba if the missiles were not dismantled and removed . Robert Kennedy stressed that he wasn't talking about weeks but hours .
 President Kennedy gave instructions for a provisional Cuban government with José Miró Cardona as leader of a free Cuba . The roles had been reversed .
 Declassified Soviet documents indicate that it was the Russian leaders who were surprised and hesitant at the firmness of President Kennedy . President Kennedy was willing to wipe out the Russian missile installations in Cuba . Fidel Castro’s disregard for the welfare of the Cuban people became evident .
 The next day, a U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba . He wrote to Khrushchev, calling on the Soviets to launch a pre-emptive nuclear attack against the U.S. He wrote .
 The Soviet Politburo blinked and gave up deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The crisis was resolved with the withdrawal of the missiles from the island in exchange for a promise that the U.S. would dismantle its missiles in Turkey .
 Nikita Khrushchev was ousted by the Politburo two years after his embarrassing fiasco in Cuba . Fidel Castro survived until his death in 2016 as a senile tyrant of a failed Marxist-Leninist revolution .