 This addendum consists of 12 pages . GRAAD 12 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 FEBRUARY/MARCH 2012 addendum .
 The source below focuses on Khrushchev's reasons to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . The source also focuses on the reasons for deploying nuclear missiles .
 A declassified military history of the Jupiter system reveals that the rockets became operational in April 1962 . That contributed to Khrushchev's proposal to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . The system was designed to launch nuclear missiles into Cuba .
 This source consists of a written and a visual source about African socialism in Tanzania . SOURCE 2A .
 Within the Declaration there was a commitment to raising basic living standards . The Declaration was made by the UK government in 2010 .
 Humaneness in its fullest sense rather than wealth creation must come first . Humaneness must be human in the sense of human kindness, not wealth .
 Societies become better places through the development of people rather than increasing production . Societies will be better places if they develop people, rather than increase production, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 The policy met with significant political resistance especially when people were forced into rural communes . The policy has been met with resistance in the past, especially in rural areas .
 Nearly 10 million peasants were moved and many were effectively forced to give up their land . Many of the peasants were forced to leave their land in order to be moved .
 The focus on human development and self-reliance did bring some success in other areas notably in health, education and political identity .
 Education had to work for the common good, foster cooperation and promote equality . Education must work for a common good and foster cooperation, she says .
 Tanzanian women clean communal plot of land in communal land . Photographs show women cleaning communal plots in a communal area .
 "I really think I ran the most successful single-party system on the continent," says the former president . "I ran a successful single party system," he says .
 I don't believe that our country would be where it is now if we had a multiplicity of parties, which would have become tribal and caused us a lot of problems . It was a single huge nationalist movement, he says .
 When I stepped down, there was 91% literacy and nearly every child was in school . Nearly all children were in school when I left office, he says . "Nearly every child in school is in school," he adds .
 This statement was made by J Atkin published in In Motion Magazine in December 1999 .
 Nyerere made members of Parliament walk two hundred miles through the countryside to the annual party meeting in Mwanza . The Tanganyikan African National Union were out of touch with the people .
 They stayed with the people in the villages, reexperiencing the real conditions in the country, not those of the city and the educated civil-service class . Hot and dusty, they stayed in the countryside .
 Below is an excerpt from Speeches that Changed the World on the Civil Rights Movement . SOURCE 3A Below is a excerpt from the book that changed the world .
 In the late '50s and '60s, a young Baptist minister stepped to the fore to lead the struggle for equality . He led the struggle against racial discrimination in America .
 Dr Martin Luther King Jr was an eloquent (wellspoken) preacher driven to rid his country of racial discrimination . Dr King was a mesmerising preacher who was driven by his desire to rid the country of discrimination .
 He was thrust into the international spotlight when he led the bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama . He led the boycott in the town of Montgomery .
 Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat in a section of a bus reserved for whites . The incident was sparked after black factory worker Rosa Parks refused to give her seat on a segregated bus .
 The boycott motivated the United States Supreme Court to outlaw racial segregation on public transport . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that racial segregation was illegal .
 This was a victory for Martin Luther King Jr and his lieutenants in the South Christian Leadership Conference . This was the victory for King Jr .
 Martin Luther King Jr wrote a letter while he was in jail in Birmingham, Birmingham . The letter is part of a letter he wrote to the civil rights leader . King was jailed in Birmingham in the 1950s .
 The nations of Asia and Africa are moving with jet-like speed toward the goal of political independence . But we still creep at horse and buggy pace toward the gaining of a cup of coffee at a lunch counter .
 You have seen vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at will and drown your sisters and brothers at whim . When you have seen hate-filled policemen curse, kick and even kill your brothers and sisters, then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait .
 African-American demonstrator being attacked by police dogs in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 . Police dogs attacked demonstrator in 1963 .
 The following is part of the famous 'I have a dream' speech delivered by Martin Luther King Jr. The speech was delivered by King in Atlanta, Georgia .
 As a result of the march and the speech, the citizens of the nation began to put growing pressure on the presidential administration of John F Kennedy, encouraging the President to push for civil rights laws .
 We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal . We are committed to the principle that men are equal .
 This extract focuses on the growing disagreement over the Civil Rights Movement . This is the latest in a growing debate over the civil rights movement in America .
 African Americans were overwhelmingly poorer than whites and they were much less likely to find employment . Despite the civil rights acts, the reality of U.S. life remained that life was still poor for African Americans .
 New movement influenced by younger and more militant blacks who argued that the civil rights acts had done very little to end racism or discrimination in the areas where it was most needed .
 Malcolm X pointed out that, although segregation was illegal in the north of the country, blacks were still often targets of racial discrimination . Malcolm X was one of the most prominent figures in the civil rights movement .
 Organisations such as the Black Panthers argued against a strategy of peaceful civil disobedience . They called, instead, for all-out war against white America .
 Growing racial tension erupted into terrible violence across the U.S. in 1965 . Growing racial tensions erupted into riots across the USA in 1965.
 This extract focuses on the language policy of the Department of Bantu Education . SOURCE 4A This extract includes an extract from the department of education .
 The issue that caused massive discontent and made resentment boil over into the 1976 uprising was a decree issued by the Bantu Education Department . The decree caused resentment and resentment that led to the uprising .
 Deputy Minister Andries Treurnicht sent instructions to the school boards, inspectors and principals to the effect that Afrikaans should be put on an equal basis with English .
 These instructions drew immediate negative reaction from various quarters of the community . These instructions were met with negative reaction .
 The first body to react was the Tswana School Board, which comprised school boards from Meadowlands, Dobsonville and other areas in Soweto .
 The Secretary for the Bantu Education has the responsibility of satisfying the Englishand Afrikaans-speaking people . Therefore the secretary for the . Bantus Education has . the responsibility for satisfying the . Englishand . Afrika .speaking people.
 They were influenced by national organisations such as the Black Peoples' Convention and by the Black Consciousness philosophy . The group was influenced by the South African Student Organisations .
 They rejected the idea of being taught in the language of the oppressor . The students reject the idea that they should be taught in language of oppressor.
 Khotso Seatlholo – a student and member of the Soweto Students Representative Council, 29 October 1976 . This is a statement by Khoto Seatlol – a . student and a member of a student . member of . the S.W. Students Representative
 Taken from www.sahistory.org.za/classroom/education-350years/1970s .
 Khotso Seatlholo says 'We have the full right to stand up and reject the whole system of apartheid'
 This extract focuses on Jimmy Kruger's view of the role of the police during the Soweto Uprising . Kruger: The police were responsible for the deaths of many during the Uprising in South Africa .
 Jimmy Kruger, the Minister of Justice and Police, told an emotionally charged gathering in Parliament that the government had 'not expected anything like this to happen' and could have done nothing to avoid it .
 He simply blamed the 'riots' on 'agitators' who were polarising the races in South Africa' and emphatically denied that the police provoked the violence . He also denied that police provoked violence .
 I have not found any grievances that would indicate that the Bantu Administration has flopped on the job. I'm happy to report that the government has not flopped, says Zibibibi .
 Soweto – A History Chrisp, P 2002. 20th Century Leaders Cooper, F 2002. Sowetet – A history of the South African city . 20th century leaders Cooper and Chrisp wrote a book about the city .
 Thinkers on Education – Julius Nyerere (Paris; UNESCO Publishing) Lane, P. Lane, 1978 . Lane: "Julius Nyereerere was a great leader of the South African community"
 Biko – The Quest for a True Humanity The Star, 21 April 2011 . Waugh, S. 2001. Biko . Biko. The quest for a true Humanity .