 Scholars now have access to audiotapes of meetings between President Kennedy and his advisers made during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . The tapes were made in the wake of the 1962 crisis .
 Former Kennedy Library historian listened to tapes between 1981 and 1996 and recently checked selections from the published book against the recorded words . The transcripts contain many errors that significantly distort the historical record .
 The author discusses a representative sample of these inaccuracies, suggests how they can mislead scholars . The author argues that subsequent printings and future revised editions should document and identify all changes and corrections .
 From his own long experience, I knew all too well how difficult and frustrating it could be to work with these noisy, low-fidelity reel-to-reel tapes .
 Complete transcripts would be of inestimable value to historians, teachers, and lay readers alike . Complete transcripts of the transcript would be invaluable to historians and teachers alike .
 This article addresses the fact that the transcripts are, unfortunately, far less accurate than they could or should have been . This article is an attempt to make the point that the transcript of this article’s interview with CNN.com .
 Sheldon M Stern, a historian and educational consultant, served as the historian at the John F Kennedy Library in Boston from 1977 through 1999 . Stern: "A plethora of transcription errors distort the substance"
 The omission of or mistranscription of passages clearly audible in the original tapes raises troubling questions about the noise-reduction technology used by the editors . Also, the omission of . passages clearly . audible in . original tapes raise troubling questions . about noise reduction technology used .
 The present author reviewed these transcripts using a home tape player and low-tech Kennedy Library cassettes without digital audiotape, a real-time timer, or any kind of noise-reduction system .
 Zelikow is now using more expensive and ‘far better technology’ than available in 1997 . Scholars should be concerned about whether any technical problems have been overcome, Zelikowski says .
 The editors commissioned a team of professional court reporters to prepare a set of “draft transcripts” from the Kennedy Library tapes . The editors explained that they had commissioned a professional team of reporters .
 Audio experts used a “technically advanced noise-reduction system” to reduce noise levels . Then, audio experts, using NONOISE, produced an improved set of tapes to be sure nothing had been lost .
 The transcripts are printed with the tapes and court reporters’ drafts . The two of us then worked with the court reporters to produce the transcripts . The transcripts were printed here .
 We had to amend and rewrite almost all of the court reporters' texts. Notwithstanding the high professionalism, court reporters had to revise almost all their texts .
 For several especially difficult sessions, we prepared transcriptions ourselves from scratch . We prepared transcripts ourselves for several difficult sessions .
 In a final stage, we asked some veterans of the Kennedy administration to review the tapes and transcripts . We asked them to clear up as many as possible of the remaining puzzles .
 The reader has here the best text we can produce, but it is certainly not perfect . It is not the best of the text we have produced, but the reader has the best .
 If they find an error or make out something we could not, we will enter the corrections in subsequent editions or printings of this volume . The corrections will be entered into subsequent editions .
 Several months ago, I was unable to find those words in the May-Zelikow transcript . However, several months later, I found them in the transcript .
 At that point, I decided to listen again to the entire tape and what I discovered left me dismayed . "What I discovered was that the tape was not the best of the tape," she said .
 The transcript is marred by errors that undermine its practical value for historians, teachers, or the general reader . The transcript has been published in the U.S. since 1973 .
 Despite the often-poor sound quality of the Kennedy Library cassettes, many of these mistranscriptions were nonetheless clear enough to be heard conclusively .
 The devil is in the details, we will examine specific examples, side by side, first from the October 18 meeting and then from a spot check of the other transcripts . We will also examine the transcripts from October 18 and other meetings .
 Transcripts show the essence of the deliberations that took place in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room in October 1962 . None of it changes what a reader of the transcripts takes away concerning the essence .
 The following article should be regarded as a document or source text with which scholars may evaluate for themselves the importance of the problems in an influential and widely distributed historical resource—problems its editors have essentially denied .
 Rusk: I suppose the only way we have of [using Rusk] is getting two-thirds vote to take necessary culty in getting a two-third vote in favor of action . But I suppose there would be no real diffithat: I would suppose there . I
 If we failed to get the two-thirds vote, which I doubt have tried as far as the American people are would be the result, then at least we would have concerned. But if we made an effort and . the two .thirds vote , then at . least we will failed
 We’ll have done that. tried as far as the American people are concerned, to have done . . . The American people will be happy with the outcome of the election, the president says .
 JFK: I would think you have to go on the assumption on the defensive, are not going to commit nuclear that they’re not . The U.S. would not permit nuclear weapons weapons to be used against the United States from Cuba, he says .
 McNamara: "This is one of the most important thoughts we face in properly interpreting the problems we face" readiness of these missiles . McNamara says it's important to understand the missile readiness of the U.S.
 We have been deterred, to my view, from Taylor: It may have been a deterrent to my getting ready to invade Cuba, as I think you know . On the other hand, now that we see that it’s not you know. enthusiasm for an invasion of Cuba
 Bundy: I don’t think there’s any harm in having a neutral-nation inspection instead of an inspection of the nation . Bundy: "There’ll be no harm" if the government doesn't have a neutral nation inspection . Bundy says he doesn't think
 Bundy: "I don’t think there’s any bite. harm in having a neutral nation for inspection and sort of sanitization" Bundy: I don't think there's any bite . Bundy: There's no bite. It's a good idea to have a
 JFK: I want to say very clearly to the military that I . recognize the appreciable problems in any military recognize we increase your problems in . any action we have to take in Cuba by the . warning military action we’re now giving. We’ve now given.
 McNamara: The legal foundation is, such an act can be confused . McNamara says the legal foundation of such a thing is be confused and confused .
 His public line seems designed Rusk: In spite of their threats of resistance to to leave him with some option to back off, if he U.S. efforts to stop Soviet ships, his chooses . Rusk says he has no obligation to back down .
 The impression of a pure U.S.-Cuban public line seems designed to leave him with some fracas will be hard to maintain once we’re in a option to back off, if he chooses .
 A U.S.-Cuban fracas will be hard to the probable Soviet is to provoke such an incident, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "On balance we think fiction of a pure U.K. vs.Cuba fracas is hard to imagine"
 The Soviets will stimulate pressures on the U.S. to risk such an incident, in the expectation that end the quarantine . On balance, we think it is probable the Soviets will provoke pressure on the United States .
 Here lies the very kinds of the resultant further rise in tension will stimulate compromise proposed . The tension is the very kind of tension that may stimulate compromise proposals .
 This will gain time for the pressures on the U.S. to end the quarantine . This will give the United States more time to quarantine .
 U.S. and Soviets to determine whether the U.N. can compromise on the issues, and whether the Soviet line proposed . And Soviets to decide whether the United States can compromise .
 The other explanation might be that they’re counting on taking political action against the first action against them .
 The other explanation might be that they’re counting on taking forceful action against the when we intercept . Unidentified: Afraid this will spread the war at sea .
 McCone: I thought the statement last night was pretty good. Dillon?: I thought . the significance of it. we don’t know the significance . We don't know what it was .
 Now, the only question I’ve got is how do we still JFK: How do we justify this ship? Now, he says, "Now, the question I've got is . How do you justify that ship?" he asks .
 McNamara: "To do any good the story must be put out immediately. In any case, it was successful and I the destroyers think to do any . good"
 Bundy: He said the knockdown of the Cuba trick had been very well received there. received there . Bundy: "The knockdown was very well [received] received there."
 Obviously, they’re not going to settle the Cuban JFK question until they get some compensation on question . ‘Obviously, they're not . going to settled the Cuban question until . they get . some compensation,’ says President Obama .
 JFK: We got the signs of life. I imagine the Air Force must be a little bad . . JFK: But we want you to know that Adlai is JFK. voice. JFK: "But we want U Thant to know . that Ad lai is our our
 May and Zelikow have assured readers that if in listening to the original tapes they discover errors or make out unclear remarks, corrections will be included in future editions or printings .
 The editors have not acknowledged these corrections in the preface nor identified them in the text itself . Also, in the fourth printing, the editors have neither acknowledged these . The editors of the fourth . printing of the . fourth printing of this book have not been acknowledged in the . preface
 Historians would never assume that any transcript can be absolutely reliable or accurate . Of course, the editors and other historians .
 The revisions suggested above will inevitably include some errors . The editing process can never be final or perfect; editing process is never final .
 If the editors disagree with these findings, I would be delighted to listen to any of these disputed passages, in private or in public, using the Kennedy Library tapes or the NONOISE tapes .
 Entirely new transcripts of the missile tapes are now in preparation by the Miller Center . Many thousands of the flawed editions remain in libraries, schools, and private collections .
 Claims made for accuracy and historical value of The Kennedy Tapes transcripts are clearly too good to be true . Regrettably, the claims made for the accuracy of the . accuracy and . historical . value of the transcripts are not true, according to the claims .