 State of readiness 11 maintained since October 23 by the Sovie, armed forces . The quarantine was lifted with the lifting of the quarantine .
 TASS dispatch, distributed abroad, led off with the President's order to lift the quarantine . So far, Moscow has net rent ved iU call for an American pledge not to invade Cuba .
 President says this move was in line with an understanding reached with Khrushchev .
 The U.S. has satisfied itself that all known missile sites in Cuba have been closed down . The government has received assurances that all IL-28 bombers ""will be withdrawn in 30 days,"" the dispatch said .
 The Cubans responded quickly and at length with a commenta..y on the Havana television network laat night . No mention was made of inspection* The Cuban government responded quickly to the question .
 No press reaction has been reported from other areas on the press conference . Almost no press reaction was reported from the other areas of the press .
 The news came loo late for early editions, and comment will be further delayed . Comment will be delayed further .
 It is probable that Soviet propaganda soon will use the President's remarks about the fulfillment of certain USSR obligations to play up Moscow's ""peaceful coexistence role"
 The TASS report on the press conference has so far not been disseminated domestically . Soviet radio audiences hea. d in an unscheduled newscast at noon Moscow time only that the President has ordered the lifting of the naval quarantine .
 At the »ame time, the Soviet commander of the Warsaw Pact forces issued instruction f cancelling a number of yet unspecified military preparedness measures instituted when the Cuban crisis started .
 His order was based on the argument that tension in the Caribbean has eased, and so has related tension in Europe . The order is based on an argument that tensions in Europe and the Caribbean have eased .
 According to the broadcast, the United States was placed in the position of provoking war or honoring its commitments to Khrushchev . The U.S. was placed with the option to provoke war or honor commitments, the broadcast said .
 The lifting of the naval blockade was a ""partial application* 1 of the agreement which ""doubtlessly contributes to easing of tensions in the Caribbean" The Cuban President ''reiterated his willingness to give guarantees against an invasion of our island oy the United States'
 Havana said the bombers are ""obsolete, slow speed and low altitude"" aircraft which ""coulc not undertake offensive actions wortiy of the name" M In addition, the quarantine removal will facilitate withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers on which the United States insisted for political reasons
 Cuba is stressing the peace theme, and underscores it by relinquishing the bombers . Brazil continues its ploys with Brazil continuing its efforts to undermine the peace .
 La Prensa recommended that the UN ""take cognizance of the facts and intervene" in the verification of the dismantlement of the Cuban basee. The UN should intervene in the disarmament of Cuba .
 November 24 issue of South America's magazine of greatest circulation, O Cruzeiro, carried an article by the respected 4 £tr political commentator Theophilo de Andrade .
 One of his most notoriously neutralist aides, Santiago Dantas, has been designated as a special emissary to Washington . He will explain Brazil's position to the United States administration to the U.S.
 He had previously indicated his displeasure with Brazilian Naval chiefs who favored positive military backing of the U.S. blockade . The United States has been conducting a blockade of the region .
 Retired Admiral Silvio Heck, an outspoken critic of Goulart's Cuban policy, was arrested . Vice Admiral Helio Gamier Sampaio was removed from his post as Commander of the Navy General Staff . Retired Adm. Heck, a critic of the Cuban policy
 European media expressed concern over the diplomatic stalemate in the Cuban crisis . He had proposed Brazilian destroyers rendezvous in Northeastern waters as a standby position .
 Castro's intransigeance, attributed in many quarters to Red China's support, was viewed as the major cause of the deadlock . Castro was seen as a major factor in the end of the Castro era .
 Some papers warned against Soviet duplicity but others felt that Khrushchev was doing his best with the thorny Cuban problem . Some papers warn against duplicity . Others felt that the Soviet government was doing its best .
 U.S. viewed as holding the top cards and urgsd to continue its firm stand . The United States was viewed as having the best cards .
 Prominence was given to reports of impending EastWest negotiations . Some attention was focused on Sino-Soviet relations .
 A number of papers expressed concern ever the long delay in implementing the KennedyKhrushchev agreement . Concerns were expressed in papers expressing concern over the delay .
 Many papers felt that the United States enjoyed strong advantages in the present situation . U« S. argued against any concessions or any weakening of the original agreement .
 L.e Monde, Paris, nointed out that a continuation of the blockade would reduce Cuba to the status of a semidependent country . Failure to carry out the agreement would permit Kennedy to reconsider his decision not to invade Cuba .
 Munich's Sueddedeutsch e Zeitung, left-center, held that any fear that Kennedy might accept Khrushchev's reported pi opos&l to recognize the German Democratic Republic in exchange for complete Sovi^L withdrawal from Cuba i3 without foundation .
 Mayor Brandt* s speech closing conference of prominent German and U.S. leaders in which he stressed the need for Western initiative on Berlin .
 Rome's II Tempo also urged the need for Western preparation, solidarity and determination . Rome's I Tempo urges the need to prepare for the world's first time .
 The major question is not the removal of offensive weapons from Cuba, but whether the . Soviet policy in favor of easing tension or the Chinese bellicose policy will prevail within the communist world .
 The President of Togo said the American action was understandable . But certain newspapers in Ghana and Nigeria continued their criticism of the United States .
 One of the few pablic expressions of official support for the UcS. came in a atat^mrnt by the President of Togo .
 Olympio said that ""no one would permit a revolver to be pointed at his head* 1 and that the action of the United States is understandable. After commenting that the quarantine might have been submitted to UN decision, Mr Olympio .
 The ofxicial rr.dio station stated that the ""blockade"" continued in effect despite withdrawal of the missiles . The radio also alleged a connection between Cuba and the United States election .
 In Nigeria the West African Pilot, consistently critical of the United States in the Cuban crisis, carried a story mentioning the Alpha 66 ""gang pirates created by the U,S." In Nigeria, the Pilot said Alpha 66 was created by U.S. and condemned American ""naked
 An article in the Daily Express reviewed the pros and cons of American interest in Cuba but was on balance critical .
 L'Action, organ of governing Neo-Destour party in Tunisia, carried an interpretive article entitled ""Mr Khrushchev's Calculated Risk" citing Cuba as examples of the Communist tactic of making ''outrageous moves"" in the hopes of securing significant gains in the process
 Removal of the miasiles from Cuba was merely the beginning, not the end of the Cuba crisis in the opinion of commentators in the Near East and South Asia .
 The Soviet Union may request U.S. concessions in exchange for Soviet concessions in Cuba, experts say . Other trouble spots, they also say, still exist, and may still exist .
 The United States will remain firm, however, say America's friends, while ""neutrals"" blame ""obstinate and hard conditions"" by the United States for the lack of a solution to the Cuba crisis .
 Removal of these bases would lessen cooperation between Turkey and the U.S. Removal would lessen close cooperation between the two countries . It would react against the feeling of Turkish people that the United States will come to Turkey's help when necessary .
 Jjap^pan-cmese media gave renewed attention to Cub^. liasrst v.st v .n.eek in concentrating straight news coverage oon n tha-^e bomber issue .
 Wide play was ggivrven ""^ to Castro's announcement that he would ggiverve \z""^op the Soviet bombers .
 The Manila TTimfr^ 8 * questioned the validity of the rFepor^t about hidden missiles and voiced the p r gs3 :ibility that it might be an effort on tht part orf advocates of a Cuban invasion .
 Japan J s number one paper, ran a aix-part analysis *v^ec * 'Wo rid Aiter Cuba' 'Wo . rid aiter Cuba.'
 The idea was partially echoed by a leading NHK (quasigovernmental) TV commentator who said the Cuba issue must be solved before taking up the Berlin problem . This con^nentarv was a:i taming m* r j 12 £g infrequent example
 He added that the present power balance should not be disturbed in seeking a solution to Berlin . He said that the power balance in Berlin should be not disturbed .
 Three Cuba-related articles are carried in the December issue of Chuo Koron , a highly influential intellectual monthly magazine . The Cuba-based issue is published by the magazine .
 The Philippines He raid and the Manila Times both had editorials on the possibility of hidden Soviet missiles in Cuba . They reached divergent conclusions . The Manila Times and the He raid found out what happened .
 The Herald voiced its suspicion that the Soviet Union and Castro were attempting to double cross the United States by hiding the missiles . It was understandable that Khrushchev would be disposed to remove the bombers, the Herald said .
 The paper concluded that President Kennedy ""is expected to assert the same firmness in his insistence on ground inspection"" that he has shown to the removal of the bombers .