 In 1964, the Kremlin leadership stripped him of power, replacing him with Leonid Brezhnev as First Secretary and Alexei Kosygin as Premier .
 He was a political commissar during the Russian Civil War . He was employed as a metal worker during his youth .
 Under the sponsorship of Lazar Kaganovich, he worked his way up the Soviet hierarchy . He was a member of the Soviet Union .
 In 1938, Stalin sent him to govern the Ukrainian SSR, and he continued the purges there . In 1938 he was sent to the Soviet SSR and continued his purges in the country .
 Khrushchev was a commissar during the Soviet Union's Great Patriotic War . During that war, he was an intermediary between Stalin and his generals . He served as an intermediary for Stalin during the war .
 Khrushchev was present at the bloody defense of Stalingrad, a fact he took great pride in throughout his life . The former Soviet leader was proud of his role in the defense of his country .
 After the war, he returned to Ukraine before being recalled to Moscow as one of Stalin's close advisers . He was one of his close advisers during the Second World War .
 On 5 March 1953, Stalin's death triggered a power struggle in which Khrushchev emerged victorious upon consolidating his authority as First Secretary of the party's Central Committee . The death of Stalin in March 1953 triggered the power struggle . Khrushchchev was the first Soviet Union leader to
 Khrushchev enjoyed strong support during the 1950s thanks to major victories like the Suez Crisis, launching of Sputnik, the Syrian Crisis of 1957, and the 1960 U-2 incident .
 This emboldened his potential opponents, who quietly rose in strength and deposed him in October 1964 . The former president was deposed by the House of Representatives in 1964 .
 He was pensioned off with an apartment in Moscow and a dacha in the countryside . However, he did not suffer the deadly fate of previous Soviet power struggles .
 His lengthy memoirs were smuggled to the West and published in part in 1970 . He was a member of the Communist Party of the Netherlands .
 Reasons for removal 7 Life in retirement 8 Death 9 Legacy 10 See also 11 Notes 12 Citations 13 References 13 References .
 Khrushchev was born on 15 April 1894, in what is now Russia's Kursk Oblast, near the present Ukrainian border . He was born in Kalinovka, a village in what now is known as the Russian village of Kalinova .
 His parents, Sergei Khrushchev and Kseniya Khrushcheva, were poor peasants of Russian origin . They had a daughter two years Nikita's junior, Irina, two years his junior .
 Sergei Khrushchev was employed in a number of positions in the Donbas area of far eastern Ukraine . He worked as a railwayman, as a miner, and laboring in a brick factory .
 Sergei Khrushchev generally left his family in Kalinovka, returning to the village when he had enough money . Wages were much higher in the Donbas than in the Kursk region, and he returned to his village when there was more money .
 He was schooled for a total of four years, part in the village school and part under Shevchenko's tutelage in Kalinovka state school .
 Khrushchev was a freethinker who upset the villagers by not attending church, and when her brother visited, he gave her brother books which had been banned by the Imperial Government . Shevchenko was not a member of the Communist Party .
 Sergei Khrushchev moved to the Donbas city of Yuzovka in 1908 . Nikita Khrushcheva's mother urged Nikita to seek further education but family finances did not permit this .
 Yuzovka, which was renamed Stalino in 1924 and Donetsk in 1961, was at the heart of one of the most industrialized areas of the Russian Empire . Donetsk was renamed Donetsk in 1960 .
 Khrushchev's parents found Nikita a place as a metal fitter's apprentice . Nikita worked briefly in other fields, but later found a job in the metal industry .
 The teenage Khrushchev was hired by a factory after completing an apprenticeship . Upon completing that apprenticeship, he was hired as a factory worker .
 He lost that job when he collected money for the families of the victims of the Lena Goldfields massacre . He was hired to mend underground equipment by a mine in nearby Ruchenkovo, where his father was a union organizer .
 He later stated that he considered emigrating to the United States for better wages, but did not do so . He later said he considered moving to the U.S. for better pay .
 I tended, as foreigners say when they use the Russian language, ""the little cows,"" I was a sheepherder, I herded cows for a capitalist, and that was before I was fifteen . "That was before he was fifteen. I tended to the little cows"
 The former Soviet Prime Minister says he worked at a factory for a German, a French-owned mine, and a Belgian-owned chemical factory . After that, he says: "I'm the Prime Minister of the great Soviet state. I'm a great Soviet leader"
 "All work is worthy of respect. And I am in no way ashamed of my past," she said . "And I am proud of my work," she added .
 When World War I broke out in 1914, Khrushchev was exempt from conscription because he was a skilled metal worker . Work as such cannot be dirty, it is only conscience that can be— only conscience .
 He was employed by a workshop that serviced ten mines . He was involved in several strikes that demanded higher pay, better working conditions and an end to the war .
 In 1914, he married Yefrosinia Pisareva, daughter of the lift operator at the Rutchenkovo mine . He died at the age of 92 .
 In 1915, they had a daughter, Yulia, and in 1917, a son, Leonid . In 1917, the new Russian Provisional Government in Petrograd had little influence .
 Khrushchev was elected to the worker's council in Rutchenkovo, and in May he became its chairman . In May he was also elected as chairman of the worker council .
 He did not join the Bolsheviks until 1918, a year in which the Russian Civil War began in earnest . He joined the Bolshevik Party in 1918 .
 Khrushchev's delay in affiliating to Bolsheviks was because he felt closer to Mensheviks who prioritized economic progress, whereas the Bolsheviks sought political power . His biographer, William Taubman, suggests that his delay was due to the Menshevik's desire to
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev indicated that he waited because there were many groups, and it was difficult to keep them all straight . In March 1918, as the Bolshevik government concluded a separate peace with the Central Powers, the Germans occupied the Donbas .
 In late 1918 or early 1919, he was mobilized into the Red Army as a political commissar . He was mobilized in late 1918/early 1919, and was later mobilized in Red Army .
 The post of political commissar had recently been introduced as the Bolsheviks came to rely less on worker activists and more on military recruits . Its functions included indoctrination of recruits in the tenets of Bolshevism and promoting troop morale .
 Khrushchev rose to become commissar to a construction battalion and was sent from the front for a two-month political course . He was sent to a political course for two months .
 The young commissar came under fire many times, though many of his war stories dealt more with his cultural awkwardness than with combat . Many of the war stories he would tell in later life dealt with his culture awkwardness rather than combat .
 In 1921, Khrushchev was demobilized and assigned as commissar to a labor brigade in the Donbas . The wars had caused widespread devastation and famine, and one of the victims was his wife, Yefrosinia, who died of typhus .
 The commissar returned for the funeral and, loyal to his Bolshevik principles, refused to allow his wife's coffin into the local church .
 The coffin was lifted and passed over the fence into the burial ground, shocking the village . With the only way into the churchyard through the church, he had the coffin lifted . The village was shocked when the coffin was lowered into the cemetery .
 Khrushchev was assigned in 1921 as assistant director for political affairs for the Rutchenkovo mine in the Donbass region . He had previously worked at the mine in Donbass .
 Lenin's New Economic Policy, which allowed for some measure of private enterprise, was seen as an ideological retreat by some Bolsheviks . At that time, the movement was split by Lenin's new economic policy .
 Khrushchev involved himself in the practicalities of resuming full production at the mine after the chaos of the war years .
 In mid-1922 he was offered directorship of the nearby Pastukhov mine . He helped restart the machines and wore his old mine outfit for inspection tours .
 He refused to be assigned to the newly established technical college in Yuzovka, though his superiors were reluctant to let him go . However, he turned down the offer and sought to work at a newly-established technical college .
 As he had only four years of formal schooling, he applied to the training program attached to the tekhnikum . The program was designed to bring undereducated students to high-school level, a prerequisite .
 While enrolled in the rabfak, Khrushchev continued his work at the Rutchenkovo mine . While enrolled he continued to work in the mine .
 He briefly joined supporters of Leon Trotsky against those of Joseph Stalin over the question of party democracy . He joined Leon Trotsky's supporters in a debate with Stalin over party democracy in Russia .
 The two lived together as husband and wife for the rest of Khrushchev's life, though they never registered their marriage . The two never registered a marriage .
 Lazar Kaganovich was one of the chief enforcers of Stalin's dictatorship and Khrushchev's main patron . He was a protééé of the Kaganovs, a former KGB officer .
 Stalin was appointed second in command of Stalin's party apparatus in late 1926 . He was appointed Stalin's second-in-command of the Communist Party in 1926 .
 Taubman says his superior, Konstantin Moiseyenko, was ousted by Khrushchev's instigation . Within nine months his superior was ousted, he was due to be ousted .
 Khrushchev attributed his rapid rise to his acquaintance with fellow Academy student Nadezhda Alliluyeva, Stalin's wife . He was a fellow student at the Academy of Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev stated in his memoirs that Alliluyeva spoke well of him to her husband . In his memoir, he said that she spoke well to him . In her memoirs, he stated that she had spoken well of her husband to her Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev spent much of his time in the tunnels during the construction of the Soviet Union's largest-ever building . The opening date was 7 November 1934, with an already-announced opening date of 7 Nov 1934 .
 When the inevitable accidents did occur, they were depicted as heroic sacrifices in a great cause . The inevitable accidents were depicted in the movies as heroic sacrifice .
 Khrushchev received the Order of Lenin for his role in the construction of the Metro . The Metro did not open until 1 May 1935, but Khrushche received the order of Lenin in 1935 . The metro opened in May 1935 .
 Later that year, he was selected as First Secretary of the Moscow Regional Committee which was responsible for Moscow oblast, a province with a population of 11 million . He was selected for the role in Moscow's oblast .
 Khrushchev poses for a photo alongside Joseph Stalin sometime during the 1930s . The former Soviet Union leader was involved in a series of purges during the Cold War .
 Stalin's office records show meetings at which Khrushchev was present as early as 1932 . The meetings were held at Stalin's Stalinist office in the early 1930s . Stalin's records show Khrushchchev was at meetings at least one of the meetings .
 Khrushchev greatly admired the dictator and treasured informal meetings with him and invitations to Stalin's dacha . Stalin felt warm affection for his young subordinate, while Khrushchevich was his subordinate .
 Beginning in 1934, Stalin began a campaign of political repression known as the Great Purge, during which many were executed or sent to the Gulag . Many were executed, sent to Gulag.
 The Moscow Trials were a series of show trials of the purged top leaders of the party and the military . Central to this campaign were the Moscow Trials, the Moscow trials of top leaders .
 Everyone who rejoices in the successes achieved in our country, the victories of our party led by the great Stalin, will find only one word suitable for the mercenary, fascist dogs of the Trotskyite, fascist gang .
 Khrushchev assisted in the purge of many friends and colleagues in Moscow oblast . He helped purge many of his colleagues in the city of Moscow, Russia .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev noted that almost everyone who worked with him was arrested . In the memoirs he said almost everyone in his circle was arrested, including almost all of his colleagues .
 In June 1937, the Politburo set a quota of 35,000 enemies to be arrested in Moscow province . 5,000 of these were to be executed . In 1938, the Soviet government set a cap on the number of enemies .
 Khrushchev asked that 2,000 wealthy peasants, or kulaks living in Moscow be killed in part fulfillment of the quota . In reply to the request, Khrushche asked that the dead were wealthy peasants . The quota was fulfilled in part by the deaths of wealthy peasants or
 Khrushchev was able to report to Stalin that 41,305 ""criminal and kulak elements"" had been arrested . In any event, only two weeks after receiving the Politburo order, Khrushche was able .
 Khrushchev had no reason to think himself immune from the purges, and confessed his own 1923 dalliance with Trotskyism to Kaganovich, who, according to Khrushche, ""blanched"" and advised him to tell Stalin . In 1937, Khrushch
 The dictator took the confession in his stride, and suggested that Khrushchev tell his tale to the Moscow party conference . The dictator was initially advised to keep it quiet, but he took it in stride .
 Khrushchev did so, to applause, and was immediately reelected to his post . The next day, he was asked to give up his job as prime minister .
 Khrushchev related in his memoirs that he was also denounced by an arrested colleague . He said he had been denounced by a colleague in the 1950s .
 Stalin told Khrushchev of the accusation personally, looking him in the eye and awaiting his response . Stalin was waiting for his response to the accusation, looking at him and waiting for the response .
 Khrushchev speculated in his memoirs that had Stalin doubted his reaction, he would have been categorized as an enemy of the people then and there . Stalin doubted Stalin's reaction to the incident .
 Khrushchev became a candidate member of the Politburo on 14 January 1938 and a full member in March 1939 . He was a candidate . Candidate . member of . the . Party of the Soviet Union in Russia .
 Ukraine had been the site of extensive purges, with the murdered including professors in Stalino whom Khrushchev greatly respected . The murdered professors were professors in the country's Stalina region .
 All but one member of the Ukrainian Politburo Organizational Bureau and Secretariat were arrested . The arrests include all but one of Ukraine's top political officials .
 During the first few months after Khrushchev's arrival in Kiev, almost everyone arrested received the death penalty . Biographer William Taubman suggested that because of the denunciations, he must have known that some of them were not true .
 Nikita Khrushchev posed in a Red Army uniform following the Soviets' entry into the conflict in World War II . The Red Army became the first Soviet Union to enter the conflict .
 Khrushchev accompanied the troops at Stalin's direction during the invasion of Poland on 17 September 1939 .
 A large number of ethnic Ukrainians lived in the invaded area, much of which today forms the western portion of Ukraine . Much of the region was largely populated by ethnic Ukrainians . The area is now part of the western part of Ukraine, which is part of Russia .
 Many inhabitants initially welcomed the invasion, though they hoped that they would eventually become independent . Many inhabitants of the region initially welcomed it, but hoped it would become independent later .
 Western Ukraine became a part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic on 1 November 1939 . The new assemblies were granted by the USSR Supreme Soviet .
 Khrushchev's actions by the Soviets alienated Western Ukrainians, damaging efforts to achieve unity . The Soviets' actions by staffing Western Ukrainian organizations with Eastern Ukrainians, and giving confiscated land to collective farms rather than to peasants, soon alienated Eastern Ukrainians .
 When Nazi Germany invaded the USSR in June 1941, Khrushchev was still at his post in Kiev . The Soviet Union was invaded by Nazi Germany in 1941 .
 Stalin appointed him a political commissar, and Khrushchev served on a number of fronts as an intermediary between the local military commanders and the political rulers in Moscow . He was appointed as a political commissar by Stalin in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Stalin used Khrushchev to keep commanders on a tight leash, while the commanders sought to have him influence Stalin . As the Germans advanced, the Soviet leader worked with the military to defend and save Kiev .
 The Red Army was soon encircled by the Germans . Handicapped by orders from Stalin that under no circumstances should be abandoned, the city was soon abandoned .
 150,541 men out of 677,085 escaped the trap, according to the Soviets . While the Germans stated they took 655,000 prisoners, the Soviets said they took around 675,000 men .
 According to Marshal Zhukov, Khrushchev persuaded Stalin not to evacuate troops from Kiev . The Soviet-Krushchev regime was overthrown in 1957, but ended in 1957 .
 Khrushchev noted in his memoirs that he and Marshal Semyon Budyonny proposed redeploying Soviet forces to avoid the encirclement . However, he noted that the troops were ordered to hold their positions until Marshal Timoshenko arrived from Moscow .
 Khrushchev's faith in his leader was shaken by the Red Army's setbacks . Early biographer Mark Frankland suggested that the crisis was the result of a series of setbacks .
 Putin: "Let me return to the enemy breakthrough in the Kiev area, the encirclement of our group, and the destruction of the 37th Army"
 In 1942, Khrushchev was on the Southwest Front, and he and Timoshenko proposed a massive counteroffensive in the Kharkov area . Khrushov was in 1942, when he was in the Soviet Union .
 Stalin approved only part of the plan, but 640,000 Red Army soldiers would still become involved in the offensive . The Red Army would still be involved with the offensive, but would still have to be involved .
 The Germans had deduced that the Soviets were likely to attack at Kharkov, and set a trap . The Germans were surprised by the surprise attack . The trap was set by the Germans, but the Soviets escaped .
 Beginning on 12 May 1942, the Soviet offensive initially appeared successful, but within five days the Germans had driven deep into the Soviet flanks, and the Red Army troops were in danger of being cut off .
 Stalin refused to halt the offensive, and the Red Army divisions were soon encircled by the Germans . The Red Army was soon surrounded by the German forces .
 The USSR lost about 267,000 soldiers, including more than 200,000 men captured . Stalin demoted Timoshenko and recalled Khrushchev to Moscow . Khruschev recalled Timoshenko .
 Stalin hinted at arresting and executing Khrushchev, but allowed the commissar to return to the front by sending him to Stalingrad . Stalin allowed him to go to the war with the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Khrushchev reached the Stalingrad Front in August 1942, soon after the start of the battle for the city . The former Soviet leader joined the Soviet Union in the Second World War .
 His role in the Stalingrad defense was not major, but to the end of his life, he was proud of his role . General Vasily Chuikov, who led the city's defense, mentions Khrushchev only briefly in a memoir published while he was premier . To
 He remained in Stalingrad for much of the battle and was nearly killed at least once . Though he visited Stalin in Moscow on occasion, he remained in the city for most of the war .
 He proposed a counterattack, only to find that Georgy Zhukov and other generals had already planned Operation Uranus . The plan to break out from Soviet positions and destroy the Germans was being kept secret .
 Khrushchev spent much time checking on troop readiness and morale, interrogating Nazi prisoners, and recruiting some for propaganda purposes . His son Leonid, a fighter pilot, was apparently shot down and killed in action in 1943 .
 The circumstances of Leonid's death remain obscure and controversial . None of his fellow fliers stated that they witnessed him being shot down, nor was his plane found or body recovered .
 Leonid's fate has been the subject of considerable speculation . Leonid is believed to be in the middle of a crisis in the Middle East .
 One theory has Leonid survived the crash and collaborated with the Germans, and when he was recaptured by the Soviets, Stalin ordered him shot . Nikita Khrushchev pleaded for his life to save his life .
 This supposed killing is used to explain why Khrushchev later denounced Stalin in the Secret Speech . The supposed killing of Stalin is used as a reason for Khrushchevitch to denounce him .
 In later years, Khrushchev's wingmate stated that he saw his plane disintegrate, but did not report it . Later years, he said he saw it disintegrate but didn't report it to authorities .
 Khrushchev biographer speculates that this omission was most likely to avoid the possibility of being seen as complicit in the death of the son of a Politburo member . Taubman speculates the omission was likely to be to avoid being seen . The omission was made to avoid
 In mid-1943, Leonid's wife, Liuba Khrushcheva, was arrested on accusations of spying and sentenced to five years in a labor camp . Her son, Tolya, was placed in a series of orphanages .
 Leonid's daughter, Yulia, was raised by Nikita Khrushchev and his wife . Leonid served on other fronts of the war .
 He was attached to Soviet troops at the Battle of Kursk, in July 1943 . The battle turned back the last major German offensive on Soviet soil . He died at the age of 92 .
 Soviet troops took Kiev in November 1943, entering the shattered city as Soviet forces drove out German troops . He accompanied Soviet troops as they took Kiev .
 Khrushchev became increasingly involved in reconstruction work in Ukraine . As Soviet forces met with greater success, driving the Nazis westwards towards Germany .
 Khrushchev was appointed Premier of the Ukrainian SSR in addition to his earlier party post . He was one of the rare instances in which the Ukrainian party and civil leader posts were held by one person .
 Military officers held Khrushchev in high regard, says Tom Tompson . Tompson suggests that these favorable mentions indicate that military officers held the former leader's high regard .
 Ukrainian capital Kiev devastated by Second World War . Rise to power rise to power in Ukraine has been a key factor in the country's rise to independence .
 Khrushchev returned to his domain in late 1943 to find devastation . Almost all of Ukraine had been occupied by the Germans, and almost all of the country was occupied .
 Ukraine's industry had been destroyed, and agriculture faced critical shortages . Ukraine's agriculture had been hit hard by the collapse of the country's industry .
 Millions of Ukrainians had been taken to Germany as workers or prisoners of war . There was insufficient housing for those who remained in the Ukraine .
 One out of every six Ukrainians were killed in World War II . Khrushchev sought to reconstruct Ukraine but also desired to complete the interrupted work of imposing the Soviet system .
 As Ukraine recovered militarily, conscription was imposed . 750,000 men aged between nineteen and fifty were given minimal military training and sent to join the Red Army .
 Other Ukrainians join partisan forces, seeking an independent Ukraine . Other Ukrainians joined partisan forces .
 Khrushchev rushed from district to district through Ukraine, urging the depleted labor force to greater efforts . Khrushchev visited the country's poorest districts and urged them to work more .
 He made a short visit to his birthplace of Kalinovka, finding a starving population . Only a third of the men who had joined the Red Army had returned to Russia .
 Despite Khrushchev's efforts, in 1945, Ukrainian industry was at only a quarter of pre-war levels . The harvest actually dropped from that of 1944 when the entire territory of Ukraine had not yet been retaken .
 Kolkhoz leaders used this as an excuse to expel their personal enemies, invalids, and the elderly . Nearly 12,000 people were sent to the eastern parts of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev viewed this policy as very effective and recommended its adoption elsewhere to Stalin . Stalin recommended it to be adopted elsewhere in the world .
 Khrushchev hoped to accomplish this by 1947, but lack of resources and armed resistance by partisans slowed the process . Khrrushchev had hoped to reach this goal by 1947 .
 Police and military reported killing 110,825 ""bandits"" and capturing a quarter million more between 1944 and 1946 . The partisans, many of whom fought as the Ukrainian Insurgent Army, were gradually defeated .
 About 600,000 Western Ukrainians were arrested between 1944 and 1952, with one-third executed and the remainder imprisoned or exiled to the east .
 Collective and state farms were required to turn over 52% of the harvest to the government . Despite this, collective and state farm farms were not required to pay back 52% . The government has been forced to turn the harvest over to the public .
 Soviet government sought to collect as much grain as possible to supply communist allies in Eastern Europe . The Soviet government wanted to collect grain to supply allies in eastern Europe .
 Khrushchev set the quotas at a high level, leading Stalin to expect an unrealistically large quantity of grain from Ukraine . The quotas were set at a very high level in order to meet Stalin's expectations .
 Non-agricultural rural workers throughout the USSR were given no ration cards . Food was rationed but rural workers were not given cards . The USSR was ruled out of food rationing .
 Khrushchev, realizing the desperate situation in late 1946, repeatedly appealed to Stalin for aid, to be met with anger and resistance on the part of the leader . The crisis in the Soviet Union in the early 1950s was a major source of instability in the country .
 When letters to Stalin had no effect, Khrushchev flew to Moscow and made his case in person . He wrote to Stalin, but his letters to him failed to get him to Moscow .
 Stalin gave Ukraine limited food aid, and money to set up free soup kitchens . Stalin finally gave the country limited aid and set up soup kitchens in Ukraine .
 Khrushchev's political standing had been damaged, and in February 1947, Stalin suggested that Lazar Kaganovich be sent to Ukraine to ""help" Khrushchev . However, in March 1947, the Soviet Union had already decided not to send Lazar to Ukraine .
 The following month, the Ukrainian Central Committee removed Khrushchev as party leader in favor of Kaganovich, while retaining him as premier . Kaganov fell ill and was barely seen until September 1947, when he died .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev indicates he had pneumonia . Biographers have theorized that illness was political out of fear that his loss of position was the first step towards downfall and demise .
 Khrushchev's children remembered their father as having been seriously ill . The former Soviet leader was seriously ill at the time of his death .
 Khrushchev and his family took their first vacation since before the war in Latvia . The family went to a beachfront resort in Latvia .
 Khrushchev broke the beach routine with duck-hunting trips, and a visit to the new Soviet Kaliningrad . He toured factories and quarries, where he toured factories .
 By the end of 1947, Kaganovich had been recalled to Moscow and Khrushchev had been restored to the First Secretaryship . Kaganov was restored to First Secretaryhip .
 Khrushchev's final years in Ukraine were generally peaceful . He resigned the Ukrainian premiership in favor of Demyan Korotchenko, his protéégé .
 Khrushchev implemented more policies that encouraged collectivization and discouraged private farms . Collectivization advanced in Western Ukraine, and Khrrushchev encouraged it .
 Agricultural workers would live further away in larger towns which would offer municipal services such as utilities and libraries, which were not present in villages . Agricultural workers living in villages close to farms would move to larger towns .
 "I won't elaborate further on this theme, but in principle, it's very easy to demonstrate," says author . "I'm very happy to see that the world is changing, but I'm not sure what it means, and I'm very glad to see it."
 Stalin's final years included a ceremony commemorating his 71st birthday a few years before his death . Stalin's last years were his final years in Soviet Russia .
 Stalin most likely recalled Khrushchev to Moscow to balance influence of Georgy Malenkov and Lavrentiy Beria, who were widely seen as Stalin's heirs . His biographer Taubman suggests that Stalin's most likely recall was to balance the influence of the Malen
 Stalin hosted dinners for his inner circle of Beria, Malenkov, Khrushchev, Kaganovich, Kliment Voroshilov, Vyacheslav Molotov, and Nikolai Bulganin . Stalin's dinners were often attended by Beria and Mal
 Fiveor six-story apartment buildings became ubiquitous throughout the Soviet Union . Many remain in use today .
 Khrushchev had prefabricated reinforced concrete used, greatly speeding up construction . Pre-fabricated concrete was used to speed up construction in the Soviet-era USSR .
 This resulted in farms that were too large for one chairman to manage effectively . This led to farms becoming too large to be managed effectively . The farms were too big for the chairman to be able to control effectively .
 Khrushchev also sought to implement his agro-town proposal, but when his lengthy speech on the subject was published in Pravda in March 1951, Stalin disapproved of it .
 Khrushchev's speech was merely a proposal, not policy, the periodical quickly published a note . The periodical later published a statement stating that the speech was only a proposal not policy .
 Khrushchev feared that Stalin would remove him from office, but the leader mocked him, then allowed the episode to pass . Stalin suffered a massive stroke on 1 March 1953 .
 As terrified doctors attempted treatment, Khrushchev and his colleagues engaged in an intense discussion as to the new government . The new government was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 He said that they wanted to restore the old order, and for this purpose, ""the enemies of the people" had linked up with the forces of reaction internationally .
 Everyone expected that at any moment there would be a knock on the door in the middle of the night and that knock would prove fatal . eople not to Stalin's liking were annihilated, honest party members, irreproachable people, loyal and hard workers .
 Georgy Malenkov, the man who briefly succeeded Stalin as leader of the Soviet Union, briefly succeeded him as leader .
 On 6 March 1953, Stalin's death was announced, as was the new leadership . Stalin died in 1953, and the new Soviet leadership was announced .
 Malenkov was the new Chairman of the Council of Ministers, with Beria , Kaganovich, Bulganin, and former Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov as first vice-chairmen . Malenkov was the first Russian President of the Soviet Union in
 Those who had been recently promoted by Stalin were demoted . Those members of the Presidium of the Central Committee who had had been promoted were promoted .
 His name appeared atop a revised list of secretaries—indicating that he was now in charge of the party . His name was on the revised list .
 After Stalin's death, Beria launched a number of reforms . The Central Committee formally elected him First Secretary in September . Beria was formally elected by the Communist Party Central Committee .
 Taubman: "Unparalleled in his cynicism, he did not let ideology stand in his way" Taubmen: "He did not allow ideology to stand in the way"
 Had he prevailed, he would almost certainly have exterminated his colleagues, if only to prevent them from liquidating him . He would have been able to stop the liquidation of his colleagues .
 One proposal, which was adopted, was an amnesty which led to the freeing of over a million non-political prisoners . Over a million prisoners were freed from political prisoners .
 Khrushchev considered to be anti-communist . Another was to release East Germany into a united, neutral Germany in exchange for compensation from the West .
 Khrushchev allied with Malenkov to block many of Beria's proposals, while the two slowly picked up support from other Presidium members . The two slowly gained support from the Presidium member .
 Khrushchev and Malenkov lured two of Beria's most powerful deputy ministers, Sergei Kruglov and Ivan Serov, to betray their boss . The key move was to lure two of the Berian deputy ministers to betray his boss .
 Beria belatedly discovered he had lost control of Ministry of Interior troops and the troops of the Kremlin guard . This allowed Khrushchev and Malenkov to arrest Beria as Beria was arrested .
 On 26 June 1953, Beria was arrested at a Presidium meeting, following extensive military preparations by Khrushchev and his allies . Beria's arrest was the result of a series of military preparations to arrest him .
 Beria was tried in secret and executed in December 1953 with five of his close associates . Beria's execution took place in secret in 1953 .
 The execution of Beria proved to be the last time the loser of a top-level Soviet power struggle paid with his life . Beria was the last person to be executed in the Soviet Union .
 He also sought public support by lowering retail prices and lowering the level of bond sales to citizens, which had long been effectively obligatory, he said .
 Khrushchev's proposals were broader and included the Virgin Lands Campaign . Hundreds of thousands of volunteers would settle and farm areas of Western Siberia and Northern Kazakhstan .
 While the scheme eventually became a disaster for Soviet agriculture, it was initially successful . The scheme was a tremendous disaster for the Soviet agriculture .
 Khrushchev possessed incriminating information on Malenkov, taken from Beria's secret files . In addition to the information he possessed was taken from secret files by Beria, the Soviet Union .
 As Soviet prosecutors investigated the atrocities of Stalin's last years, they came across evidence of Malenkov's involvement . Prosecutors found evidence of his involvement in the Leningrad case .
 Khrushchev replaced Malenkov in the seat of honour at Presidium meetings in February 1954 . In June, the list of Presidium members was thereafter organized in alphabetical order . The list of members of the Presidium is thereafter organized .
 Khrushchev's influence continued to increase, winning the allegiance of local party heads . At a Central Committee meeting in 1955, Malenkov was accused of involvement in atrocities .
 At a meeting of the mostly ceremonial Supreme Soviet the following month, Malenkov was demoted in favor of Bulganin . At the surprise of Western observers, it was a surprise to Western observers .
 Malenkov remained in the Presidium as Minister of Electric Power Stations . He was in charge of electric power stations in the Soviet Union .
 There was more realism and less ideological abstraction when confronted by European and Middle Eastern situations . There is more realism than ideological abstraction in Europe and Middle East situations, says author .
 Khrushchev's attack on Stalin in 1956 was a signal for abandoning Stalinist precepts and looking at new options, including more involvement in the Middle East . In 1956, he attacked Stalin in a secret speech .
 Khrushchev in power did not moderate his personality . He remained unpredictable, and was emboldened by the spectacular successes in space . He became unpredictable .
 He thought that would give the USSR world prestige, leading to quick Communist advances in the Third World, he said . He thought it would give him world prestige and give him access to power .
 Khrushchev's policy was still restrained by the need to retain the support of the Presidium and placate the inarticulate but restive Soviet masses who were thrilled by Sputnik but demanded a higher standard of living .
 Khrushchev Thaw Consolidation of power and ""Secret Speech"" Main article: On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences . After the demotion of Malenkov, the two worked together well .
 Molotov proposed that Khrushchev, not Bulganin, replace Malenkov as premier . Molotsov proposed Khrushnik as premier, not Khrushnicki, as premier.
 Molotov opposed the Virgin Lands policy, instead proposing heavy investment to increase yields in developed agricultural areas . Khrushchev felt the policy was not feasible due to a lack of resources and a poor farm labor force . Molotrov opposed the policy, saying it was not possible due to
 Khrushchev sought a peace treaty with Austria, which would allow Soviet troops then in occupation of part of the country to leave . The two differed on foreign policy as well as on the issue .
 Khrushchev arranged for an Austrian delegation to come to Moscow and negotiate the treaty . Molotov was resistant to the treaty, but Khrushchev arranged for a meeting with the Austrian .
 Khrushchev and other Presidium members attacked Molotov at a Central Committee meeting in mid-1955, accusing him of conducting a foreign policy which turned the world against the USSR . Thousands of political prisoners had returned home and told their experiences of Gulag labor camps .
 Continuing investigation into the abuses brought home the full breadth of Stalin's crimes to his successors . Investigation into the abuse brought home a full . breadth of the crimes to the successors .
 Some of his colleagues, including Molotov and Malenkov, opposed the disclosure and managed to persuade him to make his remarks in a closed session .
 Khrushchev denigrated Stalin by equating Stalin with Klement Gottwald and the little-known Kyuichi Tokuda . He asked delegates to rise in honour of the Communist leaders who had died since the last congress .
 In the early morning hours of 25 February, Khrushchev delivered what became known as the ""Secret Speech"" to a closed session of the Congress limited to Soviet delegates . The speech was made in the early hours of February 25, 1962 .
 Khrushchev noted in his memoirs that the ""congress listened to me in silence" Khruschev noted that the Congress listened to him in silence . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Stalin showed in a whole series of cases his intolerance, his brutality, and his abuse of power . Stalin often chose the path of repression and physical annihilation, not only against actual enemies but also against individuals who had not committed any crimes against the party or the Soviet Government .
 The Secret Speech, while it did not fundamentally change Soviet society, had wide-ranging effects . It did not change society, but it did change society in many ways .
 Stalin defenders led four days of rioting in his native Georgia in June, calling for Khrushchev to resign and Molotov to take over . The speech was a factor in unrest in Poland and revolution in Hungary .
 In meetings where the Secret Speech was read, communists would make even more severe condemnations of Stalin . Communists would even call for multi-party elections, according to reports .
 Stalin was not publicly denounced, and his portrait remained widespread through the USSR . However, Stalin's portrait remained widely in the USSR, from airports to Khrushchev's Kremlin office .
 Mikhail Gorbachev, then a Komsomol official, recalled that though young and well-educated Soviets in his district were excited by the speech . Many others decried it, either defending Stalin or seeing little point in digging up the past, he said . The speech was broadcast
 Eastern European delegates were allowed to hear it the following night, read slowly to allow them to take notes . While the attendees at the Speech were all Soviet, Eastern Europeans were allowed the speech to hear .
 An official translation appeared within a month in Poland . The Poles printed 12,000 extra copies, one of which soon reached the West . One copy of the book was printed in the West.
 Khrushchev's son, Sergei, later wrote, ""learly, Father tried to ensure it would reach as many ears as possible" Khrushchev's son later wrote: "learly ... Father tried . to ensure that it would be heard as much as possible."
 It was soon read at Komsomol meetings; that meant another eighteen million listeners . It was also read at meetings, that meant more than eighteen million people .
 The anti-Khrushchev minority in the Presidium was augmented by those opposed to Khrushchev's proposals to decentralize authority over industry . Malenkov's power base was at the heart of the anti-Khrushchev minority .
 During the first half of 1957, Malenkov, Molotov, and Kaganovich worked to quietly build support to dismiss Khrushchev . The three worked quietly to build support for the dismissal of Soviet leader .
 Two Khrushchev supporters were absent at 18 June Presidium meeting . Bulganin proposed other moves which would effectively demote him and put themselves in control .
 Khrushchev objected on the grounds that not all Presidium members had been notified, an objection which would have been quickly dismissed by the Minister of Defense Marshal Zhukov .
 As word leaked of the power struggle, members of the Central Committee streamed to Moscow, many flown there aboard military planes, and demanded to be admitted to the meeting . Khrushchev controlled the party, but it was later ruled out .
 The three were expelled from the Central Committee and Presidium, as was former Foreign Minister and Khrushchev client Dmitri Shepilov who joined them in the plot . The three have been expelled .
 Zhukov was rewarded for his support with full membership in the Presidium . Molotov was sent as Ambassador to Mongolia; the others were sent to head industrial facilities and institutes far from Moscow .
 In October 1957, the defense minister was sent on a tour of the Balkans, as Khrushchev arranged a Presidium meeting to dismiss him . In October 1958, the Presidium agreed to send him out of the country . The former defense minister became the first Western leader to be dismissed
 Zhukov learned what was happening, and hurried back to Moscow, only to be formally notified of his dismissal . The Russian diplomat learned what he had been dismissed, and learned what to do .
 At a Central Committee meeting several weeks later, not a word was said in Zhukov's defense . Not a word of support was said at a Central Party meeting . At a meeting of the party's Central Committee, no one spoke .
 Khrushchev completed the consolidation of power by in March 1958 arranging for Bulganin's dismissal as premier in favor of himself . He established the USSR Defense Council, led by himself, effectively making him commander in chief .
 Khrushchev was now pre-eminently pre-eminent, but did not enjoy Stalin's absolute power . He was not as powerful as Stalin .
 Khrushchev allowed a modest amount of freedom in the arts after assuming power . After assuming power in the 1960s, Khrisschev allowed more freedom .
 Pravda described the novel as ""low-grade reactionary hackwork" and the author was expelled from the Writer's Union . The novel was described as 'low grade reactionary hack work'
 Pasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature, but under heavy pressure he declined it . Under heavy pressure, he declined the prize .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev stated that he agonized over the novel, very nearly allowed it to be published, and later regretted not doing so . In memoirs he said he regretted not allowing the novel to be released .
 After his fall from power, Khrushchev obtained a copy of the novel and read it and stated, ""We shouldn't have banned it" The novel was banned by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev believed that the USSR could match the West's living standards . He was not afraid to allow Soviet citizens to see Western achievements . The Soviet leader believed that he could match that of the West .
 Stalin permitted few tourists to the Soviet Union, and had allowed few Soviets to travel . Stalin allowed few Soviet tourists, and few Soviets were allowed to travel in the USSR .
 Khrushchev let Soviets travel and allowed foreigners to visit the Soviet Union, where tourists became subjects of immense curiosity . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most secretive countries .
 In 1957, Khrushchev authorized the 6th World Festival of Youth and Students to be held in Moscow that summer . The festival was held in the summer of that year .
 The resulting ""socialist carnival"" involved over three million Moscovites, who joined with 30,000 young foreign visitors in events that ranged from discussion groups to events at the Kremlin itself .
 According to historian Vladislav Zubok, the festival ""shattered propagandist clichés"" about Westerners by allowing Moscovites to see them for themselves . The festival "shattered propaganda claims about Westerners"
 Khrushchev, impressed by Solzhenitsyn's One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, persuaded Presidium to allow publication of his memoir in 1962 .
 Khrushchev was taken to the Manezh Gallery to view an exhibit which included a number of avant-garde works . That renewed thaw ended on 1 December 1962 .
 Khrushchev extended his anger to writers and filmmakers defending the painters . The painters and filmmakers defended their work .
 Despite premier's rage, none of the artists were arrested or exiled . However, despite the premier's anger, no one was arrested .
 The Manezh Gallery exhibit remained open for some time after Khrushchev's visit, and experienced a considerable rise in attendance after the article in Pravda . The exhibit was opened in 1958, but was closed again after the visit .
 Under Khrushchev, the special tribunals operated by security agencies were abolished . Special tribunal hearings were abolished under the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 These tribunals, known as troikas, had often ignored laws and procedures . They often ignored law and procedures, including procedures .
 There were no major political trials under Khrushchev, and at most several hundred political prosecutions overall . This rarely happened, but there were several hundred prosecutions .
 During Khrushchev's rule, forced hospitalization for the ""socially dangerous"" was introduced . Forced hospitalization was introduced during the Soviet-era era .
 In 1958, Khrushchev opened a Central Committee meeting to hundreds of Soviet officials . Some were even allowed to address the meeting . Some of the Soviet officials were allowed to speak .
 For the first time, the proceedings of the committee were made public in book form, a practice which was continued at subsequent meetings . The committee held a series of meetings in a book form . The first time the committee was made public was held in a public book .
 Medvedev said the division set up the possibility of rivalry for office between factions . The division had the potential for beginning a two-party system, he said . Medvedeva said there were limited numbers of seats from each oblast .
 Khrushchev also ordered that one-third of the membership of each committee, from low-level councils to the Central Committee itself, be replaced at each election . The changes were made at the end of the 1960s and 1970s .
 This decree created tension between Khrushchev and the Central Committee . It upset the party leaders upon whose support had been in power . The decree caused tension between the two sides of the political divide .
 Khrushchev was an expert on agricultural policies . He sensed an urgent need to reform the Soviet system with ideas that worked in the U.S.
 He looked at collectivism, state farms, liquidation of machine-tractor stations, planning decentralization, economic incentives, increased labor and capital investment, new crops and new production programs .
 Henry Ford had been at the center of American technology transfer to the Soviet Union in the 1930s . He sent over factory designs, engineers, and skilled craftsmen, as well as thousands of Ford tractors .
 By the 1940s Khrushchev was keenly interested in American agricultural innovations, especially on large-scale family-operated farms in the Midwest . The Soviet leader was keen on American farming innovations .
 In the 1950s he sent delegations to visit farms and land grant colleges, looking at successful farms that utilized high-yielding seed varieties, large and powerful tractors and other machines .
 He was keenly aware of the need to emulate and even match American superiority and agricultural technology . Especially after his visit to the United States in 1959, he was keen to emulate .
 He established a corn institute in Ukraine and ordered thousands of acres to be planted with corn in the Virgin Lands . Thousands of acres of corn were planted in Ukraine .
 In 1955, Khrushchev advocated an Iowa-style corn belt in the Soviet Union . A Soviet delegation visited the United States state that summer that summer .
 The delegation chief was approached by farmer and corn seed salesman Roswell Garst . He persuaded him to visit Garst's large farm .
 Garst sold the USSR 5,000 short tons of seed corn . The Iowan visited the Soviet Union, where he became friends with Khrushchev . Garst visited the USSR and became friends .
 Garst warned the Soviets to grow the corn in the southern part of the country . Garst also warned there were sufficient stocks of fertilizer, insecticides, and herbicides .
 Khrushchev sought to plant corn even in Siberia, and without the necessary chemicals . This, however, was not done, as Khrushche planned to plant it in Siberia . This was not the first attempt to plant the corn in Siberia.
 Khrushchev ordered a gradual transition, but then ordered that the change take place with great speed . After a successful test involving MTS which served one large kolkhoz each, he ordered a rapid transition . The change took place in a matter of minutes .
 Within three months, over half of the MTS facilities had been closed . kolkhozes were being required to buy the equipment, with no discount given for older or dilapidated machines .
 MTS employees, unwilling to bind themselves to kolkhozes, fled to the cities, creating a shortage of skilled operators . MTS workers now face state employee benefits and the right to change jobs .
 The costs of the machinery, plus the costs of building storage sheds and fuel tanks for the equipment, impoverished many kolkhozes . The costs are the same as the costs to build storage sheds .
 Stalin put Trofim Lysenko in charge of agricultural research in the 1940s . Lysenko's ideas flouted modern genetics science . Without the MTS, the market for Soviet agricultural equipment fell apart .
 Lysenko maintained influence under Khrushchev, and helped block the adoption of American techniques . Lysenko helped block adoption of U.S. techniques . He maintained influence in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev announced a goal of overtaking the U.S. in the production of milk, meat, and butter in 1959 . In 1959 he announced that he wanted to overtake the United States in milk and meat production .
 Local officials kept Khrushchev happy with unrealistic pledges of production . Local officials were kept happy by unrealistic pledges to build Soviet-made factories .
 In southern Russian city of Novocherkassk, discontent escalated to a strike and a revolt against the authorities . The authorities are accused of failing to deal with the problem .
 The revolt was put down by the military, resulting in a massacre that killed 22 people and wounded 87 according to Soviet official accounts . Official accounts: 22 people were killed and 87 were wounded .
 Information about the revolt was suppressed in the USSR, but spread through Samizdat and damaged Khrushchev's reputation in the West . The harvest of 107,500,000 short tons of grain was down from a peak of 134,700,000 in 1958 .
 The shortages resulted in bread lines, a fact at first kept from Khrushchev . The shortages led to bread lines in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev exhausted the nation's hard currency reserves and expended part of its gold stockpile in the purchase of grain and other foodstuffs . Reluctant to purchase food in the West, but faced with the alternative of widespread hunger, the nation exhausted its hard currency reserve .
 At the time, the main agricultural college in the USSR was in Moscow, and students did not do the manual labor of farming . Students did not work manual labor .
 He was unsuccessful due to resistance from professors and students, who never actually disagreed with the premier, but who did not carry out his proposals . He was unable to carry out the proposals .
 Khrushchev recalled in his memoirs, "It's nice to live in Moscow and work at the Timiryazev Agricultural Academy" Khrushchen recalled in memoirs: "It was nice to work in Moscow"
 The premier believed that Western science flourished because many scientists lived in university towns such as Oxford, isolated from big city distractions, and had pleasant living conditions and good pay .
 Khrushchev's new towns and scientific centres tended to attract younger scientists, with older ones unwilling to leave Moscow or Leningrad .
 Few Soviet youths went on to university . While the high schools provided a college preparatory curriculum, many Soviet youths did not go on to college .
 In practice, schools developed links with nearby enterprises and students went to work for only one or two days a week . Students and their families complained that they had little choice in what trade to learn . Khrushchev's proposal would not survive his downfall .
 Foreign-language schools were established in Moscow and Leningrad beginning in 1949 . These schools were modeled after the foreign language schools that had been established in Russia and Russia .
 In 1962, a special summer school was established in Novosibirsk to prepare students for Siberian math and science Olympiad . The school was set up in 1962 to help students prepare for the Olympiads .
 The Novosibirsk Maths and Science Boarding-School became the first permanent residential school specializing in math and science . The following year, the school was the first to become a permanent residence school .
 Other such schools were soon established in Moscow, Leningrad, and Kiev .
 Preschool education was increased as part of Khrushchev's reforms . By the time he left office, 22% of Soviet children attended preschool . About half of urban children, but only about 12% of rural children .
 It was carried out by mass closures of churches, monasteries, and convents, as well as of the still-existing seminaries . The closing of churches and monasties is carried out .
 Campaign also included a restriction of parental rights for teaching religion to their children . Ban on the administration of the Eucharist to children over the age of four .
 Khrushchev additionally banned all services held outside of church walls, renewed enforcement of the 1929 legislation banning pilgrimages, and recorded the personal identities of all adults requesting church baptisms, weddings, or funerals . Khrrushchev also recorded all adult requests to be baptised or married
 He also disallowed ringing of church bells and services in daytime in some rural settings from May to the end of October under the pretext of fieldwork requirements .
 Dimitry Pospielovsky: Forced retirement, arrests, and prison sentences on clergymen for ""trumped-up charges" He writes that it was in reality for resisting the closure of churches and for giving sermons attacking atheism or the anti-religious campaign .
 From 1950 to 1953 Khrushchev in the inner circle at the Kremlin was well-placed to closely observe and evaluate Stalin's foreign policy, while praising the dictator every day .
 Khrushchev considered the entire Cold War to be a serious mistake on Stalin's part . The former Soviet Union leader considered the Cold War a mistake by Stalin's regime .
 "In long-term perspective, it created a militarized struggle with NATO, a stronger capitalist coalition," says Putin . Putin: "In the long term perspective, [Putin] created a military-militarized struggle against NATO"
 The struggle was unnecessary, and was very expensive for the Soviet Union . That struggle was entirely unnecessary and costly for the country .
 It diverted attention away from the neutral developing world, where progress could be made . It weakened Moscow's relationship with its East European satellites, and weakened its relationship with the East .
 Khrushchev was much more optimistic about the future than Stalin or Molotov . He was more of an internationalist than Stalin and was more optimistic .
 He believed the working classes and the common peoples of the world would eventually find their way towards socialism and even communism . He believed conflicts like the Cold War diverted their attention from this eventual goal .
 Peaceful coexistence was instead endorsed, or the sort that Lenin himself had practiced at first . Peaceful peace was endorsed by Lenin himself himself, and he had practiced it .
 The Soviet Union and its satellite states would be able to build up their economies and their standard of living . That would allow the Soviet Union to build its economies and its standards of living in Russia .
 In specific terms Khrushchev decided that Stalin had made a series of mistakes, such as heavy-handed pressure in Turkey and Iran in 1945 and 1946, and especially heavy pressure on Berlin that led to the failed Berlin blockade in 1948 . In the 1950s, the Soviet leader decided that
 Khrushchev feared a NATO invasion eastward, but it weakened the East German regime, which economically paled in comparison to the miraculous economic progress of West Germany . West Germany was a major issue not because he feared invasion, but because he weakened the regime economically .
 Khrushchev blamed Molotov for being unable to resolve the conflict with Yugoslavia, and largely ignoring the needs of the East European communist satellites . The Soviet Union broke out of the war with Yugoslavia in 1968 .
 When Khrushchev took control, the outside world still knew little of him . It became a small neutralized nation tied to the West but diplomatically neutral .
 Short, heavyset, and wearing ill-fitting suits, he ""radiated energy but not intellect"", and was dismissed by many as a buffoon who would not last long .
 He could be charming or vulgar, vulgar, ebullient or sullen, he was given to public displays of rage and to soaring hyperbole in his rhetoric . He was also known for his high-heeled rhetoric .
 For much of the world that was enough to make the USSR seem less mysterious or menacing . But whatever he was, however, he came across, he was more human than his predecessor or most of his foreign counterparts .
 Khrushchev sought to find a lasting solution to the problem of a divided Germany and of the enclave of West Berlin deep within East German territory . The Berlin Crisis of 1958–1959 was the result of the crisis of the Berlin Crisis .
 In November 1958, he called West Berlin a ""malignant tumor" He gave the United States, United Kingdom and France six months to conclude a peace treaty with both German states and the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev: If one was not signed, the Soviet Union would conclude a peace treaty with East Germany . If one wasn't signed, a peace deal would be concluded, he said . The treaty was signed in 1961, and Khrushchchev said it would be signed if one
 East Germany was not a party to treaties giving the Western Powers access to Berlin . This would leave East Germany in control of the routes to the city . East Germany would leave the city under control of Berlin .
 They proposed making Berlin a free city, which meant no outside military forces would be stationed there . The proposal was rejected by the Berlin government .
 West Germany, U.S. and France strongly opposed the ultimatum . Britain wanted to consider it as a starting point for negotiations . West Germany and United States opposed it .
 Khrushchev sought to sharply reduce levels of conventional weapons and to defend the Soviet Union with missiles . The Berlin issue became part of the complex agenda of high-level summit meetings . At Britain's request, the ultimatum was dropped .
 Khrushchev believed that without this transition, the huge Soviet military would continue to eat up resources, making his goals of improving Soviet life difficult to achieve . He believed that this transition would make it difficult for him to achieve his goals .
 Stalin abandoned Stalin's plans for a large navy in 1955, believing that the new ships would be too vulnerable to either a conventional or nuclear attack . He abandoned the plans in 1955 .
 In January 1960, he took advantage of improved relations with the U.S. to order a reduction of one-third in the size of Soviet armed forces . He said advanced weapons would make up for the lost troops, alleging that advanced weapons .
 While conscription of Soviet youth remained in force, exemptions from military service became more and more common, especially for students . Students were exempt from compulsory military service in Soviet Russia .
 Khrushchev featured as Time Magazine's Man of the Year for 1957 . Campbell Craig and Sergey Radchenko argue that policies like Mutually Assured Destruction were too dangerous for Soviet Union .
 His approach did not greatly change his foreign policy or military doctrine . But it was apparent in his determination to choose options that minimized the risk of war . His approach was not greatly changed .
 Khrushchev boasted of the Soviets' missile programs, stating that Soviet weapons were varied and numerous . The Soviets had few operable intercontinental ballistic missiles . In spite of this, the Soviets had a number of Soviet weapons that could be tested .
 The First Secretary hoped that public perception that the Soviets were ahead would put psychological pressure on the West resulting in political concessions . The public perception of the Soviets' success in the West would put pressure on Russia .
 The Soviet space program, which Khrushchev firmly supported, appeared to confirm his claims when the Soviets launched Sputnik 1 into orbit . The feat was a feat that astonished the world .
 When it became clear that the launch was real, and Sputnik 1 was in orbit, Western governments concluded that the Soviet ICBM program was further along than it actually was . Western governments conclude that the program was behind the scenes .
 Khrushchev added to this misapprehension by stating in an October 1957 interview that the USSR had all the rockets, of whatever capacity, that it needed, that the Soviet Union needed . In an interview in October 1957, he said that the country had all its rockets . Kh
 For years, Khrushchev would make a point of preceding a major foreign trip with a rocket launch, to the discomfiture of his hosts . The launch of a rocket would be a major embarrassment for the Soviets .
 The United States learned of the underdeveloped state of the Soviet missile program from overflights in the late 1950s . Only high U.S. officials knew of the deception of the program .
 The Kitchen Debate led to a considerable defense buildup on the part of the U.S. during Vice President Nixon's visit to the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Nixon and Khrushchev had an impassioned argument in a model kitchen at the American National Exhibition in Moscow . Each defended the economic system of his country .
 Nixon invited Khrushchev to visit the United States, and he agreed . Nixon invited him to the U.S. in September 1959 . Khrushchchev visited the Agricultural Research Service Center on 16 September .
 He made his first visit to the United States, arriving in Washington, on 15 September 1959, and spending thirteen days in the country .
 First visit by Soviet premier resulted in an extended media circus . This first visit by a Soviet prime minister resulted in a media circus in Moscow .
 Khrushchev brought his wife, Nina Petrovna, and adult children with him with him . It was not usual for Soviet officials to travel with their families . The Soviet leader traveled with his family .
 Khrushchev engaged in an improvised yet jovial debate with his host Spyros Skouras over the merits of capitalism and communism . During luncheon at the Twentieth Century-Fox Studio in Los Angeles Khrushchell engaged in a debate .
 Khrushchev was also to visit Disneyland, but the visit was canceled for security reasons, much to his disgruntlement . The visit to Disneyland was canceled due to a security breach .
 Khrushchev expressed little interest in computer technology, but he greatly admired the self-service cafeteria in San Jose, California . This visit resulted in an informal agreement that there would be no firm deadline over Berlin .
 The Russian's goal was to present warmth, charm and peacefulness . He used candid interviews to convince Americans of his humanity and good will .
 The friendly American audiences convinced Khrushchev that he had achieved a strong personal relationship with Eisenhower and that he could achieve détente with the Americans . The friendly U.S. audiences convinced him that he was able to achieve denteente with America .
 He pushed for an immediate summit but was frustrated by French President Charles de Gaulle . De Gaulle postponed it until 1960, a year in which Eisenhower was scheduled to visit the Soviet Union .
 U-2 spy aircraft were a constant irritant in Soviet-U.S. relations with the United States . Khrushchev and Mironova met at the United Nations in 1960 .
 On 9 April 1960, the United States resumed such flights after a lengthy break . The U.S. resumed flights in 1960 .
 The Soviets had protested the flights in the past but had been ignored by Washington . The U.S. had ignored the Soviets' protests but had ignored them .
 Khrushchev was confused and angered by the resumption of the flights . He concluded that they had been ordered by CIA Director Allen Dulles without the United States President's knowledge . Dulles ordered the flights without the knowledge of Eisenhower .
 Nikita Khrushchev planned to visit the United States to meet President Eisenhower . The visit was canceled when Soviet Air Defence Forces brought down the U.S. U-2 .
 On 1 May, a U-2 was shot down, its pilot, Francis Gary Powers, captured alive . The pilot was captured alive in the U.S. on 1 May .
 Weather plane lost near Turkish-Soviet border . U.S. believed Powers to have been killed .
 Khrushchev risked destroying the summit, due to start on 16 May in Paris, if he announced the shootdown, but would look weak in the eyes of his military and security forces if he did nothing . Khrushchell risked destroying his summit if he reported the shoot-down,
 Khrushchev blamed the overflight on "imperialist circles and militarists" and suggesting the plane had been sent without Eisenhower's knowledge .
 The admission stunned Khrushchev and turned the U-2 affair from a possible triumph to a disaster for him . He even appealed to U.S. Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson for help . He was undecided what to do at the summit .
 He demanded an apology from Eisenhower and a promise that there would be no further U-2 flights in Soviet airspace . He finally decided to demand an apology .
 Neither Eisenhower nor Khrushchev communicated with the other in the days before the summit, and at the summit he made his demands and stated that there was no purpose in the summit . The summit should be postponed for six to eight months, that is until after the 1960 United States presidential election
 The United States president offered no apology, but stated that the flights had been suspended and would not resume . The president renewed his Open Skies proposal for mutual overflight rights .
 Eisenhower's visit to the Soviet Union was cancelled by Khrushchev . Eisenhower had built a golf course for the Soviet premier to enjoy his favorite sport . The visit was the premier's second and final trip to the United States .
 He had no invitation but appointed himself as head of USSR's UN delegation . He had appointed himself to head of the USSR's delegation .
 He spent much of his time wooing the new Third World states which had recently become independent . He spent most of his visit to the states which became independent .
 The U.S. restricted him to the island of Manhattan, with visits to an estate owned by the USSR on Long Island . The United States restricted his visits to the estate of the USSR .
 The notorious shoe-banging incident occurred during a debate on 12 October over a Soviet resolution decrying colonialism . The incident was during a Soviet debate decrying colonial oppression .
 Khrushchev was infuriated by a statement of the Filipino delegate Lorenzo Sumulong charging the Soviets with employing a double standard by decrying colonialism while dominating Eastern Europe . The Filipino delegate said the Soviets were using a 'double standard' to decry colonialism .
 Khrushchev considered U.S. Vice President Nixon a hardliner and was delighted by his defeat in the 1960 presidential election . He was also delighted by the defeat of President Kennedy in 1960 .
 He considered the victor, Massachusetts Senator John F Kennedy, as a far more likely partner for détente . But he was taken aback by the newly inaugurated United States President's tough talk and actions in his administration .
 Khrushchev achieved a propaganda victory in April 1961 with the first human spaceflight, while Kennedy suffered a defeat with the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion . Kennedy suffered defeat in the failure to invade the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev contented himself with after-the-fact aggressive remarks . The premier had threatened to defend Cuba with Soviet missiles, the premier .
 The failure in Cuba led to Kennedy's determination to make no concessions at the Vienna summit scheduled for 3 June 1961 . Kennedy was determined to refuse to negotiate with Cuba .
 Khrushchev demanded a treaty that would recognize the two German states and refused to yield on the remaining issues obstructing a test-ban treaty . Both Kennedy and Khrushvic took a hard line, refusing to yield .
 Kennedy had been led to believe that the test-ban treaty could be concluded at the summit, and felt that a deal on Berlin had to await easing of east–west tensions . Kennedy, in contrast, had hoped that the treaty would be concluded in Berlin .
 Robert Kennedy described negotiating with Khrushchev to his brother Robert as ""like dealing with Dad" Robert Kennedy .
 The maximum territorial extent of countries in the world under Soviet influence, after the Cuban Revolution of 1959 and before the official Sino-Soviet split of 1961 . An indefinite postponement of action over Berlin was unacceptable to Khrushchev if for no other reason .
 Berlin, administered by the four Allied powers, remained open . While the boundary between the two German states had elsewhere been fortified, Berlin remained open. Berlin was a major hub for the Allied forces .
 Khrushchev authorized East German leader Walter Ulbricht to begin construction of what became known as the Berlin Wall . The Wall would surround West Berlin, which was not disavowed by Kennedy Administration .
 Construction preparations were made in great secrecy . The border was sealed off in the early hours of Sunday, 13 August 1961 . Most East German workers who earned hard currency by working in West Berlin would be at their homes .
 The wall was a propaganda disaster, and marked the end of Khrushchev's attempts to conclude a peace treaty among the Four Powers and the two German states . The treaty would not be signed until September 1990, as a prelude to German reunification .
 Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro was reluctant to accept the missiles . He warned Khrushchev against transporting the missiles in secret . Castro was persuaded by the Cuban prime minister .
 Castro stated, thirty years later, ""We had a sovereign right to accept the missiles. We had to accept missiles," Castro said . Castro stated that the missiles had a 'sovereign right' to be launched .
 On 16 October, Kennedy was informed that U-2 flights over Cuba had discovered what were most likely medium-range missile sites . Kennedy and his advisors considered approaching Khrushchev through diplomatic channels, but they could come up with no way of doing this that would not appear weak .
 On 22 October, Kennedy addressed his nation by television, revealing the missiles' presence and announcing a blockade of Cuba . Kennedy made the announcement on 22 October .
 Khrushchev and his advisors feared an invasion of Cuba . In advance of the speech but not the content of the content . Informed in advance of speech but didn't know the content, Khrushchevs feared invasion .
 Even before Kennedy's speech, Khrushchev ordered Soviet commanders in Cuba that they could use all weapons against an attack . The crisis unfolded, tensions were high in the U.S. and less so in the Soviet Union . Khrushchchev made several public appearances and went to the
 Khrushchev decided that the missiles would have to be withdrawn from Cuba . By 25 October, with the Soviets unclear about Kennedy's full intentions, Khruschev decided to pull them out .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles in exchange for a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba and a secret promise that the United States would withdraw missiles from Turkey, near the Soviet heartland . The missiles were withdrawn in return for a United States promise to not invade Cuba .
 The resolution was seen as a great defeat for the Soviets and contributed to Khrushchev's fall less than two years later . The last term was not publicly announced at the request of the U.S. and was not known until just before his death in 1971 .
 Khrushchev called the speech the best by a U.S. president since Franklin D Roosevelt . The speech was the first by a United States president since FDR .
 Plans for a second Khrushchev-Kennedy summit dashed by the U.S. President's assassination in November 1963 . Plans for the summit were dashed by Kennedy's assassination .
 The new U.S. president hoped for continued improved relations but was distracted by other issues . Lyndon Johnson had little opportunity to develop relationship with Khrushchev .
 Khrushchev & Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej met at Bucharest's B�ăneasa Airport in June 1960 . The two Soviet leaders shook hands with each other at the airport .
 The Secret Speech, combined with the death of the Polish communist leader Bolesław Bierut, who suffered a heart attack while reading the speech, sparked considerable liberalization in Poland and Hungary .
 In Poland, a worker's strike in Poznań developed into disturbances that left more than 50 dead in June 1956 . More than 50 people were killed in the disturbances that occurred in the Polish capital .
 Moscow blamed the disturbances on Western agitators . Polish leaders ignored the claim, and instead made concessions to the workers .
 Khrushchev and other Presidium members flew to Warsaw on 19 October to meet with the Polish Presidium . With anti-Soviet displays becoming more common in Poland, and crucial Polish leadership elections upcoming, Khrushches and others flew to Poland .
 The Soviets agreed to allow the new Polish leadership to take office, on the assurance there would be no change to the Soviet-Polish relationship . The Soviets also agreed to let the Polish leadership take office .
 A period of at least partial liberalization, known as the Polish October, followed . The Polish October is known for its liberalization of the country .
 The Polish settlement emboldened the Hungarians, who decided that Moscow could be defied . The Hungarians were emboldened by the Polish settlement, which emboldened them .
 A mass demonstration in Budapest on 23 October turned into a popular uprising . The uprising turned into an uprising in Hungary .
 Soviet forces in the city clashed with Hungarians and fired on demonstrators . Hundreds of people were killed in the clashes, including hundreds of Hungarians . Soviet forces clashed with demonstrators, with hundreds killed .
 Nagy called for a cease-fire and withdrawal of Soviet troops, which a Khrushchev-led majority in the Presidium decided to obey . The majority chose to give the new Hungarian government a chance .
 Khrushchev assumed that if Moscow announced liberalization in how it dealt with its allies, Nagy would adhere to the alliance with the Soviet Union . Nagy was the first member of the Communist Party to join the party in the 1950s and '60s .
 On 30 October Nagy announced multiparty elections, and the next morning that Hungary would leave the Warsaw Pact . The next morning the next day Hungary left the Warsaw pact . Nagy's government was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 On 3 November, two members of the Nagy government appeared in Ukraine as the self-proclaimed heads of a provisional government . They demanded Soviet intervention, which was forthcoming, they said .
 Soviet troops crushed the Hungarian uprising, with a death toll of 4,000 Hungarians and several hundred Soviet troops . The next day, Soviet troops crush the uprising, killing several hundred .
 Khrushchev defended his actions for the rest of his life . Despite international outrage over the intervention, he defended his action .
 Damage to Soviet foreign relations was severe, and would have been greater were it not for the fortuitous timing of the Suez crisis, which distracted world attention . The Suez Crisis was a major distraction for the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev made the statement in a speech on peaceful coexistence with the West . While many in the West took this statement as a literal threat, Khrushche made it as a threat to the West.
 Khrushchev greatly improved relations with Yugoslavia, which had been sundered in 1948 when Stalin realized he could not control Yugoslav leader Josip Tito . When questioned about the statement during his 1959 U.S. visit he stated that he was not referring to a literal burial .
 Khrushchev was successful in warming relations, ending the Informbiro period . Tito did everything he could to make the Soviets look foolish .
 Tito initially supported Nagy, but Khrushchev persuaded him of the need for intervention . During the Hungarian crisis, Tito was initially supportive of Nagy .
 The intervention in Hungary damaged Moscow's relationship with Belgrade, which Khrushchev spent several years trying to repair . Still, the intervention damaged Moscow-Belgrade relations .
 China disapproved of Yugoslavia's liberal version of communism . Attempts to conciliate Belgrade resulted in an angry reaction from Beijing .
 China Khrushchev with Mao Zedong, 1958 . Mao Zedongo sought material assistance from the USSR for material assistance in China . He also called for the return to China of territories taken under the Tsars .
 As Khrushchev took control of the USSR, he increased aid to China . He even sent a small corps of experts to help develop the new communist country .
 The Soviet Union spent 7% of its national income between 1954 and 1959 on aid to China . The USSR spent 7.5% of national income on aid between 1954 to 1959 .
 On his 1954 visit to China, Khrushchev agreed to return Port Arthur and Dalian to China . Mao bitterly opposed attempts to reach a rapprochement with more liberal Eastern European states such as Yugoslavia .
 Relations between the two nations began to cool in 1956, with Mao angered by the Secret Speech . Khrushchev's government, on the other hand, was reluctant to endorse Mao's desires for an assertive revolutionary movement .
 Mao believed de-Stalinization was a mistake, and a possible threat to his authority . Mao believed that de-stalinization would be a mistake and a threat to himself .
 When Khrushchev visited Beijing in 1958, Mao refused proposals for military cooperation . Mao refused to accept military cooperation with the Soviet Union in 1958 .
 Mao wanted to torpedo Khrushchev's efforts at détente with the U.S. Mao soon thereafter provoked the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis . Mao described the Taiwanese islands shelled in the crisis as ""batons that keep Eisenhower and Khruschev dancing, scurrying"
 The Soviets had planned to provide China with an atomic bomb complete with full documentation . But in 1959, amid cooler relations, the Soviets destroyed the device and papers instead .
 When Khrushchev paid a visit to China in September, shortly after his successful United States visit, he met a chilly reception . The former Soviet leader left the country on the third day of a planned seven-day visit .
 Khrushchev attacked China in his speech to the congress . Peng Zhen claimed that the premier's foreign policy was to blow hot and cold towards the West . The Chinese leader claimed that Khushchev's foreign policies were to blow cold and cold .
 Albania was on the side of China, labelling Khrushchev ""Rrapo Lelo" after an Albanian anti-communist peasant . In the dispute between Mao Mao and Krushchev, Albania labelled Krrushchev "Rrap
 Nikita Khrushchev with Anastas Mikoyan in Berlin in March 1964 . Supreme Soviet presidium chairman and nominal head of state Leonid Brezhnev began plotting to remove him from Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev was absent from Moscow for a total of five months between January and September 1964 . Brezhnev was given ample time for his conspiracy by the Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev was on vacation at Pitsunda, Abkhaz ASSR with his friend and Presidium colleague Anastas Mikoyan . The conspirators, led by Brezhnev, broke out in October 1964, struck in October while he was vacationing in P
 On 12 October, Brezhnev called Khrushchev to notify him of a special Presidium meeting to be held the following day . The meeting was ostensibly on the subject of agriculture, ostensibly on agriculture .
 Khrushchev suspected the real reason for the meeting, he flew to Moscow accompanied by the head of the Georgian KGB, General Aleksi Inauri, but otherwise taking no precautions . Inauri was the KGB chief of Soviet Georgia .
 Khrushchev arrived at the VIP hall of Vnukovo Airport . KGB chairman Semichastny waited for him there, flanked by KGB guards .
 Semichastny informed Khrushchev of his ouster and told him not to resist . Semchastny told him to resist, told him that he would not resist . Khruschev was ousted from Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Khrushchev was then taken to the Kremlin, to be verbally attacked by Brezhnev, Suslov and Shelepin . Khrushchev was taken into custody by the Kremlin .
 People were strolling around outside, while in the room the Presidium was meeting . The Presidium is meeting in a room at the end of the day .
 Brezhnev was elected First Secretary . Alexei Kosygin succeeded Khrushchev as premier . Breznevnev became First Secretary of the Soviet Union .
 There were multiple reasons for Khrushchev's sudden downfall . There were several reasons for his removal from the country .
 It was not a coup, because it followed the Central Committee procedures for naming leadership that Khrushchev had himself introduced . The decision to name the new leaders was made by the party's Central Committee . It followed the same procedures that had been introduced by the late leader .
 As William Tompson has noted, there were no show trials, no ritual attacks, no public confessions, and no executions . There were also show trials and ritual attacks but no executions, he says .
 For most members of the Central Committee, there was growing annoyance with his arbitrary decision-making and lack of collegiality . Most of the party members are annoyed at his arbitrary decisions . The Central Committee is growing annoyed with him .
 Khrushchev had fostered an unwieldy bureaucracy that he fostered . They complained about the unwielded bureaucracy that Khrushchevitch fostered in the Soviet Union . The Soviets complained of the bureaucracy .
 Many were angry with his high-handed disregard for Central Committee procedures, including those he himself had been responsible for introducing .
 Foreign policy issues were not a major factor in his removal because the leadership agreed with his policies, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Foreign policy issues are not a factor in removing him"
 The military was not involved in the removal of the KGB . The KGB was a key center of opposition .
 Agriculture was his signature field and the glaring failure of massive efforts to improve agriculture was the most serious domestic issue, and resulted in hostile public opinion regarding food shortages .
 Security guards kept track of all guests and reported their comings and goings . He received few visitors, especially since his security guards kept tracking down all visitors .
 Khrushchev was made a non-person to such an extent that the thirty-volume Great Soviet Encyclopedia omitted his name from the list of prominent political commissars during the Great Patriotic War . The new rulers made known their conservatism in artistic matters, as the new rulers .
 Khrushchev regretted not seeing former U.S. Vice President Nixon, then in his ""wilderness years"" before his election to the presidency, who went to Khrushchev's Moscow apartment while the former premier was at his dacha . Nixon was in his "wilderness
 These attempts failed due to background noise, so he switched to recording indoors . These attempts were made to record with the sound of background noise .
 The KGB made no attempt to interfere until 1968, when Khrushchev was ordered to hand over his tapes, which he refused to do . He refused to give the tapes to the KGB until 1968 when he was ordered by the government .
 While Khrushchev was hospitalized with heart ailments, his son Sergei was approached by the KGB in July 1970 and told that there was a plot afoot by foreign agents to steal the memoirs .
 Sergei Khrushchev handed over the materials to the KGB since the KGB could steal the originals anyway, but copies had been made . Some of the material had been transmitted to a Western publisher .
 Sergei instructed that the smuggled memoirs should be published, which they were in 1970 under the title Khrushchev Remembers . The memoirs were published in 1970 as part of a series of memoirs published by the late Soviet leader .
 Nikita Khrushchev signed a statement that he had not given the materials to any publisher, and his son was transferred to a less desirable job . Under pressure, Nikita wrote a statement saying he had given the material to no publisher .
 Upon publication of the memoirs in the West, Izvestia denounced them as a fraud . The memoirs were published in Russia in the 1990s and 1990s .
 Soviet state radio carried the announcement of Khrushchev's statement, and it was the first time in six years that he had been mentioned in that medium . It was the last time the Soviet leader was mentioned in state radio .
 In his final days, Khrushchev told his son-in-law and former aide Alexei Adzhubei, "Never regret that you lived in stormy times" in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev died of a heart attack around noon in the Kremlin hospital in Moscow on 11 September 1971 at the age of 77 .
 He was denied a state funeral with interment in the Kremlin Wall . He was instead buried in the Novodevichy Cemetery in Moscow .
 Authorities did not announce Khrushchev's death until the hour of his wake and surrounded the cemetery with troops . Fearing demonstrations, the authorities did not . announce his death until after the hour-long wake .
 Pravda ran a one-sentence announcement of the former premier's death; Western newspapers contained considerable coverage . Even so, some artists and writers joined the family at the graveside for the interment .
 Many of Khrushchev's innovations were reversed after his fall . Many of his reforms were reversed in his fall.
 His vocational education program for high school students was also dropped . His plan for sending existing agricultural institutions out to the land was also ended .
 New agricultural or vocational institutions thereafter were located outside major cities . However, new agricultural and vocational institutions were later located outside cities .
 When new housing was built, much of it was in the form of high rises rather than Khrushchev's low-rise structures, which lacked elevators or balconies . When new homes were built, many of them were in high rises .
 Some of Khrushchev's agricultural projects were also easily overturned . Some of the former Soviet leaders' agricultural policies were also overturned .
 Corn became so unpopular in 1965 that its planting fell to the lowest level in postwar period . Even kolkhozes which had been successful with it in Ukraine and other southern portions of the USSR refused to plant it .
 Khrushchev had tried to address the basic agricultural problems, which he had attempted to address, remained . However, the MTS stations remained closed, and agricultural problems remained . The MTS was closed, however, and the basic agriculture problems remained.
 The Soviet standard of living increased greatly in the ten years after Khrushchev's fall . Much of the increase was due to industrial progress but agriculture continued to lag far behind . Agricultural crises resulted in regular agricultural crises, especially in 1972 and 1975 .
 Brezhnev and his successors continued Khrushchev's precedent of buying grain from the West rather than suffering shortfalls and starvation . The West bought grain from Russia rather than suffer shortfalls .
 The new government relied on authoritarian power to assure its continuation . Neither Brezhnev nor his colleagues were personally popular, and the new government was authoritarian .
 The government's conservative tendencies would lead to the crushing of the ""Prague Spring"" of 1968 . The government would have crushed the "prague Spring" of 1968.
 Khrushchev's strategy failed to achieve the major goals he sought . Aleksandr Fursenko argued that the strategy did coerce the West in a limited manner . Khrushov's strategy did not achieve the goals he wanted, according to a book .
 The agreement that the United States would not invade Cuba has been adhered to . U.S. President Barack Obama made a pledge to keep Cuba from invading the country .
 The refusal of the western world to acknowledge East Germany was gradually eroded . In 1975, the U.S. and other NATO members signed the Helsinki Agreement with the USSR and Warsaw Pact nations, including East Germany, setting human rights standards .
 Only eras of 20th century that Russians in 21st century evaluate positively are those under Nicholas II, and under Khrushchev . According to a major Russian pollster, the only eras to be evaluated positively are Nicholas II and Khrushchchev .
 A poll in 1998 of young Russians found that they felt Nicholas II had done more good than harm . Young Russians felt all other 20-century Russian leaders more harm than good, except Khrushchev .
 The generation which had come of age during the 'first Russian spring' of the 1950s awaited its turn in power . Throughout the Brezhnev years and the lengthy interregnum that followed, the generation remained hopeful .
 As Brezhnev and his colleagues died or were pensioned off, they were replaced by men and women for whom the Secret Speech and the first wave of de-Stalinization had been a formative experience .
 The Khrushchev era provided this second generation of reformers with both an inspiration and a cautionary tale . The second generation's reformers were inspired by the Soviet Union's success .
 A Selected Guide to Russian Words, Idioms, and Expressions of the Post-Stalin Era, 1953–1991 . The guide includes a selection of Russian words, idioms and expressions .
 Khrushchev's Farming Revolution in the Post-Stalin Soviet Union PhD dissertation version . PhD dissertation on Khrushchchev's 'Farming Revolution' in the post-Krushchev Soviet Union dissertation .
 Khrushchev and Brezhnev as Leaders online . Conterio, Johanna. Breslauer, George W Khrushchevich and Breznev. As Leaders . Khrushnev, 1960–1963 online .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the brink of nuclear war online online . Frankel, Max. Frankel: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to do it"
 George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles
 Yasser Arafat / F W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin Pope John Paul II Newt Gingrich David Ho Andrew Grove Bill Clinton / Ken Starr Ken Starr Jeff Bezos George W Bush 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper /