 Archive is a tax-exempt public charity that receives no United States government funding . Its budget is supported by publication royalties and donations from foundations and individuals .
 Pan-African News Wire is an international electronic press service designed to foster intelligent discussion on the affairs of African people throughout the continent and world .
 PANW represents the only daily international news source on pan-african and global affairs . PANW is the only international news agency that reports pan-African affairs .
 PANW editor Abayomi Azikiwe is often solicited by various newspaper, radio and television stations for comment and analysis on local, national and world affairs .
 He has served as a political analyst for Press TV and RT worldwide satellite television news networks as well as other international media in the areas of African and world affairs .
 He has appeared on numerous television and radio networks including Press TV, RT, Al Jazeera, BBC, NPR, NPR and Radio Netherlands .
 Abayomi Azikiwe is the editor of the Pan-African News Wire . He is the author of the latest book, Lessons from the Detroit July 1967 Rebellion & Beyond .
 From the Soviet Union to the Bolivarian Revolution, Abayomi Azikiwe, editor of the Pan-African News Wire, has written a book about the revolution in Venezuela . The book, From The Soviet Union-to-the-Bolivarian revolution, is published
 Order this book by Abayomi Azikiwe, editor of the Pan-African News Wire, by just clicking on the above image . Read the book by the editor of this article.
 16th Annual Detroit MLK Day Rally & March . Between Holbrook & King, Noon-5:00pm on Monday . Join us on Mon. Mon. 12.30pm .
 14th Annual Detroit MLK Day Rally & March, Mon. Jan. 2018 Rally at Central United Methodist Church, Noon-1:30pm, Woodward and East Adams, Downtown . March Begins at 1:45pm . Rally at . Central United . Methodist Church at 12:30
 Jan., 2017, Noon at CUMC, Woodward at East Adams 1:30 March thru downtown; end at St. St. Mary's . Jan. 2017, noon at Cumbria's C.M.C. and Woodward's East Adams, Woodward's Adams, 1
 13th Annual Detroit MLK Day Rally & March, Mon. Feb. 9 at St. John's Episcopal Woodward at Fisher Freeway . 13th annual Detroit rally & March will take place on Monday, March 8 .
 12th Annual Detroit MLK Day Rally & March, Mon. Jan. 2015, Noon-5:30pm . Commemorating the 50th Anniversary of the 'March Against Fear' and the 'Chicago Freedom Movement' at Central United Methodist Church, Woodward Ave. at East
 MLK Day Rally & March Took Place on January 17, 2011 . The event was held at Central United Methodist Church Located Downtown on Woodward at Adams at Noon .
 Coalition Calls for a Halt to All Foreclosures, Evictions and Utility Shut-offs Demonstration at Bank of America on Tuesday, July 22, 2008 Watch Abayomi Azikiwe, PANW Editor, Speaking at a Demonstration in the Financial District in Downtown Detroit on
 Listen to African Fiesta Sukisa Featuring Nico Kasanda Doing Bea Okeyi Wapi . Check out Dr. Uhuru by the African Jazz Orchestra . Listen to Kamulanga by African Jazz .
 Check out African Fiesta Under the Direction of Dr. Nico . Check Out African Fiesta . Check out the African Fiesta under the direction of Nico .
 Nico Kasanda Composition Je m'en fous African Fiesta Orchestra With Asala Malekoun . Listen to the Classic Sound of Dr. Kasanda on Dr. Nico . Kasanda's work .
 Mira Beautiful Harmonies of Dr. Nico and the African Fiesta Orchestra Composition Mira beautiful Harmonies . Nico . Nico. Nico . The African Fiesta . Orchestra Compositions of Nico Nico .
 Dr. Nico Kasanda and African Fiesta With Sasonado have African Fiesta on CNN.com . Kasanda will host a special African Fiesta show on African soil in Africa Africa .
 Abayomi Azikiwe speaks at the Dr. Kwame Nkrumah and Madame Fathia in 1963 . She was at the centre of a debate on the role of African leaders .
 Aretha Franklin performed at the Obama Inauguration on January 20, 2009 . Franklin is One of the Great Artists to Emerge During the 1960s . Franklin was one of the greats to emerge from Detroit . Lenoir on film playing Franklin: "Slow Down"
 Just Visit This Site to Learn More about Aretha Franklin . Click on the links below to learn more about Rev. Rev. Franklin . Rev. Frank Franklin's funeral will be held in New York City .
 Aretha Franklin on Mike Douglas Show Performing Natural Woman, Dec.67 Another Version of Baby I Love You . Franklin, the Father of Aretha, in Rare Film Footage . Franklin was born in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1944 .
 Nkrumah and Other Writings on Neo-Colonialism: The Last Stage of Imperialism . The Bibliography of Dr. Kwame Nkumah includes the Bibliographical Bibliotations of the Founder of Modern Africa .
 Bolivian States Vote For Autonomy . Bolivians vote for Autonomy in a vote for self-determination . Venezuela is one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 Walter Rodney, Pan-African Historian, discusses Guyana's history of Guyana . He discusses the history of the country .