 On October 14, a U-2 spy plane overflight confirmed the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba . The U.S. mission confirmed the existence of the Soviet missiles .
 In the summer of 1962, U.S. spy planes flying over Cuba photographed construction work on missile facilities . The Cuban government was angered by the images .
 Nikita Khrushchev agrees to remove Russian missiles from Cuba in exchange for a promise from the United States to respect Cuba's territorial sovereignty . The Cuban Missile crisis comes to a close as Soviet leader Khrushche agrees to removal of Russian missiles .
 The bay is historically important for the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961 . The bay was historically important in the failed invasion of Cuba .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion begins when a group of Cuban refugees lands in Cuba and attempts to topple the communist government of Fidel Castro . The invasion was a CIA-financed and -trained group of refugees .
 Fidel Castro had been a concern to U.S. policymakers since he seized power in Cuba with a revolution in January 1959 . Fidel Castro seized power with the revolution in Cuba in 1959 . The Castro government has been a source of concern to the United States since then .
 President John F Kennedy concluded that Fidel Castro was a Soviet client working to subvert Latin America . President Kennedy concluded in early 1961 that Castro was working for the Soviets .
 Khrushchev's party colleagues removed him from power in 1964, replacing him with Leonid Brezhnev as First Secretary and Alexei Kosygin as Premier . He was replaced by Leonid Brezhnevich as First Secretary .
 Castro took a key role in the Cuban Revolution by leading the Movement in a guerrilla war against Batista's forces from the Sierra Maestra . Returning to Cuba, Castro returned to the country to fight against the Batista .
 Some 1,500 Cuban exiles opposed to Fidel Castro launched an invasion of Cuba at the Bahía de Cochinos or Playa Girón . The Bay of Pigs invasion was an abortive invasion by Cuban ex-Cubans opposed to Castro .