 Fidel Alejandro Ruz was born near Biran in the eastern province of Cuba on August 13, 1926 . He was born in 1926 . Ruz is one of Cuba's most famous artists .
 He was the third son in a family of six children including two brothers, Ramon and Raul, and three sisters, Augustina, Emma, and Angelita .
 He was the son of Angel Castro y Argiz, a rich sugar plantation owner in Cuba . He was born in Cuba and died at the age of 92 .
 Angel's mother, Lina Ruz Gonzalez, was a maid to the first wife of Angel's first wife, Luisa Argota . Angel was born in New York City, New York, and Angel died in 2003 .
 When Fidel was 15 years old, his father dissolved his marriage to Luisa and married Fidel’s mother . Fidel's father is now married to Fidel's mother, Luisa .
 Fidel Castro was 17 when his father recognized him formally and his name was changed from Ruz to Castro . Fidel Castro's name was officially changed to Castro when he was 17 .
 Fidel Castro was brought up in a wealthy background amidst the impoverished conditions of the people of Cuba . Fidel was born into a wealthy family . Fidel Castro is the Cuban president of the Cuban government .
 He attended Jesuit boarding schools and was intellectually gifted, though he liked sports more than studies . He attended the private Jesuit boarding school and attended private .
 He joined El Colegio De Belen and became the best player of the school’s baseball team . He is now a member of the best baseball team in the country .
 Fidel became more passionate and involved with social justice in 1947 . Fidel became passionate about social justice and became more involved in social justice . Fidel was arrested in 1968 after a series of political incidents .
 He joined an expedition in Dominican Republic which was trying to overthrow the dictator of Cuba, Rafael Trujillo . He joined the expedition in the Dominican Republic in an attempt to overthrow him .
 It was founded by a Cuban presidential candidate, Eduardo Chibas, who had lost the 1948 elections . Its goals included social reforms, economic independence, and nationalism .
 In 1951, Chibas ran for presidency once more with the cause to expose the corruption in the government and warn Cuban people about the plan by former president, General Fulgencio Batista, to return to power . In 1951 he ran for president again, but failed to win
 Some allies failed to provide evidence against the government’s misconduct . Unfortunately Chibas failed once more after some allies failed . Unfortunately, it was a repeat of the same failure .
 This caused Chibas to shoot himself during a radio broadcast as a punishment for failing his people . This caused him to kill himself in a broadcast broadcast . He shot himself in self-inflicted shooting .
 This marriage exposed Castro to more political connections and a wealthier lifestyle . Castro's marriage to Castro exposed Castro's political connections . Castro was married to Castro's wife in 2009 .
 He later vied for a parliamentary seat but a coup headed by General Fulgencio overthrew the government and annulled the elections . He later tried to win a seat in parliament but was overthrown by the coup .
 The results of these events placed Castro in a lifestyle of little income and no legitimate political platform . Castro's lifestyle has left him with little income, he says . Castro was forced to give up his political career after his arrest .
 He was unable to support his family eventually leading to the end of his marriage in 1955 . His marriage ended after he failed to support them financially .
 Castro solidified his relationship with the Cuban elite and the military, making his government recognized by the United States . Castro together with other members of the Ortodoxo party failed to win the 1952 elections .
 In 1955 an amnesty deal was struck with Batista government and Castro was released . Castro was freed from prison in 1955 . In 1955 he was released from prison .
 He travelled to Mexico and met Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara who helped him devise a strategy for overthrowing Batista . He used guerrilla warfare to overthrow Batista using guerrilla warfare .
 According to Guevara, the plight of the poor Latin America could only be rectified by the use of violent revolution . According to the former President of the United States, he said that violent revolution would only be possible .
 On December 2, 1956, Castro went back to Cuba through the eastern city of Manzanillo with a boatload of 81 insurrectionists . Castro returned to Cuba in December 1956 . Castro's return to Cuba was one of the most dramatic in the country's history .
 Castro was able to escape together with his brother Raul and Guevara and they ran to Sierra Maestra Mountain range . Castro and his brother were able to get away together with their brother and brother .
 Castro’s guerilla forces rebelled against the government of Batista, organizing resistance groups in small towns and cities across Cuba . In the next 2 years, Castro's guerillas fought back against Batista's government .
 Castro also controlled provinces rich in manufacturing and agricultural production . Castro also ran a parallel government and controlled provinces . Castro was president of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Castro’s forces launched major attacks on the Batista government in 1958 . Castro's forces captured key areas in the country, capturing key areas . In 1958, Castro launched major operations against the government .
 Batista’s government collapsed and, in January of 1959, he fled to the Dominican Republic . Batista fled the Batista government in 1959 . The government collapsed soon after .
 At age 32, Castro took control of Cuba . This marked the success of Castro’s guerilla campaign, and at 32, he took control .
 This led to the establishment of a new government and the appointment of Jose Miro Cardona . Jose Cardona was appointed as the new Prime Minister .
 Castro took over as the commander-in-chief of the military when he arrived in Havana . The new government was soon recognized by the U.S. and soon became Cuba's first government .
 Miro suddenly resigned in February and Castro became the Prime Minster . Castro replaced Miro Miro in February .
 Castro made changes in the government by nationalizing the plantations and factories . The purpose of ending United States dominance on the island was to end U.S. dominance .
 Castro denied practicing communism but Americans believed his policies were the same as the Soviet-style of controlling government and economy . Americans believed Castro's policies were like those of the Soviet style .
 In April of 1959, he visited the United States together with his delegates as invitees to the National Press club . He visited the U.S. in April 1959, and was invited to the club .
 He hired a popular public relations firm in the U.S. to promote his tour but President Dwight Eisenhower refused to meet him . He hired the public relations company in the United States to promote the tour .
 This rule restricted the size of land properties one could own and forbade foreigners from owning land . This rule also restricted the number of properties a person could own .
 The intention was to make the farmers independent but in essence the government controlled the properties and the farmers became mere employees of the government . The intention is to make farmers independent, but the farmers are now mere employees .
 By the end of his first year in power, he had radicalized his revolution, suppressing any critic of his policies in the media and purging any military or political leaders that criticized his way of ruling .
 He signed a trade treaty in February of 1960 to buy oil from the Soviet Union . The treaty was signed in February 1960 .
 The refineries owned by the United States stopped processing oil so Castro confiscated them . Castro confiscated the refineries so the U.S. oil was processed by the Castro government . As a result, Castro confiscated refineries .
 On January 3, 1961, Dwight Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Missile Crisis was the first time the two countries had been involved in the crisis .
 1400 Cuban exiles attacked the Bay of Pigs to overthrow the regime of Castro . The next day, 1400 Cuban exiles attacked to overthrow Castro .
 The attempt failed and 1,000 insurgents were captured with hundreds being killed . Hundreds of insurgents were killed in the attempt .
 The United States denied any involvement in the attack . It was later revealed that it was the Central Intelligence Agency that trained the insurgents and armed them with U.S. weapons .
 On May 1st of that year, he declared the end of democratic elections in Cuba . The Cuban president declared that it was an end to democratic elections .
 At the end of the year, he announced himself as a Marxist-Leninist . He adopted communist political and economic policies in Cuba .
 On February 7, 1962, the U.S. instated a full economic embargo on Cuba . The embargo has continued to this day .
 Castro improved his relationship with the Soviet Union and got more military and economic aid . Castro got more economic and military aid from the USSR .
 In October of 1962, his reliance on the Soviet Union almost sparked the start of a nuclear war . In October 1962, he relied heavily on the Soviets to avoid a possible nuclear war.
 The premier of Soviet, Nikita Khrushchev placed nuclear missiles in Cuba only 90 miles from the cost of Florida in response to the U.S. placing Jupiter missiles in Turkey . In Cuba, the premier of the Soviet Union placed the missiles 90 miles away from Florida .
 An American U2 exploration plane discovered the construction base before the missiles were installed .
 President Kennedy demanded the removal of these missiles and ordered the U.S. navy to search for any vessel that may be headed to the island . President Kennedy ordered the United States navy to look for any ship that may have been headed to island .
 After secret discussions between Kennedy, Khrushchev, and their agents, the nuclear missiles were removed . In exchange for a public declaration by Kennedy not to invade Cuba, the missile system was removed .
 The Kennedy administration agreed to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey secretly . Also agreed that the missiles would be removed from the country .
 Castro merged his revolutionary organizations with the Communist party in 1965 . Castro made himself the leader of Cuba under Fidel Castro . Castro is now the Cuban leader .
 In the next few years he started a campaign to support the armed struggle in African and Latin American countries against imperialism . In the 1990s he started to support armed struggle .
 In 1966, he created the Asia-Africa-Latin American Solidarity Organization which promoted revolution in the 3 continents . In 1966 he created an organization which promoted revolutions in the three continents .
 In 1967, he founded the Latin America Solidarity Organization which fostered revolution in some Latin-American countries . He founded the organization in Latin America in 1967 . He also founded a Latin American Solidarity Organisation .
 Through the 1970s, he made himself the leading spokesperson for third world countries . He provided military support to the pro-soviet forces in Yemen, Ethiopia, and Angola .
 The agreement by the U.S. not to invade Cuba did not entirely limit them from trying to end Castro’s regime . The agreement was made with the Cuban government, but it did not stop them from doing so .
 Castro once said that if avoiding assassination attempts were Olympic competition, he would have won many gold medals . Castro said that avoiding assassinations would have been Olympic competition .
 Infant mortality also decreased to 1.1% and Cubans enjoyed a health-care system . Cubans also enjoyed a better health care system in the country .
 Still, civil liberties were whittled away following the shutdown of independent newspapers, the loss of the right to strike by the labor unions, and the harassment of religious institutions .
 During his reign, many Cubans fled to Florida Straits in Miami, especially in 1980 . He opened the port of Mariel to the exiles for claiming their relatives .
 He loaded ships with mental patients, prison inmates, and other social undesirables . He loaded the ships with mentally patients and prison inmates . The ships were filled with social offenders .
 When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, Cuba's economy went into a tailspin . The economy of Cuba went into an economic tailspin after the collapse of the USSR .
 They lost their cheap oil imports, and sugar exports to the Soviet Union . This led to high unemployment rates and inflation, leading to unemployment rates .
 Castro appealed to the United States to lift the economic embargo but the request was rejected . Castro appealed for the lifting of the embargo but was rejected by the U.S.
 He adopted a quasi-fee economy which encouraged international investment . He then adopted a 'quasi-fee' economy which encourages international investment.
 In 1996, he visited the United States and invited Cubans living in the U.S. to start their own businesses . He invited them to come back home and start up their own business in Cuba .
 After Hurricane Michelle in 2001 which caused massive damage, he refused to get humanitarian aid from United States . Instead proposed a one-time cash purchase of food from the United States instead .
 His well-being and age was questioned in the late 1990s, but it became more significant in 2006 . He underwent a surgery for gastrointestinal bleeding .
 During this time, Raul named his brother Raul as temporary leader of Cuba . During that time, he named himself Raul .
 Since this surgery, people have only seen Castro in video and photographs . Castro has only been seen in videos and photographs since his surgery .
 On February 19, 2008, he permanently gave up his presidency to his brother Raul as a result of his deteriorating health . He gave up presidency to Raul in February 2008 . Raul died in 2008 .
 In his retirement, Fidel Castro spends his time as a columnist and publishes the popular column known as Reflections of Fidel . Fidel Castro says he is proud of his achievements in Cuba .