 In August 1945, the U.S. government dropped nuclear explosives, successively, on the civilian inhabitants of the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The United States had a monopoly of the "atom bomb"
 Japanese imperialism’s conquests and vast expansion in China, the Pacific Rim, and Southeast Asia that began in the 1930s had shrunk sharply . At the time of this clear war crime Japanese imperialism had shrunk .
 The Japanese rulers were utterly alone and isolated politically . Their German Nazi ally was defeated, smashed and under occupation . The Japanese ruler was utterly alone .
 Japanese imperialism was in headlong retreat under intense attack from, on the one hand, and indigenous independence forces in the remaining lands they occupied .
 The latter was a mass upsurge for national independence . It included resistance to Japanese aggression in parts of Manchuria in China, Korea, Vietnam and the ‘Dutch East Indies,” now Indonesia .
 At the time of the decision to explode the nukes on Japanese cities was made, the Japanese navy was incapable of any operations . The Japanese merchant fleet was destroyed and the Japanese naval was destroyed .
 The Japanese government had begun to send out ‘peace feelers,” fully aware of its hopeless situation . The government is aware of the hopeless situation and is sending out "peace feeler"
 Washington’s utterly ruthless action – rationalized as necessary to prevent mass casualties for U.S. soldiers in a ground invasion of Japan – finalized the defeat and prostration of the Japanese Empire in the Asian-Pacific ‘theater” of World War II .
 Young leaders of the Cuban Revolution were in the very eye of the storm during those last two October weeks of 1962 . Young leaders now holding governmental power .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to halt further naval shipments of nuclear missiles to Cuba and withdraw those already in Cuban territory . U.S. President John Kennedy’s demands led to the end of the Missile Crisis . The crisis was resolved in the Soviet Union and the United States .
 Khrushchev agreed to the removal of Soviet medium-range conventional bombers, very useful to the Cubans for defending their coastlines, and a near-complete withdrawal of combat brigades .
 Kennedy agreed to withdraw U.S. nuclear missiles from Turkey that bordered the Soviet Union . Kennedy also agreed, in a secret protocol, to withdraw United States nuclear missiles .
 Cuban government had, at great political risk, acceded to the Soviet proposal to deploy Soviet nuclear missiles on the island . The Cuban government was not consulted, or even informed, by the Soviet government, at any stage of the unfolding crisis .
 Five points Cuba wanted to see addressed and included in any overall agreement coming out of the crisis were ignored altogether under U.S. insistence and Soviet acquiescence . With Cuban representatives completely excluded, the Cuban representatives were ignored .
 The entire experience was both politically shocking and eye-opening for the Cuban revolutionaries . The Cuban revolutionaries were shocked by the experience . The experience was political and politically shocking .
 They came out of it acutely conscious of their vulnerability and angered over their exclusion . They were left with a feeling of vulnerability and anger over being excluded from them .
 Eisenhower White House devised the operation to overthrow the ‘Castro’ government and destroy the Cuban Revolution . Operation was carried out by the new Kennedy Administration in its third month after taking office . This major operation had been devised by the Eisenhower administration .
 By 1962 the major domestic and foreign privately-owned major means of production in utilities, transportation, heavy and light industry, manufacturing, and mining, had been nationalized by the workers and farmers government .
 The revolutionary government established a state monopoly of foreign trade . The first shoots of central economic planning began which would supersede neo-colonial capitalist market .
 A qualitative class transformation of the Cuban state had been realized in a dynamic way . With all its flaws and contradictions, contradictions, pressures and counter-pressures, the state's class transformation was realized . The Cuban state is now a model for the future of Cuban society, Cuban president says
 Washington and the entire bourgeois political spectrum in the U.S. from left to right had no illusions in this regard . Certainly, bipartisan Washington and . the entire . bourgeois political . spectrum in . the United States from left-to-right would have no illusions about this .
 The hostility of the U.S. Democratic and Republican parties to “Castro’s Revolution” was monolithic and poised for aggression at that time . The hostility to ‘Castro's Revolution’ in the United States was not monolithic .
 Playa Giron was as humiliating and unacceptable for Washington as it had built confidence and was invigorating for the Cuban revolutionaries . Playa Giron was as humiliating . Washington was humiliated and unacceptable by the U.S. and Cuba .
 Not even a nanosecond passed between the Bay of Pigs debacle and the planning for a new invasion, the author says . It was certainly no secret to anyone paying the slightest attention that not even a minute passed between Washington’s debacle at the .
 U.S. forces would be directly by United States forces without the proxy agency of the mercenary ‘troops” of the former ruling classes of Cuba, who were by then ensconced in southern Florida . But this time it would be direct by U. States forces .
 Since October 1961 the Pentagon officers assigned to prepare for the U.S. invasion of Cuba had been revising, updating and ‘polishing’ the concrete details of the invasion .
 These ‘operational plans’ were continually reviewed with President Kennedy . President Kennedy reviewed the plans with the help of President Eisenhower .
 The impact of U.S. bombing on the northern Korean state and its capital of Pyongyang could not have been encouraging to the Cuban leadership .
 Virtually the entire city was flattened by U.S. carpet bombings . Virtually all of the city was destroyed by the bombings .
 U.S. saturation bombing flattened 18 of North Korea's 22 cities, an unequaled level of destruction in modern wars . United States saturation bombing flattens 18 of the 22 cities . U.N. bombing leveled 18 of N. Korean cities, a record of destruction .
 All in all Washington dropped some 635,000 tons of bombs on northern Korea . Washington dropped over 645,000 pounds of bombs in North Korea .
 This compares to 503,000 tons of bombs dropped in the entire Pacific Theater during World War II by all sides . The bombs were dropped during the Pacific War .
 At the end of October 2017, the Donald Trump White House allowed the release of nearly 2900 previously “classified” U.S. government files and documents pertinent to the November 22, 1963 assassination .
 Documents reference U.S. violent plots against Cuba, including assassination attempts against Fidel Castro and other revolutionary leaders by the Kennedy Administration . A number of these documents reference United States violent plots .
 These reconfirm what has long been known on the massive military force Washington was planning to employ to invade and occupy Cuba and crush the revolutionary government after the Bay of Pigs fiasco in April 1961 .
 The memo was addressed to a “Special Group” within the Kennedy White House . It was coordinating intensifying efforts to eliminate the revolutionary government led by Fidel Castro . The memo is addressed to the "Special Group"
 The “operational plans” for the U.S. invasion of Cuba were to involve the initial dispatching of 90,000 troops . The initial dispatches were projected to reach the 261,000 figure . The ‘operational . plans’ for the invasion of
 There is no question that once “the dogs of war” were unleashed against Cuba, with the accompanying propaganda onslaught, Washington would wage a war of annihilation under the rote cover of “democratic” and even “humanitarian” verbiage . Washington would
 Mounting U.S. casualties would feed war fever and United States aggression . Mounting United States casualties would, in the initial period, feed War fever and aggression . War fever would feed the United States of war fever .
 By this time President Kennedy’s “Operation Mongoose’ was in effect . Operation Mongoose was launched in 1963 .
 Kennedy’s cynical purpose was to undertake and carry out any means deemed necessary to disrupt and demoralize Cuban society . The social and political conditions would be created for a full-scale U.S. invasion, he says .
 Kennedy and his civilian and military “advisors’s continued to underestimate the caliber of the revolutionary leadership and the capacity of the Cuban working people and youth they were terrorizing, they say .
 The United States rulers were not used to facing such a politically savvy enemy . Above all, the U.S. rulers were faced with such a political savvy enemy, the author says .
 The young Cuban revolutionary government, with the indefatigable Fidel Castro as its main spokesperson, was adept and quick on its feet in effectively exposing to world public opinion Washington’s anti-Cuba campaign . The U.S. government was telling the truth about what the Revolution
 The CIA attempted to assassinate Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara during July 26, 1961 – the national holiday declared by the revolutionary government commemorating the 1953 attack led by Fidel Castro and Abel Santamaria .
 The CIA plan was, if the murders were “successful,” to stage a provocation against the United States base at Guantanamo . The plan was to make it appear to be Cuban revenge for the murder of their top leaders, the CIA says .
 This would then be the pretext for a full-scale U.S. invasion . The pretext for invasion would be a pretext for the U.K. invasion, the author says .
 The cynical mendacity operating at the top of the U.S. government in the drive to bring back the power of the landowners, rich playboys, segregationists, gangsters, and pimps . The full flower of “democracy” to the benighted Cuban masses
 CIA organized one of its most pernicious campaigns against the revolutionary government . Raul Castro and Che Guevara were assassinated in 1961 .
 The Cuban Revolution advanced its program of social justice and human liberation for the oppressed majority as the most effective counter force to Yanqui aggression .
 On February 26, 1962 Cuba’s now fully legal and rejuvenated labor unions provided the people power for the campaign . The campaign was carried out in Cuba's Ministry of Health to carry out a nationwide vaccination drive for polio .
 By the end of the year the disease was completely wiped out on the island . The disease had been wiped out by the year .
 It took 43 years to recognize that Cuba was the first nation in the Americas to do so . The U.N. World Health Organization was then more subject to pressure from Washington than now .
 General Maxwell Taylor oversaw Operation Mongoose with Attorney General Robert Kennedy at the White House . He said the terrorist operation “mak maximum use of indigenous resources,” could not and would not do the job of overthrowing the revolutionary government .
 Kennedy hesitated to give green light to invasion plans he himself had ordered up . Bay of Pigs debacle still fresh in his mind, and without some of the blinders of more gung-ho invasion advocates .
 Kennedy directed that Mongoose terrorism continue and step up . It remained yellow-lighted however, however .
 From May 8-18, 1962 a “practice run’s” for the U.S. invasion of Cuba took place . More seriously, it was a "practice run" for the United States invasion .
 The full-scale “military exercise” was code named “Operation Whip Lash” and sent an unmistakable signal of intimidation from the U.S. military colossus to the six million people of Cuba . Operation Whip Lash was code-named “Whip Lash
 All this mounting imperialist intervention had only one possible ending point – short of a Cuban surrender, which would never come . The U.S. imperial intervention had one possible end point - short of Cuban surrender - .
 Events that ineluctably posed and placed the nuclear question in the equation. Events that . posed . and placed . the nuclear issue in the . equation .
 The Cuban government and the overwhelming popular majority were mobilized, armed to the teeth, and prepared to fight to the death . They wanted to live in peace and to enjoy the fruits of building a new society after a hard-fought revolutionary triumph .
 The Cuban leadership fully understood that a U.S. invasion would kill many hundreds of thousands and destroy the Cuban infrastructure and economy . The Cuban leaders fully understood a United States invasion would destroy the country's infrastructure, economy .
 How to stop the coming U.S. invasion was the burning question for the revolutionary government . The revolutionary government was in full control of the situation .
 The position of inequality was perceived in Moscow as an impediment to carrying out political negotiations and maneuvering with Washington and the NATO powers . This position was perceived as a defense of Soviet interests in the "geopolitical" Cold War arena .
 By April 1962 fifteen U.S. Jupiter nuclear missiles had been installed and were “operational” in Turkey on the border of the Soviet Union . The missiles were installed on the Turkish border with Russia .
 Each missile was armed with a 1.45 megaton warhead, with ninety-seven times the firepower of the atom bomb dropped on Hiroshima . Each missile had a warhead armed with 90 times more firepower than the bomb dropped at Hiroshima .
 Official estimate of the ‘fatality projection’ for each missile was one million Soviet civilians . The official estimate of each missile’s “fatality projected’t death toll was 1 million Soviet civilian civilians .
 The Jupiter deployment in Turkey added to the overwhelming U.S. superiority in quantity and quality in the “nuclear arms race” between Washington and Moscow . Russia and the United States have been locked in a nuclear arms race .
 According to Anatoly Gribkov of the Red Army General Staff, “The United States had about 5000 warheads, the Soviet Union 300.” The Soviet Union had about 300 warheads, according to the General Staff .
 Khrushchev decided to alleviate this ‘imbalance” by placing missiles on the Cuban island if he succeeded in selling the idea to the Cuban leadership . If he succeeded, the missiles would be placed on the island . The missiles were placed in Cuba .
 The Khrushchev government proposed to Cuba that Cuba receive nuclear-tipped missiles on Cuban territory . The Soviet Union proposed to the Cuban government in the spring 1962 .
 In no other country had the Soviet government located nuclear missiles outside of Soviet territory . No other country has done so so far .
 Washington, by contrast, had openly placed nuclear missiles in numerous western European countries as well as Turkey and secretly in Okinawa, Japan, aimed at China . Washington placed missiles in Europe, Turkey, and secretly placed in Okinawa .
 U.S. “strategic” nuclear armed aircraft were in the air ready for attack orders 24 hours a day, 7 days a week . “Strategic’s nuclear armed forces were ready to attack orders .
 U.S. nuclear submarines were in similar mode, and even more difficult to detect . United States nuclear submarines are even harder to detect than Soviet ones .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba would theoretically be a further deterrent to any U.S. “first strike” threat . Soviet missiles could be a deterrent to the United States . The missiles could also be used to deter a first strike .
 Placing the missiles in Cuba was clearly seen by the Soviet government as a bargaining piece to advance Soviet strategic interests in the nuclear chessboard . The missiles were seen as part of the US-Soviet “diplomatic” maneuvers and intrigue and political objectives on both sides .
 Khrushchev presumed that, faced with a fait accompli, Washington would redress the imbalance to the benefit of the Soviet Union, he says .
 The Soviet missiles, upon being fully operational, would be able to strike major population centers and whole geographic regions of the US, roughly equivalent to the potential death-dealing capacity Washington had through its missiles in Europe surrounding and targeted on the Soviet Union .
 Of course, the big ‘if’ in all of this reasoning was getting to the accompli . Of course the big "if" in all this reasoning is getting to an accompli. It's not the end of the process, it's the end result .
 The Soviet officials revealed to the Cuban leaders that their “intelligence” told them conclusively that a United States invasion was being seriously prepared, to be implemented at any time over the next months . The U.S. invasion of Cuba was to be carried out in the coming months
 Of course, the Soviets were not telling the Cubans anything they did not already know in general, but there were new specific facts and details . "Of course, of course, [Cubans] were not told anything they didn't already know," says author .
 The proposal that measures to fortify Cuban defenses would include the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles on the island naturally led to intense consultations within the top Cuban leadership . The now-concrete proposal that . measures to . fortify . Cuban defense would include a deployment of . Soviet . nuclear missiles
 Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, Che Gue-Gue-ara, Osvaldo Dorticos, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, and Blas Roca were involved .
 The Cuban leadership told the Soviet delegation that the nuclear deployment was acceptable in principle . The day after the proposal was received the Cuban leadership said it was acceptable . The Soviet delegation told the Cuban leaders that the plan was OK .
 Fidel Castro referred to the discussions within the Cuban central leadership . In extensive discussions with European journalist Ignacio Ramonet Fidel Castro discussed the discussions . Fidel Castro was in talks with Ramonet .
 He said that besides Khrushchev and the Soviet leadership’s “sincere desire to prevent an attack against Cuba…they were hoping to improve the balance of strategic forces . He added that it would be inconsistent of us to expect the maximum support from the USSR and the rest
 In 1992 Fidel Castro had said, “We really didn’t like the missiles.” In a speech many years earlier in 1992, Fidel Castro said he didn't like missiles . In 1992, Castro said in a speech that years later, "We didn't really like
 Fidel Castro, Raul Castro and Che Guevara argued with the Soviet leadership that the deployment should be open and public . They agreed in principle, but disagreed with the decision to deploy the weapons .
 The fact was that there was nothing in the Soviet-Cuban agreement to deploy the missiles contravened any existing international law . The fact is that there were no contravenes any existing law, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The Cuban leaders were certain that it would be virtually impossible for the shipment, site construction, and land deployment to remain concealed from the highly sophisticated U.S. surveillance technology .
 Open and transparent invasion of Cuba was the way to go politically and morally, says author . Given the United States missiles in Turkey and Italy surrounding the Soviet Union, invasion was open and transparent, he says .
 Fidel Castro speaks of the ‘strange, Byzantine discussion” over whether Soviet arms shipments to Cuba were offensive or defensive . Fidel Castro spoke of the discussion in the book with Ramonet .
 Castro: "We didn’t like the course the public debate was taking" Castro: We didn't like the way public debate had been taking . Castro: “We were very unhappy with the way the debate was going .
 I sent Che…to explain my view of the situation to Khrushchev, including the need to immediately publish the military agreement the USSR and Cuba had signed, he says .
 For us, for the Cuban leaders, the USSR was a powerful, experienced government . But I couldn’t manage to persuade him… I couldn't manage to . persuade him, he says .
 For Cuban revolutionaries, the economic, military and political ties forged with the Soviet Union had been a decisive, irreplaceable factor in their survival from the January 1959 triumph of the Revolution through the April 1961 Playa Giron defeat of the US-organized mercenary invasion .
 The unfolding of the Missile Crisis left the Cuban leadership feeling vulnerable, bypassed, and insulted by the Soviet government led by Nikita Khrushchev . The Cuban leadership felt bypassed by the perceived highhanded behavior of the Soviet state .
 Castro detailed how the ‘Missile Crisis’ unfolded and how Cuba’s relations with the Soviet Union emerged out of the crisis different from what they had been before . Castro detailed the crisis with great emotion and sharp, cool logic .
 Castro stated that Cuba's revolutionary leadership looked to the Soviet Union for, “…measures that would guarantee the country’s safety.” Castro said . Castro said that Cuba”s revolutionary leadership . looked to Russia for “measures that . would guarantee . the country
 Castro: Terrorist attacks against Cuba never stopped after Soviet missiles, planes, and combat troops were removed from Cuba at the “end” of the October Crisis . Castro: “Together with the pirate attacks and U-2 flights, incidents began to flare up at the Guantanamo
 Cuba did not want to live at the expense of humiliation or surrender; for that you do not have to be a revolutionary . But Cuba had been alive and Cuba was living, and Cuba wanted to live not to be humiliated .
 Castro: "Cuba did not agree with the way the issue was handled; it stated the need to approach the problem from different, more drastic, more revolutionary and even more legal positions" “ we saw that the United States was creating an atmosphere of hysteria and aggression,”
 Cuba had every right to own whatever weapons it saw fit, but had to adopt a policy of concessions, claiming that the weapons were defensive . And in response to the imperialist’s position, the Cuban government responded to the situation with concessions . Cuba's response was not to stand up
 The problem wasn't the legality of the agreement - everything was absolutely legal - but rather Khrushchev’s mistaken political handling of the situation . Even though both Cuba and the USSR had the legitimate right, he started spinning theories about offensive weapons .
 The missile transport was the largest sea-borne operation in Soviet history . It was the biggest sea-based operation in the Soviet history.
 All three of the SS-4 missile regiments were operational even as Soviet ships stopped moving towards Cuba . All three were operational at the time of the attack .
 The latest batch of 2017 declassified Kennedy-assassination related documents reconfirm preparations – “contingency plans” – for such an invasion had been in place for many months prior to the secret installation of Soviet missiles .
 This was the only conceivable basis for Khrushchev to make the missile proposal to the Cuban leaders and expect their agreement . This would be the only way to get the agreement, says historian John Avlon .
 A U.S. invasion of Cuba was on the hair-trigger of being ordered at several concrete conjunctures in the course of the crisis . In fact, a United States invasion of Cuban territory was on a hair-trinkling course of events .
 The decision to carry out a direct, large-scale U.S. military assault was being debated within the Kennedy Administration and the narrow circle of bipartisan Congressional leadership that was privy to the deliberations .
 President Kennedy had to choose whether to give the order to invade – again, everything was already in place for the execution of an invasion . The island where many nuclear warheads had already been in place, targeting U.S. territory, and where Cuban armed resistance to the invading troops was certain
 Cuba would be fighting from their own territory against a foreign invasion force and massive bombing assaults . For the immense majority of the Cuban population, having just experienced a profound social revolution, the Cuban revolution would be a major factor in the Cuban struggle .
 Thousands of Cuban civilians would have been instantly killed in these air strikes . Thousands of Cubans would have died in the air strikes, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The political consequences of this carnage would have been devastating for Washington even if nuclear warheads were never launched on either side, a dubious prospect at best . Washington would certainly have been devastated for Washington if it had never been launched .
 Washington would lose the “moral high ground,” so crucial in concrete questions of world politics . The U.S. would lose its moral high ground in the fight over Syria .
 Cuba would regain what had been eroded by the secretive, clumsy adventurism of Khrushchev’s ‘initiative’ and its incompetent implementation . Cuba would have regained what was eroded by Khrushchev's ‘secretive, clumsy’ adventur
 The question of the nuclear weapons that were already on the island and the more that were en route would likely have been rendered secondary and the question of Cuba’s right to self-determination would have again risen to the fore .
 Kennedy was politically savvy enough to realize all of this and finally rebuffed the advocates of launching an invasion . Kennedy was a savvy politician .
 Who actually would – in a hair-trigger political atmosphere – fire first becomes almost a moot, secondary question in the framework of such a political confrontation . Who would actually fire first?
 US “intelligence’s estimates were that 18,500 United States casualties would take place in the first period after a U.S. invasion, according to declassified material obtained by the National Security Archive .
 The presence of Soviet nuclear warheads and large numbers of Soviet military personnel, fighter jets, anti-aircraft gun emplacements, and so on, was another major factor leading Kennedy to repeatedly postpone the invasion plans and opt for a naval blockade surrounding Cuba .
 The “law of unintended consequences” comes into dynamic play . As is always the case when war and combat is actually joined, “Law of unintended consequence” is in play .
 "We knew, and do not presume that we ignored it, that we would have been annihilated," he said . "We didn't hesitate to do it. However, I didn’t hesitate to . do it," he added .
 Fidel Castro’s logic and formulations in his initial letters became necessarily more abstract and algebraic . Fidel Castro's logic and formulation in his letters became more abstract, algebraic, he says .
 Soviet forces could strike, in a limited “tactical” use, before the United States could strike the Soviet forces . U.S. forces would strike Soviet forces before they could strike them .
 The same technical, military logic of “pre-emption” would, of course, dominate the United States side . The U.S. side had a clear superiority in both quantity and quality of nuclear weapons deliverance .
 The MAD doctrine was based on each side’s nuclear arsenal countermanding the others . The MAD theory was used to countermandate each other's nuclear arsenals .
 The seemingly absurd stockpiling of nuclear warheads and delivery system locations had the “rational” kernel of logic that after a “first strike” or pre-emptive launch of warheads the ‘other side” would still have enough of an atomic arsenal left to deliver
 The key point – the only determinant fact – in whether nuclear holocaust would be unleashed – was whether the U.S. would invade Cuba . The key question is whether Cuba would invade the United States .
 The two superpowers geared up for a nuclear war, the chances of something going terribly wrong increased exponentially . The two leaders were no longer in full control of their gigantic military machines .
 Soviet troops on Cuba targeted Guantánamo with tactical nuclear weapons and shot down an American U-2 spy plane . U.S. U.2 plane was shot down by Soviet troops in Cuba in June 1962 .
 Another U-2, on a “routine’s air sampling mission to the North Pole, got lost over the Soviet Union . Another U.2 was lost over Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 The Soviets sent MiG fighters into the air to try to shoot down the American intruder . Alaska Air Defense Command scrambled F-102 interceptors armed with tactical nuclear missiles . The U.S. also scrambled F.102 interceptor missiles armed with nuclear weapons .
 It took place at what was perhaps the nadir of the downward spiral of Cuban-Soviet relations set in motion by the October Crisis of 1962 . The Cuban-Russian relations spiraled into a downward spiral .
 This on-the-ground fact was a real blow to the Cuban revolutionaries and the perspective of building a continental revolutionary army to take on the military regimes backed by the ruling oligarchies .
 These regimes of the Latin American ruling classes were themselves allied with, dependent on, and conjoined with, the dominant United States power in the Hemisphere .
 This new objective reality necessarily raised many challenges in the development and direction of Cuba’s revolutionary foreign policy . The Cuban government has been in the midst of a difficult period of transition to a new state of sovereignty .
 The Cuban revolutionary line in Latin America was opposed – with varying degrees of vehemence – by virtually all of the Latin American Communist parties that looked to Soviet Union for political direction .
 What the Cuban revolutionary leadership considered betrayal in Bolivia, disrupted and undermined the formation and development of urban resistance forces crucial to supplement the rural-based guerrilla struggle under Che’s command, leaving the guerrillas exposed and vulnerable .
 Fidel Castro gave an extensive presentation by Raul Castro, then Chairman of the Revolutionary Armed Forces and the President of the Cuban Council of State since 2006 . The Escalante affair was the first time Fidel Castro had addressed the Central Committee gathering in Cuba .
 The report was a damning indictment of a secret faction inside the PCC led by Anibal Escalante . The report found that Escalantes was a member of the secret faction led by Escalpe .
 PSP initially opposed the July 26th Movement led by Fidel Castro . By early 1958 they had endorsed the anti-Batista struggle and M-26-J leadership .
 Joint political and military collaboration was carried out in the last period before the revolutionary triumph . Joint political, military collaboration carried out during last period of revolutionary period .
 Soviet-Cuban tensions escalated in this mid-1960s period, although never to the point of a public break . Soviet-Cuba tensions escalated but never to a point of public break in the 1960s .
 The Soviet and Cuban leaderships had sharp differences in Vietnam and Latin America . Nevertheless, sharp political and theoretical differences were registered between the two countries' leaderships .
 Fidel Castro publicly excoriated the Soviet government for its relations with Latin American repressive and reactionary regimes . In several speeches in 1966 and 1967 Fidel Castro made public excursions into the Soviet Union's relations with the Latin American .
 The betrayal and execution of Che in 1967 sharpened the existing tensions . Che was followed by the Escalante intrigue and covert plotting against the revolutionary government . Che's death in 1966 sharpened tensions in the country .
 Cuban economy was being whipped by the U.S. economic blockade, particularly in the Americas . Cuba and the Soviet Union had limited but noticeable economic exchange .
 Cuba struggled with diplomatic isolation in the Western Hemisphere under U.S. pressure . Only Canada and Mexico maintained formal diplomatic ties .
 In the decade following Che’s defeat in Bolivia, all other allied Latin American guerrilla movements into the early 1970s had been crushed, most notably Argentina and Uruguay . In the 1970s, most of the allied guerrilla movements were crushed .
 At the same time there was a revival of mass urban and rural working-class struggles in a number of Latin American countries, including Bolivia . Bolivia pushed open some democratic and political space, including for revolutionaries .
 The September 11, 1973 US-backed bloody military coup against the Popular Unity government pulverized all democratic rights and political space for many years . Military rule was extended by the mid-1970s as military rule was consolidated in Argentina and Uruguay after 1973 .
 The resolution led to increased propaganda for “peace” and “reconciliation” in both Moscow and Washington, with accompanying worldwide diplomatic maneuvering . The resolution of the conflict has been followed by increased propaganda in Russia and Washington .
 U.S., UK, Soviet Union signed Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . Treaty was signed during Washington's escalation in Vietnam . U.K., UK and USSR signed the treaty .
 The new Lyndon Johnson White House abided by Kennedy’s verbal “pledge” and invasion plans were put in mothballs . The new LBJ White House continued covert action, terrorism, and containment continued .
 Johnson maintained continuity with Kennedy’s intervention and deepened it . Primary focus and attention shifted to Indochina .
 Cuba's relations with the Soviet Union began after 1968, particularly in economic exchange, through the 1970s and 1980s . The soviet government collapsed in 1991, setting off a huge economic depression in Cuba .
 In this period sharp policy differences emerged over Soviet policies in Africa, military tactics in Angola, and the soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which Cuba opposed . Cuba opposed the invasion .
 The immediate threat of US-Soviet nuclear exchange and war receded on October 28, 1962 with the announcement that Soviet ships had stopped advancing and that Soviet missiles would be withdrawn . The threat of nuclear exchange receded after the announcement .
 Kennedy approved terrorist attacks against Cuba before his assassination . Right up until his assassination Kennedy was approving terrorist attacks on Cuba .
 U.S. intervention by proxy never stopped and became systematic . United States intervention never stopped, became systematic.
 United States armed and trained counter-revolutionaries were finally defeated in the Escambray mountains in central Cuba in a campaign from 1963-65 . U.S. forces were eventually defeated .
 After a pause and renewal in the late 1960s, Cuba’s revolutionary internationalist foreign policy – in the spirit of Che – reached glorious new internationalist achievements in southern Africa . After the overturn of the hollowed-out Salazarist dictatorship in Portugal in 1974 and the collapse
 Cuban troops stopped the apartheid South African invasion at the gates of the capital Luanda in November 1975 . They were aiming to topple the newly independent Angolan government . South African apartheid South Africa was defeated by the Cuban troops .
 Cuba’s revolutionary action and solidarity over the next nearly two decades was decisive in the defending the independence of Angola, winning the independence  of Namibia, and in the retreat and unraveling of the South African apartheid state .
 Cuba did not have anything to do with nuclear weapons, nor with the unnecessary slaughter of Hiroshima and Nagasaki perpetrated by the president of the U.S. Harry S Truman, thus establishing the tyranny of nuclear weapons .
 Nahem is a retired Amtrak Locomotive Engineer . He is a member of the Brotherhood of Locomotives Engineers and Trainmen .
 His writings have been published inline in Counterpunch, Dissident Voice, MRZine, Pambazuka News, ZNet, and various Cuban online journals . He has been published in various online journals including ZNet .
 The private owners of nationalized foreign enterprises in Cuba, with their governments, negotiated satisfactory compensation with the revolutionary Cuban government, in accordance with international law . The owners of the nationalized businesses in Cuba have been compensated for their losses .
 The United States government, at the time, was already planning and organizing for the overthrow of the “Castro” government . The U.S. government was in contemptuous rejection of any negotiations for compensation to United States owners of Cuban assets .
 This was a large swath of the Cuban economy, which was dominated by U.S. capital . This was the United States' economic dominance in Cuba .
 In the 1960 Presidential election, the liberal Democrat John Kennedy promoted as an important campaign issue a supposed ‘missile gap’ – in the Soviet Union’s favor – between Washington and Moscow .
 Nixon had the disadvantage of being unable to publicly tout the Eisenhower White House’s already advanced plans for the mercenary invasion at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy carried out the invasion three months after his Inauguration .
 Some thirty-five members of the so-called “microfaction” were expelled from the PCC and received prison sentences from two to 15 years . Some 35 people were sentenced to prison sentences ranging from two- to fifteen years .
 This went as far as urging Soviet economic pressure on Cuba, for which they were charged with treason . This went so far as to urge Soviet economic pressures on Cuba . For this, the Soviet Union charged them with treason for their actions .
 Escalante’s grouping never argued for their political positions openly within the structures and procedures of the PCC, which was their right . Escalantes’ grouping never argue for their positions openly in the structures .
 In their secret functioning inside Cuba and . intrigues with Soviet and Eastern European officials and diplomats, they . portrayed Che Guevara as a “Trotskyite adventurer” and the Castro leadership as “petty bourgeois elements” that seized control of the Revolution