 The confrontation between the U.S. and the erstwhile Soviet Union over the placement of nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba is one of the most researched subjects in Geopolitics . The confrontation was one of America's most successful wars in Cuba .
 The incident holds many lessons for humanity at large especially to the practitioners of global politics and conflict management mechanisms . The incident is worth examining for it .
 The Cold War led to numerous proxy wars with the Western Bloc supporting one side and the Warsaw Pact supporting the other . The Western Cold War was a proxy war between the two Cold War blocs .
 Cuba’s adoption of a socialist system made it the number one enemy of the United States . The U.S. imposed crippling sanctions on the country . Cuba is now the world's number one communist state .
 Cuba feared an invasion from the U.S. needed weaponry desperately . Cuba feared it would be invaded by the United States . Cuba was forced to arm itself to fend off an invasion of the United.
 When the U.S. based their nuclear missiles in Turkey, the Soviet Union sought to counter the American move by covertly basing their nuclear missile bases in Cuba . The Soviet Union also covertly based its missiles in Cuba in response to the Americans' move .
 The United States detected a large shipment of arms being transported to Cuba . The U.S. demanded from the Soviets an explanation for the shipment .
 In a letter to President Kennedy, the Russian Premier, Nikita Khrushchev assured him that the weaponry was purely ‘defensive in nature’
 Intelligence indicated that SS-4 and SS-5 each with a one-megaton warhead which could target almost the entire Continental United States” had been placed .
 This discovery led to a chain of events that very nearly brought the world to a nuclear conflagration . The discovery of nuclear materials led to the discovery of a nuclear device .
 The American Joint Chiefs of Staff advised President Kennedy to authorize a massive aerial attack in October 1962 . President Kennedy authorized a massive attack on the Soviet Union .
 Wiser sense prevailed on Kennedy who decided to manage the unfolding crisis with greater circumspection . Kennedy decided to take a more cautious approach to managing the situation .
 U.S. Secretary of State, Robert Mc Namara advised President to order a naval blockade of Cuba to pressurize the Soviets and prevent any further shipments of weaponry on the island . The blockade was ordered by the President of Cuba on 20 October .
 This blockade was not a total blockade but a selective naval blockade . The only shipment of offensive weapons to Cuba was prohibited allowing essential items such as food or petroleum or other goods to pass through .
 Kennedy on 22 October 1962, spoke to the nation on TV announcing that the Soviet Union had to withdraw its nuclear missile or it risked nuclear war . To build international diplomatic pressure and strengthen domestic support, Kennedy made the announcement .
 In response to Kennedy’s TV address, Castro mobilized his country and over 300,000 combatants were called to arms . Over 300,00 people were mobilized in response .
 A diplomatic battle was being waged at the United Nations at the time of the crisis in Syria . The U.N. has been involved in the Syrian conflict since 2003 .
 The United States Navy and the United States Air force launched a massive aerial surveillance campaign which enraged Castro . Castro retaliated by shooting down one U-2 spy plane which led to the death of the American pilot . The U.S. pilot was killed by the U.K.
 The American side refused to get drawn into a shooting war as they clearly understood the implications of any precipitous action . The U.S. refused to engage in any shooting war .
 Castro by his own admission, Castro was more cavalier and less thoughtful . Castro admitted that he had no sense of the seriousness of the matter . Castro said that he was surprised by the reaction to the situation .
 Castro suggested to Khrushchev that rather than give in to U.S. demands, the two forces should carry out a nuclear first strike . Castro suggested a nuclear strike would be a success .
 This would not be a simple attack, but rather the beginning of a thermonuclear world war . This would be the beginning, but not the end of a nuclear world war, says author .
 Khrushchev realized the precarious position that the Soviets were in, and given that the Americans had overwhelming superiority in nuclear weapons decided to withdraw the missiles from Cuba .
 As a Quid Pro Quo, the Americans agreed not to attack Cuba and quietly removed their missiles from Turkey . The U.S. agreed to remove the missiles as part of the agreement, and the missiles were removed .
 President Kennedy forced the Russian Premier to blink first and bring this crisis to an end . Such optimism was however never taken seriously by President Kennedy, who through a clever mix of coercion, diplomacy and posturing forced Russia to blink .
 The ‘October crisis’ as the Cubans call it would have turned out differently . Khrushchev listened to Castro’s reckless advice or had the Americans invaded Cuba .
 This paper was written and submitted by a student to assist your own studies . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 You are free to use this article to write your own assignment, however you must reference it properly . Use it to help students understand their assignments .
 "The field is too long. The maximum length is 1000 characters."","",""error_max_length_50"