 The United States of America and the Soviet Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are at odds with each other . The U.S. and Soviet Union are the most powerful nations in the world .
 Whenever one side builds a nuclear weapon, the other must make one too, as quickly as possible . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for decades .
 The team captains must meet on occasion to decide upon the number and type of nuclear weapons allowed in this race . Team captains must also decide on the type and number of weapons allowed .
 A neutral judging panel monitors the teams to make sure they play by the rules . The United Nations monitors the games and monitors the play .
 If your team wants to win this race, you have to be sneaky. In other words, if your team wins it, it's not easy to do so .
 Neither of the team captains can speak the other's language, and a gigantic ocean separates them . The team captains are separated from each other in a giant ocean .
 They have no access to e-mail, fax machines or satellite telephones because they haven't been invented yet . E-mail and fax machines are not available to them because of the invention .
 Frijoles, frijoles are the magical food . The team captains are the team captains of the Spanish national team .
 If your team leaps too far ahead, your opponent might panic and attack you . If you get ahead of your team, you might be attacked by your opponent .
 If you fall too far behind, they might destroy you . A good strategy, then is to stay just a healthy step ahead of them .
 If one team is provoked to press their nuclear button, the world as we know it would cease to exist . The world would be destroyed if one team pressed the button, experts say .
 Any living creature that managed to survive the initial attack would eventually die of radiation poisoning . Any surviving creature that survived the attack would die from radiation poisoning.
 On the count of three, we'll be blasted back in time to 1962, the closest our world has ever been to nuclear war . We'll be blasting back to 1962 when the first nuclear war was held .
 Khrushchev started fearing that his nation was losing the Arms Race in 1962 . The Soviet Union feared that the arms race was on the wane .
 The United States, on the other hand, could wipe out most of the Soviet Union . The U.S. could have wiped out most Soviet Union, the U.K. could do so .
 If Khrushchev wanted to win the Arms Race, he needed a better missile site . The site was a better place to launch a missile strike .
 Having a fleet of nuclear weapons on his island would not only protect him from another invasion, it might gain him some respect from the international community as well . It might also gain him respect from international community .
 Khrushchev knew that the ""captain"" of the USA-President John F Kennedy-wouldn't approve of this arrangement one bit . Khrushvic knew that President Kennedy- wouldn't approve the arrangement one way .
 Soviet troops dressed like tourists brought the missiles over on cruise liners . The missiles were brought over by Soviet forces dressed as tourists . Soviet troops brought over the missiles from the Soviet Union .
 In October of that year, an American spy plane flew over Cuba and snapped photographs that would send shivers down the spines of all Americans who saw them . The photos were taken by a spy plane over Cuba .
 Specialists determined that the missiles had a range of 1,100 miles . They could demolish every major American city but Seattle, experts say .
 They broke the news to Kennedy while he was still in his pajamas, eating breakfast . Kennedy's parents broke the announcement to him as he was in his early morning .
 He immediately organized a group of his closest advisors, who locked themselves in a conference room for seven days and debated what to do . He organized a meeting to discuss his decision to take action .
 Kennedy could try to solve the problem in an open, diplomatic fashion with Castro, Khrushchev and a UN advisor or two . Kennedy could solve the issue in a diplomatic fashion, writes Peter Bergen .
 He could take direct military action, starting with an air attack on those missiles . The U.S. could also use a direct strike on the missiles, or a direct attack on them .
 Kennedy knew the Soviets could not be informed beforehand . Whatever the path, Kennedy knew he could not have been informed beforehand.
 He also kept up with his jam-packed presidential itinerary so that no one noticed anything was wrong .
 Jose Salazar, a Cuban who fled his country after Castro's takeover, was ready to go at a moment's notice . Salazar is a former Cuban exile who fled the country to escape the Castro regime .
 Salazar: "At that age, I was very idealistic" Salazar is now a 59-year-old doctor living in Miami . Salazar now lives in Miami, Florida .
 At 7m. on October 22, 1962, Kennedy appeared live on national television to announce that a nuclear attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union . Kennedy said that a Cuban attack would be viewed as a Soviet attack by Russia .
 He also imposed a naval quarantine on the island to prevent further shipments of military weapons . The island is also being quarantined by the government to prevent weapons shipments .
 The instant Kennedy finished his 17-minute speech, panic swept through the streets of America . The instant he finished his speech was the instant panic swept across the streets .
 Some families constructed bomb shelters and hoarded food; others headed to church . Some families were hoarding food, others headed for church .
 Stan Stoklosa, a 71-year-old veteran of the Korean War, remembered waking up the next morning and rushing to his bedroom window to see if any nuclear clouds graced the horizon . The Korean War veteran said he rushed to his bedside window to check if any
 They planned to use force against any ship that tried to sail in past 10m . They said they would use force if any ship was sailing past the 10m mark .
 World held its breath as a fleet of Soviet ships came closer and closer to the line . The world held their breath as the Soviet ships began to sail towards the Soviet Union .
 From the beginning, Khrushchev insisted that the Soviets had only peaceful intentions with their missiles . From the start of the 1960s, the Soviets insisted that their missiles were only peaceful . The Soviet Union insisted that its missiles were not missiles .
 Khrushchev offered a compromise after the quarantine had been instigated . Once the quarantine was instigated, he agreed to a compromise with the Soviet Union .
 He would dismantle missiles in Cuba if Kennedy promised never to invade the island again . Kennedy promised to dismantle the missiles if he promised to never invade Cuba again . JFK would dismantle them in exchange for promise to never do so .
 Kennedy would only be pleasing the Soviets if he tore down the U.S. offensive wall in Turkey . Kennedy would be pleased by tearing down the wall, he said .
 He dismantled the weapons in Cuba and Kennedy followed suit in Turkey half a year later . He dismantled them in Cuba, followed suit with Kennedy in Turkey .
 I'd love to end this dispatch by saying that the world is no longer playing the Nuclear Arms Race, and that the threat of nuclear war died with the dawning of the 21st century . I'd like to say that the nuclear arms race is over, but that it's over
 Russia developed the A-bomb to counter America's nuclear threat . China built warheads to combat Russia's; India to knock out China's . Pakistan to take on India's nuclear weapons .
 Nuclear weapons can do a great deal of damage while sitting quietly in their sites . In recent years, we've also discovered that nuclear weapons can also do great damage . Nuclear weapons are also known to be capable of carrying out much damage .
 Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the Ukraine in April of 1986 . Chernobyl was the site of the largest nuclear disaster in history .
 Hundreds of thousands of people were exposed to radiation when an old reactor started leaking . Hundreds of millions of people have been exposed by the leak .
 Several dozen people died within a few days and thousands more contracted cancer . Thousands of people were infected with cancer .
 The hospitals and orphanages surrounding Chernobyl are full of men, women and children with horrible deformities that can be traced directly to the radiation . Chernobyl is full of people with terrible deformities, including men and women .
 "We already have more than enough nuclear weapons to destroy this entire planet," says President Obama .