 Officials indulged in much finger-pointing at a two-day meeting in Moscow among officials involved in the action, a participant says . The meetings concluded Saturday after they concluded Saturday .
 Sorensen says some speakers remain overly concerned with ''national self-interest'' and ''justification'' and blaming everyone but themselves for letting the U.S.-Soviet showdown get out of hand .
 Among those around the table were former Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara and McGeorge Bundy, a former national security advisor to President Kennedy, on the American side, and former Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko .
 The focus was on October 1962, when the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. imposed a naval blockade on the island before demanding and getting withdrawal of missiles .
 The Soviets and Americans clashed on whether war had been imminent . In the two-day closed session in Moscow, the Soviets and U.S. clashed over whether war was imminent .
 The Soviets had nuclear warheads in Cuba at the time, delegates say . They were not mounted on missiles pointed at the United States, Soviet delegates said .
 Dmitry Volkogonov quoted official Soviet documents as showing there were 20 warheads already on the island and 20 more on board a Soviet vessel .
 Sergei Khrushchev: 'The warheads were there, but they were not attached to the missiles' But the son of then-Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchell said, ''The warheads . were there . But the warheads were . there, he said . But he said,
 The Soviets have said they sent nuclear missiles to Cuba because they feared a U.S. invasion of the island . The Soviets said they feared an invasion of Cuba . The Soviet Union said it sent the missiles because it feared an American invasion .
 The incident showed the danger of excessive secrecy in military matters, he said . The incident was the result of a lack of transparency, he added .
 Khrushchev erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he had not anticipated the U.S. reaction, a participant said . Georgy A Arbatov, head of the Kremlin's U.K.A.-Canada Institute, told the conference on Friday .
 Cuban official says his island had enough of bullying by the U.S. and Soviet Union . Risquet, a Cuban official, said he wanted opinions of small countries to be respected .
 The Cuban missile crisis had been unavoidable because of U.S.-Soviet approach to resolving conflicts at the time . Vitaly V Zhurkin, who heads a new Soviet institute studying Europe, says the crisis was unavoidable .
 The Soviets, Cubans and Americans who guided their nations through the Cuban missile crisis 26 years ago continue to disagree about who was to blame .
 As one of those supposedly comedic and inspirational larks, this movie is actually a ray of hope for aspiring filmmakers . "As one of these supposedly comedic larks," this movie actually is actually ray-of- hope .
 First-time writer/director Christopher Monger convinced producer, Ed Pressman, that this comedy could fly . The film is framed by the 1962 Cuban missile crisis .
 The audience hooks here were supposed to be the antics of two smarty-pants siblings in their wonder years in a single-parent family . Another of those occasions when Shirley MacLaine doesn't necessarily act as much as she gusts through a picture in another patently eccentric role .
 Teri Garr plays the central part of Kay, Kay, the mother of young Eddie and Emily . Even in bad films she can supply naturalism and charm, which is stripped out of the picture .
 The three females and Eddie pack up their belongings in an old station wagon . They leave Chicago to take up residency in a small town in Washington, where Kay has inherited the local diner . Kay inherits the diner .
 The kids run afoul of the mean-spirited next-door neighbor, Mullins, who actually beats them . Mullins beats the kids to death .
 Emily is an angel dressed in an angel outfit adorned with lights . Emily's mother puts Emily up in his frontyard tree in a Christmas Eve outfit .
 The alcoholic Mullins, played by the ubiquitous Vincent Schiavelli, is provoked into storming out on the porch . Aunt Zena sets off bright lights and a refractive poof of magic-kit smoke that briefly illuminates Emily .
 A reporter from a scandal rag as well as television cameras roll into town, creating a media circus and great business for the diner . He cleans up his life, starts going to church, convinces townspeople that he actually saw this angel, and a reporter .
 Even during the most tenuous of international events, Americans have a belief in miracles . Americans believe in miracles, even during the worst of the world .
 The central idea doesn't work because the filmmaker, in effect, asks the viewer to suspend his disbelief over and over, over . And the central idea is that the viewer is asked to suspend disbelief, he says .
 It's tough to believe that the angel ruse could have been pulled off at all, that the cranky Mullins could change so thoroughly that the townsfolk could be so gullible that the media would actually cover the event .
 Aunt Zena Shirley MacLaine was married to the late actress and co-star of the Golden Globes . She died at the age of 92 .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to an American ultimatum that the missiles be withdrawn from Cuba without an explicit link to the American Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The U.N. proposed a mutual withdrawal of obsolete American missiles from Turkey in exchange for a Soviet pullout of its missiles from
 On Oct. 1962, the Soviets began dismantling the missiles thereby ending the crisis the day after the statement was dictated . The step became unnecessary, because on Oct. 22, 1962, they began dismantling missiles .
 The Cuban missile crisis erupted in October 1962 when it was discovered that the Soviet Union had installed nuclear warheads on the island and targeted them at the U.S. The crisis erupted after it was revealed that the Soviets had installed the warheads .
 After a tense, 13-day standoff, the Soviets withdraw the missiles . The Soviets withdrew the missiles after 13 days of tension .
 American intercontinental ballistic missiles were alerted, jet fighters were scrambled and an airborne command center known as the president's ""doomsday plane" took to the air, although without the president aboard . U.S. intercontinental missile missiles were alerted .
 A training tape simulating a Soviet attack was mistakenly inserted into the Pentagon's computer system . It was later determined that a training tape had been mistakenly inserted in the system . The tape was used to simulate a Soviet invasion .
 The haphazard nature of the data quickly convinced analysts that there was a glitch in the system . Analysts say it was a mistake that the data was not properly processed .
 Sunlight reflected off some clouds over Minuteman launch silos in Montana . Clouds reflected off the clouds over some of the silos . The silos were built in the 1960s .
 Russia's early-warning satellites showed no confirmation of a U.S. attack, and the crisis was defused . The crisis was averted .
 Doris Tavenner wasn't surprised when she was called out of speech class 40 years ago to read an announcement over the school intercom . Doris was a high school senior in the 1970s .
 All students must pack their things and go straight home . Students must pack up their things, go to school buses or cars .
 In more than five years living on the U.S. Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, she had never heard of anything like this . She said she was shocked to learn of the situation .
 President Kennedy learned about a week earlier that Cuba had Soviet missiles capable of reaching the U.S. President John Kennedy had learned about the Cuban missiles . President Kennedy had been warned about the missiles .
 A blockade of the island nation and high-wire international negotiating were about to begin . The island nation was about to be shut down by a blockade of island nation . A blockade was due to begin.
 Her father, a carpentry shop supervisor, came in with no more information . Her father is a shop supervisor .
 A soldier in full battle gear walked into their house, tossed a letter on the table and walked out without speaking . Suddenly, a soldier in uniform walked into the house, tossing a letter and walking out .
 They were to leave their cars in their driveways with the keys in the ignition . The keys were to be left in the driveways but not the ignition keys .
 Before the sun set, they were aboard ships and planes leaving Guantanamo . They were aboard planes and ships leaving Guantanamo.
 Those who brought transistor radios listened as President Kennedy broke the news once they were safely out of port . The news was broadcast on a transistor radio .
 CNN traveled to Norfolk, Va., and the Little Creek Naval Amphibious Base . CNN.com will feature iReporters in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery .
 The crisis ended in two weeks, but those who elected to return did so shortly before Christmas . Those who chose to return were able to do so within two weeks .
 She noticed foxholes and bunkers that had been hastily built to defend the base if attacked . She noticed bunkers and foxholes were hastily built .
 Despite the remote and exotic location, life was not unlike what many smalltown American teens experienced in those days . Life returned to normal, which despite the remote location, was normal .
 Kids watched movies at night at outdoor theaters not drive-ins . Dry, comfortable weather allowed for outside seating and dancing to Elvis Presley songs .
 There were no traffic lights, and parents didn't worry about their children being out at night . Parents didn't have to worry that their children would be at night at all .
 Harris recalls watching movies and seeing napalm being dropped across the bay by Navy airmen in combat exercises . Harris recalls seeing the napalm drop over the bay . Harris: "It's like a war in hell"
 The first Saturday he was at Guantanamo was the first time he'd been there since 2007 . He was in the U.S. military base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, for two weeks .
 Most Americans on the base supported Fidel Castro when he came to power in 1959 . The U.S. had good diplomatic relations with Cuba, then ruled by dictator Fulgencio Batista . Most Americans in Cuba supported Castro .
 Cuban President Castro gravitated toward communism and the Soviet Union . Civilians at Guantanamo could no longer leave the base .
 Soviet warships periodically passed through Guantanamo Bay heading for Guantanamo City, which was outside the base . That increased the tension when Soviet warships regularly passed through the bay .
 The same was true of monthly defense exercises in which Marines would play the part of invaders, and Navy personnel defended the base . Navy personnel would also take part in the exercises .
 The classmates relived these memories at a reunion last month in Norfolk . The classmates were reunited last month .
 Harris and Reid did not know they lived so close to each other . Before then, they had never seen each other in their lives .
 Reid was dating one of the base policemen at the time, and the night before it happened, he gave her a hint . The night before the incident, she had been dating a police officer .
 The 11 classified letters exchanged in 1962 after the Cuban confrontation remain 'extremely sensitive' from the national security point of view,' said Pratt Byrd .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for U.S. guarantees that Cuba would not be invaded . The deal was made in return for Cuban missiles being removed from the Soviet Union .
 Mikhail Gorbachev 'absolutely would have gone along with it,' he said . Mikhail Gorcachev ' absolutely would have ... gone along' with it, he added .
 The State Department has not announced its decision to the school or the library .
 Bill Hahn searched for Soviet submarines and communication ships off the Atlantic Coast of the United States for three years during the Cold War .
 The Soviets created a missile crisis that focused the whole world’s attention on Cuba during 13 days in October 1962 . The crisis lasted 13 days .
 After the Cuban crisis, Hahn, now of Punta Gorda Isles, took a job with Sikorsky Helicopter Corp. that captures one’s imagination . Hahn: "I'm glad to have a job that captures my imagination. I'm not afraid to fly
 The February 1988 edition of “Rotor & Wing International’s” magazine had a story explaining the role Hahn and the chopper he helped build played in keeping the presidents safe .
 In 1962, shortly before President Kennedy was assassinated, Hahn joined the staff of the Sikorsky Aircraft Corp. as an engineer in Stratford, Connecticut .
 Sikorsky Presidential Helicopter Division manager . Two years later, he was selected by the firm's president to serve as manager of the division .
 Jackie Kennedy, the president’s wife, gave him the job . It was thanks to Jackie Kennedy that he got the job. The president's wife helped him get the job as president .
 The president's luggage arrived hours before the president and his wife made it to Massachusetts . The luggage went by helicopter from the White House to the Cape Cod home .
 Hahn and his staff were confronted with another big problem involving the presidential helicopter . Three or four years later, Hahn's staff faced a similar problem .
 The president wanted Sikorsky to build a helicopter that could withstand an atomic bomb blast, he says . “The president wanted it to be able to withstand a bomb blast” he said .
 Sikorsky VH-3D Presidential Helicopter might be able to withstand an atomic bomb detonation . Helicopter was designed to withstand a nuclear weapon detonation. Helicopter could be used in a nuclear war .
 This is the craft that would fly the first family to safety if nuclear war was declared . The craft would fly them to safety in the event of nuclear war .
 The 87-year-old former Sikorsky engineer said he had to find out how she wanted the Presidential Helicopter decorated . “I had to ask her what she wanted,” he said .
 Jackie Kennedy wanted the inside of the president’s helicopter decorated in shades of blue . The helicopter was decorated by Jackie Kennedy in the 1960s .
 After her husband’s assassination, when Lyndon Johnson took over the presidency, brown was the color he chose . After his assassination, Lyndon Johnson chose to wear brown .
 Later, Nancy Reagan would reject the brown colors . “ took over and she didn’t like brown. She didn't like brown,’ she said .
 Nancy wanted the carpet on the presidential aircraft to be made of blue shag loops . The carpet was made of shag looped blue shags .
 Reagan: 'Most of the women who get on Air Force One wear high heels. Reagan,’ I said, ‘Most of them . Most of the . women who . get on . Air Force . One of the most important things on the planet is that women wear high
 President Richard Nixon had to cope with a whole set of problems involving the presidential helicopter . Earlier, when President Nixon took office, Hahn had to deal with a set of issues involving the helicopter .
 Nixon got close to Egyptian President Sadat, who was vacillating between turning Egypt into a democratic country like the U.S. or putting it in the Russian sphere of influence and turning it into a totalitarian state .
 Nixon had taken three of these bombproof Sikorsky helicopters with him on his Egyptian trip . Nixon was traveling with three of the helicopters .
 They want to set up a helicopter maintenance and training program over there . The program will be set up in the Philippines .
 Problem was that the door couldn't be expanded so the president could board easier . Problem was quickly discovered there were all kinds of wires and cables running above the entranceway to the helicopter .
 President Ford would be hitting his head against a rubber cushion instead of the aluminum side of the helicopter . That way if President Ford banged his head on the aircraft, he would hit it against a cushion . The rubber cushion would be better than aluminum .
 The couple have three children, Sharon, Virginia and William, who live out of state . Sharon and William live in Virginia and Virginia .
 Some South Florida communities have moved to stop such cultural exchanges . Some communities have tried to stop cultural exchanges.
 Cuban filmmaker Gerardo Chijona had not been to the U.S. in almost a decade . He has not been in the United States since 2004 .
 Si Cuba Festival has become the most significant demonstration of the Obama administration’s departure from Bush-era policies . After months of increased cultural exchanges between the two nations, the Si Cuba festival has become a major demonstration of Obama administration's departure .
 Costing an estimated $2 million, the festival will showcase everything from classical ballet dancers to contemporary artists . The festival is expected to cost $2.5 million .
 Among the legends of Cuban entertainment expected are the National Ballet of Cuba and its famed director, Alicia Alonso . Alicia Alonso is expected to perform at the National Theater of Cuba .
 Folkloric dance troupe The Muñequitos de Matanzas, the Septeto Nacional, the Creole Choir of Cuba, the Danza Contemporanea de Cuba and the Cutumba folkloric ballet dance company also scheduled .
 For some of the groups, it will be their first time performing in the United States . For others, the groups will be performing for the first time .
 The unusual parade of Cuban works offers a “safe space” for artists and Cuba-lovers to engage, organizers say . Brooks-Hopkins and other organizers said the unusual parade offers a "safe space" for artists .
 In December, Miami City Commission unanimously passed a resolution asking Congress to end such exchanges . Hialeah did the same in February . Miami City Council passed a similar resolution .
 Miami Beach Mayor Matti Herrera Bower asked a city commission subcommittee to study it and come up with a similar proposal . At the request of the American Missile Crisis Association, Miami Beach mayor asked a subcommittee to look at it .
 Among the objections are that only the Cuban artists who follow the party line get to participate . Cuban artists say only those who follow party line will be allowed to do so .
 Miami Mayor Tomas Regalado: It's not like exile performers such as Willy Chirino would get to put on a show along Havana’s malecon . Miami mayor: It would be hard to imagine a Cuban exile performing in Havana . Mayor: Havana's mal
 Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen has instructed the city’s lobbying team to press legislators . The city has a history of lobbying for Congress, including the city of Washington .
 Civil Liberties Union of Greater Miami calls for investigation into county commissioners' interference . Fuego Cuban Music Worlds Festival was scheduled for Saturday at the Homestead Miami International Speedway . County commissioners canceled the festival, which was scheduled to take place at the track .
 The event was scrapped a day after County Commissioner Lynda Bell balked on Spanish radio . Bell was the county's first county commissioner to speak Spanish .
 Festival co-chair Ben Rodriguez-Cubeñas said organizers deliberately raised only private funds . Organizers deliberately raised funds only through private donations .
 Funders include the Cuban Artists Fund, the Ford Foundation, the Rockefeller Brothers Foundation, and the Robert Sterling Clark Foundation .
 He and others suggested that the festival could become the first step in broader engagement policy between the two nations .
 Obama administration has allowed more travel to and from Cuba and permitted more cash remittances to the island . Most experts are still waiting for Cuba’s quid pro quo .
 American subcontractor jailed in Cuba for distributing U.S. government communications equipment . Relations between the two governments remain chilly even while cultural sphere has exploded .
 The RF-8 Crusader that now rests at Castle Air Museum provides a monument to history . The RF8 Crusader is now a museum of aviation history .
 RF-8 Crusader flew during the Cuban missile crisis and Vietnam War, museum's CEO says . The plane was added to the museum's collection this year .
 Denny Baker, a pilot who flew RF-8s over Vietnam, will dedicate the plane Sunday . Baker will be dedicated to the plane . Baker is a former Air Force pilot who served in Vietnam .
 The day is one of two a year when visitors can hop inside the planes on display . It's one of only two days a year that the planes are on display at the museum .
 Thirty of the museum's 53 restored planes will have their cockpits open for public viewing . The museum's restoration of 30 restored planes is expected to be open to the public .
 Pruzzo said Castle's open cockpit show is the largest in Central California . Pruzzo: Castle's show is largest in central California . Castle is located in Castle Springs, California .
 Also at the museum are planes from the Korean War, the Vietnam War and the present day . The museum also includes planes from Vietnam War, Korea and Vietnam War .
 Open Cockpit Day is one of Atwater's hidden treasures . Russ Schaff, a restoration volunteer at the museum, says it's a hidden treasure . Schaff says the day is a "hidden treasure"
 Pruzzo's mission at the museum is to preserve military aviation history for future generations . Pruzzo: "It's important to preserve the history of military aviation for the future generations"
 Open Cockpit Day is a chance for people young and old to see what the museum has to offer . The museum will be open to anyone who wants to visit the museum .
 Intelligence analysts in Washington discounted their reports of seeing what looked like huge missile-like tubes . They believed the Soviet military buildup in Cuba was purely defensive . Analysts in Washington believed the buildup was defensive .
 The compilation of documents includes notes taken by then-agency director John McCone during White House crisis meetings, estimates by the intelligence community, reports from Cuban agents, and memoranda coded Ironbark .
 If the CIA could do it over, Studeman says, it would pay more attention to informants' reporting sightings of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Studeman: The CIA would analyze better how the Soviets viewed deployment of missiles outside their borders .
 The U.S. nearly missed the deployment of the SS-4 medium-range missiles in Cuba until it was almost too late . The documents and reminiscences highlight how the United States nearly missed .
 The deployment only became known when a U-2 spy plane photographed the launch pads on the western third of Cuba on Oct. 1962 at least one month after the first batch arrived .
 Much of the Cuban agent reporting was collected in Miami at what became the largest CIA station in the world . Warren Frank, then with the agency's foreign intelligence branch, said much of the reporting was gathered in Miami .
 Report made Sept., 1962, by a 47-year-old Cuban described as a businessman with four years of schooling and of average intelligence . Report was made Sept. 22, 1962 .
 The CIA received hundreds if not thousands of such reports, many of which its agents deemed credible . Frank: CIA agents in Miami deemed the reports credible .
 Analysts say they don't understand why the Soviets would want to deploy medium-range missiles in Cuba . Several analysts said part of the problem was that they could not understand why they wanted to deploy the missiles .
 There were those who thought the 49-year-old diplomat was prepared to sit down and forge a better relationship with the U.S.
 Mr Arbesu arrived during a period that has developed into one of the lowest points in bilateral relations since Cuban missile crisis .
 President Bush supported TV Marti - a U.S. television broadcast that the Cubans are dead set against - and favored a plebiscite in Cuba as the first step toward democracy . Just a few days after his arrival, President Bush stated publicly for the first time that he
 Mr Bush's comments set the tone for a chillier relationship with the U.S. President .
 Since then there have been more contentious issues than points of agreement . Since then it has been more difficult to come to an agreement than a deal .
 Cuba's top diplomat in the U.S. said he had no illusions about his role in Cuba's diplomatic mission . Cuban diplomat: "I'm not going to lie about my role in the United States. I have no illusions"
 Cuban displeasure at the U.S. invasion of Panama and the prospect of TV Marti . Cuba's human rights record has been criticized by the United States . The United States shelling of a Cuban freighter has also been criticized .
 Some Cuba analysts say that because relations are perfectly bad now and Cuba is particularly vulnerable, this might be a propitious time for the U.S. to negotiate a new relationship with Cuba .
 'I don't see any possibilities of any negotiations at the moment,' he said . 'I'm not going to talk about it. I don't think there will be any negotiations,' he added .
 Cuba and the U.S. haven't had diplomatic relations since January 1961 . A United States embargo has prevented most trade and travel between the two countries for nearly three decades .
 In 1977, the two countries established interests sections in each other's capitals . President Jimmy Carter established the interest sections in 1977 .
 Cuba's Cuban Interests Section is housed in Cuba's ornate old embassy on 16th Street NW . Czechoslovakia's Embassy of Prague handles its diplomatic affairs . Cuba's interest section is housed at the old embassy in Washington .
 Right now TV Marti is the issue that receives the most daily attention at the Cuban Interests Section . It's the next potential area of conflict, Mr Arbesu said .
 Cuba is vehemently opposed to plans for the TV broadcast, saying it violates both Cuban sovereignty and international broadcast agreements . Cuba has threatened to jam the broadcast and take retaliatory measures .
 There haven't been any conversations between the United States and Cuba about TV Marti for about three months, Mr Arbesu said .
 Mr Arbesu, now in one of the toughest posts in the Cuban foreign service, has a long history of negotiating .
 He is a veteran of talks that led to the agreement to withdraw Cuban troops from Angola and reinstate of the immigration accord with the U.S. with the United States . He is also a former Cuban diplomat who led negotiations to pull troops out of Angola .
 Mr Arbesu also was in Washington for talks during the Carter administration, a former U.S. official says .
 Mr Smith has watched Mr Arbesu in action at negotiating sessions, said Mr Smith . Mr Smith said: "He is very much a pragmatist; one who believes in engagement"
 Mr Arbesu was the deputy chief of the Americas Department in charge of the Caribbean and the United States . Before coming to Washington, he was the head of Americas Department .
 United States academics who have met him are impressed with his breadth of knowledge on the U.S. political scene .
 'He knows the American legislative process inside and out,' said Andrew Zimbalist of Smith College .
 Several thousand drafts, letters, and handwritten notes from Robert F Kennedy’s personal files have just last week been opened at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library .
 Robert Kennedy’s writings make vivid how close we came to the brink of war . Robert Kennedy's writings show how close the nation came to war in Vietnam .
 RFK had no doubt that his brother would have chosen an air strike against the missile sites, followed by an invasion . RFK: "Had President Kennedy been forced to choose a response in the first 48 hours after an American spy plane discovered the Soviets sneaking nuclear-tipped missiles into
 The U.S. would have felt compelled to respond in kind triggering an escalation to nuclear Armageddon . The United States would have responded to the threat of a nuclear attack .
 JFK initially chose to impose a naval blockade on further arms shipments to Cuba . Instead of the air strike, JFK imposed a naval blockage . The blockade was imposed by the Cuban government .
 U.S. planning for air strike was refined as Soviets rushed to complete construction of missiles already in Cuba . The Soviets were already building missiles that could be fired against American cities . The U.N. planning was refined in the 1980s .
 As Soviet ships approached the blockade line on Oct. 1962, Robert Kennedy wrote that “the danger and concern that we all felt hung like a cloud over us all…I think these few minutes were the time of greatest worry by the President”
 The window for U.S. action to prevent missiles in Cuba from becoming fully operational was rapidly closing . While the Soviet ships turned around rather than challenge the blockade, the window for United States action was closing .
 Both sides moved military pieces on the chessboard toward the brink of nuclear war . President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev also intensified the search for an alternative .
 Neither man would have been willing to face the real prospect of sudden death for hundreds of millions of people . They included concessions that they would not be willing to accept .
 The president chose his brother as the emissary to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to convey a last and final offer . The president's brother was chosen to convey the offer to the Soviet ambassador .
 What resolved the crisis was an imaginative combination of public deal, private ultimatum, and secret sweetener . What resolved it was a public deal and a secret deal?
 If Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles, the U.S. would pledge not to invade Cuba . The United States would have to withdraw missiles from Cuba to avoid invasion .
 RFK warned that unless Khrushchev announced within 24 hours that the missiles would be withdrawn, the U.S. would act unilaterally to eliminate them . RFK: Unless the missiles were pulled, the United States would act on its own .
 If the Soviet missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, within six months US missiles in Turkey would be gone . Secretly, he said that while there could be no official deal promising such, if the Soviet missile withdrawal from Cuba were withdrawn, the missiles would go .
 A confrontation over missiles in Cuba or Turkey could have pushed the U.S. and the Soviet Union to nuclear war . The further away from those 13 days we get, the harder it is for many people to believe that .
 RFK’s papers allow us to peer over his shoulder in the rush of events to remind us why historians agree that this was indeed the most dangerous moment in recorded history . RFK's papers remind us of why historians believe this was a dangerous moment .
 Ne ws Bank, inc. Re pro duce d with the pe rmis s io n o f Lo s Ang e le s Time s Was hing to n P o s t Ne w s t .
 Rusk was the son of a minister turned farmer turned farmer . Rusk died Tuesday at his home in Athens, Ga. Rusk, son of an Atlanta mayor, died at age 85 .
 After Kennedy's assassination, President Lyndon B Johnson insisted Rusk stay on . Rusk worked for President Johnson in Washington, D.C.
 He remained until the end of Johnson's administration in 1969, despite criticism over his advocacy of the Vietnam War .
 Rusk never apologized for his role in the war, which killed 57,000 Americans and 1 million Vietnamese . Rusk: "I'm not sorry for my role in Vietnam War, but I'm proud of my role"
 Vietnam was only one of four major global events Rusk helped preside over as secretary of state . Vietnam was one of the four major events he presided over in his four years in office .
 Kennedy ordered the Soviets to dismantle Cuban missile sites aimed at the U.S. In 1962, the world held its breath as Kennedy ordered them to do so .
 Michael Dobbs: Iran has successfully developed a nuclear warhead and may have already mated it with a medium-range Shahab-3 missile targeted at Israel . Dobbs says Iran may be ready to use the missile to launch a nuclear weapon .
 After a month in which the campaigns duked it out over national security, it's reasonable to wonder how either man would react to such an emergency .
 The 1962 standoff over Soviet nuclear missiles secretly placed in Cuba was the ultimate crisis . Chances are that in such a bind, our next commander in chief will want to consider how one of his predecessors dealt with the crisis in Cuba .
 The history of the 13 terrifying days when the world stood at the nuclear precipice has become encrusted in mythology and riddled with basic errors of fact . The world stood on the brink of a nuclear war, the U.S. has never been hit by a nuclear bomb .
 To use the 1962 showdown as a guide to handling modern-day crises, we must separate history from political spin . We need to separate history and spin, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Kennedy and his aides had an obvious interest in stressing the president's cool resolve under fire . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to say I'm cool under fire"
 I have spent thousands of hours over the past three years assembling a minute-by-minute chronology of the crisis, combing through archives and interviewing American, Soviet and Cuban participants . I have interviewed American, Russian and Cuban leaders .
 I was startled to discover that the debates inside the White House were often out of sync with events in the rest of the world . I was shocked to discover . The White House debates are often out-of-sync with events around the world, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Much of what Kennedy thought he knew about Soviet actions during the crisis rested on flawed intelligence reports and assumptions . Much of Kennedy's intelligence was flawed, he says . Kennedy: "Much of what I thought I knew was wrong was wrong"
 The Cuban missile crisis is better understood as a prime illustration of the limits of crisis management . Far from being an example of ""matchlessly calibrated'' diplomacy, it is a prime example of the . limits of the crisis management -and the importance of the ever-present screw-up factor
 JFK was led to believe that Soviet freighters transporting missiles toward Cuba had reached the U.S. blockade line around the island and turned around at the last moment . JFK was told that Soviet missiles were reaching Cuba, but turned around .
 Kennedy aides, Harvard professors and Hollywood moviemakers portrayed the incident . The incident never happened, according to Kennedy aides and Harvard professors . Kennedy aides say the incident was a hoax .
 Khrushchev had ordered his ships to return to the Soviet Union more than 24 hours earlier . The ships had been sent back to their Soviet Union bases .
 Charles Maultsby was on a routine mission to keep an eye on Soviet nuclear tests . He took a wrong turn at the North Pole and ended up in Soviet airspace on the most dangerous day of the Cold War .
 Air force chiefs failed to inform Kennedy and McNamara for an hour and a half that they had a plane over the Soviet Union . The Soviets sent MiG fighters to shoot Maultsby down and the Alaskan Air Command responded by scrambling nuclear-armed United States fighter-intercept
 As I studied the Cuban missile crisis, I was repeatedly struck by modern-day parallels . The Cuban crisis was similar to the current American missile crisis in Ukraine .
 For any future president struggling with an ""Iranian missile crisis, here are the real lessons most worth learning from 1962 . The real lessons are to be learned from 1962, writes David Frum .
 The president may be the best-informed person in the world, but there's still much that he doesn't know . The president is best-in-the-world, but still has a lot of questions to answer .
 The missiles were equipped with Hiroshima-sized bombs, could have destroyed Guantanamo in five minutes . The missiles could have been able to destroy Guantanamo in a matter of minutes .
 Kennedy had relatively good (if belated) intelligence about the medium-range Soviet missiles capable of hitting the United States . Kennedy had no idea on Black Saturday where the warheads were stored and how they had been dispersed to various missile sites .
 U.S. reconnaissance planes had actually taken photographs of Soviet nuclear-storage bunkers at Bejucal and Managua, 25 kilometres south of Havana . The CIA concluded that neither site could have been housing the warheads because of the lack of adequate security .
 Kennedy was also woefully misinformed about the size of the Soviet troop presence on Cuba . Kennedy also misjudged about the number of Soviet troop forces in Cuba .
 McNamara told the president that there were about 6,000 to 8,000 Soviet ""technicians'' on the island . McNamara said the missiles were discovered by the Soviets on Oct. 20 .
 There were 43,000 heavily armed Soviet troops on Cuba, equipped with tactical nuclear weapons . They were armed with tactical weapons aimed at suspected U.S. beachheads .
 Kennedy rightly rejected as too risky the joint chiefs' calls to invade, but he didn't know the half of it . Kennedy rejected the calls as 'too risky' and 'too dangerous' to invade . He was right to reject the calls, but not the half it was .
 Which, of course, makes precisely calibrated ""crisis management'' impossible . "Crisis management" impossible .
 Kennedy understood that the chances of dangerous, unpredictable events occurring skyrocket once you set the machinery of war in motion . Kennedy understood how dangerous events occur when you set a war machine up .
 History is determined not just by the ""rational actors'' but also by the irrational ones - the blinkered generals, the excitable ideologues, the prophets living in caves . He knew that history is determined by the "rational actors"
 The president understood, better than any of his advisers, that events were spiraling out of control by Black Saturday . "The president understood better than anyone else," says White House aide .
 Robert Kennedy sent brother, attorney general Robert F Kennedy, to Washington to meet with Soviet ambassador to dismantle missiles in Turkey . U.S. Jupiter missiles would be removed from Turkey if the Soviets withdraw their missiles from Cuba .
 Kennedy's concession-free victory in his game of brinkmanship with Khrushchev was kept secret for nearly three decades . That little detail remained a secret for three decades, even as historians and journalists churned out books celebrating Kennedy's victory .
 Kennedy was the most dovish member of the 13-man executive committee of the National Security Council, known as the ExComm, that he set up to handle the crisis . The White House tapes from October 1962 show that Kennedy was a member of ExComm .
 On Black Saturday, most of the ExComm was unwilling to swap the obsolete Jupiters in Turkey for the Soviet missiles on Cuba . Most of the exCommers were unwilling to trade the obsolete missiles in Turkey with Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy "seems to be the only one in favour of it'' Joint chiefs of staff chair Maxwell Taylor reported to his fellow generals . Kennedy ""seemed to be ... only one of them in favour''
 Joint chiefs recommended a massive U.S. air attack on Cuba, followed by an invasion within seven days . The attack could have resulted in tens of thousands of casualties, the nuking of the Guantanamo naval base and nuclear war .
 Kennedy derived his capacity for independent judgment from his own prior experience, both in and out of the White House . Kennedy said he derived his ability to make independent decisions from his prior experience .
 As a patrol boat in the Pacific during the Second World War, he had learned to be mistrustful of abstract military theorizing . As the commander of PT-109, he learned to mistrustful .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco of April 1961 had taught him to be skeptical of the assurances of the spymasters and the military brass . He said he was skeptical of assurances of assurances . He was skeptical about the assurances .
 Kennedy viewed history not as a propaganda argument to justify his decisions but as a cautionary tale . Kennedy's decision to take action in Vietnam was seen as a warning tale, he said .
 Earlier in 1962, he had read The Guns of August, Barbara Tuchman's now-classic history of the way Europe blundered into WWI .
 He was so taken by the book that he asked all his aides to read it and had it distributed to every U.S. military base worldwide . The book was so popular with the military that it was distributed worldwide .
 Had someone else been president in October 1962, the outcome might have been very different . President Richard Nixon was elected president in 1962 .
 Dr Castro ''was quite animated throughout'' the screening, his press agent said . Costner's press agent, Stephen Rivers, said Dr Castro was ''quite animated'' throughout .
 The movie tells the story of President John F Kennedy's decision to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba in October, 1962 . The movie is based on the decisions that led to the removal of Soviet missiles .
 Dr Castro and other Cuban officials in power at the time were not portrayed in the film . Dr Castro was not portrayed as a Cuban leader in the 1960s .
 Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque, Vice-President Carlos Lage and members of Dr Castro's personal staff . They were joined in the screening at the Palace of the Revolution .
 Costner stars as Kenny O'Donnell, a White House aide to President Kennedy and his brother, Robert . The actor stars in the new film, "Kenny" Costner's role is that of Kenny and Robert Kennedy .
 Madison Memorial High School students offer people chance to rewrite history . World Wide Web site took top honors in social sciences at ThinkQuest competition .
 ThinkQuest paired with a student from Singapore, Gim Teck Won, 17, for the first time last weekend . The pair met in person last weekend at the end of a week in Singapore .
 At one part of the site, visitors can assume the role of Kennedy, Khrushchev or Cuban leader Fidel Castro during the missile crisis .
 Memorial senior Andrew Holbrook finished fifth in the social science category for his Web page . Holbrook's Web page is a look at some of the battles that helped shape Western civilization . Another Memorial student finished fifth .
 Holbrook, who finished first in last year's contest for a site on Mars, teamed up with students from Virginia and Germany . Holbrook won the contest last year for the first time .