 The United States and the Soviet Union continued to compete over Cuba over the next 20 years . In the absence of an explicit agreement in 1962, the U.S. and the USSR continued to trade over Cuba by seeking to portray revisionist behaviour .
 I argue that this interaction is indicative of rhetorical-oriented conception of norms . I argue this interaction was indicative of a rhetorical-orientated conception of norm .
 This approach emphasizes how states use norms to compete under circumscribed conditions . Against constructivist approaches that focus on social identity and contractual institutionalist literature that focuses on focal points .
 Under this perspective, norms are organic entities, which like the concept of judicial review, evolve in meaning in conjunction with their practical use . In this case, norms like judicial review can be seen as an organic entity .
 In 1970, the United States confronted the Soviet Union with evidence of its building a submarine base in Cienfuegos harbour .
 In 1978 the Soviet Union refused to remove from Cuba a squadron of MiG 23 fighter aircraft identified by U.S. reconnaissance . The Soviet Union had been unable to remove the aircraft from Cuba .
 In 1979, the U.S. ‘discovered’ a Soviet brigade stationed in Cuba that had been in place since the Missile Crisis . The brigade had never been removed from Cuba but had been there since 1979 .
 President Reagan suggested that Cuba’s military activity in Central America released the U.S. of its 1962 pledge to the Soviets not to invade Cuba . Reagan suggested in 1985 that the move released the United States .
 Michael Griesdorf is a political affairs officer with the U.N. He says he is disappointed by what has happened in Syria . He says it is not the first time that the country has been bombed .
 Much of the archives that consider Soviet –American relations on Cuba have been declassified . Several former State Department, NSC, and Politburo staff members have published their own accounts of these crises .
 Of all the existing studies, though, none has ever attempted to explain the resolutions to these four events under the rubric of a single theory . None has ever tried to explain these resolutions under the theory .
 After establishing the ’62 Understanding, the U.S. and the Soviet Union continued to compete over Cuba by exploiting ambiguities in the resolution . The United States and the USSR continued to exploit the ambiguity of the '62 Understanding .
 These ambiguities determined the type of conflicts over which the superpowers would challenge each other . They regulated the manner in which subsequent Cuban conflicts would be framed, and finally constrained how the actors would respond .
 In effect, the 1962 Understanding was a non-ratified corpus of rules or guidelines that outlined what appropriate behaviour with regard to post-1962 Cuba entailed . The United States and the Soviet Union honoured these guidelines and yet pursued actions designed to have them interpreted as well .
 By most accounts the U.S. ‘won’ the Cuban Missile crisis insofar as the Soviets retracted their Cuban weapons . The important result of the conflict was that both players realized that the Cold War itself could not be won in an era where both powers possessed nuclear arsenals .
 Under conditions of Mutually Assured Destruction, deterrence theory transformed . deterrence theory was transformed by the threat of nuclear weapons .
 Going to the brink of nuclear war enabled the Soviet Union and the U.S. to recognize that the mutual gains enjoyed from at least minimal cooperation far exceeded any relative gains one might achieve through defection .
 This paper argues that as a result of the Missile Crisis the superpowers also developed a norm-governed relationship that constituted their subsequent interactions over Cuba . It argues that this relationship formed the basis for their interactions .
 The United States and Soviet Union completed the crisis by constructing an unwritten agreement or ‘Understanding’ in 1962 . The lack of public ratification combined with its inherent discursive ambiguity had the effect of transforming the Understanding into a type of normative framework around which future Cuban conflicts were built .
 Each superpower delineated in the ’62 Understanding one specific action that would induce a military response . The '62 Understanding Understanding of the 1962 U.S. Strategic Decision to Respond to the Soviet Union was created .
 The United States agreed to never invade Cuba and the Soviet Union agreed never to place offensive weapons on the island . The U.S. never invaded Cuba . The Soviet Union and the United States never placed offensive weapons there .
 Both powers accepted the shared right to monitor the other’s compliance of this resolution . The resolution was reached in December 2013 .
 In part because of Cuba’s geopolitical significance, neither superpower was content with the status quo resulting from the conclusion of the 1962 crisis . Neither superpower was satisfied with the result of the Cuban crisis .
 The superpowers shared an interest in avoiding any miscommunication that might result in a subsequent conflict deteriorating into an unstoppable spiral . Yet after going to the brink of nuclear war, the superpowers share an interest .
 By exploiting an ambiguity in the ’62 Understanding, a superpower could establish a favourable interpretation that would enable it to achieve a relative gain . The ‘62 Understanding’s ambiguity could be exploited by a superpower .
 ‘62 Understanding’ would be won if one party was able to justify its actions as consistent with the existent ’62 Understanding . Subsequent conflicts would then be won according to the extent to . which one party . could justify its . actions as . consistent with ‘
 Successful revisionist interpretations effectively become addendums to the original agreement . Successful interpretations effectively would become addendsums to original agreement.
 If true, such behaviour represents a significant finding for international relations theory . It suggests that states might subscribe to norms according to what might be referred to as a rhetorical rather than strictly expressive or strategic rationale .
 According to this perspective, norms are social facts, which define standards of social behaviour and express actors’ identities . This perspective is based on the view of norms as social facts and social facts . Norms are social fact, defining standards of behaviour and expressing identities .
 Constructivists argue that states value being accepted or acknowledged by relevant others . Constructivism is a form of statecraft that is accepted by others and accepted by them . Constructivistists say states value state acceptance and acceptance of others .
 Agents comply with norms for non-instrumentalist reasons associated with socialization and complex learning, such as subscribing to a norm has the effect of enabling it to be a part of an in-group community .
 Key premises informing constructivism are non-instrumental or expressive of social learning, persuasion, and preference change . In all, constructivism is an attempt to make social learning and persuasion more effective .
 'Contractual institutionalists' conceptualize norms as focal points as a means of conveying credible commitments and around which expectations converge . In turn, so-called ‘contractual institutionsists’ conceptualize ‘norms’
 Norm compliance is conceived primarily as a strategic endeavour that enables agents to signal to partners and rivals their intentions to reduce transaction costs and establish joint gains through cooperation .
 Griesdorf cost– benefit calculation among egoistic, self-interested actors . GriesDorf cost-benefit calculation among egos-self-interested .
 According to contractual institutionalism norms do not constitute agents’ identities and interests, they nevertheless are intersubjective rules or understandings that agents employ to adjust their strategic behaviour in order to realize joint gains .
 They affect state behaviour by ‘providing solutions to coordination problems’ They help states to adjust their preferences over actions in order to establish common equilibria .
 The differences between constructivism and contractual institutionalism are pronounced . To be sure, the differences are pronounced, but they are not all clear .
 In-group actors encourage their out-group counterparts to adopt the norms of the in-group community . Complex learning represents the important mechanism by which complex learning is important . In the former, socialization is the pivotal theoretical rationale .
 Under the contractual institutionalist approach norms serve not as a corpus of meanings that a socializing actor must adopt in order to obtain in-group solidarity, but rather represent a modus operandi for signalling congruent expectations .
 Amidst conditions of anarchy, here norms are a means through which actors overcome the security dilemma and achieve absolute gains from joint cooperation . The United Nations says norms are necessary to overcome security dilemma .
 The key premise is that norms are abstracted in a manner that they are conceptualized as causes, such as causes . Under both approaches, actors are perceived as changing their behaviour in order to comply with the norm .
 Constructivism and contractual institutionalism norms are collective understandings that make behavioural claims upon agents . Whether actors ‘are embedded in and circumscribed by a . normative structure’ or ‘strategize in an institutional setting’ for both constructivism and . contractual institutionalist norms
 The norm exists ‘out there’, and actors are effectively compelled to comply with it for either expressive or strategic reasons . ‘The norm exists 'out there', and it is out there,’s the norm .
 In this paper I explore a third approach to norms and norm compliance that is inspired by Anthony Giddens’ notion of structuration and his understanding of structure as both the medium and outcome of social interactions . This paper is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Oxford University
 The key insight to this approach is that norms themselves can be conceptualized as an emergent effect of social practices that is continually being constituted and reconstituted in conjunction with agents' social intercourse .
 The use of norms under the rhetorical approach is like subscribing to a set of evolving or organic rules, the author argues . The meanings of norms are undergoing ‘a continual “interpretation” and reinterpretation,’ he writes .
 Like constructivist premise, norms continue to hold an expressive status as something that encourages actors to adopt behaviour in accordance with a logic of appropriateness and the ‘culture of anarchy’ in which interaction is taking place .
 Under the rhetorical approach actors confront norms from a consequentialist orientation as well, as they are trying to shift the meaning of a norm in a manner that meets their strategic interests . At the same time, under the same approach, they confront norms as well as consequentialist .
 Norms structure or guide actor behaviour, but actors nevertheless are empowered agents who, in abiding by norms, seek to manipulate norms so that the results of social behaviour occur in a manner that concords with their respective objectives . Norms structures or guide actors' behaviour but actors manipulate norms to
 A prior use of a norm serves as a type of precedent that delimits the available ways that a norm can be interpreted in the future . Insights from legal theory suggest that norms can be conceptualized as something akin to a legal or institutional context .
 Under a rhetorical approach norms structure the context of interaction, norms structure interaction, says CNN.com .
 Governments that subscribe to a rhetorical approach to norms need to justify their action as being in concordance with the norm . They cannot deny or ignore the norm’s meaning in favour of some baser notion of interest, says Hurrel .
 The rhetorical conception of norms would suggest as well that actors will actively contest the meaning of norms by seeking to ‘push’ their precedent meaning towards a new one that more closely conforms with their strategic interests . At the same time, though, the rhetorical conception would suggest that actors
 ‘arguing from precedent’ sharply reduces the available ways in which a norm can be reinterpreted to those that contending parties could accept as plausibly consistent with the existent meaning . Importantly, and in keeping with the legal analogy, this rhetorical approach indicates that this
 "To this extent, my interpretation of a rule as well as my uses of words are monitored and reinforced by a group of competent speakers," she says . "I'm not going to be able to say anything in this way," she adds .
 While there are likely to be disagreements about the proper use of a term of the interpretation of a rule, purely idiosyncratic uses are excluded even if the use of the concepts remain contestable and contested .
 Kratochwil’s comments suggest that the available room for norms to be rhetorically manipulated is at once restrictive and yet nevertheless available to revision . The available room to manipulate norms is open to revision, he says .
 At the same time, neither party was content with Cuba’s stature . Neither party was satisfied with Cuba's stature .
 Neither of these points captures the interplay between contestation and conformity . Yet neither does . Neither does the point of contestation .
 Both superpowers sought to exploit ambiguities in the ’62 Understanding by claiming a revisionist interpretation of a norm was in concordance with the status quo . Rather, much like the notion of practising judicial review, both superpowers seek to exploit ambiguity .
 The normative behaviour exhibited amounted to a circumscribed competition . The behaviour of the participants amounted to an 'inconsistential competition'
 The '62 Understanding' was the foundation of social interactions and was reinterpreted by the superpowers . Each superpower had to act in a manner that would result in the ’62 Understanding retaining its status as the foundation . All without allowing the competition to spiral into violence .
 In what follows I conduct a close examination of the four subsequent conflicts . I use recently declassified documents and secondary sources to piece together the American and Soviet positions .
 In each case, I consider this rhetorical conception of norms against theories based on realist concerns for relative power and domestic politics . I consider each case as an example of a rhetorical conception against a realist conception of norm .
 I close the paper by considering how this rhetorical approach to norms might be applied to contemporary conflicts . I close I close by considering whether the rhetorical approach could be applied .
 Chairman Khrushchev has agreed to remove from Cuba all weapons systems capable of offensive use, to halt the further introduction of such weapons into Cuba . The agreement was agreed to allow appropriate United Nations observation and supervision .
 We on our part agreed that once these adequate arrangements for verification ha been established, we will remove our naval quarantine and give assurances against an invasion of Cuba . We will remove the naval quarantine once these arrangements are established .
 Fidel Castro was angry that the Soviet Union had negotiated and indeed compromised Cuban security interests without his consultation . Castro refused to permit the United Nations on to its territory in order to conduct and confirm the Soviet withdrawal .
 President Kennedy privately agreed to withdraw the Jupiter Missiles from Turkey as part of the Soviet pledge to remove surface-to-surface missiles and delivery systems from Cuba . President Kennedy also agreed to pull the missiles from Turkey .
 The Soviet Union and the United States had intended to ratify and approve a formal resolution to Cuba in the United Nations . The solution to the Missile Crisis instead became an inexplicit agreement between the superpowers .
 The Soviet withdrawal of its weapons from Cuba was verified by U.S. aerial overflight and satellite reconnaissance . The withdrawal of weapons was verified through American overflight .
 The United States never issued an official or legal commitment not to invade Cuba until after the Cienfuegos incident . For its part, the U.S. never issued a legal or official commitment to not invade Cuba . The U.N. did not issue a legal commitment
 President Kennedy substituted the unratified resolution to the Crisis with a bilateral agreement, dropping the UN supervision requirement as a condition for agreeing to ‘peace in the Caribbean:’ This government has no choice but to pursue its own means of checking on military activities .
 The trail of declassified documents supports the assertion that the superpowers exchanged a series of correspondences in which they sought to clarify how each side thought the Kennedy– Khrushchev Understanding should be interpreted .
 These correspondences between the superpowers transformed three aspects of the agreement into guidelines . Both accepted but neither sought to codify the agreement .
 The United States and the Soviet Union clearly established an official definition of offensive weaponry . The U.S. and Soviet Union agreed on the terms of offensive weapons .
 Ambassador Adlai Stevenson listed five categories of weapons that the U.S. deemed offensive in 1962 letter to UN .
 Mikoyan acknowledged this list on 3 November and officially accepted its terms several hours before Kennedy’s Press Conference on 20 November . The guideline below is a mutually acknowledged definition of offensive weaponry .
 Surface-to-surface missiles include those designed for use at sea and including propellants and chemical compounds capable of being used to power missiles . Surface-based missiles are designed to be used at sea or at sea, and can be fired at sea .
 Mechanical or electronic equipment to support or operate the above items such as communications, supply, and missile launching equipment including KOMAR Class motor torpedo boats .
 The 1962 Understanding concerned the extent of the existing Soviet military presence in Cuba and how it might change in the future . A second ambiguous element of the 1962 Understanding was the Soviet-Cuban relationship .
 Henry Kissinger, in his description of the Cienfuegos Crisis, reveals that the superpowers engaged in a written exchange regarding bases . Henry Kissinger: "The superpowers engage in an exchange of written messages regarding bases"
 Kissinger writes that John McCloy had raised the issue with Vasily Kuznetsov in 1962 . ‘The United States objected to the establishment of any Soviet military base in Cuba’
 Evidence that this norm was restricted to any new bases that the Soviets might establish . Kuznetsov said he understood’.
 Existing bases discussed and dismissed as part of the Understanding . In a document written by John McCloy summarizing his meeting with Kuznetsov, existing bases discussed .
 McCloy explicitly declares that ‘we were not introducing any new conditions [to the no-invasion pledge]’ The U.S. understood that Russia had existing bases in Cuba .
 By doing nothing about them, their presence became a mutually acknowledged agreement . By doing so, they agreed to accept the presence of them in the United States .
 A final ambiguous facet to the Kennedy –Khrushchev Understanding concerned the role of Cuba, specifically how Castro’s support of Communist movements in surrounding states would affect the superpower agreement .
 Kennedy included a clause concerning Cuban activities as a condition to the no-invasion pledge . He cited a Congressional resolution that had outlined American determination to ‘prevent by whatever means may may be necessary the Marxist-Leninist regime in Cuba from extending its aggressive subversive activities to any part
 The Soviet response to Kennedy’s comments is outlined in a 25 November meeting between McCloy and Mikoyan that took place in Hyde Park .
 The American response can be found in a 26 November draft text of the Missile Crisis agreement for the Security Council .
 Stevenson notes the excision of Cuban behaviour as a condition to the ’62 Understanding . Stevenson notes that a Cuban pledge of non-aggression was already ‘covered by the non aggression obligations of Rio Pact and UN’34 The Understanding was bilateral.
 According to the norm, Cuban activity was exempt from the American pledge to the Soviet Union not to invade the island . The U.S. pledge was made to the Soviets in the 1950s .
 Soviet chargé d’affaires, Yuri Vorontsov, unexpectedly suggested to National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger that the superpowers renew the terms of the 1962 Understanding established after the Missile Crisis . The 1970 Cienfuegos Crisis The public record .
 Kissinger ordered an additional series of U2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba that might reveal any new Soviet behaviour . Suspicious of the question’s timing, Kissinger ordered a series of reconnaissance flights .
 On 9 September American reconnaissance spotted the arrival of a Soviet naval flotilla in Cienfuegos that included a ship designed for submarine maintenance and two barges used for the storage of nuclear submarine waste . U2 missions were met with heavy harassment by Cuban fighters .
 A week later, the United States discovered evidence of a submarine tender moored in a permanent fashion, anti-submarine nets guarding the harbour entrance, a new communications centre, and a new soccer field .
 President Nixon instructed the National Security Advisor to conceal the information from public scrutiny until he returned from a European diplomatic trip . Kissinger’s strong objections were overruled by Kissinger .
 Dobrynin’s face ‘went ashen’ when the U.S. presented the evidence of the construction at Cienfuegos and demanded the immediate dismantling of the base . Richard Nixon's account: 'Dobrynin's face 'went as
 Kissinger replied affirmatively, Dobrynin responded that he would inform the Kremlin of the accusation . Kissinger replied to the accusation that he had been accused of spying on Russia . Dobrynins responded that Kissinger would inform him of the accusations .
 On 5 October 1970, the Soviet Union decided to comply with the U.S. demands . Griesdorf, Germany, was the first country to accept the United States' demands .
 The Soviet side has not done and is not doing in Cuba now – that includes the area of the Cienfuegos port – anything of the kind that would contradict that mentioned Understanding . The Soviet-Cuba agreement was reached in 1991, but it was never reached .
 President Nixon has reaffirmed that the Soviet Union strictly adheres to its part of the Understanding on the Cuban question . The Soviet Union will continue to adhere to it in the future on the assumption that the American side, as President Nixon reaffirmed, will also strictly observe its part .
 The United States government understands that the USSR will not establish, utilize, or permit, any facility in Cuba that can be used to support or repair Soviet naval ships capable of carrying offensive weapons;e.e. submarine or surface ships armed with nuclear capable surface-to-surface
 In terms of the military balance, the Soviet Union had increased its relative power by developing a second strike capability, a blue water navy, and a more ambitious intervention programme in Africa .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union had become less confrontational in their diplomatic relations . They were beginning to build a cooperative relationship that would become de tente .
 The Cienfuegos incident is the result of improved diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and the U.S.
 Kissinger notes that in 1970 public opinion was decisively in favour of the improving Soviet–American interaction . Before the Soviet concession many voiced concern that the United States was being too confrontational .
 There is evidence that the crisis was framed according to an ambiguous facet of the 1962 Understanding . First, there was evidence that there was an ambiguity in relation to the 1962 understanding .
 Kissinger knew from the 1962 archives that a submarine base, at least in the U.S. opinion, was not technically illegal . Yet despite the National Security Advisor’s confident response to the Soviet construction, Kissinger knew .
 ‘Submarine visits by Soviet submarines should best be handled by appropriate unilateral US declaration at some appropriate time’ In his 29 October 1962 memorandum, Garth notes that ‘submarines were not covered by the Kennedy –Khrushim Understanding’
 Relative power approaches amidst thawing relations appears to be insufficient without the norms explanation . Again, relative power approaches are not enough without the norm explanation .
 It was the Soviet Union that first raised the ’62 Understanding, and indeed was what prompted the American reconnaissance . Importantly, it was also what prompted American reconnaissance.
 This suggests that the Soviets recognized that constructing a submarine base in Cuba was an ambiguous act according to the Understanding of the Understanding . It was one they believed could be justified through interpretation . The Soviets believed it was an act they believed was justified .
 Even after backing down on the issue of a submarine base, there is evidence that the Soviets still sought a concession from the United States with regard to the new terms of the Understanding .
 Soviet ships and vessels enter ports of foreign states, including the ports of the Republic of Cuba, on official visits and business calls . They do so with the permission of the governments of the states concerned . If Soviet ships enter ports, they are allowed to do so by the governments .
 It is obvious that such calls are an inalienable right of sovereign states, it is universally recognized and confirmed by many centuries of international practice . Such calls are inalienated right to call the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 If a nuclear submarine were serviced from Cuba or in Cuba, that this would be a violation of our Understanding with regard to the Soviet Union’s activities in putting offensive weapons or abase in Cuba . You may recall I said that if a nuclear sub were . serviced .
 The question is whether the submarine is there for a port call or whether it is for servicing . It is not clear if the submarine will be there for port calls or if it will be for servicing.
 The Soviet Union is aware of the fact that we consider that there is an Understanding and we will, of course, bring the matter to their attention if we find that the Understanding is violated . We will also bring it to the Soviet Union's attention if it is found to be violated,
 A favourable interpretation over port calls was not the only example of the Soviet Union winning a concession in the ambiguous agreement .
 From 1972 to 1974, the Soviet Union sent submarines into Cienfuegos that challenged the nuclear qualification of the newly established Understanding as well . Barry Blechman and Stephanie Levinson describe the events in 1972 and 1974 .
 In May 1972, the Soviet Union sent into Cienfuegos port a nuclear-powered Echo-class submarine carrying non-strategic cruise missiles . In April 1974 they sent into Havana a Soviet Golf-class sub, a diesel-powered vessel that carries nuclear ballistic missiles .
 In neither of these visits did the submarines undergo servicing, their presence and the lack of an American response suggests that the Soviets again succeeded in having the ambiguity in the Understanding reinterpreted in its favour .
 Rowland Evans and Robert Novak published an article entitled ‘Cuba’s MiG 23s’ on 15 November 1978, which publicly broke the story of a second American–Soviet confrontation in Cuba . The 1978 MiG Crisis The public record .
 The article predicted that President Carter would face either doing nothing and allowing the Soviets to violate the 1962 Understanding or protesting against the MiGs .
 Evans and Novak’s story was based on a secret but leaked document issued by Defense Secretary Harold Brown to President Carter on 23 October .
 The MiG 23 was the most modern fighter jet in the Soviet airforce . Only one version of the aircraft was equipped for tactical strikes against ground targets .
 The American intelligence on the MiGs in Cuba had revealed no evidence that they had been configured for anything other than air defence and aircraft interception purposes .
 Despite its presentation by Evans and Novak, Brown’s memorandum had dealt almost exclusively with domestic public opinion . Brown's memorandum had been presented by Evans, Novak .
 The White House sought assurances from the Soviets that the MIG 23s in Cuba were not outfitted for tactical warfare . Brown was concerned not with security, but with how the American public might view the acquisition as evidence that the administration was ‘being soft’ on the Soviets .
 Secretary of State Cyrus Vance met with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko four times in November . The Soviets assured the U.S. that the weapons were not capable of delivering nuclear missiles . They maintained their intention to modernize Cuba's airforce .
 The Soviet Union has assured us that no shipments of weapons to the Cubans have or will violate the terms of the 1962 agreement . The U.S. says it has been assured by the Soviet Union that no weapons shipments to Cuba violate the agreement .
 "We will monitor their compliance with this agreement to make sure that there is no offensive threat to the United States possible from Cuba," U.S. says .
 The narrative above is consistent with the norms theory, but several other contending explanations appear at first glance to be more descriptive . Analysis: The norms theory appears to be consistent with several other theories .
 SALT would have scuttled the treaty before it even reached the Senate floor . While acquiescing to the Soviets on the MiGs might convince some American Senators that the U.S. was conceding too much in the treaty, taking military action would have saved the treaty .
 A domestic politics explanation suggests that the U.S. would not have had the political capital to fight for removal of MiG 23s .
 The White House framed the MiG incident within the context of relative power rather than according to normative behaviour patterns between the superpowers . An additional contending explanation would point out that at least some members of the White House .
 President Carter’s National Security Advisor Zbignew Brzezinski was a proponent of realist theory and the concept of linkage – the conditioning of one foreign policy on another . It is well known, for instance, that realist theories are well known in the US .
 Griesdorf relations in Cuba, but how the jets might alter the bipolar conflict in other regions of the world . The jets are seen as a way to help the U.S. influence in the region .
 Brzezinski’s hawkish reaction to the MiGs was consistent with his tenure as the National Security Advisor . It was his job to serve as a counterbalance to the President's more idealist outlook .
 The norms theory must demonstrate, however, that the superpowers framed subsequent crises according to the ’62 Understanding,’ that they attempted to favourably interpret an ambiguity in the Kennedy– Khrushchev agreement .
 Garthoff notes that the NSC staff carefully researched not only the White House and Department of State records on the 1962 and 1970 Understandings . In doing so they would have realized that the status of the MiG fighter was not explicit .
 All MiG 23s, whatever their format, are capable of carrying nuclear weapons . This term was used in reference to President Kennedy’s public announcement of the crisis .
 It is plausible that Soviets shipped MiG 23s because it was possible to exploit an ambiguity in their shared Understanding . The ambiguity arose mainly because technology had made the 1962 definition of an offensive weapon outdated .
 The version of the MiG 23 shipped to Cuba was not an offensive weapon . In practical terms the aircraft could be reconfigured 'on the ground' with little difficulty . The modifications to rewire the interceptor version can be done easily and from remote locations .
 In 1962, fighter jets could not be re-outfitted for tactical strikes on location . The U.S. Air Force would not be able to re-equipped with tactical strikes in the 1960s .
 With technology, the Soviets could exploit the definition of offensive weaponry to achieve an advantage . The Soviet Union could exploit technology to achieve a technological advantage, experts say .
 The weapons were transported to Cuba surreptitiously, unassembled and through a series of shipments over the course of three months . First, the weapons were sent to Cuba unassembled .
 The norms theory suggests that once more the Soviet Union realized its actions pushed the envelope of the ’62 Understanding . It also suggests that the U.S. realized it had to push back on the norms of the .
 By covertly shipping the MiG 23s, the Soviets sought to present the Americans with a fait accompli, which, in lieu of the Administration’s problems in the Senate, they expected would not be challenged . The Soviets hoped that the Administration's problems in Congress would
 When President Carter ended the MiG Crisis on 30 November, he implicitly resolved it by accepting a looser and less favourable interpretation of the Understanding . The conflict was framed according to the ’62 Understanding .
 The second piece of evidence concerns the norm hypothesis that subsequent Cuban conflicts will serve as precedents . The hypothesis is based on the theory that the Cuban conflict with Cuba was a precedent .
 For 17 tense days in November 1962, the Soviet Union failed to accept the Stevenson definition that had included the bomber prohibition, generating substantial concern within the Administration that the Crisis might restart .
 The Soviets conceded, and agreed to remove IL-28s in an eleventh hour deal . The deal was reached just hours before Kennedy’s 20 November press conference .
 The IL-28s’ status as an offensive weapon was ambiguous . The Soviets had been correct, though, in arguing that the status was ambiguous. The Soviets were correct, but they had been right .
 In Soviet eyes, the Americans had exploited an ambiguity in the Understanding of the Understanding so as to favourably interpret the IL-28 bombers as offensive weapons . The Americans exploited the ambiguity of the agreement so as they could interpret the aircraft as offensive .
 Florida Senator Richard Stone received a tip about a recent build-up of Soviet combat troops in Cuba . The 1979 Brigade Crisis The public record is published .
 In a closed subcommittee meeting, Stone peppered retired members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the charge . The hearing coincidentally was convened that very afternoon for a hearing on SALT II .
 Senator Stone then issued a letter to Secretary of State Cyrus Vance in which he demanded an explanation to the Soviet forces in Cuba . Stone then openly questioned whether the Soviet Union was trying to derail the SALT agreement .
 Vance responded on 27 July 1979, recalling the 1962 and Cienfuegos understandings with the Soviets . For one month, the Brigade Crisis would remain quiet .
 The administration had encountered troubling evidence of Soviet action in Cuba . Vance’s letter was technically accurate, but it was not the first .
 CIA analysis estimated that indeed the force had been in Cuba ‘since at least 1976’ It voiced concern that the soldiers’ activities had recently changed .
 Griesdorf August 1979 when Defense Department discovered through voice reconnaissance new references to the Spanish word ‘Brigada’ Suggested that the Cuban unit had changed from a training force to an infantry brigade .
 On 14 August, Brzezinski briefed the President by announcing ‘there is now an actual Soviet brigade in Cuba, with headquarters and regular organization’ The brigade issue quickly became one .
 A reference to the brigade appeared in the classified, classified, National Intelligence Daily . Carter, Vance, Brzezinski, and Brown were all away from Washington on vacation in August .
 Aviation Week called the White House for a comment . Deputy Secretary of State David Aaron and deputy National Security Advisor David Newsom denied the story . They recommended to their superiors that senior Congressional leaders be informed .
 On 30 August, eight key members of Congress were briefed, including Senator Frank Church, Democrat of Idaho . Senator Church, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee .
 Secretary Vance recommended that evidence of the Soviet brigade remain private . Secretary Vance said evidence of Soviet brigade remains private .
 Church held a bellicose press conference in his living room the day after his brief, announced the presence of a ‘Soviet brigade of combat troops’ and ‘demanded its immediate withdrawal’ After Church’s press conference, the Soviet brigade in Cuba became a
 Secretary Vance conceded that ‘the presence of this unit is not covered by our bilateral Understandings with the Soviets in 1962 and 1970'
 Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd approached Dobrynin to explain how the Soviet brigade would jeopardize SALT’s ratification . The Soviets claimed that because no new Cuban base had been established, the existing force was permitted by their Understanding Understanding .
 On 28 September, the President summoned to the White House various actors from 1962 and 1970 to confirm the Soviet explanation . The President summoned them to confirm it . The White House has not confirmed the explanation .
 Soviet brigade had been in Cuba for at least five years and probably since 1962 . The domestic political ramifications of the brigade remained significant .
 By metaphor alone the Brigade Crisis drove home the concern that the Soviets would be able to evade the monitoring procedures of the SALT treaty . Phoney issue or not, by metaphor alone, it was the concern .
 On 23 October, McGeorge Bundy submitted an op-ed entitled ‘The Brigade’s My Fault’, in which he absolved the Carter Administration of the brigade, and confirmed the existence of shared agreement about existent troops . Bundy: 'The Brigade's My Fault
 Bundy blames Vance for being 'laxed on intelligence' for the brigade's re-discovery . Bundy writes: ‘most of them did leave but we neither required nor got a pledge that all would go'
 President Carter attempted to assure the public that the Administration’s actions represented not American weakness but rather a bold commitment to security . The Brigade Crisis was resolved in a 1 October address to the nation .
 In contrast to the 1962 crisis, no nuclear threat to the U.S. is involved in the Cuban crisis, President Obama says .
 The greatest danger to all the nations of the world – including the United States and the Soviet Union – is the breakdown of a common effort to preserve the peace and the threat of nuclear war .
 The Brigade Crisis was framed and resolved according to the ’62 Understanding . The conflict fails the prediction that a superpower will choose a conflict in which it expects to be able to exploit an ambiguity .
 The U.S. accidentally discovered a Soviet force in Cuba that had always been there . Rather, the United States had accidentally discovered the Soviet force . The United States accidentally discovered that it was always there .
 The Brigade Crisis was solved peacefully to avoid alienating the Soviets or jeopardizing SALT II’s ratification . Without this prediction, alternative explanations of the crisis resolution become credible, including domestic politics .
 National Security Advisor appears to endorse this explanation in his assessment of his own performance during the Crisis . National Security Adviser appears to have endorsed this explanation .
 Brzezinski’s response to the Brigade Crisis emphasized not the terms of the 1962 Understanding but how the Soviets’ behaviour was incompatible with détente .
 In support of the norms theory, there is evidence that the U.S. attempted to exploit an ambiguity in their Understanding after the crisis had arisen .
 Griesdorf suggests that the U.S. intended to take action despite acknowledging their shared norm . He said that the United States intended to act despite acknowledging that they shared a common norm .
 Oberdorfer argues that Vance’s strategy involved picking up the term ‘combat unit’, first used by Senator Church in his press conference, to describe a force that had been described as an infantry brigade .
 The present brigade of Soviet troops in Cuba is not a threat to the security of our country no offensive weapons that can reach our shores . The thing that concerns us, however – and this is a serious matter, is that it’s a combat unit. The status quo is not
 The U.S. is trying, through diplomacy, to get the Soviets to eliminate the combat nature of this unit . But it is a combat unit, and I don't know yet whether we will succeed .
 "If we do not succeed, we will take appropriate action the change the status quo," says President Obama . "We will not succeed. If we do we fail we will change the current status quo"
 The Soviets’ behaviour also supported the prediction that the superpowers would seek to exploit an ambiguity in the Understanding of the Understanding . The Soviet Union’s behaviour was also predicted by experts .
 The United States officially requested that the Sovietswithdrawthebrigadeatleastthreetimes,and in all threecasestheSovietsrefusedto removeit . The United State officially requested the Soviets withdraw it at least once .
 The only factual controversy of the Brigade Crisis concerned the definitional term of the unit, with the Soviets insisting it was a combat or infantry brigade . The Russians maintained it was at training force, and the Americans said it was combat .
 By offering a concession to American domestic opposition over SALT, the Soviets committed the United States to the Soviet explanation of the force’s status .
 Whatever the exact nature of the unit, not only would it remain in Cuba, its presence would be legitimized as in compliance with the ’62 Understanding . The unit would have to remain in the Cuban government, but would be allowed to stay .
 The final case study is in fact a couplet of mini-crises, each of which lasted no longer than a daily American news cycle and never warranted a Soviet response . President Reagan’s threats to invade Cuba were never met with a response .
 Several times during the first five years of his administration, President Reagan attempted to loosen the American commitment with the Soviet Union not to invade Cuba . Several times in the first 5 years of Reagan's administration, he attempted to loosen the commitment with Soviet Russia .
 Reagan’s first comments occurred during a press conference on 14 September 1983 in which the President was asked about Cuban activity in the Western Hemisphere .
 While the invasion overtures tell a less intricate narrative than the other case studies, they do underscore the differences between the norms approach outlined in this paper and alternative explanations .
 Once again, domestic politics and relative power appear to account for the Cuban invasion threats .
 Clines refers to Reagan as ‘bewildered’ and ‘seemingly distracted’ in 1982 article . Domestic politics explanation would argue that these inflammatory remarks about Cuba were resolved peacefully because the American electorate and media – and not norms – monitored the leadership and forced
 Even if the U.S. thought it could persuade the Soviet Union successfully through the norm framework, American domestic politics promised to hold the Administration more accountable should it fail, increasing its costs of engagement .
 President Reagan’s 1985 charge was annulled unofficially by the State Department . The State Department revoked the charge in 1985 .
 Relative power explanation also appears to explain the Cuban threats . The relative power explanation appears to also appear to explain threats .
 In 1983, the U.S. had evidence that Cuba was serving as a weapons conduit for armaments headed to Nicaragua, and possibly to El Salvador as well . The United States had evidence of Cuba's role in supplying arms to Nicaragua and El Salvador .
 In 1985, the Americans believed that some 3000 Cuban military personnel were in Nicaragua advising and training its military . The U.S. believed that the Cuban military was in Nicaragua .
 As the Cold War renewed the hostile tone of the Missile Crisis era, it is feasible to argue that Cuba’s status in Latin America became more significant and less tolerable to the U.S. It is possible to argue it became more important to the United States .
 Both alternative explanations, however, fail to account for the entire record, CNN says .
 There is evidence that the Reagan administration was appealing to domestic politics when it invoked the ’62 Understanding .
 Reagan’s 1985 comments were delivered amidst his struggle with Congress to win support for funding the Contra rebels in Nicaragua . Reagan's 1985 comments came amid his struggle to win congressional support for the rebels in the country .
 The democratic peace theory does not constrain democratic states in their conflicts with non-democratic regimes, argues David Cameron . The peace theory doesn't constrain states in conflicts with regimes, he says .
 The media can escalate a conflict as much as mitigate it, says Evans and Novak . While it is likely that Clines’ article forced Reagan to retreat, both Evans and . Novak’s piece and Senator Church’�s press conference demonstrate how the media can
 Domestic politics cannot account for why the Cuban conflicts were resolved peacefully . Domestic politics alone can't explain why the conflict ended peacefully .
 The relative power explanation would suggest that Reagan’s comments undermined the United States’ credibility because they involved making threats and failing to follow through on them . Reagan”s comments undermine the U.S. credibility because he made threats and didn’t follow through them,
 This decidedly rhetorical approach suggests that states subscribe to norm-governed behaviour as a means of competing within a circumscribed domain . The author argues that norms are not about expressive satisfaction associated with compliance or the capacity to help realize convergent expectations .
 The '62 Understanding became the baseline from which future conflicts were framed . In order to ensure against against spiralling out of control, the ’62 Understanding was the basis for future conflicts . The ‘62 Understanding’s ‘60 Understanding became a baseline from where future conflicts
 'Like opposing lawyers, each sought to achieve an advantage by depicting revisionist behaviour as consistent with ambiguous facets of their existent agreement'
 In situations where an actor was unable to justify its actions as consistent with the ’62 Understanding, behaviour was purposefully constrained so as to remain within the envelope of what was mutually acknowledged as acceptable . ‘62 Understanding’: Behaviour was deliberately constrained so that it remained within the
 One of the ramifications of this conception of norms is that it suggests a benefit to drafting agreements that are deliberately under-specified . It suggests that it would be a good idea to draft an agreement that is deliberately under specified .
 Treaty language, like any other language, comes in varying degrees of specificity . As Abram and Antonia Chayes write, ‘language often is unable to capture the meaning with precision’
 The broader and more general the language, the wider the ambit of permissible interpretations to which it gives rise’.104 The more ambiguous the normative understanding, the greater the creative opportunity for agents to depict revisionist behaviour as consistent with the status quo.104
 The approach suggests norms might also be used successfully for contexts in which agents have little if any interaction at all . Whereas traditionally norms are portrayed as an understanding between agents who share social affinities or common knowledge .
 The insight is that norms can be used to transform noncommunicative or even violent relationships into agonistic but inherently rhetorical competitions . This is the insight that norms are used in the creation of relationships .
 If a norm is acknowledged, albeit under competitive circumstances, an actor might be successful in ‘locking in’ a previously non-responsive rival into an ongoing relationship .
 In the case of Cuba, the superpowers’ shared fear of mutual destruction provided a rationale for mutually acknowledging the ’62 Understanding . The ‘62 Understanding’ was signed by the U.S. and Cuba in 1962 .
 Even without nuclear weapons, this approach to norms pushes international relations theory away from constructivism and game theory towards the realm of rhetoric . Even without the prism of nuclear weapons .
 The key claim is that norms encourage behaviour but encourages agency as well . The key claims are that norms .
 In place of an explicit agreement, norms are more organic in character, evolving in conjunction with ongoing communication . Norms are evolving in place of explicit agreement .
 In place of common values or focal points, norms are norms are basic understandings whose ambiguity enables competition to ensue in a circumscribed manner . Norms are not common values, but instead they are common understandings that allow competition to occur .
 Brzezinski, Vance, Carter, Dobrynin, In Confidence; Gromyko, Memories. Memoirs; Brzezzinski, Power and Principle; Vance .
 Kennedy later placed the odds that the CMC might have led to nuclear war as ‘somewhere between one out of three and even, in Sorenson, Kennedy, 705. Kennedy later said the odds were ‘between one and three’
 Schelling, Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation, Oye, Cooperation Under Anarchy . Schelling and Axelrod have written numerous books on the subject of cooperation .
 Griesdorf Finnemore and Sikkink, ‘International Norm Dynamics and Political Change’, 891. The authors of the book, 'The Norms of the World' and 'Norms of Nations' are published in the book 'International Norms and
 The Americans repeatedly presented us with various claims attempting to interpret the accords more broadly, that is, in their own interest . On the other hand, the U.S. repeatedly tried to interpret them more broadly .
 See Kennedy, Thirteen Days; Rusk, As I Saw It, for confirmation of the Jupiter trade .
 The head of the USSR Merchant Fleet, I Bakaev, outlines how the Americans conducted both aerial and on-board inspections of the IL-28 rockets that the Soviets removed from Cuba as part of the Missile Crisis settlement .
 See Garthoff, Reflections, 146, for more on the Cienfuegos crisis . Garthoffs: ‘Handling the crisis was a mistake’
 Garthoff argues that the Soviets were motivated to construct the Cienfuegos base in order to ‘erase that legacy from a time of American superiority , an imposed constraint not in keeping with ‘parity” with the United States as a global power,
 U.S. and Soviet forces exchanged flares and high-speed manoeuvres in the Caribbean in 1971 . Several times in February 1971, the two countries exchanged flares .
 Kissinger justifies the American concession by writing, ‘formally proscribing port calls would have had widespread ramifications for the movement of the United States Navy and our principle of the freedom of the seas’, Kissinger wrote .
 Garthoff claims that the deliveries began in April 1978, in 'American Reaction' 438. Garthoffs, ‘American Reaction’, 438, claims that it began in 1978 .
 Brown cites in particular Senator Stone of Florida, who faced re-election in 1980 and had alienated many constituents when he voted in favour of the Panama Canal Treaty .
 The American reconnaissance is confirmed in a David Newsom summary document prepared during the Brigade Crisis . Garthoff, Détente, 682;
 In both the MiG 23 and Brigade Crises, Brzezinski continually argues that an enhanced Cuban military will increase its interventions in Africa, particularly in Angola and Zaire .
 Griesdorf Carter writes that he chose Brzezinski as his NSA to ensure that opinions from both the left and right were articulated in the White House . Carter says he wanted to ensure both sides of the aisle were articulated .
 Garthoff felt that it was conceivable that Kennedy would have tightened the embargo on 20 November had the Soviets refused to remove the IL-28s, in Garth Off, ‘American Reaction’, 437. Garth
 Garthoff, ‘American Reaction’, 429; Oberdorfer, 'Cuban Crisis’ 1979. Quoted in Garth Off, ’American Reaction, 429 .
 Dobrynin also suggests that the entire Brigade Crisis was a ‘premeditated leak’ instigated by American intelligence . The Brigade Crisis may have been the result of a leak from the U.S. intelligence .
 No such Soviet unit had been in Cuba during his time in office’, Prados, Keepers, 405, 405. Prados .
 Vance was answering a reporter’s question concerning whether he would ask the Soviets to remove the troops . Vance was responding to a reporter's question .
 Both Brzezinski, Power and Principle, 359, and Prados, Keeps, 404, support this assessment .