 In the period after Fidel Castro’s successful revolution in Cuba, 1959, the U.S. considered various plans to restore an anti-Communist government . The Americans considered various proposals to restore a government .
 The plans culminated in the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion which the American government authorized and supported . In April 1961, the U.S. government authorized the invasion .
 The issue of Cuba caused difficult relations between the superpowers . Relations were already tense as a result of the Berlin Wall crisis of the previous year .
 The Americans signalled that they would not tolerate the Soviets placing ‘offensive’ nuclear missiles in Cuba . Cuba lay only about one hundred miles from the coast of Florida .
 Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, appeared to comply with this demand . The Soviet leader appeared to agree and to comply .
 President Kennedy stated on 13 September that if Cuba were to become an offensive military base then he would take whatever steps were necessary to protect American security . President Kennedy said he would not allow Cuba to become a military base .
 During September the first missiles and the equipment to build the launchers arrived in Cuba . The first missiles arrived in September and are expected to arrive in the next few months .
 Photographs from U2 aircraft revealed that medium-range missiles were being installed . On 16 October the Executive Committee of the National Security Council held the first of its meetings to resolve what the American government regarded as a direct threat to its security .
 President Kennedy announced on television the detection of the missiles, demanded their removal, and the ExCom went into semi-permanent session to consider the next American steps .
 A variety of strategies were considered, including doing nothing . Diplomatic action, invasion, an air strike against the missiles, and a blockade were considered .
 Kennedy initially favoured military action of some sort . The possibility of invasion and air strike was held in reserve throughout the crisis .
 A blockade to prevent further missiles reaching Cuba emerged as the preferred solution . However, a blockade was preferred solution to stop further missile attacks .
 A blockade, accompanied by demands for the removal of the existing missiles, offered various advantages . A blockade would offer various advantages, including a blockade of Iran's borders .
 It demonstrated American resolve and willingness to use military force, it capitalized on America’s local naval superiority . It gave time for Khrushchev to back down, and it threw back onto him the difficult next step of escalating further the crisis .
 The ultimatum, in short, offered the ‘last clear chance’ to avoid an uncontrollable confrontation which might probably end in nuclear war . It was offered the last clear chance to avoid a nuclear war which might end in a nuclear disaster .
 He made a good deal both of the American threat to Cuba’s integrity and the deployment of U.S. medium-range missiles in Turkey, he says .
 Kennedy was reluctant to make any deal which traded the Turkish for the Cuban missiles . Kennedy personally had ordered the removal of the missiles from Turkey several months earlier on the grounds that they were unnecessary .
 The imposition of the American blockade went ahead . The risks of incidents between the two naval forces became apparent .
 In the days after 16 October the tension increased and the two states appeared to be moving to war as the Soviets showed no willingness to back down . The tension increased in the days following 16 October .
 On 26 October the Americans received in secret what they interpreted as a personal letter from Khrushchev which offered the possibility of a solution . The Americans received the letter in secret which offered a possible solution .
 The letter offered to remove missiles in return for the Americans removing the blockade and agreeing not to invade Cuba . The letter, in effect, offers to remove the missiles and remove the blockade .
 The following day Khrushchev sent a public letter demanding the removal of the missiles from Turkey in return for removal of missiles from Cuba . The letter was both belligerent in tone and more belligerent .
 The Americans were adamant that such a deal was unacceptable . The tone of the letter suggested Khrushchev might have lost control within the Presidium to more hawkish elements .
 Soviet surface-to-air missiles in Cuba shot down an American plane . The same day Soviet surface‐to‐air missiles shot down the U.S. plane .
 Robert Kennedy, brother of the President, suggested that the Americans agree to Khrushchev’s first letter, publicize the ‘agreement’ and in that way . The burden of failure and responsibility for war would fall onto Khushchev if he failed to accept .
 The Americans had secured a great diplomatic victory, though by running enormous risks . Kennedy’s prestige stood at its new peak .
 The Soviets got much less out of the crisis, though they were able to share public credit for the resolution of it . The Soviets were less fortunate to share much of the credit .
 The Americans removed their medium-range missiles from Turkey and Europe as a whole . However, they had got the American promise not to invade Cuba . They saw the Americans remove their medium‐range missiles .
 The withdrawal appears to have fatally undermined Khrushchev’s prestige within the Presidium . The withdrawal appeared to have led to his overthrow two years later . The Soviet withdrawal was a fatal blow to the Soviet leader .
 The Americans consolidated their leadership within NATO which had been threatened by their inability to prevent the Soviet gains in Berlin in 1961 .
 The successful resolution of the crisis led to an immediate improvement in superpower relations . It led to the improvement of superpower relations in the world .
 The two superpowers gave renewed attention to their doctrines of nuclear deterrence . Above all, the mutual realization of how close the world had come to war led to a renewed attention .
 In the West the missile crisis was taken as a paradigm case of a new science or art of ‘crisis management’ The decision-making processes within ExCom were analysed in order to learn the ‘rules’ or conventions of the new science .
 In particular the importance of manipulating risk, or brinkmanship, emerged as a key element in coercive diplomacy . Using the risk of war to push the opponent into backing down, coercive diplomacy is a key part of coercive diplomacy, the author says .
 Kennedy himself laid great emphasis on finding terms to offer to Khrushchev that would not be so humiliating that he would decline to take them . Kennedy: "Krushchev's terms were not so humiliating they would decline"