 The MPvBM capability we have witnessed will expand and the defensive establishments to protect this capability will also be expanded . The defensive establishments will be expanded to protect MPvB capability, the author says .
 "To satisfy their ambitions in Latin America by this show of determination and courage against the American Imperialist. To satisfy their . ambitions in . Latin American by this . show of . determination, courage against . American Imperialists.
 Tule, Spanish bases, Moroccan bases, and possibly SAC bases in Britain or Okinawa . This will increase tension everywhere and undoubtedly bring retaliation against U.S. foreign military installations .
 Whether military action should be taken prior to a warning to, or discussions with, Khrushchev and Castro . If military action was taken prior, it could have been discussed with, or discussed, with, the Soviets .
 This was discussed as a slow strangulation process, but it was stated that ""intelligence reports"" indicated that a blockade would bring Castro down in four months .
 Strafing MRBM installations and air fields with MIGs . and plus all SAM sites and coastal missile sites . None of which were identified .
 Warning to Khrushchev and Castro and if the response is unsatisfactory, convening Congress, seeking a declaration of war, and proceeding with an all-out blockade . If the response to the response was unsatisfactory he would convene Congress, seek to seek a declaration .
 In all probability this type of action would escalate into invasion and occupation, although the meeting was not agreed on this point . The meeting has not been agreed on whether this would happen .
 The recording makes it clear that McCone's account is a summarized version that excludes his own comments and observations . McCone says the recording is a summary version of his observations . The recording was recorded by McCone and his wife .
 Two IRBM sites with fixed launchers zeroed in on the Eastern U.S. Secretary McNamara expressed concern over the reports from NPIC .
 McNamara felt that this development demanded more prompt and decisive action . McNamara: "This development ... demands more prompt, decisive action"
 The group which had been meeting on Tuesday met in the Cabinet Room at 11:00m. on Wednesday/2/ with President .
 At the opening of the meeting, McCone gave a brief resume of current intelligence and Lundahl presented the most recent photography . Lundahl also gave a most recent photo of the day .
 Lundahl stated probably not and that we must have low-level photography for public consumption . Lundahl said there is probably not enough photography in the U.S. Lundahl also said there was probably not a lot of photography in public .
 He felt that the American people will accept danger and suffering if they are convinced doing so is necessary and that they have a clear conscience . However, he said that the U.S. people would accept danger if they were convinced it was necessary .
 These factors militated in favor of consulting with Khrushchev and depending on the Rio pact . The Rio pact was the basis for consulting with the Soviet Union and the United States .
 This might have the possibility of prevention of action and settlement by political means . This, he indicated, might have been possible to prevent the possible action by political .
 Rusk expressed himself in favor of leaning upon leaning upon the Rio pact, but does not dismiss the alternative of a unilateral declaration of war as the ultimate action we must take . Rusk: "The Rio pact is a good option, but it is not the only one."
 Ambassador Bohlen was not present but his views were expressed in a message which was read in which he strongly advocated diplomatic effort and stated that military action prior to this would be wrong . Bohlen said military action before this was wrong .
 He also stated that limited quick military action was an illusion and that any military action would rapidly escalate into an invasion . He also claimed that any action would quickly escalate into a invasion .
 Ambassador Thompson urged that any action be preceded by a declaration of war . He strongly advocated that we institute a blockade and not resort to military action .
 Dillon was very positive that whatever action we take should be done without consultation with Khrushchev, he said . Dillon was also positive that . whatever action should be taken without consultation .
 Rusk seemed to disagree indicating there was a possibility that Khrushchev might be persuaded to reduce his efforts . He admitted also that he might step them up as a result of discussions . Rusk said there was also a possibility of a reduction in efforts .
 President Kennedy was non-committal, however he seemed to continually raise questions of reactions of our allies, NATO, South America, public opinion and others . President Kennedy raised questions about the reaction of allies and South America .
 Raised the question whether we should not move the missiles out of Turkey . Raised a question whether the missiles should be moved out of the country .
 Bundy thought this a good idea either under conditions of a strike or during a preliminary talk, Bundy said . Bundy said he thought this idea would be good under conditions . Bundy: "I think this is not a bad idea, but it's a good thing to do"
 McNamara discussed in some detail the effects of a strike indicating that we could expect several hundred Soviet citizens to be killed . He pointed out that all of the SAM sites were manned exclusively by Soviets .
 He agreed that we could move out of Turkey and Italy; pointed out the political complications . He also agreed that he could move from Turkey to Italy and Italy .
 At this point McNamara seemed to be reconsidering his prior position of advocating military action . McNamara laid special emphasis on the fact that the price of Soviet retaliation, whether in Berlin or elsewhere, would be very high .
 Secretary Ball maintained the position that strike without warning was not acceptable and that we should not proceed without discussion with Khrushchev . Secretary Ball throughout the conversation maintained the . position that strikes were not acceptable .
 Second would be referred to as a fast dynamic action which would involve the strike of substantial proportions with or without notice . The strike would involve a strike of significant proportions .
 Akalovsky drafted the bill on October 21 and approved by the White House on October 23 . The White House approved the bill October 23, 2013 .
 The President and the Foreign Minister also discussed Berlin, a test ban agreement, and U.S. -Soviet bilateral relations . memoranda of these conversations are printed in vols.
 This, he said, was the basic core, the credo of Soviet foreign policy, and it was not just a statement . It was not a statement, he added, but it was a core core of the Soviet policy .
 Acheson: "Acheson, Homage to Plain Dumb Luck, 202. For a record of their conversation, see a transcript of the conversation .
 The President then conferred with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara from 4:30 to 5m. He then conferred on the President from 4 to 5pm .
 If one were to compare the human and material resources of Cuba and the United States, one would see immediately that the U.S. was a giant and Cuba only a baby . The United States is a giant, and Cuba is a baby, Cuban President Castro Castro says .
 Small Cuba could encroach upon any Latin American country, it is strange to believe that small Cuba can encroach on any Latin America country .
 Cuban leaders, including Castro personally, had stated for all the world to know and in the most solemn fashion that Cuba did not intend to impose its system . Cuba was in favor of peaceful coexistence, says Castro .
 Those who called for aggression against Cuba said that Cuban statements were insufficient, in spite of the fact that those statements were substantiated by deeds . However, those who called on Cuba to attack said that .
 If one were to approach problems this way, then it would be easy to justify any aggression, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 All international problems must be resolved by negotiation between the states concerned. All international issues must be solved by negotiation, says President Obama .
 The United States and USSR were now negotiating and making statements which should be given credence . After all, the U.S. and USSR was now negotiating .
 The President was surely familiar with President Dorticos' speech at the General Assembly 72/ What the Cubans wanted was to make their home and country secure, he said .
 They appealed to reason and conscience and called upon the United States not to resort to encroachments . The U.S. should not use the U.K. not to intervene in the region, they say .
 Mr Khrushchev's conversation with the President at Vienna/3/ had been frank, he himself wished to be frank, too . The President's permission was granted to Khrushchchev, who wanted to be honest .
 The situation today could not be compared to that obtaining in the middle of the 19th century . The situation now is not as bad as it was in the mid-19th century, the author says .
 Modern times are not the same as those when colonies had been divided among colonial powers . Modern times were not the case of colonial powers such as Britain and Ireland .
 Modern times could not be compared to those when it took weeks or months for the voice of the attacked to be heard . Modern times are not as long as those when attacks took months or months to be carried out .
 Khrushchev had been favorably impressed with the President's statement at Vienna regarding the equality of forces of our two nations . Mr Khrushiev had been impressed by the President of the Soviet Union .
 Russia could not stand by as a mere observer when aggression was planned and when a threat of war was looming . Since this was so, i.e., since the USSR was also a great and strong nation, it could not sit by as an observer of aggression . i.E.
 The Soviet Government believed that if both sides were for relaxation of international tensions and for solving the outstanding international problems, such demonstrations could be designed only for the purpose of increasing tensions .
 If worse should come to worse and if war should occur, then surely 150,000 soldiers would be of no significance . If worse comes to worse, the soldiers would not have any significance .
 Today was not 1812, when Napoleon had relied on the number of soldiers, sabres and rifles . As the President was surely aware, today was not Napoleon's 1812 .
 Neither could today's situation be compared to 1941, when Hitler relied on the number of tanks and guns . Hitler had relied heavily on tanks, guns and guns during that period .
 Today, life itself and military technology had created an entirely different situation, where it was better not to rely on arms . Life itself and technology has created a situation where it is better to rely less on arms, the author says .
 Gromyko stated that he was instructed to make it clear, as the Soviet Government had already done, that such assistance was not offensive . Training by Cuban nationals in handling defensive armaments were by no means offensive .
 If it were otherwise, the Soviet Government would have never become involved in rendering such assistance . The Soviet government would never have been involved in providing such assistance.
 If the Soviet Government had pursued a different policy, the situation in that country today would be quite different . The situation in the Soviet Union today would have been quite different, writes Peter Bergen .
 It was quite evident that the Soviet Union and its friends had broader opportunities of influencing the situation in that country than had the U.S. The United States. The Soviet Union had more opportunities to influence the situation than the United States did .
 The USSR had sought an understanding on that question, since it could not go back on the basic principle of its foreign policy, which was designed to alleviate tensions, to eliminate outstanding problems and to resolve them on a peaceful basis .
 The Soviet Government addressed its appeal to the U.S. on this question because both our countries were major powers and should direct their efforts only to ensuring peace . The Soviet government said the Soviet government was concerned about the situation .
 The President said he was glad that Mr Gromyko had referred to Laos because he believed that the Soviet policy on that problem was as he had described it . President: I believe that the policy on Laos is as he described it. The President was glad he had said that Gromy
 The Soviet Union had apparently met its obligations just as the U.S. had met them . So far, the Soviet Union has apparently met their obligations . The United States had met its own obligations .
 A most serious mistake had been made last summer with respect to Cuba . However, it was not the first time the British government had made such a mistake .
 The U.S. had not pressed the Cuban problem and had attempted to push it aside, he says . The United States had not pushed the Cuban issue aside, but a number of people opposed the regime now prevailing in Cuba .
 Last July the USSR, without any communication from Mr Khrushchev to the President, had embarked upon the policy of supplying arms to Cuba . But then last July last July, the USSR decided to supply arms to Havana .
 The President said he did not know the reasons for that shift in Soviet policy, because there was no threat of invasion . He would have been glad to give appropriate assurances to that effect had Mr Khrushchev communicated with him .
 Soviet arms supply had had a profound impact in the United States . Ambassador Dobrynin was surely aware of how the American people and the Congress felt on this matter .
 The administration had tried to calm this reaction and he, the President, had made a statement that in view of the nature of Soviet assistance to Cuba at this time coolness was required .
 President said he could find no satisfactory explanation for Soviet actions . Yet, he wished to stress that Soviet actions were extremely serious and he could not find a satisfactory explanation .
 The Soviet Union was surely aware of United States feelings with regard to Cuba, which was only 90 miles away from the United States . Cuba was 90 miles from U.S.
 The President continued that the United States planned no blockade of Cuba . It was only a question of ships taking arms to Cuba not being able to stop in the U.S. with their return cargo .
 The President said he did not know where it was taking us but it was the most dangerous situation since the end of the war . The President did not say where it would take us, but said it was 'most dangerous' since end of war .
 The United States had taken the Soviet statement concerning the nature of armaments supplied to Cuba at its face value . The U.S. had taken it at face value at the time .
 President had attacked last Sunday in Indianapolis a Senator who was advocating invasion of Cuba . He had stated that the Cuban problem must be kept in perspective .
 Mr Gromyko said that there had already been an invasion, and it was well known how it ended . Mr Gromko said there was already been a invasion of Russia .
 It was well known now, both from facts and statements, including the President's own, under what circumstances and by whom that invasion had been organized, it is now well known .
 Cuban emigrees and smaller Caribbean countries which had helped them would not have dared undertake any invasion . Everyone knew that if the U.S. had merely lifted its little finger, Cuba would not be able to do so .
 The President interjected that he had discussed with Mr Khrushchev the April 1, 1961, invasion and had said that it was a mistake . The President said he had talked about the invasion and said it was an error .
 He also pointed out he would have given assurances that there would be no further invasion, either by refugees or U.S. forces .
 Last July the Soviet Union took certain actions and the situation changed. But last July, the situation was changed. The situation changed, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Mr Gromyko continued that Cubans and the Cuban Government had before them the vital question of whether they should remain unprepared to resist attack or take steps to defend their country .
 Soviet specialists were training Cubans in handling certain types of armaments which were only defensive-and he wished to stress the word defensive-in character . Such training could not constitute a threat to the United States, he said .
 He reiterated that if it were otherwise the Soviet Union would never have agreed to render such assistance . The Soviet Union has never agreed to provide such assistance, he said .
 Introduction last July of intensive armanents had complicated the situation and created grave danger . Introduction last year of intensive armanents "created grave danger," says the Russian president .
 His own actions had been to prevent, unless United States security was endangered, anything from being done that might provoke the danger of war, he said .
 The President then read a portion of his September 4 statement on Cuba/5/ and stated that this had been United States position and policy on this question .
 The Attorney General had discussed the Cuban situation with Ambassador Dobrynin so that the latter must be aware of what it was . He noted that the Attorney General and the Cuban ambassador had discussed it with Dobrynins .
 The President again recalled his Indianapolis speech of last Sunday and said that we were basing our present attitude on facts as they had been described by Mr Gromyko . Our presumption was that the armanents supplied by the USSR were defensive .
 On October 18, 1962, the Central Intelligence Agency released a ""Joint Evaluation of the Soviet Mission Threat in Cuba" based on intelligence obtained as of 9m. that day .
 The evaluation was codenamed Iron Bark because it drew upon intelligence material provided by the Central Intelligence Agency's important Soviet source, Colonel Oleg Penkovsky .
 It was based on photo interpretation of U-2 photography made on October 14, and two on October 15 and two of six missions on October 17 . The analysis was made based on "very preliminary and incomplete readout"
 These mobile missiles had to be considered operational and could be launched within 18 hours after the decision to launch was made . Mobile missiles could launch within the next 18 hours of a launch decision .
 These sites were probably intended for 2200nm intermediate-range ballistic missiles and could be operational by December 1962 . The sites were likely to be operational in December 1962.
 All missiles were manned by Soviet personnel and were under Soviet control . The missiles were launched in the 1980s and 1991 .
 The expected warheads for these missiles would weigh 3,000 pounds and have yield in the low megaton range . The warheads would be expected to weigh around 3,500 pounds .
 The significance of these developments was that the Soviet Union ""intends to develop Cuba into a prime strategic base, rather than as a token show of force", according to the evaluation .
 The mixed force of 1020-and 2200nm missiles posed a common threat to the U.S. and a large portion of Latin America . The mix of missiles was created in the 1980s .
 Secretary Rusk opened the meeting by asking Mr Johnson if he was ready to lay a program before the group . The meeting was filled with members of the armed forces .
 The papers have not been identified further, but McCone's memorandum is included in the Supplement .
 No draft of the speech, dated this early has been found, but an 11-paragraph synopsis of a speech for October 23 is attached to the paper described in footnote 5 below .
 After sketching the advantages and disadvantages of a blockade, it presented a 5-day scenario . It also predicted the reaction of United States allies, the Soviet Union, and Cuba .
 Another paper ""Second Draft, 10/19/62"" on the blockade consisted of a detailed list of the elements in a course of action . Another paper "Second Draft" was published in 1962 .
 White House statement for the evening of October 22, III, a 1-page paper dealing with an announcement for the morning of October 23, and a 2-page, 1 1 -paragraph synopsis of the President's speech on October 23 .
 To estimate probable Soviet reactions to certain U.S. courses of action with respect to Cuba . Soviet Reactions to Certain United States Courses of Action on Cuba on Cuba .
 A major Soviet objective in their military buildup in Cuba is to demonstrate that the world balance of forces has shifted so far in their favor that the U.S. can no longer prevent the advance of Soviet offensive power even into its own hemisphere . The United States is trying to show that the
 The withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would create serious problems in the USSR's relations with Castro . It would cast doubt on the firmness of the Soviet intention to protect the Castro regime and perhaps on their commitments elsewhere .
 If the U.S. accepts the strategic missile buildup in Cuba, the Soviets would continue the buildup of strategic weapons in Cuba . If the United States accepts the . U.K. would continue to build the . stockpile of strategic . weapons .
 We have no basis for estimating the force level which they would wish to reach, but it seems clear already that they intend to go beyond a token capability . The U.S. has no plans to reach a force level beyond that level, however .
 We consider in Annex B/l/ the possible effects of a missile buildup in Cuba upon the overall relationship of strategic military power . We also consider the effects of the Cuban missile buildup .
 U.S. acceptance of the strategic missile buildup would provide strong encouragement to Communists, pro-Communists, and the more antiAmerican sectors of opinion in Latin America and elsewhere .
 Anti-Communists and those who relate their own interests to those of the U.S. would be strongly discouraged . Conversely, anti-Communist and anti-communist groups would be discouraged .
 It seems clear that, especially over the long run, there would be a loss of confidence in U.S. power and determination . The loss of trust in the United States would lead to a serious decline in influence generally, he says .
 If the U.S. confronts Khrushchev with its knowledge of the MRBM deployment and presses for a withdrawal, we do not believe the Soviets would halt the deployment . If the United States confronts the Soviets, it would not stop the deployment of MRBM .
 Any warning would of course degrade the element of surprise in a subsequent U.S. attack . Any warning of an attack would degrade the elements of surprise .
 Castro would tighten internal security and take ruthless action against any attempts at revolt . Castro's military machine might be impaired by a total U.S. blockade, but he would take action .
 There is no reason to believe that a blockade of itself would bring down the Castro regime . A blockade of Cuba could bring down Castro's regime, says CNN.com .
 The Soviets would almost certainly exert strong direct pressures elsewhere to end the blockade . The Soviet Union would exert similar pressure elsewhere, such as in the West .
 The attitudes of other states toward a blockade action are not considered in this paper .
 It is obvious that the Soviets would heavily exploit all adverse reactions . The Soviets would be keen to exploit any adverse reaction to the situation, says author .
 Soviet Reaction to Use of Military Force/2/ /2/ For a further comment on differences between reaction to a blockade and U.S. measures of force against Cuba, see Annex A 9 .
 If the U.S. takes direct military action against Cuba, the Soviets would be placed under great pressure to respond . If they could not save Cuba, they would inflict an offsetting injury to United States interests . The Soviets would respond in ways which, if not saved Cuba, would
 This would be true whether the action was limited to neutralizing strategic missiles, airfields, surface-to-air missile sites, or cruise missile sites . The action would be limited to an effort to neutralize these missiles, or neutralize the strategic missiles .
 In reaction to any of the various forms of U.S. action, the Soviets would be alarmed and agitated, since they have to date estimated that the United States would not take military action in the face of Soviet warnings .
 On the other hand, the Soviets have no public treaty with Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the island . Cuba has not acknowledged the existence of Soviet bases in Cuba .
 We do not believe that the USSR would attack the US, either from Soviet bases or with its missiles in Cuba, even if the latter were operational and not put out of action before they could fire .
 Since the USSR would not dare to resort to general war and could not hope to prevail locally, the Soviets would almost certainly consider retaliatory actions outside Cuba .
 The timing and selection of such moves would depend heavily upon the immediate context of events and the USSR's appreciation of U.S. attitudes . The timing of such a move would depend on the timing of events .
 "They might react here with major harassments, interruptions of access to the city or even a blockade" with or without the signing of a separate peace treaty . They might react to the sign of a peace treaty with or not a separate treaty, the author says .
 On October 20 this estimate was updated to include a 3-page inventory of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba . We believe that whatever course of retaliation the USSR elected, the Soviet leaders would not deliberately initiate general war .
 On October 19, 1962, the Central Intelligence Agency released another ""Joint Evaluation of Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba" for the initial evaluation .
 It included Iron Bark material and was based on ""relatively complete photo interpretation"" of four of the six U-2 missions of October 17 and part of the final two missions . The U.2 mission was the last of the October 17 missions .
 An evaluation discovered an additional regiment of Soviet 1020-nm missiles at two sites east of Havana in the Sagua La Grande area . The sites appeared to be more permanent than the two sites already identified at San Cristobal in western Cuba .
 There is still no evidence of currently operational nuclear storage facilities in Cuba . However, there was evidence that a site was under construction near Guanajay .
 The evaluation suggests that the assumption that nuclear weapons were already in Cuba still held true . The evaluation suggested that the assumed nuclear weapons already held true in Cuba .
 The evaluation also suggested that the 1020-nm missiles would probably be equipped with 2 to 3 megaton warheads . The evaluation said the 2200-nm IRBM's would probably have 3 to 5 megat warheads .
 Report of Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee, Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee and the National Photographic Interpretation Center dated October 19, 1962 .
 There were no U-2 photographic reconnaissance missions over Cuba from August 29th to October 14th .
 The gap in photographic coverage was in part due to bad weather and a desire to avoid activating the SAM Air Defense installations which the Russians were hurriedly installing in Cuba during this period .
 Information from these missions is not fully processed, but will be available for presentation by Monday . Information from this missions will not be fully processed .
 The Council was informed that sixteen SS-4 missiles, with a range of 1020 nautical miles were now operational in Cuba . The missiles could be fired approximately eighteen hours after a decision to fire was taken .
 The President summarized the discussion of the intelligence material as follows . The President said the material was presented to the American public .
 There is something to destroy in Cuba now and, if it is destroyed, a strategic missile capability would be difficult to restore . If it was destroyed, it would be hard to restore, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Blockage Track Secretary McNamara explained to the President that there were differences among his advisers which had resulted in the drafting of alternative courses of action .
 Military planners are at work on measures to carry out all recommended courses of action in order that, following a Presidential decision, fast action could be taken .
 This route is aimed at preventing any addition to the strategic missiles already deployed to Cuba . This route would eventually eliminate these missiles, the U.S. says .
 He said to do this we should institute a blockade of Cuba and be prepared to take armed action in specified instances . He said the blockade should be instituted and armed action was possible .
 One presented a 5-day scenario with anticipated Soviet, allied, and Cuban reaction; the second outlined nine courses of action in the 24 hours before a blockade was instituted; the third offered 23 steps that had to be taken before the A hour .
 Secretary McNamara concluded by explaining that following the blockade, the United States would negotiate for the removal of the strategic missiles from Cuba . McNamara: The U.S. would negotiate with Cuba to remove strategic missiles .
 He said we would have to accept withdrawal of U.S. strategic missiles from Turkey and Italy and possibly agreement to limit our use of Guantanamo to a specified limited time .
 He added that we could obtain removal of the missiles from Cuba only if we were prepared to offer something in return during negotiations .
 He opposed as too risky the suggestion that we should issue an ultimatum to the effect that we would order an air attack on Cuba if the missiles were not removed .
 It would take a long time to achieve the objective of eliminating strategic missiles from Cuba, says President Obama .
 It avoids any surprise air attack on Cuba, which is contrary to our tradition, says President Vladimir Putin .
 'It is the only military course of action compatible with our position as a leader of the free world,' says President Obama .
 The move avoids a sudden military move which might provoke a response from the USSR which could result in escalating actions leading to general war . The decision was made to avoid the risk of a military response from Russia .
 The President pointed out that during a blockade, more missiles would become operational, and upon the completion of sites and launching pads, the threat would increase . The President said that during the blockade more missiles will become operational .
 General Taylor asked General Taylor how many missiles we could destroy by air action on Monday . He asked him if he could destroy missiles by air attack on Monday.
 Joint Chiefs of Staff favor an air strike on Tuesday when U.S. forces could be in a state of readiness . General Taylor reported that the Joint Chiefs' decision to strike was made on Tuesday .
 He said he did not share Secretary McNamara's fear that if we used nuclear weapons in Cuba, nuclear weapons would be used against us . He did not think he shared that fear .
 Secretary Rusk asked General Taylor whether we dared to attack operational strategic missile sites in Cuba . SecretaryRusk asked . General Taylor . whether we dare to attack . operational strategic . missile sites .
 General Taylor responded that the risk of these missiles being used against us was less than if we permitted the missiles to remain there . General Taylor said the risk was less if the missiles were allowed to be used .
 The President pointed out that on the basis of the intelligence estimate there would be some fifty strategic missiles operational in mid-December, if we went the blockade route and took no action to destroy sites being developed .
 General Taylor said that now was the time to act because this would be the last chance we would have to destroy these missiles . General Taylor: Now is the time for us to act .
 "If we did not act now, the missiles would be camouflaged in such a way as to make it impossible for us to find them," says President Obama .
 If they were not destroyed, we would have to live with them with all the consequent problems for the defense of the United States. Therefore, if they were . were not . destroyed, "we would . have to . live with . the consequences of the . U.S.
 The President agreed that the missile threat became worse each day, adding that we might wish, looking back, that we had done earlier what we are now preparing to do .
 Secretary Rusk said that a blockade would seriously affect the Cuban missile capability . The Soviets would be unable to deploy to Cuba any missiles in addition to those now there .
 Under Secretary Ball said if an effective blockade was established, it was possible that photographic intelligence would reveal that there were no nuclear warheads in Cuba . Ball said none of the missiles now there could be made operational .
 General Taylor indicated his doubt that it would be possible to prevent the Russians from deploying warheads to Cuba by means of a blockade because of the great difficulty of setting up an effective air blockade . Taylor indicated that an effective blockade of Cuba would be difficult to set up .
 McNamara stated that if we knew that a plane was flying nuclear warheads to Cuba, we should immediately shoot it down . Secretary McNamara said that if . we knew . that plane was . flying nuclear . warheads to . Cuba, he said . McNamara later said .
 There are now 6000 to 8000 Soviet personnel in Cuba, he said . Parenthetically, he pointed out there are now 6,000 Soviet personnel .
 President asked whether the institution of a blockade would appear to the free world as a strong response to the Soviet action . The President asked if it was a strong reaction to the USSR's action .
 He is particularly concerned about whether the Latin American countries would think that the blockade was an appropriate response to the Soviet challenge . He is concerned that Latin American nations might think that a blockade is appropriate .
 Attorney General returned to the point made by General Taylor,e.e. that now is the last chance we will have to destroy Castro and the Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba . The Attorney General said that now .e.i.e . that now, i.e., that now
 Mr Sorensen said he did not agree with the Attorney General or with General Taylor that this was our last chance . He said he disagreed with Attorney General and General Taylor .
 He said a missile buildup would end if the Russians would not use force to penetrate the U.S. blockade . He said Russia would use force against the United States blockade .
 Mr Bundy handed to the President the ""air strike alternative, 75/ which the President read. Air Strike Route" Mr Bundy . Bundy handed the . air strike alternative to the . President .
 General Taylor emphasized the opportunity available now to take out not only all the missiles, but all the Soviet medium bombers which were lined up in the open on airbases in Cuba .
 Mr McNamara cautioned that an air strike would not destroy all the missiles and launchers in Cuba . McNamara: "We could knock out two-thirds of these missiles"
 Those missiles not destroyed could be fired from mobile launchers not destroyed . Mobile launchers could also be used to launch missiles from the ground .
 General Taylor said he was unable to explain why the IL-28 medium bombers had been left completely exposed on two airfields .
 The only way to explain this, he concluded, was on the ground that the Cubans and the Russians did not anticipate the U.S. air strike . He concluded .
 Secretary Rusk wondered whether planes were decoys . Rusk said he hesitated to ask the question but he wondered whether decoys were decoy .
 He wondered whether the Russians were trying to entice us into a trap . He also wondered whether Russia was trying to lure us into an entice .
 Secretary McNamara stated his strong doubt that these planes were decoys . McNamara said he doubted the planes would be decoys in the fall of the fall .
 If we do not destroy the missiles and bombers, we will have to change our military way of dealing with external threats, says General Taylor . General Taylor returned to the point he had made earlier .
 The President raised the question of advance warning prior to military action . The President asked whether we should give a minimum of two hours notice of an air strike to permit Soviet personnel to leave the area to be attacked .
 General Taylor said that the military would be prepared to live with a twenty-four hour advance notice or grace period if such advance notice was worthwhile politically . General Taylor: The military would live with such an advance notice .
 The President expressed his doubt that any notice beyond seven hours had any political value . The President said he doubts that the notice would be political .
 There was a brief discussion of the usefulness of sending a draft message to Castro, and a copy of such message was circulated . A draft message was also circulated .
 The President stated flatly that the Soviet planes in Cuba did not concern him particularly . The President said he did not worry about the planes he saw in Cuba .
 He said we must be prepared to live with the Soviet threat as represented by Soviet bombers . He added that we must also be prepared for the threat posed by Soviet aircraft .
 The existence of strategic missiles in Cuba had an entirely different impact throughout Latin America . However, the existence of the Cuban missiles had a different impact .
 In his view the existence of fifty planes in Cuba did not affect the balance of power . But missiles already in Cuba were an entirely different matter, he said . In his opinion, the presence of missiles in Cuba was not a problem .
 The advantage of proceeding in this way, he added, was that we would get away from the Pearl Harbor surprise attack aspect of the air strike route . The advantage was that this would be a better option than the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Mr Bundy pointed out that there was a risk that we would act in such a way as to get Khrushchev to commit himself fully to the support of Castro .
 Secretary Rusk doubted that a delay of twenty-four hours in initiating an air strike was of any value . Rusk doubts that a 24-hour delay in a strike would be any value, he said .
 Secretary Dillon mentioned seventy-two hours as the time between instituting the blockade and initiating an air strike in the event we receive no response to our initial action . Secretary Dillon said that the two-hour period is between the beginning of a blockade and the end of a strike .
 Director McCone stated his opposition to an air strike, but admitted that in his view a blockade was not enough . McCone said a blockade would not be enough, but a blockade is needed .
 He argued that we should institute the blockade and tell the Russians that if the missiles were not dismantled within seventy-two hours, the U.S. would destroy the missiles by air attack .
 He called attention to the risk involved in a long drawn-out period during which the Cubans could, at will, launch the missiles against the U.S.
 Secretary Dillon said that the existence of strategic missiles in Cuba was, in his opinion, not negotiable .
 He believed any effort to negotiate the removal of the missiles would involve a price so high that the U.S. could not accept it, he said . He believed that any attempt to negotiate a price would be too high .
 If the missiles are not removed or eliminated, the U.S. will lose all of its friends in Latin America, he said . The missiles will become convinced that our fear is such that we cannot act, he added .
 He admitted that the limited use of force involved in a blockade would make the military task much harder and would involve the great danger of the launching of missiles by the Cubans .
 Deputy Secretary Gilpatric saw the choice as involving the use of limited force or of unlimited force . He said the choice was between limited use and unlimited use .
 He was prepared to face the prospect of an air strike against Cuba later . He opposed the initial use of all-out military force such as a surprise air attack .
 He defined a blockade as being the application of the limited use of force . He doubted that such limited use could be combined with an air strike .
 General Taylor argued that a blockade would not solve our problem or end the Cuban missile threat . General Taylor said a blockade of Cuba would not end the threat .
 He said that eventually we would have to use military force . If we waited, the use of military force would be much more costly, he said .
 Such a strike would result in several thousand Russians being killed, chaos in Cuba, and efforts to overthrow the Castro government . The strike would be a strike that would kill thousands of Russians, according to Russian diplomats .
 In his view, the probability was high that an air strike would lead inevitably to an invasion, he said . The probability of a strike would be high, he added .
 He doubted that the Soviets would take an air strike on Cuba without resorting to a very major response .
 In such an event, the United States would lose control of the situation which could escalate to general war . In such a case, the U.S. could lose control over the situation .
 The President agreed that a U.S. air strike would lead to a major Soviet response, such as blockading Berlin . The President said that a United States air strike .
 Russia would be willing to take strategic missiles out of Turkey and Italy if this issue was raised by the Russians, he said . He agreed that at an appropriate time we would have to acknowledge that we were willing to .
 He felt implementation of a blockade would also result in Soviet reprisals, possibly the blockade of Berlin . He felt that implementation of the blockade would result in a blockade of Germany .
 "If we instituted a blockade on Sunday, then by Monday or Tuesday we would know whether missile development had ceased or whether it was continuing," he said . "We would know if by Tuesday or Wednesday we would be able to see if it had stopped or not," he added .
 Secretary Dillon called attention to the fact that even if the Russians agreed to dismantle the missiles now in Cuba, continuing inspection would be required to ensure that the missiles were not again made ready .
 President said he would favor an air strike which would destroy only missiles . The President said that if it was decided to go the Bundy route, he would prefer an air attack .
 He repeated this view that we would have to live with the threat arising from the stationing in Cuba of Soviet bombers .
 He did not think we should initiate such a strike because of the risk of escalating actions leading to general war . He said we should not initiate a strike as a result of escalating action leading to war .
 He said a sudden air strike had no support in the law or morality, and, therefore, must be ruled out .
 He urged that we start the blockade and only go on to an air attack when we knew the reaction of the Russians and of our allies, he said . Reading from notes, he urged that the blockade should start .
 Director McCone acknowledged that we did not know positively that nuclear warheads for the missiles deployed had actually arrived in Cuba . At this point, McCone said we didn't know positively .
 Although we had evidence of the construction of storage places for nuclear weapons, such weapons may not yet have yet been sent to Cuba .
 The President asked what we would say to those whose reaction to our instituting a blockade now would be to ask why we had not blockaded last July, the President said .
 Both Mr Sorensen and Mr Ball made the point that we did not institute a blockade in July because of the existence of the strategic missiles in Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk suggested an immediate freeze of the strategic missile capability in Cuba to be inspected by U.N. observation teams stationed at the missile sites .
 He referred to our bases in Turkey, Spain and Greece as being involved in any negotiation covering foreign bases . He said the bases in Spain, Greece and Greece were involved in negotiations .
 He said a United Nations group might be sent to Cuba to reassure those who might fear that the U.S. was planning an invasion . The U.N. group might also be sent there to reassure people who fear an invasion of Cuba .
 Ambassador Stevenson stated his flat opposition to a surprise air strike, which he felt would ultimately lead to a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Ambassador Stevenson felt the strike would lead to an invasion of the country .
 He predicted that such action would reduce the chance of Soviet retaliation of a nature which would inevitably escalate . He supported the institution of the blockade .
 In his view, "our aim is to end the existing missile threat in Cuba without casualties and without escalation," he says .
 He urged that we offer the Russians a settlement involving the withdrawal of our missiles from Turkey and our evacuation of Guantanamo base .
 The President rejected the thought of surrendering our base at Guantanamo in the present situation . The President sharply rejected the idea of giving up Guantanamo .
 He felt that such action would convey to the world that we had been frightened into abandoning our position, he said . He added that such a move would convey that we . had been 'frightened into abandoning their position'
 He was not opposed to discussing withdrawal of our missiles from Turkey and Greece . But he was firm in saying we should only make such a proposal in the future .
 The Attorney General suggested that we might tell the Russians that we were turning over nuclear weapons and missiles to the West Germans .
 Ambassador Thompson stated that our first action should be the institution of a blockade . Ambassador Thompson said that the first step should be to establish a blockade of the border .
 He thought we should launch an air strike to destroy missiles and sites, after giving sufficient warning so that Russian nationals could leave the area to be attacked . Following this, he thought . He thought . The air strike should be given sufficient warning to Russian nationals so that they could . leave the
 The President said he was ready to go ahead with the blockade and to take actions necessary to put us in a position to undertake an air strike on missiles and missile sites by Monday or Tuesday .
 General Taylor summarized the military actions already under way, including the quiet reinforcement of Guantanamo by infiltrating marines and the positioning of ships to take out U.S. depend-ents from Guantanamo .
 Attorney General said we could implement a blockade very quickly and prepare for an air strike later if we so decided . The Attorney General also said that we could prepare for a blockade .
 The President said he was prepared to authorize the military to take those preparatory actions which they would have to take in anticipation of the military invasion of Cuba . The President also said he would authorize the . military to . take those preparations .
 He suggested that we inform the Turks and the Italians that they should not fire the strategic missiles they have even if attacked . The Turks and Italians should also be told not to fire strategic missiles if they are attacked .
 He agreed that we should move to institute a blockade as quickly as we possibly can . The blockade will be imposed as well as possible, he said .
 Secretary McNamara recommended that no low level photographic reconnaissance should be undertaken now because of the blockade .
 Secretary Rusk recommended that a blockade not be instituted before Monday in order to provide time required to consult our allies . The blockade should not begin before Monday, Rusk said .
 Mr Bundy said the pressure from the press was becoming intense and suggested that one way of dealing with it was to announce that we had obtained photographic evidence of the existence of strategic missiles .
 This announcement would hold the press until the President made his television speech . This announcement was the first time the President had made a television announcement .
 The President acknowledged that the domestic political heat following his television appearance would be terrific . The President also acknowledged that he would welcome the political backlash following his appearance .
 He said he had opposed an invasion of Cuba but that now we are confronted with the possibility that by December there would be fifty strategic missiles deployed there .
 Only now do we have the kind of evidence which we can make available to our allies in order to convince them of the necessity of acting, he said .
 It is possible that we may have to make an early strike with or without warning next week . It's possible that it may be possible that the U.S. military may strike early next week.
 He stressed again the difference between the conventional military buildup in Cuba and the psychological impact of the deployment of strategic missiles to Cuba .
 General Taylor repeated his recommendation that any air strike in Cuba included attacks on the MIGs and medium bombers . General Taylor: Any air strike should include attacks on bombers and aircraft in Cuba .
 The President repeated his view that our world position would be much better if we attack only the missiles .
 President Obama directed that air strike plans include only missiles and missile sites . He directed that preparations to be ready three days from now .
 U.S. Under Secretary Ball expressed his view that a blockade should include all shipments of POL to Cuba . Ball said that the blockade should also include the shipment of POL .
 Secretary Rusk thought that POL should not now be included because such a decision would break down the distinction which we want to make between elimination of strategic missiles and the downfall of the Castro government .
 The President acknowledged that the issue was whether POL should be included from the beginning or added at a later time . The issue is whether the issue should be added from the start of the process .
 Secretary Rusk called attention to the problem involved in referring to our action as a blockade . The United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the blockade was a 'blockade'
 President asked Secretary Rusk to reconsider present policy of refusing to give nuclear weapons assistance to France . Parenthetically, the President asked secretary Rusk .
 He expressed the view that in light of present circumstances a refusal to help the French was not worthwhile . He said in the light of the present circumstances, it was not worth helping the French .
 He thought that in the days ahead we might be able to gain the needed support of France if we stopped refusing to help them with their nuclear weapons project .
 There followed a discussion of several sentences in the ""blockade route"" draft of the President's speech .
 Reference to economic pressures on Cuba would not be made in this context . Reference to the Cuban economy would not have been made in the context .
 The President made clear that in the United Nations we should emphasize the subterranean nature of the missile buildup in Cuba . President Obama made clear in the U.N. that in Cuba, it was a subterranean threat .
 Only if we were asked would we respond to talk about the withdrawal of missiles from Italy and Turkey. Only if asked, would we say that we were prepared to discuss withdrawal from Italy, Turkey and Italy .
 In such an eventuality, we would have to make clear to the Italians and the Turks that withdrawing strategic missiles was not a retreat, the President said . We would be prepared to replace these missiles by providing a more effective deterrent, such as the assignment of Polaris submarines .
 The President made clear that our emphasis should be on the missile threat from Cuba, the President said . The President said the focus should be focused on Cuba's missile threat .
 Ambassador Stevenson reiterated his belief that we must be more forthcoming about giving up our missile bases in Turkey and Italy . Ambassador Stevenson said the U.S. must give up its missile bases .
 He said the situation required that we offer to give up such bases in order to induce the Russians to remove the strategic missiles from Cuba .
 Mr Nitze flatly opposed making any such offer, but said he would not object to discussing this question in the event that negotiations developed from our institution of a blockade .
 The President concluded the meeting by stating that we should be ready to meet criticism of our deployment of missiles abroad . But we should not initiate negotiations with a base withdrawal proposal .
 Noted a briefing by the Director of Central Intelligence, supported by photographic intelligence, establishing the presence in Cuba of Soviet strategic missiles, including mobile launchers and missile sites .
 President Obama met with the Attorney General at the White House on October 20th . Attorney General Jeff Sessions met with President Obama and spoke with him privately . Sessions said he spoke with Attorney General Sessions about the issue .
 The Attorney General was to meet alone with the President, presumably to discuss policy matters . The attorney general is expected to meet with President .
 I told the AG I was very worried about some of the wording in the second draft of the speech of the President as prepared by Sorensen/1/ . I was most particularly worried about the approach of Governor Stevenson. Governor Stevenson . Governor Stevenson's approach to the White House
 "We must not lose sight of the very important objectives of removing the Castro Communist government from Cuba and establishing a climate which would permit the Cuban people to establish a government of their own choice"
 Stevenson's proposal would remove Guantanamo Base and place a crown of jewels on the head of Castro . Stevenson: "We nor anyone else could do much about it after such a position had been established publicly. Such a position was established publicly" Stevenson:
 The AG called me at my home and said he had discussed my views with the President who concurred . He said he felt I could rest assured that the situation that worried me would not develop further .
 I then mentioned to the AG that numbered paragraph 2 of the speech did not give the President latitude for military action which may be necessary without suffering the indictment of committing a ""surprise attack" and that I suggested some different wording to Sorensen .
 The AG then asked I call the President to arrange for a briefing of General Eisenhower . The President then asked me to call the Attorney General to meet with him .
 I immediately talked with the President by telephone and arranged to see Eisenhower on Sunday morning and possibly take him to the White House for a direct meeting with the president . I immediately called the President and arranged for a meeting with Eisenhower .
 I expressed my concern at the wording of paragraph 2 of the speech . I then expressed my concerns about the wording, I said .
 The President said he had made up his mind to pursue the course which I had recommended and he agreed with the views I expressed in the afternoon meeting . The President concurred with the view of the President, adding that he agreed .
 For McCone's record of this meeting, mistakenly noted as occurring at 10m., see the Supplement . McCone: "The meeting was not at 10:30 a.m."
 The meeting was held in the Oval Room at the White House . It lasted from 11:30m. to approximately 12.30m .
 In attendance were the Attorney General, General Taylor, General Sweeney and the Secretary of Defense .
 Secretary of Defense stated that following the start of an air attack, the initial units of the landing force could invade Cuba within 7 days . Initial units could be ready within seven days .
 The movement of troops in preparation for an invasion will start at the time of the President's speech .
 No mobilization of Reserve forces is required for such an invasion until the start of the air strike . Reserve forces are not required until the beginning of the strike, the source says .
 General LeMay had stated that the transport aircraft, from Reserve and Guard units, which would be required for participation in such an invasion, can be fully operational within 24 to 48 hours after the call to active duty .
 The Secretary of Defense reported that, based on information which became available during the night, it now appears there is equipment in Cuba for approximately 40 MRBM or IRBM launchers .
 The location of the sites for 36 of Cuba's missile launchers is known . of the 36 known sites appear to have sufficient equipment on them to be included in any air strike .
 40 launchers would normally be equipped with 80 missiles . We believe that 40 launchers are normally equipped with 40 missiles . The missile launchers are thought to be capable of 40 missiles a day .
 A Soviet ship believed to be the vessel in which the Soviets have been sending missiles to Cuba has made a sufficient number of trips to that island within recent weeks to offload approximately 48 missiles . John McCone reported yesterday that a Soviet ship .
 We assume there are approximately that number of people on the Island today, although we have only located approximately 30 of these . Therefore, we assume there is about that number on the island today, but only 30 have been located .
 General Sweeney outlined the following plan of air attack . The object of the attack would be the destruction of the known Cuban missile capability . The plan was outlined by Sweeney .
 The 5 surface-to-air missile installations in the vicinity of the known missile sites would each be attacked by approximately 8 aircraft . The 3 MIG airfields defending the missile site would be covered by 12 U.S. aircraft per field .
 Each of the launchers at the 8 or 9 known sites would be attacked by 6 aircraft . The launchers would be used to launch missiles at each of the sites .
 The United States aircraft covering the 3 MIG airfields would attack the MIG's if they became airborne . The U.S. aircraft would attack MIGs if they become airborne .
 General Sweeney strongly recommended attacks on each of the airfields to destroy the MIG aircraft . General Sweeney also strongly recommended attacking MIG planes .
 General Sweeney stated that he was certain the air strike would be ""successful" However, even under optimum conditions, it was not likely that all of the known missiles would be destroyed .
 General Taylor, General Sweeney and the Secretary of Defense all strongly emphasized that in their opinion the initial air strike must be followed by strikes on subsequent days . These in turn would lead inevitably to an invasion, they said .
 CIA representatives say it is probable the missiles which are operational can hold indefinitely a capability for firing with from 2-1/2 to 4 hours' notice . CIA representatives said it is possible the missiles could hold indefinitely .
 Included in the notice period is a countdown requiring 20 to 40 minutes . The countdown is required to take place between 20 and 40 minutes for the duration .
 First wave of our aircraft would give 10 minutes of warning; second wave, 40 minutes warning; and the third wave a proportionately greater warning . First and second waves would give more than 10 minutes warning .
 General Sweeney strongly recommended that any air strike should include attacks on the MIG aircraft and, also, the IL28s .
 To accomplish the destruction of these aircraft, the total number of sorties of such an air strike should be increased to 500, the author says . The author says the total sorties needed to be increased by 500 sorties .
 The President agreed that if an air strike was ordered, it should probably include in its objective the destruction of the MIG aircraft and the IL28s .
 The President directed that we be prepared to carry out the air strike Monday/1/ morning or any time thereafter during the remainder of the week .
 It would lead to unpredictable military responses by the Soviet Union which could be so serious as to lead to general nuclear war . It could lead to an unpredictable military response by the Soviets .
 Mr McCone agreed with the Attorney General, but emphasized he believed we should be prepared for an air strike and thereafter an invasion .
 Namara's initials appear in an unidentified hand indicating he signed the original . RSMc/2/ /2/McNamara: "I'm not sure what happened to me"
 At 12:30m. on October 21, 1962, President Kennedy met with British Ambassador Ormsby Gore at the White House .
 Kennedy summarized the evidence from the U-2 flights, stated that the United States appeared faced with either an all-out air strike on October 22 to eliminate the missiles or to blockade the island . Kennedy asked Ormsby Gore which of these two courses of action he could support .
 The President admitted that he and his principal advisors had come to the same conclusion . The President then admitted that the decision was made by his advisors .
 Intelligence officers summarized new information which had become available since yesterday's meeting . Intelligence officers were briefed on new information .
 There was some discussion of the date when positive information as to the existence of strategic missiles in Cuba became available . There was also discussion of when the information became available to the public .
 The draft was revised to state that such information became available Tuesday morning, October 16th . The draft has been revised to say such information is available now .
 Draft speech summarized number of missiles and number of sites known to exist in Cuba . Draft speech summarizes number of missile sites, number of known sites in Cuba known to be there .
 Secretary McNamara recommended, and the President agreed, that specific numbers of missiles and sites be deleted . The President agreed to delete the missile and missile sites .
 The question was raised as to whether the speech should emphasize Soviet responsibility for the missile deployment or Castro's irresponsibility in accepting them . Castro was criticized for accepting the Soviet missile program .
 Secretary Rusk argued that we must hold the USSR responsible because it is important to emphasize the extra-hemispheric aspect of the missile deployment .
 The President referred to the sentence mentioning the deployment of missiles by the Soviet Union and called attention to our deployment of . missiles to Italy . President refers to the . sentence mentioned the . deployment of missile missiles by Soviet Union .
 Secretary Rusk pointed out that our missiles were deployed to NATO countries only after those countries were threatened by deployed Soviet missiles .
 The President pointed out that Soviet missiles were in place, aimed at European countries, before we deployed U.S. missiles to Europe . The President said that Soviet missile systems were aimed at Europe .
 Secretary Dillon recalled that we sent U.S. missiles to Europe because we had so many of them we did not know where to put them . Secretary Dillon said the missiles were sent to Europe .
 The President referred to the sentence in the draft speech which states that the USSR secretly transferred weapons to Cuba . The President also referred to a sentence in a draft speech . The draft speech refers to the secret transfer of weapons from the USSR .
 He said we should emphasize the clandestine manner in which the USSR had acted in Cuba . The USSR acted clandestinely in Cuba, he said. He said .
 The Attorney General wanted to be certain that the text as drafted did not preclude us from giving nuclear weapons to Western Germany, West Berlin, and France in the event we decided to do so .
 It was agreed that no message would be sent to President Dorticos of Cuba at the present time and the draft speech was so revised . The draft speech has been revised and no message was sent to Cuba's president .
 The question of whether our actions should be described as a blockade or a quarantine was debated . The question was whether the question should be called a quarantine or a blockade .
 Secretary Rusk said he preferred ""quarantine"" for political reasons in that it avoids comparison with Berlin blockade . The legal meaning of the two words is identical, but legal meaning is identical .
 President agreed to use ""quarantine"" and pointed out that if we so desired we could later institute a total blockade . The President agreed that if he so desired, we could institute a complete blockade of the country .
 Both Dillon and McCone urged that the speech state that we were seeking to prevent all military equipment from reaching Cuba . Both Secretary Dillon and Director McCone. urged that .
 They argued that later we might act to prevent all equipment from reaching Cuba even though at present our objective was to block offensive missile equipment . The Cuban government argued that the U.S. might act later to block all equipment reaching Cuba .
 President preferred the phrase ""offensive missile equipment"" on the grounds that within forty-eight hours we will know the Soviet reaction . The President preferred to use the term "offensive missile equipment"
 At such time we will know whether, as expected, the Soviets turn back their ships rather than submit to inspection . The Soviets are expected to turn their ships back into ports .
 Initially our objective is to block offensive weapons and later we can extend our blockade to all weapons, if we so decide . Initially our . objective is block offensive . weapons and then we can block all weapons if we . so decide, says President Obama .
 The President parenthetically pointed out that we were not taking action under the Monroe Doctrine . The President . President . Pointed out that . We were not . taking action .
 The President agreed that these words should remain so that he would not be hindered from taking additional meas-ures if we so decide at a later date . The President said these words would remain to allow him to take further measures .
 Secretary Rusk commented that our objective was to ""put out the fire"" in Cuba and get United Nations teams to inspect all missile activity in Cuba . U.N. teams will be able to inspect missile activity, he said .
 The President felt that a better tactic was for us initially to frighten the United Nations representatives with the prospect of all kinds of actions . Then, when a resolution calling for the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba, Turkey and Italy was proposed, he said .
 Ambassador Stevenson calls for U.N. Security Council meeting to demand missile standstill in Cuba . Ambassador Stevenson: "We should take the initiative by calling the United Nations Security Council"
 Secretary Rusk pointed out that following the President's speech we would either be in the posture of a complainant or of a defendant . The Secretary of State Rusk said we would be either in a position of complainant or defendant following the speech .
 Mr Sorensen said our posture should be to accuse the Soviets of being the aggressors . He said we should seek to persuade others to agree with us .
 He foresaw that some nations in the U.N. would immediately try to label us as the aggressors because of the actions which we had taken . He foresees that some countries in the United Nations would immediately .
 He said our U.N. action should be aimed at removing the missile threat . Our objective on OAS would be to persuade other Latin American countries to act with us under the Rio Treaty .
 Assistant Secretary Martin said if there were a U.N. action before the OAS acted, the usefulness of the organization would be seriously affected . The OAS has been criticized for not acting before the UN has acted .
 Secretary Rusk felt we should act first in the OAS, then in the U.N. where our action program could be more flexible, he said .
 President agreed that a reference in the draft speech to a Caribbean security force should be dropped . The President agreed to drop the reference in a draft speech .
 The President said we should pin the responsibility for the developments in Cuba directly on Khrushchev . President said the responsibility was to be pinned on the Soviet Union .
 Ambassador Thompson agreed naming Khrushchev would make it harder for him to reverse his actions in Cuba . Such reference to him would be more effective in producing favorable actions, he said .
 President asked that the phrases describing the horrors of war should be deleted . The President asked for the phrase to be removed .
 TASS statement on Cuba flatly states that the Russians have all the weapons they need and require no more for their defense . Ambassador Thompson urged, and the President agreed, that we should use the part of the Tass statement as a basis .
 The only reason for Soviet deployment of weapons to Cuba is the aim of dominating the Western hemisphere . Therefore, the only reason is that the Soviet weapons are to be deployed is to dominate the Western Hemisphere .
 The President agreed that the invitation to a summit meeting should be deleted . The invitation to the summit meeting was deleted .
 Ambassador Stevenson said he favored an early conference with the Russians on terms acceptable to us . Ambassador Stevenson repeated that he favored early talks with Russia .
 The President responded that he did not want to appear to be seeking a summit meeting as a result of Khrushchev's actions . The President said he didn't want to . appear to appear . to appear as a . result of the actions . President responded .
 President added that we should not look toward holding a meeting until it is clear to us what Khrushchev really thinks he will obtain worldwide as a result of his actions in Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk said our first objective was to get a fully inspected missile standstill in Cuba before we sit down to talk with the Russians . The U.S. wants to inspect the missile system before talking with Russia .
 Mr McCone was concerned that if we let it be known that we are prepared to talk to the Russians now, it would appear to outsiders that our only response to Khrushchev's challenge was to negotiate .
 Attorney General said in his view we should anticipate a Soviet reaction involving a movement in Berlin . The Attorney General . said that in . his view, he should anticipate the Soviet reaction .
 Secretary Dillon felt that the Soviet reaction in Berlin would be governed by the actions we would take in response to the Russian missile deployment in Cuba . Secretary Dillon said the reaction to the Cuban missile deployment would be similar to that of the Soviet response .
 The President told Wilson that we should go ahead with the television project involving the relay of signals via instruments aboard a ship at sea for use anywhere .
 Attorney General felt that the paragraphs in the President's draft speech addressed to the Cuban people were not personal enough . The Attorney General said he felt the speech was too personal .
 President decided that no information on missile deployment would be given out today . No information was given out to the press .
 General Taylor said an invasion of Cuba could be carried out seven days after the decision to invade had been taken . General Taylor was speaking in response to a Presidential question .
 Secretary McNamara said the President had asked a question which was difficult to answer precisely . Secretary of State McNamara says the President asked the question 'difficult to answer'
 Present plans called for invasion to follow seven days after initial air strike . Present plans for invasion called for seven days following initial air strikes .
 The timing could be reduced, depending upon whether certain decisions were taken now . The timing of the decision could be limited, depending on the timing .
 Some actions which were irreversible would have to be taken now in order to reduce the time when forces could be landed . Some actions . would have been taken now, says the British PM .
 He promised the President a breakdown of the decisions which he would have to take immediately in order to reduce the seven-day period . He promised to take immediate action .
 The President said that in three or four days we might have to decide to act in order that we would not have to wait so long prior to the landing of our forces, he said .
 A decision taken today would mean that an air strike could not be undertaken before seven days, and then seven days later the first forces could be ashore . As he understood the situation, he said, the decision would mean .
 General Taylor explained that air action would be necessary to bring the situation under control prior to the dropping of paratroopers . General Taylor said air action was necessary for the situation to be brought under control .
 Secretary McNamara said planning was being done under two assumptions . McNamara: "Planning for the future is very different"
 The first called for an air strike, and seven days later, landings would begin . Landings began seven days after the first strike was ordered by the U.S. government .
 Twenty-five thousand men would be put ashore the first day, and on the eighteenth day, 90,000 would be ashore . On the 18th day of the war, the U.S. troops would put ashore .
 The second plan provided for the landing of 90,000 men in a twenty-three day period . The plan was designed to land 90,500 men in 24 days .
 The President told General Taylor that he wanted to reduce the length of time between a decision to invade and the landing of the first troops . The President wanted to do those things .
 Secretary Dillon said a blockade would either inevitably lead to an invasion of Cuba or would result in negotiations, which he believes the Soviets would want very much .
 "We would break up our alliances and convey to the world that we were impotent in the face of a Soviet challenge," he said . "It would break ... alliances and conveys the world," he added .
 Unless the Russians stop their missile buildup at once, we will have to invade Cuba in the next week, no matter what they say, if we are to save our world position, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We cannot convey firm intentions to the Russians otherwise and we must not look to the world as if we were backing down. We must not be backed down. Russia must respect the U.S. President Vladimir Putin's decision to step down .
 Secretary McNamara expressed his doubt that an air strike would be necessary within the next week . McNamara also expressed his doubts that the strike would take place within the coming week .
 Admiral Anderson describes the way the blockade would be instituted . Admiral Anderson described, in response to the President's question, the blockade .
 The Navy did not need to call up reserves now to meet the immediate situation, says Navy spokesman . He added that the Navy is not calling up reservists now .
 The Navy knew the positions of twenty-seven to thirty ships en route to Cuba . The U.S. knew the position of ships in the Cuban Islands .
 Eighteen ships were in Cuban ports, and fifteen were on their way home . 15 were on the way home from Cuba .
 Admiral Anderson described the method to be used in the first interception of a Soviet ship . The method was described as 'the method to intercept the Soviet ship'
 It was hoped that a cruiser rather than a destroyer would make this interception . It is hoped a cruiser would make the interception .
 He favored a twenty-four hour grace period, beginning with the President's speech, during which the Russians could communicate with their ships, giving them instructions as to what to do .
 Secretary McNamara said he would recommend to the President later today which kinds of reserve forces should be called up . McNamara will recommend to President .
 He felt air reserves would be necessary if it were decided to make an air strike, but probably would not be needed if our action was limited to a blockade, he said .
 Admiral Anderson said we had a capability to protect U.S. ships in the Caribbean . Admiral Anderson: We have a capability .
 If Komar ships took any hostile action, they could be destroyed, thereby creating a new situation . The Komar ship could be attacked by the Komar forces, which could destroy them .
 If a MIG plane takes hostile action, he would like to be in a position to shoot it down, he said . "He wants to be able to shoot down, thereby creating again a new situation," he added .
 He estimated that the Soviets could not get naval surface ships to the area in less than ten days . Soviet submarines could not reach the area within ten to fourteen days, he said . He said that Soviet ships would not be able to get to the region in ten to 14 days .
 Admiral Anderson said he would ask higher authority for permission to attack a Soviet submarine en route to Havana . He would ask for permission from higher authority to attack it .
 Secretary McNamara favored rules of engagement which would permit responses to hostile actions . McNamara said he favored attacks to destroy the source of the hostile action .
 The President answered a question as to whether we were to stop all ships, including allied ships . He favored stopping all ships in the expectation that allied ships would soon become discouraged and drop out of the Cuban trade .
 Diplomatic Measures Under Secretary Ball summarized a scenario /5/ providing for consultation with our allies . Ball said the situation was a 'scenario /5'
 Dean Acheson would brief de Gaulle and the NATO Council, Ambassador Dowling would brief Adenauer, and Ambassador Bruce would brief Macmillan . He said the NATO council would be briefed by Achesons, Dowling and Bruce .
 Present at such briefings would be technical experts from CIA who could answer questions concerning the photographic intelligence which reveals the missile sites .
 The President said we must assume that Khrushchev knows that we know of his missile deployments, and, therefore, he will be ready with a planned response .
 He asked that the draft speech emphasize his belief that the greatest danger to the U.S. in the present situation is doing nothing but acknowledging that in days to come we would be seriously threatened .
 Ambassador Stevenson foresaw problems he foresaw in the United Nations . Ambassador Stevenson read from a list of problems which he predicted in the U.N.
 Secretary Rusk said we must decide on tactics for the Security Council meeting . Secretary Rusksy said: 'We must decide whether to decide tactics'
 The aim of all our actions is to get a standstill of missile development in Cuba to be inspected by United Nations observers and then be prepared to negotiate other issues . U.N. observers will be required to inspect Cuba's missile development and then inspect the missile development .
 President asked Assistant Secretary of Defense Nitze to study the problem of withdrawing U.S. missiles from Turkey and Italy . The President has asked him to look at the problem .
 Mr Nitze said such a withdrawal was complicated because we must avoid giving the Europeans the impression that we are prepared to take nuclear weapons of all kinds out of Europe .
 McNamara stated that the U.S. could not lift its blockade as long as Soviet weapons remained in Cuba . McNamara said the United States would not lift the blockade if the Soviet weapons were kept in Cuba. McNamara: "The United States cannot lift its . blockade"
 The President asked why we could not start with a demand for the removal or the withdrawal of the missiles, he said . "If at a later time we wanted to negotiate for a less favorable settlement, we could then decide to do so," he added .
 The Attorney General said we should take the offensive in our presentation to the United Nations . Attorney General says we should 'take the offensive' in presentation .
 Our attitude should not be defensive, especially in view of the fact that Soviet leaders had lied to us about the deployment of strategic missiles to Cuba, says President Obama . The U.S. should not have a "defensive" attitude, he says .
 The President interjected a directive that we reverse our policy on nuclear assistance to France in the light of the present situation . President Obama interjected the directive .
 Ambassador Stevenson repeated his view that the United States would be forced into a summit meeting . Ambassador Stevenson said he preferred to propose such a meeting with Russia .
 President disagreed, saying that we could not accept a neutral Cuba and the withdrawal from Guantanamo without indicating to Khrushchev that we were in a state of panic . The President disagreed . President disagreed and said that .
 An offer to accept Castro and give up Guantanamo must not be made because it would appear to be completely defensive . The U.S. should not offer Castro and Guantanamo to accept Guantanamo .
 President Obama said he would accept nothing less than the ending of the missile capability now in Cuba . He said there would be no reinforcement of that capability, and no further construction of missile sites .
 Secretary McNamara stated his view that in order to achieve such a result we would have to invade Cuba . McNamara: "In order . to achieve that result, we would . have to . invade Cuba" McNamara said .
 The President said what he was talking about was the dismantlement of missiles now in Cuba . President Obama said the President said that was the case .
 Ambassador Stevenson thought that we should institute a blockade, and when the Russians rejected our demand for a missile standstill in Cuba, we should defer any air strike until after we had talked to Khrushchev .
 Assistant Secretary of State Martin indicated that if we did not use the OAS in preference to the United Nations, we would jeopardize the entire hemispheric alliance, Martin said . Martin said if we didn't use the U.N. in preference, it would be jeopardizing the
 Under Secretary Ball agreed that we should put primary emphasis on the OAS . Ball preferred that any inspectors going to Cuba should be OAS inspectors rather than UN inspectors .
 The President indicated a need for further discussion of this matter and suggested that Secretary Rusk speak to him later about it .
 President asked that the word ""miscalculate"" be taken out of the draft letter prepared for him to send to Khrushchev 76/ He recalled that in Vienna Khrushchen had revealed a misunderstanding of this word when translated into Russian .
 He also requested that reference to a meeting with Khrushchev be deleted from the draft letter . The draft letter was sent to the Soviet Union in 1964 .
 Noted briefing by Director of Central Intelligence on latest information about the Soviet strategic missile build-up in Cuba .
 Discussed and revised a draft Presidential speech to be made on October 22, 1962 . Discussed a draft President's address to be held on October 23, 1962.
 Reviewed military plans to be implemented following the President's speech . Reviewed plans to implement military plans following President's address .
 Letter to Prime Minister Macmillan to be delivered at 10:00m. to deliver at 10 a.m. Following is text of letter to the Prime Minister .
 "This constitutes a threat to the peace which imperils the security not only of this hemisphere but of the entire free world," says President Barack Obama . Obama: "This is a serious threat to peace"
 Last month I stated publicly that the U.S. would consider the presence of ground-to-ground missiles in Cuba as an offensive threat . You will recall that last month .
 The foregoing has created a highly critical situation which must be met promptly and fearlessly . The situation is a 'highly critical situation' for the country .
 This evening at 1900 hours Washington time I shall be making a public statement of which Ambassador Bruce will be giving you a draft together with this message . Ambassador Bruce is to give a draft of the message to the media .
 This text is not necessarily final in every detail, but the essentials of the problem, and the means by which I intend to meet it, have already been decided as set forth in the present text . This text may not necessarily be final in detail .
 Ambassador Bruce will also be prepared to explain to you the evidence on which we have based our conclusions . Ambassador Bruce is also prepared fully to explain the evidence that we have .
 I am also writing to Chairman Khrushchev to bring home to him how perilous is his present course of action, but expressing the hope that we can agree to resume the path of peaceful negotiation .
 I am quite clear in my mind that these missiles have got to be withdrawn, and you will see that I intend to state this publicly in my speech as well as telling Chairman Khrushchev this in my letter to him .
 The object of the quarantine, which will be put into effect immediately, is to prevent the Soviet Union from introducing additional missiles into Cuba and to lead to the elimination of the missiles that are already in place .
 I shall also be sending a personal message to Prime Minister Diefenbaker, General deGaulle, Chairman Adenauer, and Prime Minister Fanfani/2/ I have sent Dean Acheson to Paris assist Ambassador Finletter in briefing the North Atlantic Council shortly before
 I wanted you to be the first to be informed of this grave development, in order that we should have the opportunity, should you wish it, to discuss the situation between ourselves by means of our private channel of communication . However, he said he wanted to be first informed of the grave
 "This is a solemn moment for our two countries, indeed for the fate of the entire world," says Putin . Putin: This is a serious moment for Russia and the world .
 It is essential that the already great dangers before us should not be increased through miscalculation or underestimation by the Soviets of what we intend to do, and are prepared to endure .
 I need not point out the possible relation of this secret and dangerous move on the part of Khrushchev to Berlin . I need to point out to you the possible connection of this move to Berlin, writes .
 It is a source of great personal satisfaction to me that you and I can keep in close touch with each other by rapid and secure means . I intend to keep you fully informed of my thinking as the situation evolves, he writes .
 I am also requesting an urgent meeting of the United Nations Security Council . In the meanwhile, I am requesting an immediate meeting, the UN Security Council will be called on .
 I have asked Ambassador Stevenson to present on behalf of the United States a resolution calling for the withdrawal of missile bases and other offensive weapons in Cuba under the supervision of United Nations observers 73/ This would make it possible for the U.S. to lift its quarantine .
 President Kennedy, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Secretaries McNamara and Rusk, Special Assistant McGeorge Bundy, and Under Secretary George Ball met on October 22, 1962 .
 A tape recording of the conversation is available, but is of poor quality . It is punctuated by long periods when apparently material was being read and/or drafted . Tape recording of conversation is also available .
 The tape, which lasts for 40 minutes and 40 seconds, ends before the meeting does . The tape ends before it does .
 The President stressed the need to inform personnel at missile sites in Turkey not to fire if and when they came under Soviet attack . The President also stressed the importance of informing personnel at the sites not to shoot .
 The group also discussed making clear to Allies that commitments in Berlin would not be compromised . The United States needed to protect U.S. credibility and to maintain the strategic balance .
 The group finished with a discussion of the timing of the President's public announcement of the discovery of the missiles .
 The tape lasts for 11 minutes and 18 seconds and covers the entire meeting . The tape ends up covering the entire session of meetings .
 The President opened the meeting by asking Secretary Rusk to read the attached message from Prime Minister Macmillan which had just been received . The President read the message and observed that for a first reaction to the information of our proposed blockade it was not bad .
 He added that it was comforting to learn that the British Prime Minister had not thought of anything we hadn't thought of . Mr Cameron said it was 'comfortable' to learn from the British PM's view of the situation .
 What we now need are strong arguments to explain why we have to act as we do . What we need is strong arguments for the government to justify its actions . We need to be able to explain to the public why we are acting .
 Secretary Rusk stated that the best legal basis for our blockade action was the Rio Treaty . The Rio Treaty was agreed to be used as a basis for the blockade action .
 The use of force would be justified on the ground of support for the principals of the United Nations Charter, not on the basis of Article 51 . Article 51 might give the Russians a basis for attacking Turkey .
 Secretary Rusk commented that if we do not win the support of the OAS, we are not necessarily acting illegally . Secretary Ruskowski said that if . we do . not win support of OAS we are . not necessarily . acting illegally, Rusk said .
 He referred to the new situation created by modern weapons and said rules of international law should not be taken as applying literally to a completely new situation .
 Secretary Rusk said the Department had decided to hold off calling a Security Council meeting despite the possibility that the Russians might ask one first . He said the meeting would be delayed because of the possibility of a meeting with the Russians .
 The basis of this decision was that we would have to name Cuba in the documents requesting the Security Council meeting and this we did not wish to do . The basis was that . We did not want to do this, and this is not what we wanted to do, he says .
 Director McCone summarized the latest intelligence information and read from the attached document . McCone: "Director McCone summarizes the latest intel information and reads it out"
 The London Evening Standard had printed a great deal of information about the existence of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba .
 Ill Apparent reference to notes by McCone for this meeting, October 22. McCone's notes were taken during the meeting . McCone: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, I'm sure I'm not going to make a decision"
 President outlined the manner in which he expected Council Members to deal with the domestic aspects of the current situation .
 He said everyone should sing one song in order to make clear that there is now no difference among his advisers as to the proper course to follow . He said there was no difference between his advisers and his own advisers .
 He pointed out the importance of fully supporting the course of action chosen which, in his view, represented a reasonable consensus . He said: "I think it's important to fully support the decision to take the matter seriously"
 Any course is extremely troublesome and, as in the case of the Berlin wall, we are once again confronted with a difficult choice . The Berlin wall was built in 1961, when the Berlin Wall was erected .
 If we undertake a tricky and unsatisfactory course, we do not even have the satisfaction of knowing what would have happened if we had acted differently . We do not know what would've happened if they'd acted differently, they say . We are not even able to know if we acted differently
 He mentioned that former Presidents, Eisenhower, Truman and Hoover had supported his decision during telephone conversations with them earlier in the day .
 In September we had said we would react if certain actions were taken in Cuba . We had said in September that certain actions would be taken in the country . In September it had said it would react to certain actions by Cuba .
 We have to carry out commitments which we had made publicly at that time. We have been made publicly committed to our commitments . We have not been allowed to leave the country, it has been claimed .
 The secret deployment by the Russians of strategic missiles to Cuba was such a change in their previous policy of not deploying such missiles outside the USSR . If we took no action in this case, we would convey to the Russians an impression that we would never act, no matter what they did anywhere
 Gromyko had left the impression that the Soviets were going to act in Berlin in the next few months . The Soviets were expected to act within a few months of the fall of the Berlin fall .
 If they acted now in response to our blockade action, they would only have brought on their Berlin squeeze earlier than expected . Therefore, if . acted now, if they acted . now, we would only . have brought . on their . Berlin squeeze .
 The effect in Latin America would be very harmful to our interests if, by our failure to act, we gave the Latinos the impression that the Soviets were increasing their world position while ours was decreasing . The effect of failing to act on the continent would be harmful to the U.S.
 The President concluded by acknowledging the difficulties which he was asking the military to accept because of the necessity of our taking action which warned Cuba of the possibility of an invasion, he said .
 Secretary Rusk said that if anyone thought our response was weak, they were wrong because he believed that a ""flaming crisis" was immediately ahead of us . Rusk commented that if . anyone thought their response was . weak they would be wrong . He believed that the 'f
 The President read from a list of questions and suggested answers which might be made public . The President is expected to make a decision on the matter .
 The response is that we needed more evidence of the exist-ence of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba . The response to the question is that it was necessary to find out the existence of the missiles .
 If we had acted earlier, we might have jeopardized our position in Berlin, he says . European Allies would have concluded that our preoccupation with Cuba was such as to reveal our lack of interest, thus tempting the Russians to act in Berlin .
 Earlier action would undoubtedly have forced us to declare war on Cuba . This action, without the evidence we now have, would have thrown Latin American support to Castro, writes David Cameron .
 There followed a discussion of why evidence of Soviet missiles was lacking . There was also a discussion about the lack of Soviet missile evidence .
 Information about strategic missile sites was reported by refugees but these reports could not be substantiated from aerial photography . Information about the sites was not substantiated .
 It was not until October 14th that photographic evidence of the sites and missiles was available . Images of the missile sites and missile missiles were available until October 15th .
 The cloud cover prevented photography for a period of time . The possibility of an attack on an overflying American plane led to a restriction on the number of U-2 flights .
 McCone felt that the information given to Senator Keating about the missile sites had come from refugee sources, which he had accepted without further substantiation . Mr McCone said he accepted the information without substantiating .
 The Attorney General pointed out that even if there had been U-2 flights, construction at the missile sites was not far enough along to have been detected by photography much earlier .
 All Soviet experts agreed Khrushchev would not send strategic missiles to Cuba . It was pointed out that all experts agreed that Khrushvic would not have sent missiles .
 Secretary Rusk cautioned that we should say nothing now which might tie our hands later in the event we wanted to take additional actions . Commenting on what should be said publicly about our actions in Cuba .
 The President referred again to the question of distinguishing between Soviet missiles in Cuba and U.S. missiles in Turkey and Italy .
 The President thought that it was most important that everyone be fully briefed as to why these situations with respect to the deployment of missiles do not match, he said . The President said he wanted to know why the missile deployment in Syria did not match .
 TASS said Russia had no need to position strategic missiles in foreign countries . He again called attention to the secret deployment of the weapons and the TASS statement .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba have a different psychological effect than Soviet missiles positioned in the USSR . The Soviet action in Cuba may in fact be a probing action to find out what we would be prepared to do in Berlin, says historian .
 Secretary Rusk added that the threat to the United States from Soviet missiles in Cuba was of worldwide importance because this threat was to a country which in effect provided the sole defense of some forty Free World States . Rusk said the threat was of global importance .
 The President suggested that we should make clear the difference between our Cuban blockade and the Berlin blockade . We were not preventing shipments of food and medicine to Cuba, but only preventing the delivery of offensive military equipment .
 The President responded by saying that we should ask the press not to push this line of questioning and to accept our statement that we are taking precautionary moves in anticipation of any contingency .
 Secretary McNamara agreed that the Defense Department had been ordered to be prepared for any contingency . Defense Department was not now ready to say anything more than was in President's speech .
 Secretary McNamara said an information group was working on the problem of voluntary press censorship based on experience during the Korean War .
 Secretary McNamara reported that the Defense Department was working on how we would prevent the introduction into Cuba of nuclear weapons by airplanes . McNamara: "The Defense Department worked on how . we would . prevent the . introduction of nuclear . weapons by . airplanes"
 He said some planes could fly non-stop from the Soviet Union if refueled en route . Some planes could also be refueled in the U.S. without refueling, he said .
 Present arrangements provided that we would be informed of any plane flying to Cuba and we would then decide what action we would take against it . Present arrangements were provided that . We would then be able to take action to take against the plane .
 It was agreed that no reserves would be called today, but that a review would be made tonight as to the necessity of such action . No reserves will be called, but a review will be made as to whether such action is necessary .
 Acting Secretary Fowler raised several questions involving domestic controls, including gold transfers, foreign exchange controls, and control of the stock market .
 Another look would be taken the following day before any recommendation would be made as to closing the stock market .
 Secretary Rusk said that if we were asked whether our blockade was an act of war, we should say that it was not . The blockade was not a war, says Rusk .
 The President asked whether friendly ships would be halted and Admiral Anderson replied in the affirmative, saying that we would challenge all ships . Admiral Anderson said: "We would challenge any of the friendly ships"
 The President agreed that we should stop all Soviet Bloc and non-Bloc ships when the order to institute the blockade was given . President agreed to stop all Bloc ships .
 The President discussed the reasons why he had decided against an air strike now . The President also discussed why he decided not to use the air strike .
 First, there is no certainty that an air strike would destroy all missiles now in Cuba . No certainty that a strike would kill all missiles, experts say .
 "We would be able to get a large percentage of these missiles, but could not get them all," says President Obama . The U.S. military says it would be "able to get" many of the missiles .
 We would not know if any of these missiles were operationally ready with their nuclear warheads . In addition, we would not be certain that our intelligence had discovered all the missiles in Cuba . We were not certain that any of the missiles had been discovered .
 "We could not be certain that others unknown to us would not be launched against the U.S. Therefore, in attacking the ones we had located, we could not . be certain," the president said .
 The President said an air strike would involve an action comparable to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . President said it would involve a similar action similar to the attack on the Japanese .
 An air strike would increase the danger of a worldwide nuclear war . Finally, an air strike could increase the risk of a world war .
 The President said he had given up the thought of making an air strike only yesterday morning . President Obama said he gave up the idea of a strike on Syria on Monday morning .
 In summary, he said an air strike had all the disadvantages of Pearl Harbor . An air strike would have all the same disadvantages as a Pearl Harbor strike .
 It would not insure the destruction of every strategic missile in Cuba, he says . It would end up eventually in our having to invade, he adds .
 Bundy added that we should not discuss the fact that we were not able to destroy all the missiles by means of an air strike . Bundy said that at some later time we might wish to make such an attack .
 Noted intelligence summary presented by the Director of Central Intelligence, "b. Noted an intelligence summary . Noted President Obama's election victory .
 Discussed domestic aspects of actions to be announced later in the day . Discussed the domestic aspect of the action to be made public .
 Copies were sent to Ball, Gilpatric, Thompson, Sorensen, Bundy, O'Donnell, Salinger, Wilson, Rostow, and Nitze . In addition to the recipients mentioned in the source text, copies were also sent .
 An Executive Committee of the National Security Council is established for the purpose of effective conduct of the operations of the Executive Branch in the current crisis . The Vice President, Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense will be included in the committee .
 This committee will meet, until further notice, daily at 10:00m. daily in the Cabinet Room .
 The first meeting of this committee will be held at the regular hour on Tuesday, October 23rd . Further arrangements with respect to its management and operation will be decided .
 Leadership, except for Senator Hayden, The President, Rusk, McNamara, McCone and Ambassador Thompson McCone read a summary of the situation, copy of which is attached . This statement had been discussed with the President, Attorney General and Bundy .
 Hickenlooper asked when missiles would be in operational status . There were a few questions of a substantive nature, including when missiles will be operational .
 Thompson then indicated it was more probable that Cuba may force a showdown on Berlin . Thompson: It's more likely that Cuba will force a clash with Berlin .
 Secretary Rusk then reviewed his current appraisal of the Soviet Union . Rusk said there had been some radical moves within the USSR which were indicating a tougher line .
 It appeared the hard-liners are coming in to ascendancy and the soft co-existent line seems to be disappearing . Hard-liners seem to be coming into ascendancy in Washington .
 The President reviewed the chronology of the situation, starting on Tuesday, October 16th, when the first information was received from the photographic flight of October 14th . The President then reviewed the timeline of the events, starting with Tuesday, Oct. 16th .
 President Eisenhower briefed President Eisenhower on the missile threat . President Eisenhower said he immediately ordered extensive overflights to intercept missiles . The U.S. military action on our part might cause the firing of many of them with serious consequences to the United States .
 President concluded whatever we do involves a risk; however we must make careful calculations and take a chance . The President concluded that whatever we did involves an enormous risk .
 The blockade of Cuba on the importation of offensive weapons was to be undertaken, all ships would be stopped and those containing offensive weapons would not be permitted to proceed . The blockade was aimed at stopping the imports of offensive weaponry .
 Khrushchev has once again rattled his missiles; he can become firmer and firmer, and we must react . We must not take a gamble and must not temporize, writes David Frum .
 He did not specifically say by surprise attack; however he did not advocate warning . He did say he didn't advocate warning, but did not say how to attack .
 McNamara described the blockade, indicating that this might lead to some form of military action . McNamara said there would be many alternative courses open to us. McNamara then said that the blockade could lead to military action.
 The President reviewed the time required to assemble an invasion force which would involve 90,000 men in the actual landings and a total of about 250,000 in the invasion force .
 He stated this could not be done in 24 or 36 hours but would take a number of days . He said many preliminary steps had been taken and preliminary steps have already been taken .
 Halleck recalled a recent briefing by Secretary McNamara in which he stated it would take three months to prepare adequately to invade Cuba . Hallecks recalled that McNamara said he was prepared for three months of invasion .
 McNamara reaffirmed the 250,000-man figure, with 90,000 of them actually involved in the landing force . McNamara then reaffirmed that figure .
 He stated that he could be ready in 7 days and that the landing would be preceded by substantial air strike . He said he would be ready to land in seven days . He also said that he would land in the area with substantial air strikes .
 He also seriously criticized any policy which involved extensive airborne alerts of SAC in the interests of our state of readiness, pointing out that the consequences would be the serious attrition of our SAC forces, most particularly the B-47s .
 McNamara stated that we could carry on an airborne alert indefinitely because preliminary plans had been made, repair parts, etc., secured and were in position . McNamara: "We can continue to carry on the alert indefinitely"
 Vinson asked if Joint Chiefs of Staff actually approved the plans for the invasion . Vinson then asked if the Joint Chiefs had approved the invasion plans .
 This is the first time anyone has raised doubt as to whether the MRBMs and the IRBMs are offensive missiles . This was the first question raised over whether the missiles were offensive missiles.
 Senator Saltonstall brought up the question of the legality of the blockade . The blockade has been described as illegal by the US government .
 A great many Senators expressed concern over the proposed action with the OAS . The OAS would delay rather than act, indicating that they felt it would delay .
 Saltonstall then asked whether a blockade would be legal if the OAS did not support it . Saltonst then asked if a blockade was legal if it was not supported by OAS if it were not .
 The President answered that it probably would not; however we would proceed anyway . The President said it probably wouldn't happen anyway .
 Fulbright then stated that in his opinion the blockade was the worst of the alternatives open to us and it was a definite affront to Russia . The moment that we had to damage or sink a Soviet ship because of their failure to recognize or respect the blockade we would be at war with
 The time has come for an invasion under the President's statement of February 13th . The time is now come to an invasion, says the President .
 The President took issue with Fulbright, stating that an attack on these bases, which we knew were manned by Soviet personnel, would involve large numbers of Soviet casualties . This would be more provocative than a confrontation with a Soviet ship .
 Vinson urged that if we strike, we strike with maximum force and wind up quickly . This would involve the minimum of American losses and insure the maximum support by the Cuban people at large . Vinson: The Cuban people would very quickly go over to the side of the winner .
 The meeting was concluded at 6:35 to permit the President to prepare for his 7:00 o'clock talk to the nation .
 He stated that in his opinion ships which were accosted on the high sea and turned back would be a more humiliating blow to the Soviets and a more serious involvement to their pride than the losing of as many as 5,000 Soviet military personnel .
 At 7:41 a.m. on October 21, the Department of State had sent Ambassador Kohler the first draft of this message . At 7.41 m. ET, the State Department had sent a draft version of the message .
 Subsequent changes and additions resulted in only the second and final paragraphs remaining as originally drafted . Subsequent additions and changes have resulted in fewer than two paragraphs remaining .
 A copy of the statement I am making tonight concerning developments in Cuba and the reaction of my Government has been handed to your Ambassador in Washington . In view of the gravity of the developments to which I refer, I want you to know immediately and accurately the position of my government .
 The Congress adopted a resolution expressing its support of this declared policy 72/ Despite this, the rapid development of long-range missile bases and other offensive weapons systems in Cuba has proceeded .
 JFK's initials appear in an unidentified hand presumably indicating he signed the original . Sincerely, JFK/3/ /3/Kennedy's initials .
 Kennedy refers to it as happening ""one hour"" after Rusk gave Dobrynin the message to Khrushchev, but that would be during the address to the nation . Kennedy says it happened 'one hour' after the message was given .
 To allow it to continue would have thrown into question all our statements about Berlin, says German Chancellor Angela Merkel . "To allow it [Berlin] to continue [would] throw into question our statements," she says .
 It may be necessary to expand blockade to include fuel, lubricants and so forth. It may also include fuel and lubricants . The blockade may also be expanded to include lubricants, fuel and other items .
 There is no telling what he will do-probably it will be something in Berlin . "There will be nothing in Berlin. There will be a lot of things in Berlin," he says .
 "We are aware that this action does not immediately solve the problem. We are aware . This action is not complete application of force," says the police chief . "It is not the only solution"
 Cuba now invites him into Berlin. These may be necessary but going completely into Cuba invites him in Berlin .
 "If we had the force on hand to take Cuba tonight that would be okay, but it would take a week to build up," says President Obama . "It would take one week to take the country to Cuba, but that would take another week."
 "It is obvious that he was attempting to face us in November with a bad situation. It is obvious," he said. "It was obvious that it was obvious he was trying to ... prepare for us," he added .
 The build-up in Cuba, if completed, would double the number of missiles the Soviets could bring to bear on the U.S. They would also overcome our warning system which does not face south .
 The short distance involving short times of flight would tempt them to make a first strike . Furthermore, the short distance involves short . times of . flight . It would tempt the short . distance of short . time of flight .
 It faces Khrushchev with action taken which has unpleasant options for him also . It faces action taken by the government, but also unpleasant options also .
 They will be delivered to President de Gaulle's Chef de Cabinet as soon as they are received . However, they will be given to the president's Cabinet .
 President de Gaulle read both communications carefully and then remarked that he would welcome further elucidation by Mr Acheson . Mr De Gaulle: "I'm glad to see further clarification from Mr Achon"
 Acheson outlined background of present situation in Cuba, reason for President's proposed action, going into considerable detail . emphasized that maximum buildup had occurred within past week . Mr Sherman Kent was prepared to brief President de Gaulle in more detail .
 President Kennedy wishes to react, and to react now, and certainly France can have no objection to that . It is legal for a country to defend itself when it finds itself in danger, he said . He continued .
 He then referred to blockade and said there would be no objection on part of France to U.S. to initiating such blockade . But he himself had doubts as to its effectiveness .
 He wondered whether it would be enough effective to cause Cubans to remove missiles and bases . He wondered if it would cause Cuba to remove its bases .
 President de Gaulle referred to our proposal to consult with other U.S. nations, asked whether that would be effective, and remarked he himself did not know whether it would .
 With respect to proposed action in Security Council, President de Gaulle remarked that he realized that this was in line with our policy . With respect of proposed action, he said that he . realized that . this . was in . line with policy, he added .
 There might be much talk, but he doubted whether Security Council would be effective, he said . He doubted if Security Council will be effective .
 President de Gaulle said that he felt blockade was one positive step, and he repeated that France made no objection thereto . In conclusion, he said that France had no objection to blockade .
 President de Gaulle said he believed that if blockade were initiated USSR would react perhaps in neighborhood of Cuba, but more likely in area where they could act more effectively . USSR would respond perhaps in area of Cuba more likely, he said .
 President de Gaulle felt they would choose Berlin since they would want to make West suffer, and this was where they could do so most effectively . De Gaulle: "This is where they [the West] could make [West] suffer most effectively"
 If they choose Berlin, President de Gaulle said, three powers would have to take necessary steps . Number of countersteps have been prepared and they would have been taken, he said .
 President de Gaulle continued that perhaps Soviets wished, and perhaps United States also wished to some extent, to intensify international situation somewhat to bring about talks . De Gaulle: "Perhaps U.S. also wished, perhaps ... to intensify situation somewhat"
 President de Gaulle expressed appreciation for having been informed by President of France . De Gaulle said he was pleased to have been informed of the situation .
 He said that he realized this had been done after decision had been made, but nevertheless appreciated being informed .
 Mr Acheson said he would reply to President's letter as soon as possible . Meanwhile, he would explain de Gaulle's appreciation and tell him he would be replying to him .
 President de Gaulle said that in this serious time it was important that governments keep in close contact with each other . De Gaulle: "It's important to keep close contact. It's a serious time"
 This would be done in Washington through Ambassador Alphand and through Ambassador Bohlen when he arrives here shortly . This would have been done in D.C. and Washington, the ambassador says .
 President de Gaulle ruminated that while one never knew what real intentions of Soviets were, he did not think present situation would lead to war . De Gaulle: "I don't think there will be war"
 He thought it might be great maneuver to engage U.S. in talks on Berlin and on Cuba . He said it might not be a great maneuver, but it could be a good maneuver .
 Berlin was the sensitive point and it was there that Soviets no doubt would press . Berlin was a sensitive point for the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev wanted to impress other Latin American states by showing them that USSR could establish themselves anywhere in Western hemisphere and could not be moved out .
 He repeated he hoped blockade would be effective, but did not think it would be . He said he did not expect it to be effective .
 At this point Mr Kent was called into room to brief President de Gaulle . At this time Mr Kent had been in the French president's office .
 President de Gaulle was obviously very interested in briefing and showed keen interest, asking pertinent questions, which revealed his military background . De Gaulle's military background was revealed during the briefing .
 Cuba's self-sufficiency with respect to food, petroleum, etc. In addition to specific technical questions, he also asked about self-sufficient food and petroleum . Cuba is self-sufficient in food, oil and petroleum resources, he said .
 President de Gaulle inquired what countries were being informed in similar manner . President de  Gaulle asked what countries had been informed of the situation .
 "He appreciated significance of situation rapidly, and obviously found here subject which interested him considerably," he said . He said. He appreciated significance .
 His Chef de Cabinet was extremely cooperative in maintaining secrecy of interview . We drove to Elysee in Elsyee motorcars and were taken in back door to avoid leaks .
 The meeting began with a briefing by Mr McCone in which he emphasized the strength of evidence substantiating the non-participation of Cubans in Soviet missile installations .
 There was general discussion of the problem of adequate briefing of Members of the Congress and of the press on the way in which the crisis had developed .
 A number of assignments have been given to individual members of the Committee for further work on this problem .
 The President approved plans for the issue of the Proclamation of Interdiction of ship delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba . The President also approved plans to issue a Proclamation .
 The President signed an Executive Order authorizing the extension of tours of duty of certain members of the Armed Forces . The President approved and later signed an executive order authorizing the extensions of tours .
 The President approved the following contingency plan for action in the event of an incident affecting U-2 overflights . The plan was approved by the President of the United States .
 The President will be informed through SAC/DOD channels, and it is expected that if there is clear indication that the incident is the result of hostile action, the recommendation will be for immediate retaliation .
 It was expected, but not definitely decided, that if hostile actions should continue after such a single incident, it would become necessary to take action to eliminate the effectiveness of surface-to-air missiles .
 The Secretary reported that he was not ready to make a recommendation on air intercept of Soviet flights to Cuba . The Secretary of State said he was maintaining aircraft on alert for prompt reaction against known missile sites .
 The Attorney General was delegated to check the legal possibility of permitting foreign flag ships to participate in United States coastwise trade . This would prevent shipping requirements for an invasion from disrupting United States commerce .
 The Secretary of Defense recommended, and the President approved, about six low-level reconnaissance flights for the purpose of obtaining still more persuasive photography of Soviet missile sites . President approved the flights .
 The President, on hearing these reports, asked whether United States air forces in Southeastern United States were properly deployed against possible hostile reaction . After discussion, he directed that photographs be taken of U.S. airfields to show their current condition .
 There was a brief discussion of possible reactions in Berlin, and the President indicated that he would wish to consider whether additional Soviet inspection of convoys would be acceptable .
 After the meeting, the President designated Assistant Secretary Nitze to be Chairman of a Subcommittee of the Executive Committee, for Berlin Contingencies .
 Rostow, Rostow and Wiesner led two committees to consider advance planning during the crisis . The first was to consider planning for the crisis; the second was to deal with communications .
 The President decided that it would be advisable not to make his forthcoming trip to Brazil, and the assignment of diplomatic disengagement was given to the Department of State .
 There was discussion of the problem of effective communications and it was agreed that for the present, Dr. Dr. David Cameron will remain in the role of the government .
 Wiesner will be asked informally to lead an inter-departmental review of this matter and to report on the problem on Wednesday, October 24 .
 Prints from a copy that bears this typed signature . McGeorge Bundy/5/ /5/ Prints for a copy of this signed copy .
 The source text is a translation done at the Embassy in Moscow and received in the Department of State at 11:56 m.m. ET .
 Ill Embassy translation follows of Khrushchev's letter of October 23 to President . Ill Embassy translated from letter to President of Soviet Union .
 I hope that Government of United States will show prudence and renounce actions pursued by you, which would lead to catastrophic consequences for peace throughout world . I hope government of U.S. will show . prudence .
 At 9m. on October 23, 1962, Secretary of State Rusk addressed a Special Meeting of the Council of the Organization of American States . Rusk was a member of the OAS .
 Rusk asked the Council to take all measures necessary to remove the threat to hemispheric security . Rusk said the situation had been brought to a head .
 The Council continued its deliberations until 5m., when it passed, with one abstention, a resolution along the lines called for by Rusk .
 Ambassador Stevenson delivered his opening statement to the United Nations Security Council . He called the installation of the missiles in Cuba a profound challenge to the peace . Ambassador Stevenson said the installation was a challenge .
 For text of his statement and the following ones by the Cuban and Soviet representatives, see United Nations doc. For text, see U.N. doc. for text of statement .
 Intelligence There was a preliminary report of low level reconnaissance. There was an initial report of . low level . reconnaissance .
 A further message to Khrushchev was agreed in the form later dispatched by the State Department .
 The President requested the Secretary of Defense to give a further review to the process of naval action and engagement under the quarantine .
 The Secretary of Defense was requested to consider and recommend appropriate arrangements for the continuation of General Nor-stad as Supreme NATO Commander during the crisis . The Secretary-of-Defense was requested .
 Assistant Secretary Pittman was requested to produce recommendations for a special plan covering the southeastern area of the United States during the period of a possible invasion of Cuba .
 The President is expected to review these plans at a separate meeting on October 24th .
 Assistant Secretary Nitze is confirmed as Chairman of a subcommittee on Berlin preparations of the Executive Committee . Nitze was confirmed as chairman of the subcommittee . He will also be Chairman of the Committee of Berlin preparations .
 The President invited Mr Nitze to sit regularly with the Executive Committee in this capacity . Nitze has been invited by the President to sit with him regularly .
 Rostow was confirmed as Chairman of a second subcommittee on advance planning . Rostow is also confirmed to be Chairman of the second subcommittee of the Senate's advance planning committee .
 The President said he felt that Norstad was so experienced and so capable and his judgment so sound, as evidenced by today's cable, he did not think that Lemnitzer would be hurt, and he wished Norstad to remain . Norstad said that he would take the risk of
 I have received your letter of October twenty-third./2/ 1 think you will recognize that the steps which started the current chain of events was the action of your Government in secretly furnishing offensive weapons to Cuba .
 I met with Ambassador Dobrynin last evening on the third floor of the Russian Embassy and made the following points . The meeting took place at 9:30m., October 23.
 "I told him first that I was there on my own and not on the instructions of the President," says President Obama . "I said I was not on his instructions," says Obama. "I'm not going to lie to the President. I'm not lying. I told him
 Russia had not placed any long-range missiles in Cuba and had no intention to do so in the future, he said . When I had met with him some six weeks before, I said, he had told me that the Russians had not .
 President Obama said he would not put missiles in Cuba which would be able to reach the continental U.S. He interrupted at that point and confirmed this statement and said he specifically told me they would not .
 President assured Americans that weapons being furnished by the Communists to Cuba were defensive and that it was not necessary for the United States to blockade or take any military action . I said based on that statement which I had related to the President plus independent intelligence information at that time, the President had gone
 I pointed out that this assurance of Dobrynin to me had been confirmed by the TASS statement and then by Gromyko when he visited the President on Thursday 72/ I said that based on these assurances the President had taken a different and far less belligerent position than people like
 I pointed out that the President felt he had a very helpful personal relationship with Mr Khrushchev . President felt that the relationship was very helpful .
 He said there was a mutual trust and confidence between them on which he could rely . Obviously, they did not agree on many issues, he said .
 Mr Khrushchev requested the President to withdraw the troops from Thailand and that step was taken within 24 hours . As an example of this statement I . related the time that Mr Khrrushchev . requested the . President to withdrawal the troops . from Thailand .
 Khrushchev and the Russians at this time was hypocritical, misleading and false, he says . "I said that with the background of this relationship, plus the . specific assurances that had been given to us, we felt the action by Khrush . was hypocritical," he adds .
 Dobrynin's only answer was that he had told me no missiles were in Cuba but that Khrushchev had also given similar assurances through TASS . As far as he knew, there were still no missiles in Cuba, he said . Dobrynins: "No missiles are in
 The President did not tell Gromyko the facts on Thursday, he says . The one he stressed was why he didn't tell the truth, he said . The President said he did not lie to the President .
 He said this was something they could not understand and that if we had the information at the time why didn't we tell Gromyko. He said it was something that they couldn't understand . He said if we'd known why we didn't tell them, we should have told G
 There wasn't anything the President could tell Gromyko that he didn't know already, and after all, why didn't tell the President this instead of, in fact, denying it. Number one, there wasn't nothing the President . Number one: Why didn't the President tell
 President was so shocked at Gromyko's presentation and his failure to recite these facts that he felt that any effort to have an intelligent and honest conversation would not be profitable .
 Dobrynin says he doesn't believe Gromyko thought there were any missiles in Cuba . He says he didn't think there were missiles in the country . Dobrynins says he spoke with the former president of Soviet Union to discuss the situation .
 He said he was going to contact his government to find out about this matter . He said: "I'm not going to be surprised"
 I expressed surprise that after all that had appeared in the papers, and the President's speech, that he had not had a communication on that question already . I expressed a surprise that Mr. Obama did not have a communication already, he said .
 He replied that was their instructions last month and he assumed they had the same instructions at the present time . He said that was last month .
 All we really knew about were the sites and not missiles, he said . There was a lot of difference between sites and the actual missile itself .
 I said I did not have to argue the point-there were missiles in Cuba-we knew that they were there and that I hoped he would inform himself also . I said he did not need to argue with the point. I said we knew that missiles were there .
 I left around 10:15m. and went to the White House and gave a verbal report to the President . I left at 10:30m. ET and went back to the Oval Office to give the President a statement .
 Another memorandum from Smith to McCone, October 23, estimating the effect on Cuba of a blockade covering all goods except food and medicines is in the Supplement .
 A challenge at sea to the quarantine is unlikely, at least for a day or two . A challenge is unlikely to be made at sea at sea .
 Thereafter a challenge is likely if the Soviets believe that their political efforts are not succeeding and a heightening of the crisis is required . Thereafter, a challenge will likely be likely to be needed if the Soviet leadership is not succeeding .
 Retaliatory actions would follow if the incident itself failed to produce quick political results . The incident would be the first time the U.S. government has been involved in a political crisis .
 It would be aimed either at a U.S. ship elsewhere or at access to Berlin . We think the latter somewhat more likely .
 TASS statement suggests that the Soviets wish to retain full freedom of action while they consider their initial moves .
 There is some intelligence, dating from before the President's speech, indicating that the Soviets had decided to run any U.S. blockade which might be established .
 We think it likely that, at least for a day or two, they will avoid a challenge at sea while they observe the results of their political efforts to get the quarantine lifted . Nevertheless, we think it will likely be a challenge for them .
 If the USSR feels that these efforts are succeeding, the Soviets will probably continue to avoid challenges, lest an incident interrupt this favorable trend . If the Soviets feel successful, they will probably not be challenged again . The Soviet Union will continue to ignore challenges .
 If and when they decide to permit an incident of this sort, the Soviets would not allow the U.S. to board a vessel, since this would mean acceptance in principle of quarantine .
 Instead of attacking a ship carrying a nonmilitary cargo, the U.S. would probably be choosing a ship with a non-military cargo and allowing it to be attacked .
 It is possible that the Soviets, in deciding to test the quarantine, would accompany their probe ship with a submarine which would counterattack the United States vessel after the Soviet ship was struck .
 The Soviets would almost certainly think the U.S. would respond by tightening the blockade and launching a full-scale effort to seek out and destroy a Soviet submarine in the area of quarantine operations . We think this unlikely, however, because the United States would tighten the blockade .
 After an incident, the Soviets would probably allow a pause while they exploited this incident and observed its effects . The Soviets probably allowed a pause to observe the effects of the incident .
 Unless the U.S. showed signs of quickly yielding, however, they would then follow with some form of retaliation . The United States would then likely follow with a retaliatory response, says CNN.com.com .
 "We do not believe that this would take the form of major military action," says CNN.com . We do not think this would be the first major action against Syria .
 The Soviets would choose between an attack on a U.S. ship elsewhere or a move on the access routes to Berlin . The move was designed to remind the United States of the vulnerability of its position in Berlin .
 In most circumstances, they probably would regard a Berlin move as both more effective and easier to control . Berlin move is likely to be more effective than any other move .
 The USSR might use a submarine, however, to deliver through the quarantine some particularly critical item, to demonstrate its ability to frustrate U.S. efforts .
 The Director of Central Intelligence summarized the intelligence briefing . President Obama received a briefing from the CIA .
 The Secretary of Defense presented photographs of dispersal of existing U.S. planes . The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff reported that modifications of readiness were being considered .
 The Secretary of Defense reported the plans for naval interception, noted the presence of a submarine near the more interesting ships, and warned that radio silence might be imposed . Radio silence might also be imposed, according to the report .
 There was discussion of the problem of dealing with such submarines, and it was understood that in the event of intervention by a submarine in the process of interception the submarine might have to be destroyed .
 In the middle of the meeting there were reports that certain Soviet ships appeared to have stopped or turned back . President directed that there be no interception of any target for at least another hour while clarifying information was sought .
 President directed that most urgent action be taken by State, Defense and CIA to improve communications worldwide . Wiesner presented an initial briefing on the communications situation .
 The President directed that special responsibilities should be assigned to designated individuals . A plan for this purpose will be presented for approval by State, Defense and White House officers at the next meeting .
 President directed that State and USIA should give immediate attention to increasing understanding in Europe of the fact that any Berlin crisis would be fundamentally the result of Soviet ambition and pressure . inaction by the United States in the face of the challenge in Cuba would have been more and not less dangerous for Berlin
 The President directed that a senior representative of USIA should regularly be present at meetings of the Executive Committee .
 Soviet reaction Cuban quarantine likely involve efforts to compare missiles in Cuba with Jupiters in Turkey . Soviet reaction to Cuban quarantine will likely involve comparing missiles to Jupits in Turkey.
 Possible that negotiated solution for removal Cuban offensive threat may involve dismantling and removal of Jupiters . Possible solution may involve removing Jupits from the U.S.
 Recognize this would create serious politico-military problems for US-Turkish relations and with regard to Turkey's place in NATO Alliance . U.S. and Turkey's relations with NATO Alliance would be at risk .
 "We need to prepare carefully for such contingency order not harm our relations with this important ally. Therefore need prepare carefully," he said . "Such contingency order would not harm the relations with the important ally"
 Ambassador Finletter requested comment on NATO aspect of problem . AmbassadorFinletter also requested comment regarding NATO aspect problem .
 At 2:19m. on October 24 the Department of State sent a similar telegram to Rome . Do not discuss with any foreigners 71/ Rusk /1/ at 2:20m.
 Defense intercept, trail, and photograph, but not interfere with, such vessels . Department of Defense intercepts, trail and photograph vessels .
 The object is to record the fact of their turnaround and, to the extent possible, the character of their cargo . The object of the project is to document the turnaround of the aircraft .
 The order to search be determined by the order of their operational availability to our forces; 3. That the order to . search be . determined by . order of . their operational . availability to their forces; . That . that the order . to search should be determined . by order of
 Should a vessel refuse to comply with orders to stop, we should proceed with special attention to the minimum use of force, given the likelihood that their cargoes will prove innocent .
 Some of the Bloc vessels proceeding towards Cuba appear to have altered course; 2. Some of these vessels appear to be changing course; 3.2.3.5.4.5 .
 Other vessels are proceeding towards Cuba and will be intercepted in accordance with the Proclamation . Other vessels will also be intercepted by Cuban authorities .
 Inspection of other vessels is required, now and in the future, until offensive weapons and installations are removed from Cuba . Such vessels could contain essential components for offensive weapons, the Cuban government says .
 We are starting over here a thinking session as to what might be done which will be going on all afternoon . We are looking at what could be done to get the best out of the situation .
 Six interesting ships have turned back; six may not be a precise figure . Bundy-Two tankers are coming on, but six interesting ships are turning back .
 Khrushchev told Lord Russell he thought it would be useful to have a top level meeting . Lord Russell agreed to meet with the former Soviet leader .
 Also printed in Department of State Bulletin, November 12, 1962, page 740 .
 On October 25 President Kennedy responded to the Secretary-General reiterating U.S. statements made in the Security Council . President Kennedy assuring U. Thant of his desire to reach a satisfactory solution of the crisis .
 U Thant responded to Chairman Khrushchev the same day requesting that Soviet ships en route to Cuba avoid the interception area imposed by the United States quarantine . The request was to allow time for discussion of an agreement under the U.N. Charter .
 In a letter to President Kennedy, U Thant appealed to him to issue instructions to U.S. ships in the Caribbean to avoid direct confrontation with Soviet ships . In the letter, U. Thant expressed the hope that a settlement could be reached quickly .
 A similar but briefer memorandum of a telephone conversation between Bundy and Ball at 8:05m. is in the Supplement . A similar memo of a phone conversation with Bundy at 8.05m .
 Bundy-I am getting a little groggy, so many people have different views, but the current situation is this, Bundy-Bundy says . Bundy: "The current situation in the U.S. is this. This is the most important thing that the country needs to know
 Bob thinks it may be important to intercept a tanker and turn him back . Bob thinks that it may well be important for the U.S. to intercept the tanker .
 "He is going to go down to Flag Plot and look hard and find out what he knows and what anyone knows about where these things will be," says President Obama .
 The question is really what orders Admiral Innison has for dawn, that they require Presidential action and a meeting of the Committee tonight .
 I think we have to leave the question of further discussion in suspense until McNamara has reviewed it and come in and said what he thinks will happen . McNamara: "We have to stay in suspense"
 If he comes in and says let's let it go until the meeting tomorrow morning, which we might as well have at 10 as at 8, because we miss dawn in either case . If he came in, he would have to wait until the next morning, he wouldn't have to
 Bundy: "Since we are not singling out any special ships, then we ought to just take anything that comes on a nondiscriminatory basis"
 "They are not operating on the basis of enforcing a blockade in that sense," he said . "They're not operating in that way," he added .
 They are enforcing a blockade with instructions from McNamara as to which ship to enforce it upon . McNamara has instructed them to enforce the blockade .
 Bundy-All I'm saying is is is that means different orders from what they now have. Ricker felt that that was the easiest operational kind of of— Bundy- Bundy . Ricker: "I'm not sure what the new orders will be" Bundy-Bundy: "
 Ball-My own view, you may pick out certain ships as we were preparing to do, but those ships are not now in the equation . Therefore, the thing to do is to take anything that comes and I would feel happier if the first ship that came along was a Belgian or
 Ball-I will probably hear later tonight from Bob after he has been out there and had a look at the area . Ball says he will hear from Mr. Ball later tonight . Ball: "I'm not sure what I'm going to hear from Bob"
 Bundy-I would think that when Bob has had a look at Flag Plot, he will call me and I will call you, Bundy- Bundy- said . Bundy- I would think . Bob will be able to get back in touch with Bundy-
 A copy of this letter, transmitted in telegram 1070 from Moscow, October 24, arrived in the Department of State at 9:24m. The letter was sent from Moscow .
 I have received your letter of October 23/1/ have studied it, and am answering you. Lot 66 D 304) Dear Mr President:
 Khrushchev signed a copy of the original of the book . The book was signed by the then-Krushchev in 1956 .
 Khrushchev, he said, is sending us desperate signals to get us to help take him off the hook . He said, "Krushchev" was sending us 'desperate signals' to help him off .
 He is sending messages exactly as he did to Eisenhower directly after the U-2 affair . The U.2 affair is the latest in a series of scandals involving President Obama .
 The signals are the instructions to the Soviet ships to change their course; the message to Bertrand Russell;/1/ his obviously premeditated appearance last night at an American concert in Moscow and his subsequent visit with the American singer . The signals were the instructions . The messages are the
 In view of these signals from Khrushchev, the worst mistake we can possibly make is to get tougher and to escalate . The worst mistake is to 'get tougher' and 'escalate' the situation .
 The best way out is the resolution recommended by Cleveland as Tab C in his memorandum (the defanging resolution) 72/ However, Harriman disagrees with Cleveland's view that we should negotiate this resolution .
 He thinks we should try to get Ireland to introduce the resolution tomorrow . He thinks it should be introduced in Ireland tomorrow .
 Incidentsstopping of ships, etc. will begin the process of escalation, engage Soviet prestige and reduce the chances of a peaceful resolution . Incidents of stopping of ships will begin to begin to escalate, engaging Soviet prestige .
 If we act shrewdly and speedily, we can bail Khrushchev out and discredit the tough guys around him . The tough guys who sold him the Cuban adventure on the theory that Americans were too liberal to fight, he says .
 Presumably a reference to Cleveland's October 24 memorandum to Rusk and Ball . October 24, 1962"""" /2/Presumably .
 Ball-The letter from Khrushchev/1/ is garbled, and I am trying to fill it in . Ball: "I am trying . to fill in" Ball .
 It simply says that the OAS has no authority in these matters; that one has to bide by international law; we are committing an act of piracy . If you were in his place you would take the same view, says the minister .
 I don't think we have any option but to go ahead and test this thing out, in the morning, but at least this is the notice he has given to us . I'm not sure whether we will be able to test it out in the night, but this is at least
 Pres. Pres. Bob McNamara: "Do you want to call up Bob McNama because we have got the tanker we talked about stopping?"
 Ball— I'll talk to Bob about it and I will also get hold of Dean and maybe we had better get back to you . Ball: "I'll talk about it. I'll get back in touch with Bob and Dean" Ball:
 U Thant has just gotten through speaking, and I am waiting for a call from Stevenson . Stevenson: "U Thant is just getting through speaking" Stevenson is waiting to hear from Stevenson.
 Stevenson is kicking like a steer about reply tonight, but I think we have to reply tonight . Stevenson is kick-like a steer, but he thinks we have a reply tonight. We need to reply .
 Ball: He is concerned primarily about the conditions which we put in that proposed reply . Ball: "He feels that those are in effect conditions to talking rather than the kind of conditions that might emerge out of talk" Ball: Ball is concerned that the conditions we put into the proposed reply
 "We have got to be quite specific about them, otherwise we will get ourselves in a hopeless harass, and I don't think we can afford to do it at this point," says Mark Hughes .
 Ball-I think he would like to suggest some concessions we are prepared to make. Ball said: "I think [Mr Ball] would like some concessions he would be willing to make." Ball said he was prepared to suggest concessions .
 "We have to get this thing back to U Thant tonight even though it isn't published," he says . "We ought to be very prompt in getting some reply back before the Soviet Union comes in with an acceptance"
 "I may not be able to hold the line with him and he may insist on talking with you," she says . "He may insist to talk with you. I may not hold the . line," she adds .
 Pres. Obama: "I think the impression tonight seems to be that the Russians are giving way, which is not quite accurate" Pres. Barack Obama: 'I'm not quite quite accurate. I'm not sure what's happening'
 State and Defense should put out the indication that Russian ships are approaching, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think that after you talk to McNamara and the Sec. they ought to have put out a warning"
 In the meantime, I will get hold of Bob and Dean, and we may have to get back to you . In the past, we will get back in touch with the pair .
 Pres. Pres. Obama: "Of course we didn't present them with a way out" Pres. Bush: "To be sure that the Russians./l/l/ Of course we . didn't give them a chance out"
 I don't know whether U Thant has presented them with a way out, whether they are interested in a way . I don’t know whether they’re interested in an exit from the club, but I’m not sure if they're interested in it .
 I suppose there may be a slim chance they may be, we ought to give out a message in a way that gives them enough of an out to stop their shipments without looking like they completely crawled down . We should be careful not to look like they are crawling down .
 A memorandum of this telephone conversation, which also deals with stopping a tanker, is ibid. A copy of the conversation, with the details of the phone call, can be read here .
 Pres. Pres. Obama: 'Just say that we suggest the Russians suspend their shipping, until we have a chance to meet with them. - In other words just say that . we suggest we suggest that we . suggest that they suspend their . shipping, and until we . have a
 "We can't withdraw shipping, we can't stop. Just say otherwise, they have got," says DHL chief executive .
 Ball-This is what the letter said, that you said last night,/2/ because what you said was that you hoped that he would not challenge, direct his captains not to challenge the blockade, and that we were talking about these letters in the Security Council . Ball: "
 We can take it late in the afternoon, the question would be if there is any message we would send to U Thant to give them a way out . We would ask: "What message would we send to them? What message would you give to them to give you a way
 Let me just read you what we sent him last night, what you sent him . Let's read what you wrote to him, what he received last night. Let's see what he got from you .
 I don't think there is anything we can say to him that will cause him to change. I think there will be nothing we can do to stop him from doing so. I'm not sure what will change him, I'm sure he will change his mind .
 Ball-I just have been talking to Stevenson and Stevenson and the trouble with the U Thant proposal is that there is no inspection or verification in it at all . Ball says Stevenson's proposal doesn't have any inspection or verify in it .
 Stevenson said he thinks that if we were to accept the principle of some preliminary conversation, in the course of the conversation we could insist upon some kind of verification about when you have to point into the UN . That would give us protection while we were trying to work something out .
 What we could say is that if you will hold up your ships during the 2 or 3 days, we would have some preliminary talks in the UN to see to if there is some solution . Ball: "We could say that if we would hold up our ships during this time, we
 U.S. should ask Soviet Union to hold up their shipping for the next, for the immediate area, says Pres. Thant . Pres. Kim Jong Jong-Jin: "We should get ourselves back to U Thant"
 Union, it appears that a confrontation is about to take place, Pres. George W. Bush tells the Union to hold their ships, while we meet with him tomorrow afternoon .
 "In that case, we could pick up this tanker tomorrow afternoon, instead of tomorrow morning," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the tanker could be picked up in the morning of Tuesday .
 The Pres. had the idea that maybe we ought to do with U Thant tonight instead of trying to get a message back to K because there isn't much we can say that we didn't say in that message he sent last night .
 There is going to be a confrontation in the morning which could escalate until there is a chance for a discussion on the modalities of negotiation . Try to get U Thant to make a direct appeal to U. K to hold off his ships on the ground .
 The Pres. is very reluctant to face this thing particularly with a tanker involved tomorrow until we make one last try to see if the UN can get itself in between . The UN is trying to get themselves in between the two sides .
 McNamara: "Ask it what it is carrying, where it is going, and if it answered satisfactory to let it go, not to board it" McNamara says he was simply to hail it and ask it where it was going, not board it .
 If it goes on through, then we have lost the principle of the quarantine, having done that. We have already done that, says the BBC's Richard Quest . If it passes through, it will be 'lost the principle'
 Russia could let this one go but then there will probably be a whole day without stopping a ship, and I am afraid this would be misinterpreted in Moscow, particularly in the light of this letter . On the other hand, we could let it go, but then it would probably be
 The President's idea, this was a kind of an idea we were developing together was possibly if we could get Thant tonight to make the appeal on the ground that there was going to be a likelihood of a confrontation and ask K. to instruct his fellows to talk with ours .
 In the meantime, to hold his ships away from Cuba that something might might be done . In the meanwhile, something might happen to happen .
 Sec. Sec.-I don't think there is a chance in the world that K would get instructions to this tanker by 2 am. He says he doesn't believe there would be a chance of K getting instructions to the tanker at 2am.
 Ball-In the meantime, we could hold off til, actually we could even change the thing for half a day as far as that goes . Ball-in-law: "We could even hold off until the end of the day"
 Sec. Sec.-I think you might talk to Adlai about this, see if U Thant on his own responsibility will ask Mr Thant not to send his ships pending modalities .
 "There really isn't anything much that we can say that hasn't been said," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It's not surprising that there's a lot of things to say," he says .
 If we can now get Thant to do something rather than doing it ourselves, we'll be able to do it ourselves . We hope to see Thant do something in the future .
 K71/ says he can't give instructions to his ships to abide by the blockade . "If we violate these rules, that will be our fault," he says . "They will be forced to take measures that they deem necessary and adequate," he adds .
 Implications being knowing that there may be a submarine or two in the waters, that could be an attempt to torpedo one of our ships . Implications are that it could be a possible attempt to try and torpedo a ship, the author says .
 Would U Thant be prepared to send a message to K along the lines that he is very concerned about possibility of a confrontation, and that he asked K to hold his ships away from Cuban waters .
 Ball-If we could get something out like that tonight, I think we would hold off, because all we've got is a tanker coming through, Ball-Ball says . Ball: If we could hold off tonight, we would be holding off .
 Stevenson-I think it would be a lot more helpful for me in trying to get U Thant to do this if I could have a copy of the message that we have from K Ball— I can give you, Stevenson- Stevenson . Stevenson: It would be more helpful to me
 Stevenson— Well, if you could put on the wire to me, so that I would have it first thing in the morning a substantial text of it. Stevenson: "I would like to see it first day of the morning" Stevenson: If you could send it to me first thing
 Ball-I think it would have to be done tonight if we're going to do it because we've got a time dislocation and things are moving so swiftly . Ball: "Things are moving very swiftly. We've got to do something very quickly"
 I'm afraid it will be almost impossible to do anything with him tonight. I'm not sure what to do with him. I am afraid he will not be able to do something with me tonight .
 Stevenson-I could talk to him on the phone and tell him what the burden of this thing is and that I'm going to be around in the morning with a suggestion that he send a message to K saying that he. was going to. K. Stevenson- Stevenson .
 Stevenson: See, what he already said is please hold off on everything . Stevenson: "Please hold off everything. Please hold off" Stevenson .
 Ball: "He is disturbed about the possibility of a confrontation at sea under the quarantine before further action could be taken" He would therefore like an agreement from K that he will hold his ships off on the condition, away from Cuban waters, we won't molest them"
 Stevenson-He says that all concerned should refrain from any actions which may aggravate the situation and bring with it the risk of war . He says that the situation is very serious and should not be aggravated .
 Yes, but this is giving specific content to it in terms of what the real danger, an immediate confrontation, may be. Ball says . Ball: "This is not the first time I've seen this in a film, but it's the second time I have seen it in a
 Stevenson: I think if he had some feeling that we were likely to present this thing in general subject or conditions, which he knows about, I think maybe he would send such a message . Stevenson: "I think maybe ... he would ... send such an important message"
 Ball-This position, I don't want to misrepresent the President on it, but this position that I have from him is that we could hold off for a while while there is some discussions on the modalities of the thing if they will hold their ships away while we do that .
 Ball-There is a ship which was going to be challenged at 2 o'clock tomorrow morning, which is just about 2-1/2 hours from now . Ball-The ship is going to challenge at 2:30am tomorrow morning .
 Ball: Yes, and we can continue to hold that one off until we can see if something like this would work . Ball: "Yes, and yes, we can . We can hold that off for a while" Ball: We need to see if it would work.
 Ball-That is on the theory that we stop everything and challenge it and find out what's on board . Stevenson: "Although it was not carryingBall-That, it was carrying something that we stopped everything and challenged it and found out what was on board"
 "We don't want to let ships go through because this discredits our firmness of attention," says the ship's captain .
 If we could get an agreement from the Russians to hold their ships off while we talk about this, the modalities. What I think, if we could . get a . agreement from Russia to hold ships off, we would be able to talk to the Russians. We could get a
 Ball--Yes, I think it would be that long probably before we get something settled. Ball: "Yes, yes, yes" Ball: It wouldn't be too long before we got something settled . Ball: I'm not sure how long it will be before we have something settled
 We won't take any action as long as their ships are held off, that way we avoid a confrontation until we can see if we can get the modalities with negotiation . We will not take action until we have a chance to see if negotiations can be reached .
 Thant has agreed to send a message to K which he probably can't do tonight because of the communications but will do it first thing in the morning . Ball-The situation with Stevenson is that he finally got Thant out of bed and Thant will send the message .
 Ball-He says that first thing in the morning he will send the message to K saying that he, pending some consideration of his proposal, he would hope that K will keep his ships away and prevent a confrontation . He thinks there is a chance the Americans are prepared to discuss the mod
 Ball-I raised this with Stevenson and in the first place this is not a public thing, this is a private thing . Bundy-It will be public soon enough. Bundy: It will be a public affair soon enough . Bundy:
 Ball-I asked Stevenson to try to get the thing from him in the morning and shoot it down to us as soon as he can . Ball said Stevenson will try and get it back down to the surface .
 I think I would have put it up in tougher terms, but that's the way it went. I think it would have been more difficult to put up tougher terms . I think he would have had a tougher term put up, he says .
 Bundy-Yes, I think the main thing is that Adlai should know what he has sent in the morning . Bundy: "I think the most important thing is to know what I have sent" Bundy says .
 Ball-I asked him to get it from Thant first thing and let us know, and he said he would . Ball said he hopes Thant doesn't give too much of an impression of our willingness, but in any event it's just Thant giving an impression .
 Bundy-Bundy reads reply to K Ball . "There is only one very minor point, but I think it might be a major one. There is only a minor point," he says . Bundy-bundy: "I think it's a major mistake"
 I think this language is more precise in the case than we can document to the Chairman. I think it's more precise than we've been able to document to Chairman. We're happy to clarify that this is not the case, but it's the case that we're trying to get
 "It takes it out of that dialectical argument as to what's offensive and what isn't," she says .
 I don't know George; I have cleared it with everybody else; I think we had better leave it as it is. I don’t know George . I think it's a good thing to say 'I have cleared everybody else,' says George Bush Jr.
 Ball-The only thing that concerns me about the Stevenson thing is that he has probably given the impression to U Thant that we will go further than he will go, Ball-Thant says . Ball says he is concerned Stevenson has 'given the impression' that he thinks we will
 Bundy-I don't know how to advise you on that other than to say that we probably will not go further than we will go . Bundy: "We probably will probably go further, but we will probably not" Bundy-
 If it indicates a weakness in relation to K that will create another element of miscalculation . Ball will not be able to rely heavily on the strength of his team .
 Bundy-It would seem to me that you should say to Adlai that nothing in, from the point of view of us in Washington, any message to K should be inconsistent with that message, Bundy-Bundy says .
 Ball-I think I will get hold of Adlai first thing of the morning and let him go over and talk to Thant . Ball-Thant: "I think he will get back in the morning" Ball: "Adlai will go over to talk to Ad
 Bundy: If Adlai knows early in the morning that he must not sign the U.S. to anything that would make that letter impossible without checking back with us . Bundy: "If you're going to sign that letter, please check back to us" Bundy: Adl
 A note on the source text indicates it was relayed to McNamara, Lemnitzer, CIA, and Departments of the Treasury and Justice . The source text was sent to the U.S. Treasury, Justice Department, the Treasury, and others .
 Please deliver to highest ranking Soviet official immediately available . Please deliver the highest ranking Russian official available . The Soviet Union was founded in 1968 .
 Concern that Soviet vessels may be under instructions to challenge quarantine and thus bring on a confrontation at sea between Soviet ships and Western hemisphere ships which could lead to an escalation of violence .
 Concern that confrontation would destroy possibility of talks such as Secretary General has suggested as prelude to political settlement . Concern that such confrontation would kill possibility of peace talks . Concerns that such confrontations would destroy chance of talks .
 Hope that Khrushchev will hold his ships out of interception area for limited time in order to permit discussions of modalities of agreement . Hope for talks to be limited time .
 Confidence that Soviet ships are not proceeding to Cuba, that U.S. will avoid direct confrontation with them during same period in order to minimize chances of untoward incidence . Confidence, on basis that Soviet ship not proceeding, that United States will avoid confrontation with .
 We should not give Khrushchev impression that we can agree on any interim arrangement for uninspected moratorium or ""voluntary suspension"" without explicit provision for adequate UN observation . UN observation to ensure against weapons being imported, work on sites continued .
 White House feels it undesirable to give any impression to SYG that would be inconsistent with draft answer to proposal that was cleared by President and sent to you Wednesday night .
 I called special attention to the Belovodsk and reported on page II-5 and the searching of the Cubana airplane by Canadians . The search of the plane by Canadians was reported to have taken place on page IV-2 .
 Decision was reached that Navy be instructed to board the next Soviet ship contacted which would be the Graznyy, a tanker, but which was carrying a deck load which might be missile field tanks . Decision was made that the next ship contacted was the tanker, which might carry a deck
 Contact was to be made with the Graznyy as early as possible and that was estimated to be about 8:00 o'clock in the evening, Friday, October 26th . Contact was expected to be around 8:30 a.m. on Friday .
 McNamara recommended several recurring low-level surveillance strikes of multiple aircraft in an operation that would resemble an air strike . McNamara: The operation would be similar to an Air Force strike .
 It was the Secretary's opinion that since all of these were indicators of some indecision on the part of the Soviets, that we should pursue low-level surveillance in the interests of gathering intelligence, simulating air attack, and to determine whether the Soviets are building additional sites .
 8 sorties were ordered immediately to cover the nine missile sites, the IL 28 site, the MIG 21 airfield, and the nuclear storage sites and the KOMAR missile ship sites . This recommendation was approved and the sorties ordered immediately .
 It was decided this reconnaissance should not be announced, but, if questioned, we should refer to the President's statement . The reconnaissance was decided not to be announced but should be referred to President Obama .
 President asked whether Soviet ships bound elsewhere than Cuba had changed course . President asked if Soviet ships were changing course in Cuba . President also asked if ships bound in Cuba were going to Cuba .
 Bundy reviewed Khrushchev letter to the President of the 24th of October and the Kennedy reply 72/ McNamara raised the question of accelerating or raising the escalation of the actions we have so far taken, expressing concern over the plateau, indicating determination to meet our ultimate objective .
 The President requested Mr McCone to prepare a careful analysis of the present situation inside Cuba . He asked for further consideration by USIA of the possibility of dropping propaganda leaflets .
 The Secretary of Defense reported the current military situation, and on the President's direction instructions were issued for selective investigation and boarding of non-bloc ships, excluding tankers .
 All armed forces in Cuba have been instructed to fire only in response to attack . The Secretary of Cuba reported that all armed forces have been told not to fire in Cuba .
 Many installations are so camouflaged as to be in a low state of readiness . Many installations in the U.S. are camouflaged to be low-ready .
 The Secretary of State recommended a program of low-level reconnaissance for the purpose of improving intelligence, camouflaging the possibility of a later attack, he said . The secretary of State said the U.S. is concerned with offensive installations in Cuba .
 The President approved an immediate daylight mission of 8 low-level reconnaissance aircraft to cover missile sites, airfields holding IL28's and MIG's, KOMAR naval vessels, coastal installations, nuclear storage sites, and selected SAM sites .
 President Bucharest directed that the tanker Bucharest not be intercepted for the present . The President directed that that was not intercepted, the tanker was not to be intercepted .
 Her status as a tanker with no contraband cargo made it desirable to allow her to proceed . The ship was allowed to proceed as it was carrying no cargo .
 President Obama directed the Defense Department be prepared to make an intercept of an appropriate bloc ship on Friday in daylight .
 There was preliminary discussion of alternative courses of action in the immediate future . President asked the other members of the Committee to make appropriate arrangements for preparing alternative course of action for discussion .
 Missile fuel will be added to the list of contraband goods under the Proclamation of Interdiction . The President approved the recommendation of the Secretary of Defense that missile fuel be added . Missile fuel is now a part of the prohibited list .
 I saw U Thant this morning and conveyed to him suggestions contained in Deptel 1084 71/ He said he would transmit suggestions to Khrushchev in form of confidential message . He said: "I saw him and conveyed suggestions to him"
 Thant told me Zorin asked him at 7:30 last night what Thant appeal in Council was going to say . Thant said he was asked by Zorlin what he would say in Council appeal .
 Thant replied that it was based on his appeal to Khrushchev and Kennedy . Thant said it was a response to his appeal for the world's first lady .
 Zorin replied that it was very bad proposal, since blockade was wholly illegal and that Thant should be concerned with legality and not with legality . After Thant explained to Zorlin nature of his appeal, he said that lifting quarantine with stopping ships going to Cuba was illegal .
 Thant said he was not concerned with legality, but with averting a crisis . Thant replied: "I'm not concerned about legality, I'm concerned about averting the crisis"
 Thant told me that Afro-Asians were putting great pressure on Zorin to accept . Thant expects negative reaction from the Russian president, but says he expects negative reply .
 If both sides accept his suspension proposal this afternoon, he thinks SC should recess pending discussion on modalities . If both parties accept his proposal, he wants SC to recess . SC should discuss modalities, he says .
 Director McCone gave an intelligence briefing which contained no major new information . The briefing was briefed by the Director of State Department .
 The Graznyy is one of three oil tankers with deck tanks probably containing ammonia . He listed fifteen ships en route to Cuba, among them the Graznnyy .
 Mr McCone noted that a Bloc ship would be entering the Panama Canal on November 2 . The Bloc will enter the Panama canal on November 1 .
 It would be searched, as have Bloc ships transiting the Canal during the past seven years . The Canal has been searched by the Bloc during that time .
 Mr McCone said he had no information of any unusual developments in Europe . He said he did not have any information about unusual developments .
 Secretary Dillon noted that there had been a run on gold in Germany and to a lesser extent in London .
 Gold purchases reflect the fear of the buyers, says economist . He concludes that the gold market reflects the real fear of buyers .
 Secretary McNamara said that the East German passenger ship Voelker Fruendschaft was at the Cuban barrier . McNamara: The ship was a passenger ship from East Germany at the time .
 Secretary McNamara reported that the Lebanese ship which was to have been boarded had turned back before crossing the barrier . The Lebanese ship was to be boarded but turned back .
 Late information on the Graznyy revealed that it was lying dead in the water . The ship was found dead in a shallow spot in the ocean .
 He said the question was whether we can get Soviet strategic missiles out of Cuba or at least under UN control . The question is whether the country can get its strategic missiles from the Soviet Union .
 He added that if there was any prospect of success in following a political track, we would have to keep heavy pressure on the Russians . He said if there were any prospects of success we would need to keep pressure on Russia .
 We must know what is going on at the IRBM sites in Cuba and we need to know whether warheads have actually been delivered to Cuba . We must also find out if warheads have been delivered .
 Shortly we must decide if the Soviet signals which they are sending us means they are getting ready to talk or whether they are preparing to attack us . Shortly we will decide if we must . decide if they are . ready to . talk or if they're getting ready . to talk .
 Secretary Rusk said we would probably be able to get only a seven-to-two vote in the Security Council,/2/ but even so, action in the UN General Assembly was a possibility .
 He thought that many Latin American States would support this zone, along with many other UN members, and the Soviets would have a difficult time opposing it . The zone would be located in Latin American states, he said .
 The purpose of these talks is to arrive at a solution of the crisis, or, if no solution is possible, to provide a basis for later action, having been unable to negotiate a settlement . The talks will be held in the hope of reaching a solution to the crisis .
 IRBM sites in Cuba are becoming operational and the IL-28 bombers will soon be able to fly . Talks could not go on for two weeks, but must be limited to a very few days, he said . IL-27 bombers will be able be able fly, he added .
 Secretary McNamara said all of his actions were taken with a view to applying force gradually . McNamara: All of the actions are taken with the view of applying force slowly .
 The ten air reconnaissance missions flown today went well and he recommended that ten more be flown tomorrow . The ten more missions flown tomorrow will be flown .
 Other military actions being taken would be meaningful to the Russians but would still not force escalation . The Russian military action would still be meaningful but would not force further action .
 Secretary McNamara described night reconnaissance flights which involve dropping flares . The Soviet missiles now have an eight-hour countdown .
 Low-level reconnaissance could give us intelligence as to whether the Soviet missiles are being placed in position to reduce the length of the countdown . The Soviet missiles could be placed in place in order to reduce their countdown .
 Secretary Dillon noted that the urgency of the situation was considerably reduced if the Russians do not try to break the quarantine . Secretary Dillon said the urgency would be reduced if Russia does not try and break quarantine .
 If the U Thant proposals were rejected, we could go to the General Assembly where as many as eighty States might support a Latin American denuclearization proposal . The U.N. Security Council could vote on the proposal in a special session .
 Secretary McNamara said there were many ways of increasing pressure on the Russians by military measures, i.e. quarantine, inspection at sea, surveillance, and the addition of jet fuel to the list of products embargoes, he said .
 He said we might decide that it was better to knock out the missiles by air attack than to stop a Soviet ship on the high seas .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that we might buy the charter and cargo of tramp steamers going to Cuba . The idea was suggested by Rusk that the government might purchase the charter of the ships .
 We could pay either the captain or the owner of the ship whatever he asks to defect with his ship . We could also pay the owner or captain whatever he wants to defect .
 Such action would step up pressure on the Cubans without further use of military force . The U.S. military says it has no obligation to engage in military action .
 Director McCone agreed that such action would be effective because it would greatly reduce imports into Cuba . He said it would also take away from the Cubans their outgoing cargoes .
 Secretary McNamara suggested that we might consider harassing all ships heading for Cuba by requiring that they go into U.S. ports for inspection, which could take up to several weeks .
 Secretary McNamara commented that the dropping of flares on IRBM sites at night would be highly effective . The dropping flares would be a highly effective tactic .
 General Taylor thought that the psychological effect of night reconnaissance would be entirely favorable as well as serving to keep up the pressure and providing more information about the readiness status of the strategic missiles . General Taylor said that night reconnaissance will provide more information .
 Secretary Rusk said he would seek to define our future political moves later in the evening .
 Secretary Dillon stated his support of the idea of a Latin American denuclearized zone . Secretary Dillon said he supports his support for the idea . The secretary of state said the zone would be a 'denuclearized area'
 Attorney General repeated his question as to whether we really wanted to stop a Soviet ship . The Attorney General asked whether the U.S. had any intention to stop the ship .
 He said he believed the Soviets had turned their ships around because they did not want us to see what was on them . He said the Soviets turned the ships around to prevent us seeing them .
 The tankers, however, continue to move toward Cuba because they have nothing but petroleum . They have nothing to offer in Cuba because of the country's oil wealth .
 He said he felt that the measures we take should indicate clearly that we mean business but we should avoid a direct confrontation now . He said: "We should avoid direct confrontation"
 Secretary McNamara said we should decide tonight to take meas-ures tonight which would put us in a position of being ready to board Bloc ships approaching the barrier . McNamara: We should be ready to take measures tonight to prepare for the Bloc .
 We could let Soviet tankers through quarantine and announce later we were putting an embargo on aviation gasoline . We could also announce later that we would put an embargo of aviation gasoline on aviation gas .
 If we were going to board the East German ship we would have to decide tonight. If we wanted to board it, we'd have to choose tonight. We're going to decide if we want to board a German ship .
 Both General Taylor and Secretary Dillon pointed out that we could not permit Soviet technicians to go through the quarantine even though technicians are not on the embargo list . The quarantine was imposed on Soviet technicians .
 Secretary McNamara recommended that the East German ship not be stopped because it might be necessary for us to shoot at it or to ram it . McNamara: "We might shoot at or ram it. We might shoot it or ram"
 The current situation is that the ship has been hailed and a United States destroyer is following it . The ship has hailed and the U.S. destroyer has been following it.
 If in so doing we injure passengers and then discover there are no strategic missiles aboard, we would be in a very difficult situation . The situation would be a 'difficult situation' if it were to injure passengers .
 In addition, our world position would appear weak if we allow Soviet ships through the quarantine but stop an East German ship . In addition to the quarantine, the U.S. would appear weakened if we allowed Soviet ships though but stopped East German ones .
 The Voelker Freundschaft will make a landfall tomorrow and a decision must be made by 2:00 AM this morning if we want to stop it outside Cuban territorial waters . A decision to stop the ship will be made this morning .
 Secretary McNamara reviewed the situation with respect to the Voelker Freundschaft . Secretary McNama reviewed the . situation with . respect to . the Voeelker . Freund .
 The East German ship left Rostov on October 1 1 and Leningrad on October 14 . He said the ship had departed Rostov, Russia, on Oct. 1 and Oct. 14 .
 The destroyer Pierce is following the ship which is still outside the barrier . The ship is still in the area but is still on the surface of the sea .
 Mr Bundy said the East German ship was not covered by U Thant's message . He said it was not the only message sent by the ship .
 President McNamara said the only argument against stopping the ship is U Thant's request for no incidents for the time being . General Taylor and Director McCone asked Mr McNamara to stop the ship .
 Secretary McNamara repeated his earlier statement with respect to the difficulty of stopping a passenger ship . McNamara said the difficulty was difficult to stop the ship from hitting the ocean .
 He preferred to stop the Graznyy tomorrow if Khrushchev did not accept U Thant's proposed mediation effort . He preferred a stop in Graznnyy to stop tomorrow . He was disappointed by the outcome .
 Attorney General says he wished to describe again the other side of the argument . Attorney General said he wished he had been able to explain his side .
 Surveillance measures could be taken to keep pressure on the Russians and provide time for political measures suggested by Secretary Rusk . Surveillance measures are possible to keep the pressure on Russia .
 He says it may be better to avoid confronting the Russians by stopping one of their ships and to react by attacking the missiles already in Cuba .
 Secretary Dillon said he preferred that the confrontation take place in Cuba rather than on the high seas . Secretary Dillon: "I hope that this will happen in Cuba, not on the coast"
 Secretary McNamara reported that there had been no response yesterday or today to our low-level reconnaissance flights . The Pentagon has not responded to any of those flights .
 He recommended that we continue to fly daylight reconnaissance missions and add night reconnaissance missions . He said the public should know that we are increasing the pressure on the Russians .
 "We will let the tanker through the barrier and later add jet fuel to the list of products embargoed," says President Obama . The U.S. government says it will not allow jet fuel into the country .
 Attorney General said that fifteen ships have turned back, which is an impressive action taken by the Russians . The attorney general said that 15 ships turned back .
 "We must be careful that the Russians do not think that we are backing down," says Putin . "We are not backing down. We need to be careful," he says .
 Secretary Rusk called attention to the importance of the first case of our boarding a ship . The Secretary of State Rusk said it was the first time the ship was boarded .
 If the ship carried deck cargo or dry cargo, the case would be different than a passenger ship which is a bad first case . The case is different if the ship was carrying deck cargo .
 Mr Rostow stated the argument for adding petroleum products to the blockade which he said would have a drastic effect on the Cuban economy . He said it would be a drastic change on the Cuba economy .
 The President again said we should let the East German passenger ship go through and we should seek to avoid any incident in order not to create a bad effect on U Thant's negotiations .
 We could decide tomorrow afternoon what more we should do after we know Khrushchev's reply to U Thant . We could then decide what more should be done tomorrow afternoon, says Mr. Thant.
 He said we must act soon because work on the missile sites is still going on . He added that we must back up very soon the firmness we have displayed up to now .
 Ambassador Thompson said we must react very soon to Khrushchev's strong letter . Ambassador Thompson pointed out that we must respond very soon, Thompson said .
 Secretary Rusk noted that Bloc shipping worldwide was behaving normally except for the ships in Cuban trade . Rusk said Bloc ships worldwide were behaving normally .
 Mr McCone reported that some of the strategic missiles deployed in Cuba are now operational .
 The President had before him at the meeting a folder containing drafts of alternative next major moves (copy attached) Not found attached .
 "Scenario for Airstrike Against Offensive Missile Bases and Bombers in Cuba,"" undated , and a paper on the Progressive Economic Blockage. Lot 65 D 438, Political Actions), ""Scenario"
 An earlier version of this article included a section on the blockade . This article was amended to reflect a different version of the article .
 Bromley Smith/6/ /6/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature . Bromley . Smith .
 I sent you the text of what I said, and I think it was very well accepted. I sent it to you, and it was well accepted,” he said .
 I made all the points I could, especially the one you gave me about your statement of September 11, and the reception was good— and that was very well received . I made a good point about September 11 and said it was a very well-received .
 U.S. asks Khrushchev to keep ships out of there and ask us to avoid a confrontation . We've got a second message from U Thant/1/ which you may be familiar with which says that . . .
 "We are sending back a message that if he keeps his ships out of there of course we will avoid a confrontation," he says . "Now we are inclined to— we are ... inclined to ... send back a ... message"
 One tanker said it was coming from the Black Sea to Cuba and the cargo was oil . The cargo was going to Cuba, but it was carrying oil .
 It stopped in Leningrad on its way and it may have 6,000 tons of cargo on it, so we are going to have to stop that, we think . It may have been stopped in the city, but we are not sure if it will stop .
 Khrushchev continues to have come toward Cuba toward Cuba . U Thant is supposedly arranging for the Russians to stay out, so we are going to have to let some hours go by, but sooner or later, probably by tomorrow evening, we are .
 Khrushchev: 'This is piratical and their ships are going to go through and not submit to this' 'If we do stop them they have the means of action against us' 'We got a message last night from Mr Khrushvic/2'
 I have just seen your message to U Thant./l/ It seems to me extremely ingenious and very calm, because you are saying that the-as you say, the real point is that they ought to get rid of these weapons . The real point of the message is that the
 Ambassador Stevenson will be discussing with U Thant the arrangements . Ambassador Stevenson is also expected to meet with the U.S. delegation .
 The second one said that he is asking Khrushchev to keep his ships out of there . The second said that the second one . said he was asking Khruschev to stop his ships from there .
 We are therefore going to accept that because it comes further in our direction than his first one, and tell him that if he can keep the ships out of there that's fine, then we won't have the incident . We will accept that, because it's further in the direction of
 "Some ships still are coming. On the other hand, we do point out in our response to him that some ships are still coming," he said .
 The first search of the ships will come tomorrow, but that will come after the Russians have already searched the area .
 "We have got to extend this blockade, and consider other action to stop it. Now then, if we begin the conversation we are going to begin to point out that work is going on," he said .
 I think the next thing for us to do is to figure out how we will handle this first search in view of the fact that the UN is involved in this now . The next thing is to be decided on how to handle the first search, he says .
 "I don't want to have an incident-fight-with a Russian ship tomorrow morning and to search it at a time when it appears that U Thant has gotten the Russians to agree not to continue," he says .
 "If we get through that problem, then when these conversations begin we will then begin to emphasize that work on these sites is continuing," he says . "We must tighten the blockade and possibly take other actions"
 Even if the talks don't begin, we are going to begin to say it on Saturday /3/ anyway . That would probably begin to be emphasized the minute the talks begin, but even if talks don’t begin, it would be emphasized .
 The 14 ships that have turned back are the ones that have the sensitive cargo that he doesn't want us to produce, he says . As I say, the 14 ships ... are obviously the ones he wants to turn back .
 Turkish PermRep has consistently made it clear that Turks set great store in Jupiters placed in Turkey . Perm.Rep here has consistently .
 Turkey regards these Jupiters as symbol of Alliance's determination to use atomic weapons against Russian attack on Turkey whether by large conventional or nuclear forces . Turks have been most reluctant admit presence IRBM's publicly .
 Fact that Jupiters are obsolescent and vulnerable does not apparently affect present Turkish thinking, says Turkish president .
 My impression is that symbolic importance represents a fixed GOT view, although of course Hare can comment much better than I on this point . I think symbolic importance is symbolic importance .
 For above reason any arrangement of kind suggested reftel which would not have received prior complete support by GOT would, it seems to us, be most damaging by GOT . GOT: "Any arrangement which would, however, not receive prior support from GOT, would, seem to be most
 "I emphasize prior consultation, and I think it should be an arrangement freely arrived at by them," says President Obama . "It should be a free-come-in arrangement," says Obama .
 Any arrangement that would not substitute some other considerable kind of atomic capability in Turkey for Jupiters would be rejected by them . My guess is that any arrangement that . would not . substitute some sort of . kind of . atomic capability . in Turkey would not be accepted by them,
 Cuba is by definition outside NATO area . U.S. nuclear-capable base should be closed down, not Turkey or Italy, says CNN's John Avlon .
 Such deal would then be strictly US-USSR trade rather than involving one of our NATO allies in any deal . Such a deal would be strictly U.S.-U.S. trade .
 The weapons were put in Europe as result of heads of government decision in 1957 in response to boastful Soviet MRBM threat to Europe . Alliance might very well conclude that U.S. was willing weaken nuclear defenses in Europe in order to remove threat in Western hemisphere .
 Some members of Alliance might be willing accept Cuba-Turk deal ""to avoid nuclear war"", i.e., Norwegians, Danes and maybe even British. However, cannot discount possibility that some members Alliance might accept deal . i.E. may be willing to
 Turkey turned down similar proposal in April 1961 . Turkey would not have no say in use of Polaris in time of crisis .
 Turks feel some assurance in having weapons on their territory and somewhat in their hands . Nevertheless, one might argue Turks have no say over Jupiter use now because of custodial arrangements .
 Turkish concern re Polaris substitution might be partially met by consulting them on targeting so as to assure that targets of interest to them are covered by Polaris . Polaris could be used to target Turkish targets in the US .
 Three Polaris submarines in area would effectively more than double coverage presently afforded by obsolete Jupiters . Also could point out that three Polaris submarines would effectively double coverage .
 If such firm suggestion made this should be acceptable arrangement to Turks to compensate for loss of obsolete Jupiters, Turks should be compensated for loss .
 Such offer would take form of converting merchant-type vessels to MRBM force, utilizing Polaris A-2 missiles . U.S. studies and presentation to NAC by Smith on 22 October .
 Polaris could be stationed in eastern Mediterranean . Implementation of this type of force could be realized in short period of time . It would be necessary as interim step before force comes into being .
 Polaris deployment would then fill gap caused by removal of Jupiters, while Southern Command Multilateral Force was being put together . Polaris deployment was then filled in by Polaris deployment .
 NATO could be investigating possibility of setting up NATO-wide multilateral seaborne force . At same time, rest of Alliance could be looking at setting up multilateral force . NATO-based force could be set up by NATO in the future .
 Southern Command MLF might well serve as model for larger force . It could be expanded as other allies indicated desirability to join arrangements this type . Southern command MLF could be model .
 To make this whole alternative palatable to Turks and others would require clear U.S. support, the U.K. should implement multilateral seaborne-type force, the author says .
 Italians more prone to dismantle Jupiters if proper substitute can be found . Italian fans are prone to dismantling Jupeters if a proper substitute is found . Italy's World Cup team-mates will be hoping to win the tournament .
 The gesture could well look good in face of world opinion . Whether or not this would be acceptable to Soviets, the gesture could be made .
 "Strong consideration should be given to withdrawing Jupiters and creating pilot MLF," says author . This would strengthen NATO nuclear capability in eastern Mediterranean, he says .
 Turks didn't agree to stop Jupiter program in 1961, even when faced with facts Jupiters obsolete, of no military value and good Soviet target, they might be willing now to accept substitute in MLF which more effective from all angles .
 He explained the ramifications of removal and how some of them might be met . He explained in detail the ramifications .
 Soviets Continue to Seek Abandonment of Quarantine While Missiles Stay Ships Turning . Soviets continue to seek abandonment of quarantine while Missiles stay ships turning . Soviets seek abandonment of quarantine while missiles stay turning .
 Yesterday the pattern of Soviet ships turning off their Cuban courses has continued . Yesterday's pattern of turning off Cuban courses continued .
 The USSR wants to identify the U.S. as the aggressor, and recognition that if an incident occurs, the USSR will be helpless at the site of the incident and will face the choice of escalation . In doing so its reasons are probably the desire .
 Soviet strategy at the moment still is designed to gain time and flexibility for political action . Soviet strategy still is . designed to get the quarantine stopped while the missiles stay in Cuba .
 Moscow is already complying with the U Thant proposal, although formally it may refuse to do so . It is thus seeking to exert pressure for at least tacit U.S. abandonment of the quarantine, Moscow says .
 Cuba insists that there can't be no restriction on weapons in Cuba . Cuba insists weapons are designed solely to defend Cuba against aggression .
 It is probably waiting to see how much momentum will develop for a trade involving U.S. strategic bases . The United States is prepared to exert further force to remove missiles already in Cuba .
 Until it obtains greater certainty on these points, the U.S. will probably keep its missiles in place . The U.N. has not been able to confirm the decision .
 The source text is attached to a memorandum from Rostow to Bundy, October 25 . Rostow and Bundy met in Washington, D.C.
 The USSR's first objective in the present stage of the crisis is to retain the bases in Cuba . The USSR is seeking to retain control of Cuba's bases in the country .
 The immediate Soviet aim is to deter the United States from more drastic action . Thus the immediate Soviet attempt is to . deter the U.S. from more . drastic action. Thus the . immediate . Soviet aim was to deter . from more radical action .
 Their diplomatic moves and conduct at sea to date suggest that they fear further U.S. action may be imminent . They wish not to have their prestige further engaged if this should occur .
 The primary Soviet tactic will be to draw the United States into negotiations, meanwhile getting a standstill . The United States is getting stuck in negotiations with Russia .
 The Soviets calculate that, if this can be done, they will have laid heavy inhibitions upon further U.S. unilateral action . With the passage of time, the existing bases will become part of the status quo, the Soviets calculate .
 They prefer the lifting of the quarantine be made a precondition of negotiations, but they probably will not insist upon this . They prefer, of course, that lifting the quarantine is a pre-condition of negotiations .
 US-Soviet-Cuban talks are likely to take place in Cuba . They will probably propose or accept any of several forms of negotiation .
 At the present juncture the Soviets probably view a summit meeting as an appealing proposal to keep open the line of negotiation, especially if a stalemate in UN approaches which might free the United States to take military action .
 With a summit in prospect they would estimate the pressures for the U.S. to wait would be great . With the pressures on the United States to wait for the summit, they say .
 A summit therefore would buy the Soviets some additional time, offer a forum to make a reasonable case, confuse the issues, and raise the political costs of further U.S. action .
 At the same time, they would not want to be faced at the summit with an ultimatum or an unyielding United States position . If it resulted in further actions, further actions would redouble the humiliation to the USSR and Khrushchev personally . The U.S.
 U.S. summit offers more advantages than drawbacks, analysts say . On balance they probably feel that as long as the United States did not appear determined to take action, the summit offers advantages .
 Although the Soviets would like to minimize the risks at the present juncture, they find it very difficult to acquiesce in the United States quarantine . The U.S. government is quarantined the U.N. quarantine .
 U.S. allowed other vessels through upon a verbal declaration of cargo . Their reported reaction suggest that they could accept some time a tacit agreement .
 It is unlikely that the Soviets will submit to boarding, since in doing so they would be accepting the quarantine . The Soviets are unlikely to accept the quarantine, since it would be accepted by quarantine .
 So long as they wish to avoid incidents, therefore, they will be extremely anxious to determine how the U.S. intends to enforce quarantine .
 "The best circumstance would be to lead the United States into attacking a manifestly peaceful vessel," he says .
 The time will probably come when the USSR decides that it would be useful to increase tensions by stepping up the element of threat in their pronouncements . The time is likely to come when Russia decides to step up the threat in its pronouncements.
 Even in this circumstance, however, they are likely to continue avoiding any further commitment to Cuba so long as they remain uncertain about United States intentions . The U.S. remains uncertain about Cuba's intentions .
 With respect to the missiles already in Cuba it seems highly improbable that the USSR will agree to withdraw in the absence of major U.S. concessions elsewhere . The USSR is unlikely to agree to pull out of Cuba unless the United States makes concessions elsewhere in the region .
 There is one circumstance, however, in which a break in this Soviet position might occur, might occur .
 The USSR would regard a successful U.S. military action against the bases, or against Cuba as a whole, as a very great defeat, which might substantially stiffen Western determination to resist Soviet demands in other confrontations,g.g.
 If they believed U.S. military action was all but imminent and unavoidable, they might make a last-minute offer to dismantle the bases in return for some Western concession which, while not offsetting their loss, offered some prospect of saving face .
 It is difficult to conceive, however, how the Soviets could frame such moves or time them properly . The Soviets could use such moves to frame them properly, however .
 In this circumstance they might decide to let the United States attack proceed and recoup as much as possible thereafter through political exploitation and, perhaps, an off-setting injury to United States interests elsewhere . Thus in this circumstance, the U.S. might decide not to attack .
 Bundy-We have boarded the Lebanese/1/ and care/2/ wants to have it got out by Sylvester right away in order to restore our credibility before flag plot leaps . Bundy-Bundy-Baldwin: "We have board the Lebanese. We have boarded
 No prohibited cargo was found and the ship was subsequently allowed to continue to Havana . The ship was stopped in Havana, Cuba, after it was found to have no prohibited cargo .
 Second, we have got this very neat point of how to organize the process of Stevenson's instructions today . We have also got this neat point: How to organize a process of writing .
 Bob McNamara and the Attorney General are steamed up about getting a think tank going like the ones we had last week . Let's have them at the meeting in order that they were at a meeting and then we better work out-Bob McNamara, the attorney general. Let's
 The White House wants to borrow space in your Department to do it . And I think they are right about that, and they are going to want to borrow .
 It seems to be that those two things-we will have to generate an instructions working party and maybe it's all one thing . Maybe the instructions will lead to what the rest of the problems are. It seems that maybe the instructions are what the other problems are .
 Ball-I had McCloy in for breakfast this morning, with Cleveland, going over the instructions . McCloy had a breakfast with McCloy at the start .
 Ball-He is very, very clear in what the objectives have to be, and he is very firm and tough . Ball-It is very clear what the objective has to be for the club, says Ball-Germain .
 Ball— I think it is very important that that point be made because what is happening right now is they haven't given him anything to do . Ball: "I think it's very important to that that . That point should be made" Ball: The president's job is at stake
 Bundy-Well then he certainly should say to them at each stage and you should emphasize and the President should, Bundy-Bundy says . Bundy: "You should bring them both to the 10:00 o'clock. That's what you should do."
 President takes it for granted that McCloy is in on all the talks, because he isn't in on anything at the moment . McCloy has been in talks with the White House since March 1 .
 Ball-Knowing my old friend I can tell you that this has got to be made explicit and the bipartisan way is the way to play it . Ball-Obama: "I can't wait to see what's going to happen next."
 I will pass that to the Boss and I will have a word with you before the meeting if there is any difficulty about it. I will be in touch with the Boss if there are any difficulties about it, he says .
 The record of action of the meeting, prepared by McGeorge Bundy, is in the Supplement .
 Mr McCone described the celebration which took place in Havana following the arrival of the tanker Bucharest . Bucharest had been allowed to pass the quarantine line because it was carrying only oil, which is now contraband .
 Non-Bloc ships could be used to carry military materials if chartered on a bare boat basis by the Russians .
 Mr McCone reported that he had stood down the CIA operation . The operation involved sending into Cuba by submarine ten teams involving fifty people .
 The President has asked that the proposal to put ashore the ten teams be discussed by the Special Group today . The President agreed and asked that .
 The President suggested that the Mongoose operation be reconstituted, possibly as a subcommittee of the Executive Committee, and oriented toward post-Castro Cuban problems . The President also suggested that Mongoose operations be reorganized .
 President stressed the importance of tying together all existing groups engaged in covert activities to integrate our planning .
 Director McCone raised the question of the location of the SS Oxford, a communications [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] ship which is now standing some ten miles off Cuba . The SS Oxford is now ten miles from Cuba .
 He expressed concern that this very valuable ship might be destroyed by hostile action . He expressed his concern that the ship might also be destroyed .
 The President said this was an operational problem, the Navy should have the authority to control this ship, but it should take into account CIA's concern . The Navy should control the ship, he said .
 Three subcommittees are at work-one on Berlin, chaired by Paul Nitze, one on forward planning, and one on worldwide communications problems . One on communications problems is chaired by William Orrick .
 No crash program would be undertaken now, although preliminary measures are to be initiated .
 He referred to the amount of sensitive information which has been leaked to the press . He urged that information about future actions must be more carefully guarded .
 The Defense Department was authorized to release information on the boarding of the Lebanese ship, the Marucla, the first dry cargo ship which had been loaded in a Soviet port . The Defense Dept. was able to release the information .
 In the event that comparisons were made between stopping the Lebanese ship and permitting an East German ship to go through the quarantine line, the point will be made that the East Germany ship carried only passengers . In the case that comparisons are made with stopping the Lebanon ship and allowing the East German vessel
 Secretary McNamara read a list of Bloc ships and their locations and noted that there would be no intercepts at sea today . McNamara: "No intercepts will be made today at sea"
 President suggested that if we decide to embargo bomber fuel, we should also mention the fact that we were embargoing fuel which was contributing to the operational capability of the strategic missiles . The President suggested we should mention that fuel contributed to operational capability .
 Secretary McNamara pointed out that construction on the strategic missile sites in Cuba was continuing . McNamara also said that construction of the sites is continuing .
 He asked that public announcement be made of our continuation of air surveillance . He asked for public announcement of our continuing air surveillance.
 He recommended daylight reconnaissance measures be flown today and a night mission tonight, including the dropping of flares .
 The President directed that we dramatize the fact that the missile buildup in Cuba is continuing, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He authorized daylight reconnaissance measures but decided to delay night flights . He authorized nighttime reconnaissance measures, but delayed night flights to avoid detection .
 He urged that USIA keep the pressure on the Cuban people and mentioned the dropping of leaflets over Cuba .
 Acting Director Wilson requested that better aerial pictures be made available to USIA for distribution . USIA has requested better aerial photographs of the World War II site .
 The President authorized the use of any reconnaissance pictures, including those used by Ambassador Stevenson in his UN speech .
 U.S. Navy ships would stay close to all Cuban ports to ensure that there were no landings unknown to the UN inspectors .
 Secretary Rusk pointed out that we must make clear to U. Thant that the quarantine is related to the Soviet missiles rather than to Soviet military shipments to Cuba . The quarantine was related to Soviet missiles, rather than military shipments .
 Secretary Rusk said Puerto Rico and the Canal Zone would be exempted, but that possibly we might have to accept a ban on the storage of nuclear weapons in the canal zone . Puerto Rico would be exempt from the ban, but possibly we could accept a nuclear weapon ban .
 The proposal would hinder transit by air of nuclear weapons in Latin America . Conceivably, it would hinder the transit of nuclear arms in the region .
 McNamara favored the idea if it was conditioned on the elimination of Soviet missiles in Cuba . McNamara said the Joint Chiefs were cool toward the proposal of a Latin American atomic-free zone .
 General Taylor said Chiefs had no formal position on the proposal . But they were very sceptical as to its efficacy, he said .
 He felt that discussion of this proposal would divert attention from the Soviet missile program . The proposal was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 He is concerned about its effect on the defense of Panama and on our submarine defense system . He was also concerned about the effect on Panama and our submarine system .
 French would have real problems in connection with their weapons testing program, he says . He added that, if, as a result, an atomic-free zone in Africa was made for Africa, the French would be at risk .
 Secretary Rusk said the French could use our nuclear weapons test sites if their African sites were put off bounds . He said this last point could be met by telling the French they could use their nuclear test sites .
 Sorensen points out that if the OAS would support the atomic-free zone proposal, Cuba would be in violation and action could be taken to remove nuclear weapons from Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk felt that it was better for us not to participate in such action as would be necessary if it were done by an organization, i.e. the OAS, to which we belong, to be .
 The President noted that the plan proposed by Brazil not only calls for an atomic-free zone in Latin America,/3/ but it also encompasses a guarantee of the territorial integrity on all Latin American States .
 Secretary Rusk: 'We are committed not to invade Cuba, having signed the UN Charter and the Rio Treaty'
 The draft resolution was subsequently submitted to the First Committee as draft resolution A/C.l/L/312 . It has been subsequently submitted in a draft resolution .
 Secretary Rusk read a draft cable which he wished to send to the Brazilian Ambassador in Cuba outlining an approach to Castro,/4/ with a view to persuading him to break with the Russians .
 Mr Nitze called attention to the importance of getting Soviet missiles out urgently .
 Mr McCone expressed his dislike of a situation involving continued control of Cuba by Castro . He said he didn't want to see the situation in Cuba .
 Even if the Soviet missiles are removed, Castro will be in an excellent position to undertake the Communization of Latin America . Castro, if he is left in control, will be an excellent place to take over Latin America, says Julian Zelizer .
 Secretary Rusk said the present position is that Cuba ties to the USSR are not negotiable . Rusk also said the Cuban government is not willing to negotiate with the Soviet Union .
 Mr Bundy pointed out, and the President agreed, that our objective was to get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba . Mr Bundy said, and . the President . agreed, and agreed, with Mr Bundy . The President agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 Mr Nitze called attention to the importance of obtaining a guarantee that the nuclear missiles would be disassembled from their launchers .
 Castro would pledge not to accept offensive weapons of any kind, ever, in return for U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . Bases would be dismantled under United Nations supervision . U.N. supervision would be overseen by the United States under Castro .
 I said I didn't know but that perhaps this is something that could be talked about . I said that perhaps perhaps this could be discussed about. I said it was something that might be possible, but it was not clear what .
 "He gave me his home telephone number so I could call him tonight, if necessary," he said . He gave me a telephone number to call him if necessary .
 Fomin claimed that Cuban delegate to UN during Security Council debate asked for such no-invasion assurances in return for dismantling but that he got no reply . Fomin claims he asked for no reply from UN Security Council delegate during debate .
 I told him I'd followed the UN debate very carefully but could not recall any such remarks on Cuban's part . He said he'd followed it very carefully and could not remember any remarks .
 Russia forced to make concessions to Communist China in order to convince them to stop the fighting against India . Fomin also said Russia had been forced ""to make some concessions"" to Communist . China . Russia had to make 'some concessions' to convince the Communist China to stop fighting .
 He recalled they hadn't helped the ChiComs with nuclear weapons or conventional weapons in the past, even tanks . He hinted it might be aid in the conventional field . But he recalled they haven't helped them with conventional weapons .
 Martin was drafted by Martin, cleared with U Alexis Johnson, and approved by Rusk . Rusk was approved by both Martin and Johnson .
 We believe time has come for representative friendly country to discuss with Castro alone predicament in which Soviet actions have placed him . Time has come to discuss Castro's predicament with a friendly country, we say .
 We also believe Brazilian Ambassador in Havana is best person to do this and therefore wish you to see Hermes Lima as soon as possible to secure his agreement to instruction to their Ambassador .
 This approach to Castro should be handled in such way as make absolutely clear to Castro it is solely Brazilian initiative . This approach is needed to make it clear that it is a Brazilian initiative, not a government initiative .
 We would hope matter could be handled by Brazilians with greatest discretion . Naturally we would hope it could be dealt with with the utmost discretion .
 The countries of the Inter-American System have unanimously called for their removal and approved and are participating in the meas-ures being taken to eliminate this Soviet threat to all of them . The countries are calling for the removal of the Soviet threat .
 The Soviet Union is turning around its cargo ships in face of U.S. quarantine which the countries of hemisphere have authorized . Soviet Union turned around cargo ships after the United States imposed quarantine .
 Soviet officials put out feelers to allied governments for exchanges of their position in Cuba for concessions by NATO countries in other parts of the world . The Soviet Union is failing to support Cuba on this matter, and numerous feelers have been put out .
 Time is very short for Castro to decide whether to devote his great leadership abilities to the service of his Cuban peoples or to serving as a Soviet pawn in their struggle for world domination by force and threat of force .
 If Castro tries to rationalize the presence of these missiles as due to Cuban fear of a U.S. invasion, Ambassador Batian should reply that he is confident that the OAS would not accept an invasion of Cuba once the missiles were removed, he says .
 The meeting began with a discussion of the considerably-increased activity in the dispatch, and preparation for dispatch, of agent teams . The meeting also discussed the increased activity of agents in the field .
 All plans for dispatch should be suspended pending further examination . Instructions were issued during the course of the meeting designed to recall the three teams already on the way .
 It was agreed that the first order of business with regard to these teams is to examine in detail the requirements toward which they could contribute . The teams will be examined in detail in order to examine the requirements .
 General Carroll, to examine what military requirements such agents could service, State Department for political intelligence requirements, and USIA for requirements peculiar to that Agency . General Carroll will also look at the State Department, USIA and the USIA .
 After this examination, it will then be decided what the best use of these agent assets actually should be .
 Mr McCone and Mr Harvey said during the course of the discussion on agent teams, that the action taken had represented a unilateral decision by CIA . The action was not in response to specific military requirements, they said .
 CIA had considered that it was a continuation of previously-approved operations . CIA had felt that this was within its sphere of responsibility, and particularly with respect to the first three teams had considered it to be a continuation .
 Mr McCone commented that internal security in Cuba is now far more stringent than it was two weeks ago, thereby making agent operations much more difficult . He felt that agent activity on this scale will only be justified if the responsible departments specifically require it .
 General Taylor said Chiefs had approved use of submarines for agent dispatch . He said they had not been asked to review operation in broader context .
 The Chiefs concluded that no revolt should be stimulated unless and until the United States is ready to support it . The military establishment does not wish to take over sabotage and similar operations at this time .
 Mr McCone agreed that it is possible that as the situation develops, CIA Cuban operations might move under military control, but that such action is not indicated at this time .
 Mr Harvey made the point that the proposed agent dispatches would not use up all existing assets .
 He said in the event of invasion, a sizable number of Cubans could be trained quickly . He said that in the case of an invasion, Cuba could be easily trained quickly.
 The Attorney General and General Lansdale emphasized that the Cubans are entirely prepared to make the necessary sacrifices if they are in support of an approved plan . The attorney general and general Lansdale said that Cubans will make sacrifices if approved .
 The Cubans do want assurances that such activities are approved at a high level . Cubans want assurances they are allowed to take part in such activities . The Cuban government has been criticized by the U.S. for its lack of transparency .
 Mr Bundy emphasized the importance of planning for the use of Cubans in political and civil activities during military action .
 He felt that there should be established within the government some sort of "Office of Free Cuban Affairs" The office should probably should be placed within the Department of State .
 The activities of this office would be distinct from General Lansdale's operations but would be closely related to them . The activities would be similar to General Lansdal's operations .
 He pointed out that top priority should be given to selecting a man to head such an office .
 Bundy said a subcommittee of the NSC Executive Committee should be established to deal with Mongoose affairs . Bundy also said he thought a subcommittee should be set up to handle the matter .
 McNamara: Mongoose in the short-term should be considered in the context of providing support for action designed to get rid of the missiles .
 CIA should continue to develop the balloon propaganda facilities, it was recognized that by the target date of 1 December this capability might not be needed because of other methods of delivery .
 Establishment of USIA's new 50 KW transmitter in the Florida Keys should be expedited . Establishment of new 50KW transmitters in Florida Keys is needed urgently .
 It was reiterated that General Lansdale is the focal point for all Mongoose activities, that he is charged with their overall management . Lansdale should be kept informed of all significant plans and activities in connection with the project .
 Thomas A Parrott signed a copy of the original of the book .
 Rusk, Johnson, Chayes, Martin, McCloy and Stevenson cleared in draft by Rusk . Rusk was drafted by Cleveland and cleared by the Browns .
 At beginning of first meeting with SYG you should take occasion restate basic U.S. position that early removal nuclear missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba is the essence of the matter . Early removal of nuclear missiles from Cuba should be key, he says .
 We understand that the Secretary General is proposing first a discussion of some form of standstill or freeze (covering arms shipments to Cuba, the build up of offensive weapons in Cuba, and our quarantine action) to be followed by broader talks on peaceful settlement of the larger issue .
 The build up of weapons must stop, and weapons must be removed before too long, the team says . The team says they are willing to handle matter in two stages .
 The OAS quarantine action will not be lifted until the threat which provoked it is removed, it says . We would emphasize further that the quarantine action won't be lifted unless the threat provoked it was removed .
 Within this framework of policy, following is for your guidance in early discussions with SYG and Soviet delegates, following . Follows the guidance of your guidance to SYG, Soviet delegates .
 Security Council has adjourned sine die and all efforts will be focused for next two or three days on US-USSR discussions through or with Thant . U.S. Security Council will be focusing on the US-U.K. talks through or through Thant, says
 SYG calls discussion of 'modalities' is not an attempt to solve basic problem, but must at least attempt to achieve a condition which would involve no more offensive arms being delivered to Cuba . No further build-up of missile sites or bomber facilities, and any existing Cuban nuclear strike
 Achievement of such a standstill will require substantial administrative effort by SYG with assistance of a number of countries, to put UN in position to guarantee that standstill would be effective .
 The problem of ""modalities"" divides naturally into two parts, UN control of shipments to Cuba and UN observation of Cuban compliance with suspension of further build-up . Cuban nuclear strike capacity is inoperability of any nuclear strike capability .
 The United States Fleet would remain approximately as deployed at the present time . The U.S. Navy would remain about as deployed as it does .
 U.S. Naval Force would maintain surveillance to discover any attempt to off-load or trans-ship at locations other than designated UN ports .
 Responsible U.S. Fleet Commander in the area would report any violation he might observe to Washington which would bring violation to attention of SYG or head of UN observation operation .
 "It would have to be understood by SYG from the outset that U.S. surveillance continues and latent force is in background," says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Sea traffic to Cuba consists of one or two ships arriving per day . On present basis, sea traffic to Cuban island consists of just one ship a day .
 A list of "prohibited material" is included in Presidential Proclamation and supplementary orders under it will be provided for your guidance in discussing this point . The list of prohibited material is provided for you to discuss .
 UN observers will be stationed in the main military and civilian airfields in Cuba . UN observers would be stationed at the main airfields .
 Observers would be stationed in adequate numbers to ensure no further construction or improvements of MRBM or IRBM sites, and to ensure that any existing missiles are kept inoperable .
 Inspectors to be provided under this procedure must be of such technical competence . Inspectors must be able to identify items of offensive military equipment, and to carry out control functions at airports and missile sites .
 Inspectors must also have authority to observe separation of components of missile system to ensure that the missiles are inoperable . Not only must inspectors be physically placed to observe what is there, they must have the authority to inspect separation of parts of the system .
 Several dozen well-trained technical people would be required and number of countries from which they could come is limited . Many of the personnel would in practice be performing administrative functions .
 Dependable first-rate personnel for this operation will be essential . U.S. should have a strong voice in their selection, says President Obama .
 Technical teams would examine U.S. advice as to where to go and what to look for . Advance preparation of technical teams would include examination of United States advice .
 Quality and political reliability of inspectors would be key to any inspection system . Inspectors should be able to be trusted to make sure they are working on the right track .
 Likelihood that Soviets will permit real inspection their site is so remote that it would be unwise to concede on quality and reliability in return for paper agreement on access to site . U.S. would not be willing to give up on quality, reliability of site .
 Violations or suspected violations of agreed arrangements observed by that UN observer team will be immediately notified to the SYG . Violations will be passed by him to the parties concerned .
 The U.S. retains the right to reactivate quarantine measures or take other necessary action if agreed arrangements are violated . The United States will, of course, retain the right .
 Legal and parliamentary status in the United Nations of arrangements agreed between the parties directly concerned can only be worked out when it is possible to see what kind of a UN operation would be involved .
 Security Council action would probably be useful at least to place at SYG's disposal the resources he would require for any substantial UN operation . Security Council might be useful for SYG to place resources at his disposal .
 During talks on standstill arrangements we do not think it would be useful to start process of bargaining on wider issues, or on possible terms of final peaceful settlement . We do not want to start bargaining on such wider issues .
 The original Russian language text, which bears no classification, is ibid . It bears no classifications .
 The source text is a translation done at the Embassy in Moscow, which received the letter at 4:43m. ET .
 The first section arrived in the Department of State at 6m. and the last at 9m. They arrived at the State Department at 6pm and 9pm .
 From your letter, I got the feeling that you have some understanding of the situation which has developed and a sense of responsibility . Ill Ill from your letter: 'From your letter I got a feeling of . understanding of . the situation and responsibility' Ill said .
 If war broke out, it would be a war not only between the Soviet Union and the United States, but a worldwide cruel and destructive war . The preservation of world peace should be our joint concern, he says .
 Fomin asked several times if this message came from high sources and Scali replied that it came from very high places . The paper went on to note that Fomin . Fomin said he asked Fomin several times about the message . Scali responded to the question several times .
 The Soviet Counselor then inquired if it would be possible to have United Nations inspectors also check United States bases in Florida and surrounding Caribbean countries . U.N. inspectors would also be allowed to check U.S. bases .
 Stevenson, McCloy, Yost and Plimpton met at 4:30 pm at Secretariat with SYG, Loutfi, Narasimhan and Rikhye . Stevenson and McCloy met at . 4:20 pm at . Secretariat .
 "The real essence of the problem was to get the missiles and the nuclear aircraft out of Cuba," he says . "We pointed out that the real issue was getting the missiles out of the Cuban airbase"
 No further weapons or materiel should be introduced; There should be no further work on the sites; The missiles presently in Cuba should be inoperable; and The suspension of the quarantine should be suspended . No further work should be done on Cuba's missile sites .
 If it were agreed that no bloc ships or bloc-chartered ships were to approach Cuba, the only remaining problem would be the inspection of other ships . As to shipping, if it were . agreed that . no bloc . ships or . bloc-chartered ships were . to
 This inspection could take place at the ports of embarkation, on the assumption that the ship was not calling at a bloc port, or at the landing ports .
 Rikhye pointed out that ships declare cargoes at landing ports, which should simplify inspection . He said that ships declaring cargues at landing points should ease inspection .
 United States Fleet would continue to be deployed during interim period, not for purpose of interception but to ensure that there was no trans-shipment at sea or landing at uninspected ports . U.S. Fleet will be deployed to ensure there is no transshipment in sea or
 It was agreed that the problem of inspection would be quite simple if bloc lived up to Khrushchev agreement to keep bloc shipping away from Cuba .
 We next raised question of inspection of incoming aircraft at airfields . We also raised the question of inspecting incoming aircraft .
 It was pointed out that few aircraft come in from the bloc, and that the principal problem might relate to incoming cargo planes from other countries .
 They were located at a strictly military field, which had previously been closed up . We pointed out that they were located in the military field .
 Heavy camouflaging of the sites is being attempted to cover them up . Construction was progressing rapidly through yesterday, and that heavy camouflaging was being attempted . As to sites, we said that construction .
 We pointed out this was vitally important and urgent problem, which required UN inspectors and constant reports by them . UN inspectors are needed to deal with the problem, the BBC said .
 SYG said he would send appeal to Castro tonight through Inchaustegui to suspend construction of the sites, and would also speak to Zorin about it . SYG: He would also send appeal for suspension of construction to be suspended .
 SYG said he would insist on a UN team to oversee compliance . SYG would insist that UN team oversee compliance with the dismantling of the sites .
 We stated that non-operability of existing missiles was a difficult problem which it was essential to deal with . We said non-operation of existing missile missiles was an essential problem .
 IRBM missile sites not yet ready and would not be for some time . Problem related primarily to medium-range missiles since IRBM sites were not ready . IRBM missiles would be used to launch medium range missiles .
 We discussed possibility of separating missiles from launchers as a guarantee of non-operability . The missiles could be separated from launchers, the government said .
 If missiles close to launchers, only a few hours are required for firing, and we must have guarantee against surprise launching . The U.S. must also have a guarantee of protection against surprise launch, the U.N. says .
 Rikhye said he was sure Soviets would not permit inspectors to look at such equipment .
 He asked whether UN presence might not give assurance that there would be no attack . He asked if UN presence would not give assurances that there was no attack on Syria .
 Our aerial surveillance was also mentioned as a possible deterrent and a possible Soviet and Cuban guarantee of no attack . The U.S. and Cuba were mentioned as possible deterrent .
 Soviet nuclear striking capacity was estimated to be increased 20 per cent by Cuban installations . We pointed out that problem of crucial importance since .
 SYG again raised question of solving whole problem through assurance by U.S. that it would not attack Cuba and would prevent others from doing so, with resulting dismantling of all Soviet installations . SYG said this should be a starting point .
 He suggested the possibility of writing him a letter to the President to the effect that the U.S. willing to make such a guarantee, if offensive weapons withdrawn, which he would use in negotiations . He suggested that the President's letter could be written to him .
 We pointed out that the OAS would have to be consulted in any such connection, which the SYG said he understood . The OAS has been consulted on the proposal, which he said he understands .
 LA states considered Cuban indirect aggression against them . We also referred to problem of what LA states consider indirect aggression . LA states also considered what they considered Cuban direct aggression .
 SYG said it would be much easier to get Cuba to agree if there were reciprocity for face-saving purposes . UN inspection of Cuban refugee camps would prove no military training, SYG says .
 UN inspection teams must include sophisticated experts who understand enough of missiles to know what to look for, UN says . UN inspectors must be sophisticated experts, says UN spokesman .
 U.S. ought to be able to designate or nominate people for the team . We pointed out that United States ought to nominate people .
 SYG said it would be difficult to include nationals of United States and USSR . He said he was sure teams would have to be composed of neutrals .
 Many neutral countries now know quite a bit about missiles as a result of Geneva conferences . Geneva conferences have helped neutral countries learn a lot about missiles .
 It was agreed that the United States could brief the teams ahead of time to show them what to look for . The United States agreed that they could brief them ahead of the match .
 Rikhye said he would be glad to get together with a U.S. expert on missile matters to discuss the inspection problem as related to missiles .
 SYG asked Zorin as to publication of letters to and from President and from Khrushchev . As regards publication of SYG's recent letters to . President and to and . and from . and to . and . from Khrrushchev, SYG has been asked to
 SYG said publication of such letters should be withheld . Until agreement to publish was received from Soviet Union, SYG withheld publication .
 SYG much less concerned with blockade than at earlier meeting with Yost and Plimpton,/l/ and seemed much more aware of site construction and missile operability problems and need for inspection . SYG seems much more concerned with site construction than with earlier meeting . Meeting with Y
 U.S. guarantee to Cuba could be short-circuit solution of whole problem, says Obama . Cuba has been a source of tension between Washington and Havana for years .
 Since Stevenson was still in Washington, Yost and Plimpton had represented the United States side . Yost had been representing the U.S. side since Stevenson was there .
 Governor Stevenson saw U Thant this afternoon/1/ and made our proposals about the importation of arms ceasing, and that work on these bases stopping and leading to eventual dismemberment . Well, Governor Stevenson .
 There are some reports around, some Russian conversations, but it's rather unofficial and unreliable, about some thought that it's possible they might do something about withdrawing the weapons . If they could get a territorial guarantee of Cuba, they might withdraw weapons .
 "But that is so unofficial that I'm not in a position now to know whether there's anything to it or not. But that's so unofficial," he said .
 Khrushchev told U Thant that he would keep his ships out of there for the time being, but he wouldn't do it very long . Khrrushchev said he would not keep the ships out for the long-term .
 "He isn't giving us very much because actually he's got no ships in the area anyway anyway," he says . He says. "I'm not going to be able to get very much of what he's giving us."
 He's keeping his ships out of there for the time being . But at least he's made that announcement; he's making that announcement .
 Unless in the next 48 hours we get some political suggestions as to dismantling the base, we're then going to be faced with a problem of what to do about this build-up . And I put a statement out this afternoon describing how the build up is going on .
 Cuba might be made like Belgium was-an international guarantee of inviolable country which all of us would guarantee its neutrality and inviolability independently . Well as I see it-one idea you just mentioned is that Cuba might have been made .
 There is no room for a settlement on that basis. Well, that is a matter that it seems to me we ought to be thinking about and we will be talking about that in the next 24 hours— as to whether there is any room for that .
 The Russians have shipped in a good deal of defensive equipment . It would leave the Russians perhaps free to ship in more of the equipment . The deal is good for the Russians, who have already shipped in .
 We now find a good many self-propelled armored vehicles, with very sophisticated conventional equipment, and so on. It's a good step up to the next generation of armored vehicles . The U.S. military says it will be a major challenge to the Syrian regime .
 "It may be a possibility, but I could probably give you more information about that by tomorrow night," he says .
 There have been a couple of hints but not enough to go on yet yet . But at least there have been some hints, but there are no hints yet .
 U Thant might himself propose to the United Nations, which I believe they would accept, that he should go with the team and insure that these missiles were made inoperable during the period of any conference or discussion .
 "There would have to be some technical way of determining that these weapons were being made inoperable," he says . The weapons are not being used, he adds .
 He might suggest to the UN that he would go with a team of experts which would supervise the matter during the talks . I am quite sure that U Thant would have done such a thing, he says .
 Refugee Camps in Florida, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Guatemala and Swan Island . Also want to inspect some of the refugee camps in Florida and Nicaragua .
 "I don't think we've got anything going there that would be difficult to inspect," says Mark Hughes . "We've got a lot of work to do in the area," says Hughes .
 Political proposals are now being looked at in view of the Governor's conversation . But this is all part of the political proposals which are now looking at .
 By tomorrow morning or noon we should be in a position of knowing whether there is some political proposal that we could agree to, Prime Minister David Cameron says .
 In the meanwhile the quarantine stays; he doesn't send ships in; we let a ship pass this afternoon . There are no other ships within 48 hours or so, so we don't expect any problems on the sea .
 The problem that concerns us is the continued build-up, and I issued a statement on that today . The problem is that we have to deal with it, he says . The government has not been able to find a solution to the problem .
 I think I could probably get you a little more precise information on the various political proposals than U. Thant's conversation with Stevenson . Stevenson: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do, but I'm glad to hear from Stevenson"
 I'll send you a report on that tonight and then you will have it in the morning . CNN.com will feature the latest in a series of stories from the White House .
 If we want to save face, would it be worthwhile our undertaking to keep open eyes on all exiles which are here in England during the same period, during the conference. If you are in the UK, it's important to keep an eye on all the exiles that are here
 I will put that into the machinery and then I will be in touch with you on that . Let me put that in the machinery, I said, and I will get in contact with you . I'm not sure how long it will be .
 President: Good, Prime Minister, let me send that over to the Department. Mr. Obama: "Good, PM. Let's go back to the U.S. President"
 I think we don't want to have too many dismantlings, but it's possible that that proposal might help . I think it might help. It's possible it might be a good idea to have some of the world's largest structures dismantled .
 They might also insist on Turkey and Italy, but I will keep in mind your suggestion here so that if it gets into that that may be advantageous, it may also be advantageous .
 I will let Stevenson know that and he will have that in mind in the conversation . I will tell him that . I'm not sure if he will be interested in a meeting with the media .
 You will send your message tomorrow and we will continue this tomorrow. You will continue to send it to the world tomorrow .
 The prospect of a trade of missiles and some guarantees of Cuba is still so vague that I am not really in a position to say that there is any possibility as yet . I haven't seen the entire conversation, but I think that there may-and the prospect .
 "We let one ship pass today for the very reason that you've named. Well, we're not going to have any problem at sea because he is keeping his ships out of there."
 "If in the end of 48 hours we are getting no place and the missile sites continue to be constructed, then we are going to be faced with some hard decisions," he says . "On the other hand, if in the next 48 hours there are no places and the sites continue
 President: "That's correct, and that's really why we have not done more than we have done up until now" Mr. Obama: "We are not going to do more"
 If the missile sites continue and get constructed and we don't do anything about it, then I would suppose that it would have quite an effect on Berlin anyway . But of course on the other hand, if the sites continue, they would have a big impact on Berlin, he says .
 I will send you a message concerning them and you will send me U Thant's conversation . I will also send me a message regarding them and send me the conversation .
 Yes, I'll send you a memorandum based on the conversation that Stevenson had with U. Thant . Yes, Mr. Stevenson says .
 I will also keep in touch with you tomorrow at this time if you-or otherwise, I'll send you a message tomorrow. I'll also keep track of you tomorrow .
 I won't bother to call you tomorrow, because I may be down-I may be away from here tomorrow evening, and I assume you may be too . "I won't be calling you tomorrow because I'm down," she says .
 I will send you a message if there is anything new, and in any case I will talk to you on the phone before we do anything of a drastic nature. But I'll send a message to you if there's anything new. I will be talking to you before I do anything
 General Norstad would stay on until January 1st, that there be an overlap with Lemnitzer's tour of duty, says CNN's John Sutter .
 You'll be getting a formal letter, and I didn't want to say anything about it because we haven't been in touch with General de Gaulle as yet, who is very sensitive in these NATO matters . The French president is "very sensitive" in NATO matters, he says .
 I'll be in touch in a formal way with you tomorrow on that matter . Well, I'll send you tonight the memorandum on the U Thant conversation-and I hope all goes well. Well, he says .
 President: Good, fine, Prime Minister, and I'll be in touch with you very shortly. Thank you very much President: Prime Minister . Prime Minister: "I'll be very happy to see you back in touch very shortly."
 Reports number one and two are included in the Supplement . Report Number Three of the Planning Subcommittee .
 The Planning Subcommittee considered the situation as of Friday morning, October 26, 1962 . The planning subcommittee considered the issue as of that morning .
 To maintain diplomatic and public focus on the continued exist-ence and expansion of offensive installations in Cuba . To increase the degree of our pressure and to build anxiety in all quarters that more decisive action will be required of the United States to eliminate the offensive installations .
 Pressure building up to airstrike against missile installations in Syria . Operational and political track involving progressively increased pressure building up an airstrike on missile installations .
 Assessment of possibilities and dangers in Cuban political situation . Assessment and recommendations concerning possibilities of dangers in Cuba political situation.
 Regular daily reassessment of Soviet intentions and appropriate posture for U.S. Assessment of Free World political position vis-a-vis the crisis . Recommendations for United States action .
 The planning tasks listed in Report Number Two are either going forward or will be consolidated into the tasks listed above . The planning task list is either going ahead or going forward .
 The source text is attached to an undated memorandum of transmittal to the President and to an October 26 memorandum from Rostow to Rusk . It states that it was prepared in response to a ""direct request"" from Bundy on October 24 . Bundy asked Rostow for information on
 The optimum setting for US-Soviet negotiations would be one in which Soviet offensive weapons had already been removed from Cuba . The best time for talks would be when offensive weapons were removed from the country .
 Soviet acceptance of some proposal involving cessation of Soviet site construction and perhaps of Soviet shipping to Cuba . Or ascending United States economic and military pressures on Cuba .
 The actual situation may include both some diplomatic progress and some increased U.S. pressure . The situation may also include increased United States pressure .
 If negotiations fail, for expanded U.S. economic or military action to remove the weapons . The negotiations are expected to pave the way for expanded United States economic or . military action .
 To use the crisis to reach agreement on other measures that would, in any case, be in our interest . The crisis would be in the interest of the UK, says David Cameron .
 "It is essential to avoid any implication that we are trading off pre-crisis allied or U.S. interests to secure removal of Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba," says President Obama .
 The best way to attain the purposes in para 2 may be through a Summit meeting . The Summit meeting may be a meeting of Summit members .
 At this level, it may be easier to widen the scope of the negotiations in such a way as to resolve the crisis without an obvious and humiliating Soviet backdown .
 The situation may well develop so as to make these alternatives more feasible and useful . Other levels and forums are also available .
 If negotiations do not succeed, we will take early action to remove Soviet offensive weapons, says President Obama .
 We should seek an immediate allied decision to set up the small pilot NATO Southern Command multilateral seaborne force proposed by Ambassador Finletter . We should make clear our intent to provide interim coverage with Polaris and other external forces .
 Turkish and Italian governments should get quietly on the NAC record what we would take to be their intent, i.e., to phase out IRBM's in view of the prospect of the Southern Command force, the interim Polaris and other United States coverage .
 "We should make crystal clear, in negotiations, the sharp division between Cuba and other subjects on which we would wish to negotiate regardless of whether there was a Cuban crisis," says President Obama .
 In negotiations about Cuba, we should demand early agreement on removal of Soviet offensive weapons, possibly in the context of a Latin American ""nuclear free"" zone, in return for the end of the quarantine .
 Safeguards against miscalculations, e.g., exchange of U.S. and Soviet military observation teams, direct communication facilities between United States and Soviet national command centers, etc. Safeguardards against .
 Review of key differences of approach in the Geneva Disarmament and Test Ban negotiations . U.S. and Soviet negotiators will try to determine if any useful new directive can be given to the United States .
 We would make clear that the troop issue was non-negotiable, but that we were prepared to reach a ""Solution C"" type agreement, which did not purport to be a final Berlin settlement but which put the matter on ice and allowed East Germans to substitute for the Soviets
 This could be dressed up in various ways— UN observer, no nuclear arms in Berlin, etc. -for face-saving purposes . This could have been dressed up as a UN observer .
 If the Soviets were interested, this matter could be pursued further at the minister level with other interested parties . The Soviet Union could be interested in the project, according to Russian diplomats .
 We might suggest to the Soviets that feasible aspects of the German question might be pursued further at the foreign minister level with other interested parties . Mixed commissions to increase inter-German contacts might be considered .
 Heads of the UK and French governments would be invited to meet in a future quadripartite Summit, to review any work done at the foreign minister level in the meantime on Berlin and Germany .
 "Speed is of the essence, since passage of time may make less credible our resolve to remove Soviet offensive weapons if negotiations fail," says President Obama .
 If we asked her to stop and she did, we would inspect the cargo for contraband and release her . If, as expected, she had no prohibited material aboard, she would be released if there was no contraband .
 If she refuses to stop, we would stop her by force and sink her if the cargo included prohibited material . We would also sink her in the water if she refused to stop .
 Secretary McNamara recommended, and the President approved, two daylight reconnaissance missions . One in the morning and one in the afternoon, the missions would take place in daylight hours .
 Under Secretary Ball reported that the Turks would be very difficult about withdrawal of their strategic missiles . The Italians would be easier to persuade if we chose to withdraw Jupiters from Italy, he said .
 Mr Bundy read a draft press statement and Mr Gilpatric read a statement which he had prepared . The pair read a joint statement from Mr Bundy and MrGilpatric .
 Mr Sorensen introduced a draft statement which was read by the group 76/ /6/ not found .
 It was not possible to say with certainty whether the Soviet public offer included all NATO basses or referred specifically to Turkey .
 The Attorney General expressed his concern as to what our position would be if we talked to the Russians for sixty days and then the Cubans refused to permit UN inspectors to continue to ensure that missiles in Cuba were inoperable, he said .
 Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, October 27, 1962 . Message from Chairman Khruschev to . President Kennedy: "I'm sure you can't wait to see what's going to happen"
 A copy of this article has been sent to Acting SecretaryGeneral U Thant . A note on the source text indicates a copy of the article was sent to acting SecretaryGeneral Thant.
 Problems of Communism reports that this message was broadcast over Moscow radio at 5m, the same time the Russian text was delivered to the Embassy . Problems of Communist reports that the text was broadcast by Moscow radio .
 Khrushchev signed a copy of the original . Print from a copy that indicates Khrushchechev signed the original.
 This study will be provided by the Department of Defense in conjunction with the DOD Comptroller's office .
 Mr Schaetzel stressed the dilemma involved in trying to keep the Allies sufficiently informed to carry them with us while at the same time guarding security .
 He said it would be highly desirable for the Allies to be kept abreast of the developing situation through official United States channels rather than through the press .
 Proposals were made to have Mr Thompson and Mr Nitze give regular briefings to the quadripartite Ambassadors .
 Schaetzel will have a paper on Monday setting forth this proposal in detail . Mr Schaetz has a paper to propose the proposal .
 General Twitchell was asked to put in a paper at the same time on the possibility of supplying screened operational information to the British Army .
 Mr Schaetzel will also look into the question of making similar periodic reports to other nations through our embassies .
 The subject was discussed and while no firm and formal judgments were reached the sense of the group was that the door should be closed as quickly as possible on the idea of trading the United States position in Turkey for the Soviet position in Cuba .
 Mr Merchant proposed that a special envoy, possibly Mr Livingston Merchant, should be sent to Ankara to consult with the Turkish government and keep them informed of developments in this area .
 Mr Nitze summarized the contents of the letter sent by Khrushchev to the President . He also referred to a subsequent TASS release which linked the Cuban missiles with those in Turkey 73/
 The sense of the group regarding the need to keep Turkish bases from being linked in any way with the Cuban situation was conveyed to Mr Nitze .
 There will be no meeting on Sunday, October 28, except at the call of the chair . Meeting will be held at the chair of the board .
 Stevenson, McCloy, Yost and Plimpton had conference with SYG alone at 11:45 this morning . Stevenson and McCloy had conference at 12:30 a.m.
 Khrushchev's message of last night to the President contained no reference to Turkey . We showed the message to President,/1/ pointing out that it contained no mention of Turkey .
 "We also pointed out it in effect conceded existence in Cuba of complete nuclear missile capability"
 SYG had just seen Reuter despatch regarding Khrushchev's public statement regarding Turkey . SYG was in the midst of a crisis in the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 Khrushchev's Turkey proposal was the result of his own clandestine nuclear intrusion into the Western Hemisphere . He gets a guarantee of Cuban integrity and the removal of the Turkey base, whereas all we get is removal of intrusion which he should not have made anyway .
 Turkey base is not for the defense of Turkey but for the defence of Europe, NATO says . NATO base is part of the whole NATO defensive structure . Turkey base not for Turkey's defense but for Europe's defense of Europe .
 We pointed out that these were informal observations and that we had no positive instructions from Washington . We pointed to the fact that these are informal observations were made .
 We said the Turkish base might be a proper subject for discussion covering various aspects of the overall disarmament and European situations after the status quo had been restored . We said such restoration requires removal of weapons from Cuba .
 The removal of nuclear weapons from Cuba was an immediate essential for NATO allies in Turkey . Since all NATO partners involved in Turkey base any negotiations as to its removal would require a great deal of time .
 We said it seemed highly probable that the Cuban issue could be settled on the basis of Khrushchev's first letter . We urged SYG to press for such immediate solution and for confining all discussions to Cuba and the exclusion of the Turkish base problem .
 SYG said he would keep the points in mind, but that he did not wish to make any remarks on substance of the matter . SYG: "I would keep these points in my mind" SYG says he would not make any comments about substance of matter .
 SYG does not want the American image tarnished by any public impression that Khrushchev is reasonable and the United States not . He hopes the reply would evidence willingness to negotiate .
 SYG mentioned the great concern all over world as to seriousness of situation . SYG said the situation was very serious and that it was serious .
 SYG said he had urged both Castro and Zorin to have work on sites stopped immediately . SYG: "I have urged both leaders to have their work stopped immediately"
 Zorin had turned request aside asking how anyone could rely on U.S. intelligence . He had asked if anyone should rely on the United States intelligence .
 SYG also said that as to inspection of ship cargoes arriving in Cuba, Zorin had said this question should be addressed to Cuban authorities . SYG said that this is a matter of concern for Cuban authorities.
 SYG would prefer to confine discussions to Cuba, we believe . We have little confidence he will take firm position with Sovs on this point . SYG wants to avoid being caught in middle .
 Secretary McNamara reported on today's daylight reconnaissance mission . Secretary of State McNamara said the mission was a "reconvoyance mission"
 There followed a discussion of a draft letter from the President to Khrushchev . The President added to the draft an offer to discuss with the Russians the proposals they had made public .
 The President asked whether we should call together the represent-atives of NATO to report to them what we had done and were planning to do . The President said that the President wanted to call together NATO representatives to report their progress .
 Secretary Rusk then read a Stevenson draft of a letter to Khrushchev 74/ /4/ Not found .
 Unless the missiles are defused immediately, the Chiefs recommended implementation on Monday/5/ of OP Plan 312,e.e. a major air strike, and, seven days later, OP Plan 316, which is invasion plan .
 The President directed that our air reconnaissance missions be flown tomorrow without fighter escort . The President has directed that the President .
 The President considered a draft message to the Turks about their missile . The Turkish missile is believed to have been launched by the U.S.
 NATO response would be to use United States forces in Turkey to attack Soviet Black Sea fleet . U.S. forces would attack, by sea and by air, by air and by sea, the Soviet fleet .
 Regarding the drafting of this message, see Robert F Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 102, and Theodore C Sorensen, Kennedy, 714 . Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. was assassinated in June 1968 .
 The effect of such a settlement on easing world tensions would enable us to work toward a more general arrangement regarding ""other armaments""", as proposed in your second letter which you made public . The United States is very much interested in reducing tensions and halting the arms race .
 "For this reason I hope we can quickly agree along the lines outlined in this letter and in your letter of October 26. /s/ John F Kennedy""
 At the request of Secretary Rusk, I telephoned Ambassador Dobrynin at approximately 7:15m. on Saturday, October 27th. At the time of the call, I was asked to speak to the Russian ambassador in London .
 A letter had just been transmitted to the Soviet Embassy which stated in substance that the missile bases should be dismantled and all offensive weapons should be removed from Cuba . In return, Cuba and Castro and the Communists ended their subversive activities in other Central and Latin American countries, we would agree to keep
 The call up of the air reserve squadrons is necessary to the invasion plan and will also serve to keep the pressure on the Russians . The call-up is necessary for the invasion plans .
 He said mobilization of private U.S. shipping should be initiated tomorrow in order to have sufficient ships available for an invasion . He said the mobilization should be started tomorrow .
 The President said that if our reconnaissance planes are fired on tomorrow, and if we know the results of U Thant's talks with the Russians, then we should take out the SAM sites in Cuba by air action .
 With respect to the Soviet tanker Graznyy approaching quarantine zone, the Attorney General recommended that we take no action against it .
 The President agreed that if the tanker crosses the barrier, we should let it through, but thereafter no Bloc ships would be allowed to cross into the zone . President agreed to allow the tanker to cross the barrier if it crossed the barrier .
 Secretary Rusk agreed, adding that the actions had already created sufficient pressure on the Russians for today . He said the actions we had taken already had created enough pressure on Russia to today .
 The President said that tomorrow we could consider adding POL to the list of prohibited goods and by publicly announcing the mobilization of U.S. shipping .
 The message included a list of questions to be answered and ended with a recommendation to reject Khrushchev's offer to trade European missiles for U.S. missiles in Turkey . The President read aloud the message .
 There followed consideration of a draft cable to Ambassador Finletter in Paris instructing him as to how the NATO meeting should be handled .
 Secretary Rusk recommended that we not state our preferred position first but present the various alternatives to the NATO members and oblige them to state their preference . The NATO members should state their preferred position in writing .
 "We would make clear that we must stand unified with NATO countries," says Putin . Putin: "We need to stand united with the NATO countries"
 The President agreed that our posture should be that of consulting NATO countries-not pushing for only one course of action . The President also agreed that the U.S. should consult with NATO countries .
 The Attorney General has recommended that we should not take our final position for a few more hours . The attorney general recommended that the final position be taken a few hours longer than expected .
 In NATO meeting we would do no more than recite the facts and express our objective of trying to keep the situation limited to the Western Hemisphere. In the NATO meeting, we would .
 NATO would hold off one more day a decision on accepting the Turkish/Cuban missile trade offer of the Russians . We would report the following day to NATO to NATO and hold off a decision to accept the offer .
 The President agreed to delete from the message the section on our preferred course of action . The President also agreed to remove the section of the message .
 NATO meeting tomorrow is to be a briefing and a request for their views . NATO meeting will be a request and a briefing of their views. The NATO meeting is scheduled to be held in Brussels tomorrow .
 Ambassador Finletter is not to bring up the question of the possible withdrawal of the Jupiters from Turkey . The ambassador will not discuss the possibility of the withdrawal of Jupeters .
 The President did not approve a draft message to Khrushchev dealing with the shooting down of a U.S. plane . The draft message was rejected by the President .
 The President agreed that Ambassador Hare would not raise with the Turks the question of withdrawing the Jupiters . The State Department would inform Ambassador Hare, for his information, of what we are considering .
 Personal letters to de Gaulle and Adenauer were given to the President for signature . Personal letters were given for signature by the President of France .
 The President asked the group to meet the following morning at 1 1:00 o'clock . The group agreed to meet again the next day .
 If these planes were attacked, the attacking planes would be fired upon . The planes would have been fired upon if they were attacked by the Taliban .
 One-OCI analysis of two Soviet letters to the U.S. of 26 and 27 October . The letters were sent to the United States .
 The likeliest explanation of Soviet behavior in addressing two inconsistent letters to the President in such short succession is that they came to believe that the U.S. intended firm or radical action against the Cuban bases at a fairly early date .
 They sent a second letter containing a more specific proposal, but one involving substantial Soviet concessions, in an effort to generate pressures which would head off this U.S. action or, if this failed, to make it as costly as possible in political terms .
 The Soviets can, if they choose, repeat their Cuba-Turkey offer and complain that U.S. preconditions amount to an unacceptable ultimatum . But they probably now recognize that this may not deflect the United States from its insist-ence that the sites be immediately dismantled .
 The U.S. can alter tactics radically, going over to a threatening line in their statements and buttressing this with a deliberate maritime incident in the Caribbean and moves to globalize the crisis, e.g., some action against Berlin . Or they can alter .
 Their tactics to date, however, and their apparent belief that the United States is determined on further actions, argue strongly against this latter course . The U.S. has not responded to the situation in Syria .
 A third course would be to accept some of the conditions stated by the United States today and to continue the search for negotiations which would lay inhibitions on further unilateral moves .
 In return for a removal of weapons from Turkey, the Soviets have now offered substantial concessions . The move would raise doubts in that country and in NATO as a whole concerning the U.S. commitment .
 In the process, the Soviets have gone far to acknowledge the truth of the President's original charges . The Soviet Union has gone far further to admit the truth .
 They have made statements which must seriously undermine Castro's confidence in Soviet support, and even Soviet intentions . As another result, they have made . statements which have seriously undermined Castro's . confidence in . Soviet support .
 The next Soviet position may be less demanding than the Cuba-Turkey swap . Russia's position may not be as demanding as that of Turkey's .
 We think that they might limit their demands to a U.S. undertaking not to pursue Castro's overthrow, we think . The United States might limit its demands to an agreement not to overthrow Castro's regime .
 In return, they might agree to cease work on those sites which are not yet operational and to discuss means of ""rendering the weapons inoperable,"" and to move toward international inspection .
 Former Secretary of State Dean Rusk shed new light on the question of whether the U.S. would have considered removing Jupiter missiles in Turkey in return for a Soviet agreement to withdraw the missiles in Cuba and defuse the crisis . Rusk: The United States would have been prepared to
 Rusk's letter was read to the conference of former officials and scholars of the crisis by McGeorge Bundy . Rusk wrote the letter to former officials .
 Bundy said Cordier was asked to stand by with the contingency plan the night of October 27 . Bundy added that Cordier had been asked to help with the emergency plan . Bundy said the plan was a precautionary call for the public safety .
 The proposal, he noted, intentionally bypassed the United States Mission at the United Nations . The proposal is intentionally bypasses the U.S. mission at the UN .
 The intention was to make it appear to be a United Nations proposal, rather than one that originated in Washington . The intention is to make the proposal appear to have originated in the United States .
 Draft by Bundy and U Alexis Johnson, cleared by EUR and NEA, and approved by U. Alexis Johnson . Drafted by Bundy .
 Message from Khrushchev to President received night October 26 (being repeated repeated Finletter, Paris and London only) seemed to offer real hope solution could be found within framework supervised withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba in exchange for commitment by United States not invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev's message to U Thant agreeing keep Soviet vessels temporarily outside quarantine area also seemed favorable sign . Khrushchev agreed to keep Soviet ships temporarily out of quarantine area temporarily .
 Khrushchev wrote letter linking Cuban settlement to withdrawal of NATO Jupiters from Turkey . These hopes have been diminished by subsequent public letter linking Cuba to withdrawal from Turkey, the letter said .
 The situation as we see it is increasingly serious and time is growing shorter . The situation is 'increasingly serious' and 'time is growing short', says the government .
 The U.S. remains determined to insure removal of offensive installations in Cuba . The United States is determined to remove offensive installations from Cuba .
 "We are combining reasonable diplomatic offers and military pressure in even balance to this end," says President Vladimir Putin .
 Construction on missile sites continues, but there is every indication that more of the missiles are becoming operationally ready . The missile sites are still under construction, but construction on the sites continues .
 "Unarmed U.S. military aircraft which today were conducting publicly announced surveillance over Cuba were exposed to intensive ground fire and one of these aircraft is missing," the Cuban government says .
 At the present rate of speed the first vessel will reach the quarantine area during daylight Sunday and an incident may occur . The first vessel is expected to arrive in daylight Sunday morning .
 U.S. holds to the position that this matter should be settled within framework of the Western Hemisphere . We have taken note of the Soviet public message to President of October 27th in which a connection is made between NATO defenses and Soviet action in Cuba .
 In these circumstances the United States feels it is essential to inform its allies and consult with them on the general situation . The United States. feels it .
 It is of the utmost importance that nothing in your discussion should hint of any readiness to meet Soviet Jupiter exchange proposal . It is equally important that you should allow free expression of European views, whatever they may be .
 U.S. action in Cuba-if it becomes essential- will be directed at a potential threat to the total strategic balance endangering other NATO countries at least as much as the United States . In stimulating free response, you should strongly press the point that United States action .
 Began by saying this extremely important and sensitive diplomatic initiative being made under direct instructions of Secretary and requiring utmost secrecy, with perhaps vital bearing on peace .
 Portuguese translation eight numbered points typed on plain paper . Then gave him Portuguese translation of the points .
 Hermes felt that new suggestion was a perfectly natural supplement to what they had been doing and said he would undertake it . Hermes felt it was a 'natural supplement' to what he had done .
 I pointed out certain essential differences, notably effort to appeal personally to Fidel to divorce himself from Soviet control, referring to our previous talks with Dantas .
 Khrushchev speech Saturday should be final proof to Fidel that Soviets interested only in using Cuba to pursue own security interests, while creating new dangers for Cuba, says Cuban president .
 A footnote in the Bulletin this message was broadcast over Moscow radio at 5m. and a copy delivered to the Embassy in Moscow at 5:10m. A copy of the message was delivered to a copy of it at 5.10m . According to the Bulletin, it was broadcast
 I have received your message of October 27/1/ 1 express my satisfaction and thank you for the sense of proportion you have displayed and for realization of the responsibility which now devolves on you for preservation of the peace of the world .
 If we do take practical steps and proclaim the dismantling and evacuation of the means in question from Cuba, in so doing we, at the same time, want the Cuban people to be certain that we are with them and are not absolving ourselves of responsibility for rendering assistance to them .
 A still more dangerous case occurred on 28 October, when one of your reconnasissance planes intruded over Soviet borders in the Chukotka Peninsula area in the north and flew over our territory . The Russian military said it was a "still dangerous case"
 An account of the meeting as dictated by Walter Elder, based on a debriefing of McCone, is reproduced ibid., 347 . Elder's account is based on the debriefings of the McCone team .
 The full TASS text of the Khrushchev reply/1/ to the President offering to withdraw Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba under UN supervision had been read by all prior to the opening of the meeting .
 Secretary Rusk began by making general comments to the effect that everyone present had helped to bring about the highly advantageous resolution of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Mr Bundy interrupted to say that everyone knew who were hawks and who were doves, but that today was the doves' day . Bundy: "Today is the day that everyone knows who are doves and who are hawks"
 Secretary McNamara said we would not have to face a decision on halting a Bloc ship today because the tanker Graznyy was lying dead in the water outside the quarantine zone . No other Bloc ships, if they continued toward Cuba, would be reaching the barrier .
 Secretary McNamara and Secretary Rusk recommended, and the President agreed, that no air reconnaissance missions be flown today . The President agreed to the decision .
 President asked what we would substitute for our air surveillance of Cuba . The President asked for a substitute for air surveillance, the Obama administration said .
 Secretary McNamara said this surveillance might be by the UN or a joint inspection of United States /UN inspectors in a neutral plane .
 He said our objective should be to have reconnaissance carried out by the UN tomorrow . He said the UN should be carrying out reconnaissance into the area .
 Technically, this could be arranged, but we do not know whether the UN would undertake the task . The UN would not be able to do this, but it is possible to arrange for it .
 President suggested that we tell the UN they must carry out reconnaissance or else we will . The President suggested we tell them to do so, or we will. The UN should carry out a reconnaissance, he said .
 The purpose of the release of this information on Soviet armaments in Cuba was to facilitate the inspection task which we expected the UN to promptly undertake . The release of the information was intended to facilitate a UN inspection task .
 President called attention to the IL-28 bombers which he said we should ask the Russians to withdraw by making a private approach to Khrushchev . The President called .
 The President agreed, but added that he did not want to get into a position where we would appear to be going back on our part of the deal . The President said he did want to avoid appearing to go back on his part of it .
 Admittedly, we would face the problem of Soviet armaments in Cuba if the Russians continued to build up their defensive capability there . The Russians are building up their defence capabilities in Cuba .
 At this time Dobrynin told the Attorney General that Khrushchev had agreed to dismantle and withdraw the missiles . At the time, Dobrynkin told the attorney General that the missiles had been withdrawn from the Soviet Union . The missile withdrawal was part of the agreement .
 The Soviet leader directed that comments by everyone on the Soviet statement be reserved . He directed everyone to respect the statement .
 Our posture is to be welcoming the Soviet offer to take out the offensive weapons under UN inspection, but attention should be called to the many problems we would encounter in implementation of Khrushchev's offer .
 We should point out that we were under no illusion that the problem of Soviet weapons in Cuba is solved . We should not think that we have solved the problem, we say .
 President Obama said he can't draw no conclusions about how Russia will act in the future in areas other than Cuba . He said we should make clear that we should not draw no general conclusions .
 He made specific mention of the problem of Communist subversion in Latin America . He asked that we refer to this problem either in our letter to Khrushchev or in U Thant's letter . U. Thant asked that this be referred to either in U.K. or in
 Ambassador Stevenson directed that Ambassador Stevenson be asked to talk to UN officials about this aspect of the Cuban problem . Ambassador Stevenson was asked to speak with UN officials .
 Thompson and Ball drafted by Thompson, Ball, cleared by McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Rusk . Ball was cleared by Bundy, Bundy and Rusk, who approved the draft .
 Am seriously disturbed at apparent lack of interest on part of Secretariat in great importance of aerial photographic surveillance in carrying out task in Cuba . Am. "Am seriously disturbed"
 This by no means is necessarily a complete inventory of offensive weapons in Cuba or their locations as of the time UN begins its operations . While we have made available to the Secretariat fullest information on characteristics and locations of weapons as of forty-eight hours or more ago .
 Aerial photography does not guarantee one hundred percent knowledge of situation nevertheless it is vastly superior, more thorough, more efficient and economical than Nineteenth Century approach .
 This is particularly true where weapons concerned are of mobile field type not requiring elaborate fixed bases . This is especially true when weapons are not required to be deployed in fixed fields .
 Aerial photography is an essential supplement to ground observation in carrying out its task of verification, says the Secretariat .
 "We stand prepared immediately to assist UN in any way agreeable to it" "We have made substantial preparations that would permit UN begin this mission tomorrow including possibility of flying UN marked planes carrying UN observer"
 If even with this assistance UN unwilling or unable to undertake mission tomorrow, we must assert position that we have preserved our freedom of action and will undertake mission ourselves . This is politically less desirable than UN mission and physically more dangerous .
 Only this way can we carry out obligation to forestall any chance trickery endangering our national security . Only this manner can be forestalled any chance of endangering national security. Only this can be done in this manner .
 Results such mission would be made available to UN to assist it in its task . Of course results such . mission would . be made . available to . UN .
 If UN does not intend to undertake aerial reconnaissance, U.S. may find it necessary in its own protection continue reconnaissance . United States may need to continue aerial reconnaissance in own protection .
 Department of State: Secretary of State's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 . The State Dept. of State says it has no comment on the issue .
 A memorandum of a similar conversation with Alphand earlier in the afternoon is in the Supplement . Alphand and Alphand spoke to each other on the phone .
 The Secretary Sir David Ormsby Gore, British Ambassador Mr William R Tyler, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs The British Ambassador told the Secretary how gratified HMG was by the present course of events in Cuba .
 His Government thought that it was important to consider what might be done next, and in what forum, and what might it be next .
 Secretary said there had been no ""cozy deals"" in connection with the change in the Soviet position . The Secretary said he first wished to make it very clear that there were no ""Cozy deals"
 The only thing Khrushchev was getting for his present attitude was that the U.S. would not intervene militarily in Cuba so long as the offensive weapons were removed under conditions of proper inspection and verification . The United States .
 He added that we were not going to guarantee the Castro Government, and that the Rio Pact still holds . The Rio pact still holds, he said .
 The British Ambassador said he thought that there might be some value in making the United States guarantee dependent on Khrushchev's behavior with regard to Berlin . The Ambassador said that perhaps . perhaps Khrush . could be brought to giving some assurances in this respect .
 The Secretary agreed that if developments continued on their present course, this would require a major consideration of a lot of problems .
 The British Ambassador said that Khrushchev would doubtless try to salvage his position by assuming the posture of 'a man of peace' who was leading the world in the direction of solutions of problems of disarmament and nuclear testing, etc. The Ambassador said .
 The Secretary agreed and said it was important not to ""crow"" about the strengthened Western position .
 The Secretary of State said that the prompt and full support of the British Government, as well as that of our other NATO Allies,/2/ have been a powerful factor in strengthening our position .
 However, we were not out of the woods yet, and it was not excluded that we would have to face unpleasant surprises tomorrow . We were not excluded from facing unpleasant surprises in the coming days .
 A report on the North Atlantic Council discussion of the Cuban situation on October 28, is in Polto circular 12, October 28 . Ill A report of the discussion is published by the Atlantic Council .
 The British Ambassador said he felt that the chances were all in favor of the West emerging from the present crisis in a greatly strengthened position . He said it was important and urgent to consider how this could be turned to even greater advantage .
 At mtg with U Thant this evening Stevenson received SYG's message to President in regard to his negots with Castro . Stevenson pointed out reference to attitude other American states . toward assurances against invasion of Cuba was based on our understanding their position .
 SYG said it would be extremely helpful to him in working out desired arrangements with Castro if Pres. could publicly suspend quarantine on Oct. 30 . SYG: It would be helpful to work out desired arrangement with Castro .
 He pointed out that he is constantly being belabored by Sovs and Cubans with claim they have complied with his appeal of Oct 25 and that U.S. has not . He said that he was constantly belaboring by Russians, Cubans and others .
 He felt that United States naval units could be left at present stations but would simply not exercise right of search during SYG's two-day visit to Havana .
 If his report is favorable and satisfactory verification arrangements established, suspension would become definitive . On other hand if his report was favorable or satisfactory, suspension could become definitive.
 U.S. reconnaissance flights over Cuba might be suspended during his visit there . It was also suggested that, without any public announcement, the flights may be suspended .
 It was pointed out that any incident caused by such flights during his visit would be extremely embarrassing to him .
 SYG insists verification arrangements must be approved and in place before blockade suspended . SYG said he simply did not believe there was any likelihood that there would be no likelihood that Sovs would launch missiles on U.S. during next two or three days .
 He felt it would obviously be suicidal for them and for Cubans if this were done . He said it would be suicide for the Cubans and for them if this was done .
 He expressed grave concern at call-up yesterday of Air Force Reserves . Without explicitly saying so, left impression he thought some of United States actions have been excessive .
 In reply we explained the grave and important character of the threat with which we had been confronted. In reply, we explained in considerable detail. We explained in particular detail. The threat was very grave, important and important .
 Stevenson mentioned possibility of Castro as useful gesture of good will restoring body of U-2 pilot . Stevenson mentioned possible of Castro's presence in Castro's Cuba .
 Stevenson suggested SYG might, if opportunity occurred, sound out Castro on ceasing his subversive activities in other countries . Stevenson also suggested that SYG may also speak out Castro about ceasing subversive activities .
 Stevenson emphasized that this should not be connected in any way with present situation, which it would undoubtedly complicate but might simply be broached as an important matter to be dealt with in future . Stevenson emphasized however that this is not connected to the present situation .
 Narasimhan expressed view that Castro would almost certainly raise question of United States subversion in Cuba . This would give SYG opportunity to respond in manner Stevenson suggested . Narasimshan said SYG would respond to the question raised by Castro .
 Stevenson urged again that all of these matters be firmly excluded from present negot since their introduction into it might cause serious delay and complication .
 Director McCone summarized current intelligence, including evidence that all Cuban military forces have been ordered not to fire at United States planes unless fired upon .
 The President read and approved the announcement of the creation of a Coordinating Committee . The committee will handle all matters involved in the conclusion of the Cuban crisis .
 The President agreed that we could wait today, but that we did face the longer range problem of how we continue surveillance of Cuba . We cannot rely on the UN to undertake adequate surveillance, he said .
 Under Secretary of the Air Force Charyk reported on a conversation last night with UN officials . Air Force Under Secretary said he had a conversation with the UN .
 He said he had offered them RC-130 planes, which they were prepared to use . But they did not want these planes flown by United States crews, he said .
 Mr Charyk said the Canadians, South Africans and Indonesians have crews which could fly the planes .
 UN could not make arrangements to fly reconnaissance missions today . UN observers could be on the ground in Cuba by Wednesday morning, official says .
 The UN official said the UN did not want U.S. reconnaissance planes overflying Cuba during the Secretary General's visit there on Tuesday and Wednesday .
 Pictures taken would reveal suspicious locations to which ground observers could be promptly dispatched . Ground observers would be dispatched to find suspicious locations .
 UN officials had asked for voluntary suspension of the blockade on Tuesday and Wednesday, leaving the United States ships on station . Mr Charyk said there had been no discussion yesterday of United States reconnaissance flights .
 UN inspectors would be in all ports and report to us on incoming and outgoing cargo . The UN would also be in charge of inspections of all ports in the world .
 We would make available film to the UN reconnaissance missions if they would provide us with copies of the exposed films . The UN would also provide copies of exposed films to the reconnaissance missions .
 Secretary McNamara recommended that we send reconnaissance missions this afternoon after notice has been given to the Cubans and to Kuznetsov . The U.S. is sending reconnaissance missions to Cuba .
 He recommended that U.S. ships remain on station, challenge all ships entering quarantine zone, and let such ships through because their cargo would be inspected by UN observers in Cuban ports .
 Secretary Rusk emphasized that we must maintain the quarantine until arrangements for UN inspection of offensive weapons in Cuba are completed .
 He agreed that the United States ships should stay on station, but that we should leave ambiguous for the next twenty-four hours whether or not we will maintain the quarantine . The U.S. ships will remain on station .
 The quarantine was off pending installation of a UN inspection system . He said we should not say that the quarantine is off pending the installation of an inspection system.
 Secretary McNamara urged that the new Coordinating Committee work immediately on the question of Communist covert aggression in Latin America which would be based in Cuba . McNamara: "The Committee would work immediately"
 The President said he had talked to Ambassador Stevenson yesterday . Ambassador Stevenson said that the phrase ""peace in the Caribbean"" covers subversion . The president said he spoke with Ambassador Stevenson .
 The President said Ambassador Stevenson had discussed this question with U Thant . Ambassador Stevenson would try to get back into the formulation of the settlement some specific reference to subversion .
 General Taylor urged that we be prepared to fly six to eight low-level missions today, but no high-level . General Taylor said that we should be prepared for six or eight missions today . The U.S. will be ready to fly eight to eight missions .
 He recommended that we announce that we were conducting low-level reconnaissance pending satisfactory UN reconnaissance arrangements . The U.N. Security Council agreed to announce that it was conducting reconnaissance .
 He turned again to the question of what we would do on the surveillance problem for the long run . He said it was not clear what the U.S. government would do .
 Secretary Rusk noted that Khrushchev expressed his wish that reconnaissance cease, but he had not made it a condition to withdrawal of offensive weapons . Rusk: "Reconnaissance ceased, but not a condition"
 The President decided that no public announcement of the aerial reconnaissance would be made, but that if we decided to fly these missions, we will notify the Cubans and Kuznetsov immediately prior to the overflights .
 General Taylor restated the requirement for the reconnaissance missions if we are to know whether the Soviets are actually dismantling the missile sites or whether they are continuing to work on the missile complexes . General Taylor: Reconnaissance missions are necessary to know if they are dismantling missile sites .
 Secretary McNamara believes UN observers arriving in Cuba on Wednesday will see no missiles . U. Thant believes that observers arriving at the Cuban capital will not see missiles . McNamara says observers will be able to see no missile missiles .
 President asked the group to consider how this should be done . The President said that we would need aerial pictures on Wednesday .
 Aerial missions today are not crucial, but this week we must have aerial pictures of the missile sites . This week we need to have aerial images of missile sites in the area .
 Secretary McNamara expressed his doubt that we can get the UN to fly reconnaissance missions . Secretary of State McNamara said he doubts that the UN will fly the missions .
 The Planning Subcommittee reviewed the situation as of Monday morning, October 29, 1962 . The planning subcommittee was briefed on the situation in 1962 .
 It was agreed that the Soviet adventure in Cuba in part reflected a high degree of anxiety concerning nuclear balance .
 The most likely assumption is that, having failed in the Cuban ploy, they will consider other methods for retrieving their position in the nuclear arms race . For example, a radically accelerated ICBM program, the positioning of weapons in space, etc.
 This task was assigned to DOD in consultation with other appropriate parts of the Government . This task has been assigned to the Department of Defense .
 The group chaired by Mr Harvey will continue to explore these implications and propose courses of U.S. action .
 The situation inside Cuba, in the wake of the Russian defection, may open to us possibilities of change in the character of the Cuban government or its policy which, evidently, should be fully explored, says David Cameron .
 It is possible that there are certain lessons to be drawn from the recent confrontation over Cuba for our Berlin contingency planning . It was judged possible .
 Mr Rowen and Mr Kitchen will seek to formulate these in consultation with Mr Nitze and his committee .
 It was judged appropriate to consider what political and other measures may be considered to induce or force the Soviet Union to honor its pledge given at Geneva that infiltration into South Viet Nam via Laos would end after the Laos settlement . The Soviet Union will be extremely sensitive to any further pressures we may mount
 With confidence strengthened in the credibility of the U.S. deterrent, it was judged time to make a major push in the Atlantic partnership .
 There is an urgent need to look to a multilateral resolution of the nuclear problem at an earlier date than might have otherwise been envisaged . There is also a need to press on with various trade, currency and aid problems within the OECD's orbit .
 In the wake of the crisis, it was judged essential that we seek to consolidate the new unity and confidence of the OAS . We seek to exploit the crisis to weaken the Communists, to reduce the fear of Communists in Latin America .
 There is a danger that right wing groups might now assume that reform and development are less urgent than previously . It was noted that, in the face of United States strength, there was a danger .
 Two observations emerged on the subject of negotiation with the Soviet Union . Two observations were made on the matter of negotiation .
 Historically, the instinctive reaction of the USSR to an international setback is to regroup, to consolidate, and to avoid, for a time, fresh initiatives . The reaction to a setback in the Soviet Union is to 'regroup' and 'avoid fresh initiatives'
 If that is their reaction on the present occasion, they may use it merely as an occasion to hold to firm previous positions . If that's the case, they could use it as a reason to hold on to previous positions, they might use it just as a matter of principle .
 Khrushchev may wish to move forward towards a detente on Berlin and to leave behind him some achievement in the field of arms control and disarmament . On the other hand, it is conceivable he may want to move ahead towards detente .
 There is as yet no basis for a judgment as to the course Moscow will, in fact, follow . Moscow will not be able to predict which direction Moscow will follow .
 In the light of these alternatives, we should be prepared, should a summit take place, with an array of proposals, ranging from a mere reaffirmation of the status quo through limited to quite radical steps forward . Use the occasion of such negotiations as a means of assessing the policy and intention
 Courses of action designed to strengthen our position vis-a-vis these countries have to be designed on a case-by-case basis . The UK has been criticised by some of the world's most powerful countries .
 The crisis bears on future disarmament negotiations and meas-ures in two specific respects . It is the first time the crisis has been discussed in a disarmament-related way .
 First, the Soviet performance in Cuba dram-atizes beyond any doubt the case for inspection . Second, it dramatizes the case in Cuba for inspection. First, it shows beyond doubt that there is no doubt that this is true .
 In addition, we should explore ways of consolidating the de facto precedent of our unilateral inspection of Cuban bases . The OAS ruling that secrecy is inappropriate in this Hemisphere is inappropriate .
 It was universally agreed that such a paper, if it were decided to issue one, should be factual with no elaborate effort to draw lessons for propaganda purposes .
 The question of whether such a paper should be organized to provide a full record of what now can be made public was referred to Mr U Alexis Johnson and Mr Edward Martin .
 Turkish Ambassador, acting on the urgent instructions of his Government, called on Mr Tyler on October 29 . The Turkish Ambassador was acting on his Government's urgent instructions .
 President Kennedy's refusal of any deal with the Soviet Union regarding the missile bases in Turkey . President Kennedy refused to make a deal with Russia regarding the bases .
 At this special session, the Turkish permanent representative would review the events which led up to the IRBM's being stationed in Turkey . Turkey's permanent representative will emphasize that the IRMB's were placed in Turkey not merely for Turkey's defense but for NATO defense .
 Turkish permanent representative would state that, when dangers subsequently appeared, some seemed to regard Turkey as at fault . The Turkish Government regretted that, . some seemed . to regard the Turkish Government as . at fault, he said .
 Mr Tyler said he wished to repeat what the Ambassador had said regarding the circumstances that led to the placing of the missiles on Turkish soil . Mr Tyler stated his appreciation for the advance information the ambassador had given us .
 These missiles were for the defense of the NATO area and that defense was indivisible . The missiles were launched in the NATO region and were used to defend NATO .
 The United States viewed its NATO commitments in all areas of NATO as being equal . The U.S. viewed its commitment to NATO as equal .
 Turkish President Putin hopes Ankara will not pay too much attention to our own press comment which had ranged far wide .
 Even we wondered whether a given article had been inspired, was a trial balloon or what. Even we, he said, wondered whether it was inspired or was a hoax .
 Ambassador Menemencioglu interrupted to say that he recognized the freedom of our press but had noticed that it was disciplined when the facts were known . He said that the line taken by the press today (October 29) was a very good one .
 Mr Tyler said that the Secretary had recently talked with the press on a background basis . He said that he had been talking to the press about the Secretary .
 Mr Tyler stated that the Cuban crisis was not yet settled and that we would know tonight if work on the bases had been stopped . Mr Tyler said we would be able to see if work was stopped tonight .
 Mr Tyler stated that he wished to reassure the Ambassador again that there had been no ""deal"" regarding Turkey . Mr Tyler said that there was no deal with Turkey regarding the country .
 He remarked upon the audacity of Khrushchev in drawing a parallel between Turkey and Cuba . He also remarked upon his admiration for the similarities between the two countries .
 Mr Tyler said that there was nothing in the arrangement with the Soviets which implied a guarantee of the Castro regime . He added that there were no guarantees that the Soviet regime was guaranteed .
 The Russians are willing to have the International Red Cross officials inspect all cargoes going to Cuba to ensure that no arms are taken to Cuba . The Soviet position on inspection, as stated by Kuznetsov, is that the Russian government is willing to allow the Red Cross to inspect
 The Russians would not permit on-site inspection until all Soviet missiles have been removed . The Russians are not allowed to inspect the site until the missiles are removed .
 Secretary Rusk said that if there was to be no inspection on the ground, air reconnaissance became crucial . Air reconnaissance is crucial for air inspections, he said .
 U Thant had asked Stevenson how long we wanted the inspection to go on, he said . Stevenson said he was surprised to be asked how long the inspection was allowed to continue .
 Permanent inspection would be difficult, but inspection limited to a period of weeks would be easier . Permanent inspection is difficult but limited inspection limited only to a few weeks .
 The President said he approved of the plan to have Red Cross officials inspect all ships from Bloc ports . The Red Cross will inspect ships from all ports in the Bloc .
 He also agreed to suspend the quarantine for two days during the visit of the Acting Secretary General to Havana .
 Admiral Anderson wanted to stop this ship, but it had been decided not to stop it . Admiral Anderson had been trying to stop the ship, and decided not .
 General Taylor commented that what we are asking the Russians to do is to dismantle their missiles immediately . General Taylor said the Russian missiles should be dismantled 'immediately'
 Mr Bundy added that our request did not include dismantling the SAM sites . Mr Bundy said the request was not to dismantle SAM sites.
 He agreed that surveillance should be done in the least provocative way . But we must continue to maintain surveillance until a satisfactory UN system is in place, he said .
 No reconnaissance flights will be flown tomorrow or Wednesday, he said . He agreed that no reconnaissance flights would be flown today .
 Secretary McNamara said that if we were to have no on-site inspection in Cuba, we must have high and low-level reconnaissance . McNamara: "We must have ... high level reconnaissance" McNamara says .
 President asked whether it would be possible for us to obtain pictures of the outgoing Soviet ships . The President asked if it was possible to obtain photographs of the departing ships .
 If nose cones are on missiles in Cuba, then we will face a most difficult decision . Secretary Rusk said the political situation appeared to support the belief that Khrushchev's deal is still on .
 McCloy had called Rusk to report on the meeting described in this telegram . McCloy was in the middle of a meeting with Rusk .
 Latter commenced by saying USSR complied with SYG's appeals by suspending arms shipments and avoiding confrontation at sea but there had been no U.S. response . Latter commenced saying USSR had complied with the appeals but no United States response .
 Thant replied response is that United States will suspend blockade when verification established . Thant said U.S. will suspend U.K. blockade when verified established . U.N. has not responded to the request .
 Thant suggested to Zorin two days ago that Sov ships submit to verification . Thant had suggested that the Sov ships should submit verification . Sov ships must submit verification, Thant said .
 Kuznetzov added his govt. would prefer Red Cross personnel undertaking task should be from neutral nations . Red Cross staff should be neutral nations, he said .
 Red Cross could board Sov vessels either from neutral ships or Sov ships at sea . Red Cross was able to board neutral ships from neutral vessels or at sea from Sov ships .
 When SYG mentioned inspection at Cuban ports Kuznetzov replied he had no objection but this would depend on Cuba . SYG: "I have no objection to this"
 SYG expressed to U.S. personal doubts that Red Cross would undertake this duty, though UN had had offer from high Red Cross official several days ago to help in Cuban crisis . U.N. had offered to help Cuban crisis earlier this week .
 If they did accept he supposed they would fly people from Geneva to some spot near Cuba where they would embark on neutral ships to accost Sov ships . He supposed people would be flown to Cuba to embark neutral ships .
 Castro accepts inspection in Cuban ports if Castro accepts would be far simpler . Inspection of Cuban ports would also be far easier if Castro accepted .
 SYG expressed view Sovs would not submit even to Red Cross inspection if they had any intention of shipping arms . SYG said they would therefore be very unlikely to do so during immediate future .
 Kuznetzov mentioned reference in Khrushchev's second letter to SC involvement in SC involvement . As to sites and missiles, Kuznezov said reference was made in reference to sites, missiles .
 When dismantling has been completed Sovs will report to SC and propose UN team be sent to verify dismantling . UN team will be sent in to verify the dismantling .
 Kuznetzov did not estimate duration of dismantling but SYG got impression it would be no longer than week or two . SYG: "It will be a matter of weeks or two"
 He is therefore thinking of SC mtg early next week after he has had opportunity for further round of consultations with US, USSR and Cuba following his return . He is also considering further round-of-consultations with U.S., Cuba and Cuba .
 Stevenson made clear it was imperative that U.S. have assurance that dismantling is going on . Stevenson: "It is imperative that United States have assurance"
 SYG expressed hope Sovs might be ready to send teams as early as next Monday . SYG hopes Sovs will be ready for teams as soon as next week . Sovs is expected to be in action next week.
 He was not inclined to press Sovs too hard since he could not imagine they would set off rockets at U.S. during next few days . He said he did not think he would be pressed too hard .
 Cubans had refused to state their views on verification until he arrives in Havana . It is clear that Sovs control missile sites, are presumably engaged in rapid dismantling .
 Narasimhan says verification on the spot might well be permitted in second stage while launching pads and emplacements are being destroyed . He says this would probably be the case while weapons are actually being removed from the site .
 Stevenson made clear that our intense and urgent preoccupation was with weapons being rendered immediately inoperable and with this fact being verified . Stevenson said: "We need to verify the fact that weapons are being rendered instantly inoperative"
 He was worried at implications of word ""continuation"" and feared this meant United States expected UN to continue inspection of Cuba for indefinite period .
 SYG calls for inspection of what SYG called ""CIA training camps for exiles" in U.S. and certain Caribbean countries . If this were the case he felt it certain that Castro would make counter-demand for inspection .
 We disabused him of idea that inspection for an indefinite period is contemplated . We disconfused him .
 Stevenson and McCloy again referred to necessity of inspection during immediate interim period . Stevenson, McCloy said. "It is imperative that the inspection be carried out during the interim period"
 If inspection on the spot can't be obtained, aerial inspection becomes all the more important .
 SYG said he saw no objection to aerial inspection during interim period if Cuban Govt. agrees . SYG: No objection to an aerial inspection of Cuba if Cuba agrees .
 McCloy indicated that until UN aerial observation set up United States has to reserve right to maintain observation itself . McCloy said until UN set up U.S. has to maintain control of the situation itself .
 McCloy indicated we could give no assurances concerning lifting of quarantine until verification established . McCloy also indicated that we could not guarantee lifting of quarantined quarantine .
 Discussion ensued whether quarantine linked only with imports of arms into Cuba or with elimination of offensive weapons from Cuba . UN side maintains former and United States side latter . Discussion ensued over whether quarantine is linked only to imports of weapons into Cuba .
 The United States issued a statement to effect that at SYG's request quarantine being temporarily suspended for the duration of his visit . It was eventually agreed that for immediate purpose of the visit most desirable handling would be issuance by United States of simple statement .
 Pres. Pres. said in letter to Khrushchev that he was confident other Western Hemisphere nations would also give assurances against invasion of Cuba was of course merely expression of United States conviction and not commitment on behalf other American Republics .
 Drafted by Cleveland, cleared with Department of Defense, approved by U. Alexis Johnson .
 Khrushchev has proposed that International Red Cross assume function of monitoring shipments into Cuba to make sure that no arms are coming in from Soviet Union to Cuba . We understand from telcons that Khrushvic has proposed .
 Inspection to be in port of entering if Cuba agrees or at sea if preferred . Inspectors to be at sea or at port of entry to Cuba . Inspections to be done in port or in port if Cuba agreed .
 If at sea, Red Cross personnel should board from neutral or Soviet ships, not American vessels, not U.S. vessels . Red Cross officials should board neutral or Russian ships, if at sea .
 Red Cross personnel should be citizens of neutral or non-aligned countries . Red Cross staff members should have been citizens of countries neutral or not-aligned .
 If possible, ICRC operate as executive agent of the SYG, in manner analogous work of League of Red Cross Societies in refugee field . ICRC would prefer to operate in some fashion as Executive agent of SYG . If possible we would prefer ICRC to operate as Executive Agent
 Some continuing reconnaissance from the air seems essential during period of dismantling and withdrawal of missiles and other major weapons . Some of the major weapons are being dismantled and withdrawn from the country .
 This will be especially true if no on-site inspection of missile sites can't be arranged until dismantling is complete . This is especially true in the case of dismantling completed .
 If possible, we would still prefer a technically competent reconnaissance done by UN itself . We would still like to see if possible, it would be done by the UN .
 Canadian offer of pilots for RF-lOls, or other possibilities accomplishing same purpose . Therefore important to pursue . offer of pilot for the RF-LOls .
 One of United States planes on today's reconnaissance was fired on by Cubans . One of U.S. planes was on a reconnaissance mission in Cuba .
 Pending examination results of today's reconnaissance, no decision yet on whether to suspend U.S. aerial reconnaissance during period SYGs visit to Cuba . No decision yet yet on decision yet to suspend United States aerial reconnaissance .
 It will be important to have assurance, including if possible photographs, of missiles being packed up and actually leaving on ships . It will also be vital to have photos of missiles packed up, say experts .
 ICRC could likewise monitor export of major weapons . Perhaps as part of monitoring operation in ports, ICRC may also monitor major weapons export . ICRC should also monitor the export of weapons .
 Pictures from reconnaissance mission did not reveal whether work on missile sites had halted or whether dismantlement of the missiles had begun .
 Secretary McNamara called attention to the reported activities of Alpha 66 . Secretary of State McNamara calls attention to reported Alpha 66 activities . Alpha 66 was formed in the 1960s .
 The President stated that insofar as we had any control over the actions of Alpha 66, we should try to keep them from doing something that might upset the deal with the Russians, he said . The President also said that we should keep Alpha 66 from doing anything that may upset our deal with
 The President noted that anti-Castro groups did have a stake in continuing the struggle, and, therefore, might make an effort to cause difficulties during the period when it appeared we would be reaching some kind of a solution with the Russians .
 The President authorized a public statement to the effect that it was too early to judge whether the missiles were being dismantled and construction at missile sites halted . The President says it is too soon to judge if missiles are being dismantled .
 McNamara directed that no U-2 planes fly anywhere until he was satisfied that a system had been developed to safeguard against navigational errors resulting in overflights of Soviet territory . McNamara said he had directed that . no U.2 planes flew anywhere until . he was . satisfied that
 President agreed that no air reconnaissance missions would be flown over Cuba today or tomorrow . But he directed that every effort be made to get UN surveillance under way as soon as possible .
 Secretary McNamara said that there were ten or twelve issues connected with the Cuban crisis which were being reviewed and would be ready for Presidential consideration tomorrow . McNamara also said that ten or 12 issues are being reviewed .
 President directed that no one on the Executive Committee should personally see any reporter . Nobody in the group should say anything except Bundy, Salinger, and Sorensen, who were authorized to talk to reporters .
 The President said we were not dealing with a finished episode, and therefore, information going to the press needed to reflect the solidity of the Committee . The president said information should reflect the 'solidity' of the committee .
 Three sanitized versions of the crisis, all to be approved by the President, are being prepared by Defense, State, and White House press officers . Mr Salinger said that three sanitized . versions of . the crisis being prepared .
 The President agreed not to issue the draft Executive Order covering ships engaged in the Cuba trade, but requested the State Department to explain to reporters that the reason for not issuing the order was because it was aimed at a situation which had been radically altered by the discovery of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba
 Acting Director of USIA Wilson reported that Cuban exiles were seeking to buy time on U.S. radio stations . Acting Director Wilson said Cuban exile was seeking to purchase time on United States radio .
 It was expected that if they succeeded, they would make inflammatory statements about present U.S. policy toward Cuba .
 The President authorized Wilson to talk to the Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission about blocking these broadcasts without appearing to be imposing censorship of the radio stations .
 During courtesy call on Gromyko at 4:00m. today, he introduced subject of Cuba . Said that Soviet Government wished as quickly as possible to reach agreement pursuant to KennedyKhrushchev exchange of letters .
 Agreement should ""codify"" obligations of both sides, i.e., U.S. obligations to refrain from attack on Cuba and to rescind blockade . U.N. obligations should be codified, i., i.E. U.K. obligation to remove weapons ""which
 Soviet Government expects United States will take steps to bring negotiations quickly to satisfactory end . Soviet government expects U.S. to bring talks to an end quickly .
 Gromyko said he did not want to enter upon substantive discussion this matter now, just wanted to mention it in passing . He said he didn't want to discuss it now .
 President regards exchange of letters with Khrushchev as constituting agreement on basic principles involved, on basis of which question was prompt execution of obligations . President regards . issue as 'basic principles involved'
 Talks should be fast, but talk should not delay action, says David Cameron . "So far as speed of negotiations is concerned, the faster the better," he says .
 There will be a meeting without the President in the Conference Room of the Under Secretary of State at 6:00 m. this evening,/l/ .
 It will be helpful if members can find a little time to think about them beforehand . Members of Congress should take a moment to prepare for their upcoming events .
 At lunch with Kuznetsov today we discussed Cuba and he was very pleased that we would accept Red Cross inspection of the incoming ships . Russia is very pleased with the inspection of incoming ships, he says .
 "He assured me emphatically that the weapons would be dismantled and removed," he said . "We could count on it, and then have whatever verification at the end of the process we wanted," he added .
 He found it hard to believe that we would doubt their word in present circumstances, when I explained that surveillance during the interval to confirm compliance was necessary . He also said surveillance was necessary to ensure compliance .
 The Cuban president asked if we could not fly our high-level reconnaissance planes along the coast outside Cuban territorial waters and get good enough pictures . Then he asked if he could fly his high level reconnaissance planes around the coast .
 I said I doubted if that would be adequate, and suggested that reconnaissance planes could be transferred to the UN, painted and marked appropriately, and manned by neutrals if available, or by combined Russian, Cuban and American crews .
 He was noncommittal, but clearly worried about Cuban objections to over-flights . He was not bothered by Cuban objections, but did not appear to bother him .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says evidence of Russian prestige is compromised . He did, however, say something about compromise of Russia's prestige by this evidence .
 Khrushchev had told him before he left Moscow that it would probably take two or three weeks to complete dismantling and removal process, he said .
 He seemed to be especially eager to discuss disarmament and other bases and to explore other possibilities for talks on broader basis .
 "He plans to stay here as long as he can do anything, see people, and talk usefully about our mutual problems," he says . He plans to remain in the U.S. as long he can see people and usefully talk about their problems .
 He asked why he and I should not discuss the whole range of problems and added that as peoples we get along very much better than on official level, and that just now relations were badly strained .
 He feels our positions are now so close that we should be able to reach agreement . He feels that he feels our position is so close he can reach agreement with him .
 In response to my suggestion that agreement on above-ground testing could now be reached quickly, he pressed me on why we insisted on underground inspection and why we seemed to want to make more underground tests .
 Scientists are confident they can detect and identify everything using their new technology . They say they are confident that their scientists could really detect everything .
 After the usual explanations that all underground tests could not be identified and that there were means to prevent any real danger of espionage, he proposed a toast to disarmament and that we should talk more .
 Mt. Mtg was extremely cordial, and we also talked about previous mtgs and my writings on the Soviet Union with which he was familiar . He was also familiar with his writings on Soviet Union .
 He discussed with great candor the agricultural problem and the slow development of the virgin lands project . He said they are consolidating and mechanizing and not increasing acreage .
 Arthur Dean is seeing Arthur Dean this afternoon with regard to the disarmament negotiation . Arthur Dean says he will be seeing him this afternoon .
 Riki reported that the first session which has terminated went very badly . Riki said that the session which ended ended very badly. Riki also reported that Riki had a very bad reaction .
 Castro says no intrusion or inspection whatsoever on Cuban soil by anybody . Castro says there will be no inspection by anybody on Cuba's soil . Castro: No intrusion by anybody whatsoever on Cuba soil .
 They will do some work on him tonight and might break him down by tomorrow morning . They will work some work tonight and may break him up by tomorrow .
 "He asked that further reconnaissance by us be held off for another day so that it would not screw up the thing up," he said . He asked for further reconnaissance of the device to be delayed .
 He thinks if they don't get results tomorrow and he runs in this stone wall he will come back and call a Security Council meeting Thursday to ask for further instructions . He says he thinks if the results don't go well, he will call the Security Council on Thursday .
 The Cubans have refused Riki any access to inspect the sites and he has no clue as to what has transpired . Riki has no idea what has happened to the Cubans and has been refused access to the sites .
 Kuznetsov seemed alarmed today/1/ about the attitude of the Cubans, but so far as the Russians are concerned, he was confident of progress . He said we would have to run some high level overflights unless we get a breakthrough .
 The Security Council thing will be awkward because of the absence of an agreement of that kind would, of course, only increase the offense to the Cubans . The absence of a Security Council agreement would only be worse for Cuba .
 If this is the only way out we had better have a talk with Kuznetsov and see if we can reach some sort of secret agreement . Then go ahead with the Security Council agreement and confer with the Soviets, he says .
 The Secretary suggested possibly the Cubans and Stevenson asked do we want to do that? Stevenson asked the Secretary of State . Stevenson suggested possibly Cubans, Stevenson asked if we want that. Stevenson said yes, and Stevenson agreed .
 Stevenson is not clear in his mind who it would possibly be-perhaps Mexico . Stevenson: "I'm not sure in my mind who would be the person who would want to kill me" Stevenson says he's not sure if Mexico will kill him .
 The Secretary of State said he would report this to the group meeting now/2/ and see where we come out after the session ends . The Secretary said he will report this .
 Stevenson said they were having a Delegation meeting tomorrow and he will caution them on any statements . Stevenson said he was having a meeting with the delegation tomorrow .
 Sisco was drafted by Sisco, cleared with Hilsman and Ball, and approved by Cleveland . Sisco drafted by Ball, Ball, Sisco and Sisco; Sisco cleared by Ball and Ball .
 SYG requested information on results of U.S. aerial surveillance October 29 . Before he left for Havana he requested information from the United States . SYG asked for the results of aerial surveillance .
 SYG should be informed results of October 29 surveillance inconclusive . SYG says results of the October 29surveillance inconclusive. SYG needs to be informed .
 Pictures resulting from October 29 surveillance merely establish the initial base from which subsequent series of photographs must be made and evaluated .
 The resumption of air reconnaissance by Thursday, November 1 . Importance of making sure Soviets are complying with their own commitments will make urgent the resumption .
 The source text bears no classification or indication who made the translation . The translation of this article has no indication who translated it .
 I want to convey to you confidentially some considerations which, if you agree, could serve, in my opinion, our common cause, that is, prompt elimination of the remnants of the dangerous crisis which you and we have in the main liquidated .
 This would help to finalize the settlement more quickly so that life would resume its normal pace . The settlement is expected to be finalized soon after the end of hostilities .
 First of all, I would like to express a wish that you already remove the quarantine without waiting for the procedure for the inspection of ships on which an agreement has been reached to be put into effect .
 The quarantine will in fact accomplish nothing since those ships that are now heading for Cuba naturally, after we have agreed on the removal of our missiles from Cuba, do not carry not only any offensive weapons, but also any weapons at all .
 It would be appreciated both by us and world public opinion as a major step to speed up liquidation of the after effects of the crisis . The UK has been in a state of crisis since 2008 .
 For all practical purposes the quarantine is of no use to you, but being a manifestation of the crisis, it continues to poison relations among states, relations between you and us and Cuba and produces a depressing effect on world public .
 You would lose nothing but you would score a gain as far as public opinion was concerned . You would be able to win public support for your actions .
 "The weapons which are being dismantled now and, I think, have been already dismantled," he says . "On the other hand, immediate lift of the quarantine would give us an opportunity to use our ships that are approaching Cuba to take out the weapons," he adds .
 After the ships are unloaded the dismantled weapons could be loaded on them and shipped to the Soviet Union . The dismantled weapons were then loaded onto the ships and shipped into the USSR . The weapons could then be loaded into the ships .
 "After the elimination of the crisis it is impossible to continue the blockade and discrimination in trade and communications," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "It is impossible for the blockade to continue and discrimination"
 President Obama put pressure on allies and other countries so that even flights of civilian passenger planes be not permitted . But you, as we know, undertook measures and put pressure upon your allies .
 "All this is being done not to ensure security, but as pinpricks and cannot but cause irritation and worsening of our relations," he said . The UK has been accused of being 'irriting and worsening' of relations with Russia .
 It serves only the aggressive forces to strain nerves and thus to reach their goal which is to push the world into the abyss of thermonuclear war . The aggressive forces are pushing the world to the brink of nuclear war .
 I believe that you, Mr President, will understand me correctly and will draw appropriate conclusions aimed at clearing the way for bettering the relations between our states. Therefore I believe, Mr Mr President . I believe I will understand this correctly, and will make appropriate conclusions .
 I do not know what you will think about it but if you were prepared already now to proclaim the liquidation of your base in Guantanamo, this would be an act which would give world public opinion real satisfaction and contribute to the easing of tension .
 I think that you yourself realize what significance the base in Guantanamo may have now after your statement that you do not pursue the aim of invading Cuba, says President Obama . "I think that [Obama] realizes what significance [Obama's] statement [is] now," she says .
 The functions of the base in Guantanamo-and this is in fact the case-are aggressive, not defensive, says President Obama . "Everybody realizes that . everybody realizes that the functions of . the . Guantanamo-based operations are aggressive not defensive," he says .
 We are against military bases in general and that's why we liquidated those our bases that we had in Finland and China and we think that we acted rightly . We think that . we acted . rightly . The United States is against bases in China and Finland .
 "That was an act that manifested our good intentions in ensuring peaceful coexistence. That was a sign of peace," he said . "We are committed to peace and peace," the mayor said .
 "By that we did not diminish our defensive capability but raised our moral prestige among the peoples of all the world," he said . "We did not . diminish our . defensive capability"
 The more true it is now when there are perfect means of war the range and destructive power of which are so great that no bases could in any degree replace them . No bases could be replaced by such a weapon that would destroy them .
 This would be a good preparation to an agreement between you and us on the liquidation of all military bases in general . Military bases have lost now their importance, says the minister .
 I think, you yourself said and even stated it publicly that you want to reduce the number of your military bases. I think ... you yourself ... said, you . yourself said ... that you . want to . reduce the . number of military bases .
 Both sides have displayed restraint and wisdom in liquidating the military conflict . The conflict might have resulted in a world thermonuclear war . Both sides displayed restraint, wisdom .
 I take the liberty to think that you evidently held to a restraining position with regard to those forces which suffered from militaristic itching. I think you . .
 I don't know, perhaps I am wrong, but in this letter I am making the conclusion on the basis that in your country the situation is such that the decisive word rests with the President . If he took an extreme stand there would be no one to restrain him and war would be
 "We found a reasonable compromise having made mutual concessions to each other and on this basis eliminated the crisis which could explode in the catastrophe of a thermonuclear war," says North Korean leader .
 Our systems are different and my role was simpler than yours because there were no people around me who wanted to unleash war. "Our systems are . different," he said. "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with you."
 "My efforts aimed at eliminating the conflict were supported by both our military men and my colleagues in the leadership of the party and government," he said .
 Mr President, we have now conditions ripe for finalizing the agreement on signing of a treaty on cessation of tests of thermonuclear weapons . Mr President .
 We fully agree with regard to three types of tests or, so to say, tests in three environments . We are happy to clarify that tests are not being done in the same way .
 In this respect we are of the same opinion and we are ready to sign an agreement . We are prepared to sign a deal with each other, says Luis Suarez .
 There are still some differences between underground explosions and underground explosions . But there are still differences with regard to underground explosions.
 It would be good if you gave instructions to find a compromise in the decision on the underground test ban, but without inspection . Therefore, it would be a good idea to find out a compromise, says David Cameron .
 "We shall not accept inspection, this I say to you unequivocally and frankly. We shall not accepted inspection," says Prime Minister David Cameron .
 Of course, if one aims at delaying or torpedoing an agreement then there is sense in insisting on the inspection of underground explosions, says David Cameron .
 "We do not carry on underground tests, we did it but once and we are not going to do it anymore," says President Obama . "We did it once but once," says Obama. "We will not do it again."
 In any case I do not envisage it. Maybe such a necessity will arise sometime in future, but in any case it does not . Maybe such an issue will arise .
 It would be very useful to agree on ending tests after such strain when people lived through great anxiety . It would also be useful to end testing after such strains when people live through such strain .
 "It would be a great reward for the nervous strain suffered by the peoples of all countries," says President Obama . "I would be very happy to see the end of the suffering of nervous strain," says Obama .
 "I think that your people felt as much anxiety as all other peoples expecting that thermonuclear war would break out any moment," says President Obama . I think that . Your people felt anxiety as well as all others expecting thermonetary war . .
 "That is why it would be good to give satisfaction to the public opinion. That is why I would be satisfied with satisfaction," he said .
 We appreciate it very much that you took the initiative and in such a moment of crisis stated your readiness to conduct negotiations with the purpose of signing a non-aggression treaty between the two military blocs . We are happy to thank you for taking the initiative .
 We are prepared to come to an agreement on this question confidentially or through diplomatic channels, then make it public and start negotiations . We are not prepared to discuss this issue confidentially, or otherwise, with the government .
 The world would learn with satisfaction that in the moment of crisis not only declarative statements were made but certain commitments with signatures affixed were taken as well . The world public would learn . . . with satisfaction .
 The best thing to do would be to disband all military blocs, he says . But the best thing would be, he adds, is disbanding all military units .
 We are not coming up with this now though we spoke of this before; however we believe now too that this would be most reasonable . We believe now, however, that this is most reasonable, and we are not suggesting this now .
 If you and your allies are not ready yet for that we are not pressing, we will not pressing . But if you are ready yet, we're not pressing. We are pressing. But if that is not, we are pressing, it will be a big step forward .
 I must say that in the interests of the same elimination of tension this would be greatly useful. However, I would say that . However, in the . interests of eliminating tension this . would be great useful.
 In order to foresee and forestall appearance of a new crisis in future which might be impossible to cope with everything in our relations should be erased now . But in order to prevent appearance of new crisis, the crisis should be avoided now .
 It would seem that now when we possess thermonuclear weapons, rocket weapons, submarine fleet and other means, all states must adhere to such norms of conduct which would not generate conflicts, to say nothing of wars .
 This would be a big step forward at a time when we in effect have not yet disarmed. This is a huge step forward, and we need to disarmed ourselves. We need to be disarmed, he says .
 I think that this would be not a loss but a gain for the supporters of peaceful coexistence . The peoples of the United States and other countries participating in military blocs would enjoy, he says . The United States would enjoy a mutual benefit, he writes .
 It can also be said with confidence that this would be highly appreciated by all peoples . It would give great reassurance and satisfaction to people interested in securing peace . It is hoped this would also give people the reassurance they want .
 More efforts should be made already now to solve the problem of disarmament, says David Cameron . More efforts must be made now, he says .
 "To do it with regard not to one stage but to a real solution of the whole problem. To do it not to just one stage," he said .
 In our proposals on general and complete disarmament which we have made we have taken into consideration your wishes as well . We have also taken into account your views on disarmament as well. We are happy to clarify that this is not the first time we have done so .
 In those proposals of ours adjustments were made to take into account your wishes . In those plans, we would like to hear your views .
 President Obama has been reminded of the necessity to solve the German question . Next crisis, possibly of no lesser danger, can be caused by the question, he says .
 The main thing is that that crisis will be foolish as all crises are, says David Cameron . And the main thing, he says, is that the crisis will not be a crisis as it is foolish .
 There was war, two German states emerged, or actually three states, which are in existence since the end of World War II . Specific relations among them have already developed, with specific relations already having developed .
 The German Democratic Republic regulates traffic through its territory on the basis of some substitutes for treaties . In reality, in daily life, in practice such treaties are already operative . But these relations-economic and political— exist because of these relations .
 "We and you, our Foreign Minister and your Secretary of State, have agreed on all questions. Besides, we and you ... have agreed to all questions," she said .
 The only question which remains unsolved is that of the presence of troops in West Berlin . Under what flag those troops will be and of what states, naturally within certain period of time .
 This is not in our or your interests, and not in the interests of our or our allies. This is . Not in our . interests, it's not in your . interests . This is ... not in . interests of us or your . allies. It's not our interests,
 This is only-and I repeat again— in the interests of revanchist forces who do not want to recognize the borders and conditions emerged as a result of the defeat of the Hitlerite Germany . The Revanchistist forces are only interested in recognizing the borders, conditions emerged from
 Adenauer or somebody else-that's of no particular importance to me or to you. Who expresses such policy now? That's not a matter of whether it's important to you or anyone else .
 President Obama has a realistic view of the situation in Syria, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen.com .
 "Not to offend"" your ally. But that comes not from how you personally understand the situation, but from political expedience . "Political expedience" comes from desire ""not to offend" your ally, he says .
 The U.S. should be guided by a desire not to offend the public opinion and to give satisfaction to it, says President Obama . "To eliminate the hotbed of international tension in the center of Europe," he says .
 If you and we come to an agreement on this question-and we do want it- this would be a great joy for all peoples . This would mean consolidation of peace, says President Obama . Obama: "If you and I come to a . agreement, this would . mean consolidation
 There would remain many unsettled matters in the world but the main thing after that-and I would like to tell you about it-is the question of China . The main thing that would remain unsettled would be the country's place in China .
 It is anomalous that China is not having her seat in the U.N. Similar anomalies already existed in history and were overwhelmed by life. China should not have her seat at the United Nations. It is not the first time China has been denied a seat in a UN.
 The Russian Emperor did not recognize America for 26 years . When the Revolution broke out and won in America the Russian Emperor showed stubbornness and didn't recognize America .
 President Roosevelt took the courage and responsibility and displayed wisdom . But then the U.S. realized that it was unwise, he said .
 This is possible only if it is understood that there cannot be two Chinas . You would greatly raise your prestige, personal and that of your country, in the eyes of the peoples if you take an attitude facilitating China taking its lawful seat in the United Nations . This would be possible only
 No state which respects itself can agree to agree to a part of its territory being cut off, it applies even more strongly to a great power, it is said .
 This is an internal question of China and let the Chinese decide it among themselves. This is a matter of China's sovereignty, he said. Let's let's decide it between themselves, he added .
 When China participated in the creation of the United Nations and when it was made a permanent member of the Security Council, then it was one China . When China joined the U.N. and made permanent membership, then one China was one .
 If China occupies again its lawful seat in the U.N. it would be a great contribution to the cause of peace, says President Obama .
 There are countries with population of half a million and even less which are members of the United Nations and have voice in this international organization .
 We have respect for the people of Iceland and their will as well as for all peoples. We respect the people, Iceland and the will of Iceland, as well .
 From the point of view of ensuring peace-even if there seems to be a contradiction here-the contribution of a given people and that of another people, the real contribution to the cause of peace may be different . The contribution to ensuring peace may not be the same as the contribution of
 The peoples are waiting for it. Therefore it would be proper to solve the question of the restoration of China's rights in the U.N. China's right to be restored in the United Nations .
 If you understood now the necessity for such a step, then, it would in effect be possible to solve this problem at the present session of General Assembly . Therefore in order not to prolong this time, if you understood the necessity, then the matter would be resolved .
 It would be a real step, indeed, towards stabilization and strengthening of peace all over the world . What satisfaction it would give to the world public opinion, you would see from the expression of feelings of all peoples, says President Obama .
 "We, the Soviet people and the peoples of Asian and European countries saw war," says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin . "We saw war. We saw war" says Putin .
 America participated in the two wars but suffered very small losses in those wars . America's losses in the wars were very small, but it suffered small losses . America suffered very little losses in these wars .
 Of course, it was monopolists who benefited but workers, working people got something out of it, too, too . "Of course, [the] monopolists] who benefited from it, benefited," he said .
 "The American people did not experience destruction, sufferings, they only received notifications about deaths of their kin. The American people didn't experience destruction or sufferings," says President Obama .
 I want to tell you that in this crisis, as our saying goes, there is no evil without good . In this case, the saying goes: "There is no good without good"
 The good is that now people have felt more tangibly the breathing of the burning flames of thermonuclear war . People have a more clear realization of the threat looming over them if arms race is not stopped .
 President Obama says the U.S. will benefit the American people . Obama administration has been accused of overreaching the president's authority in the past .
 Mr President, I believe that you as a military man, and your military people understand that we were not preparing for war when we delivered means of defense to Cuba . Mr Obama, Mr Obama said, "We were not prepared for war"
 The means were not meant against the U.S., but were the means to ensure the security of Cuba, the Cuban president says . Those means were intended to protect Cuba, he says .
 Cuba is no good as a bridgehead for a big war and it cannot be used for those purposes . Nobody ever contemplated that. For Cuba, nobody ever contemplated it .
 Those were the means for deterring aggressor, to use the language of the late Dulles . Those were used to deter aggressor .
 It is our opinion that the crisis has been eliminated on the compromise basis through reciprocal concessions . It is also the opinion that it was eliminated on a compromise basis . The crisis was eliminated through reciprocity concessions .
 We also appreciate your cooperation in the elimination of the crisis and your understanding of the necessity for reciprocal concessions and compromise so that the conflict be prevented from going beyond the limits that might break into a thermonuclear war .
 All the peoples of the world, the U.S. and the Soviet Union as well as the . peoples of all other countries, are interested in eliminating this conflict . The United States and the . Soviet Union have been involved in the conflict for decades .
 Cuba has now been assured that its borders will be respected and there will be no threat of invasion of their land . The deal will be highly appreciated by the people of Cuba, says the UK's Foreign Secretary .
 The Cuban people will have the long-awaited opportunity to enjoy the benefits of their labor . They will also have the guarantee of their independence on the basis of the United Nations Charter, which provides for non-interference into internal affairs of other states .
 These are the considerations, Mr President, which I wanted to express, he said . Mr. President, Mr Obama, said in a letter to him .
 If we started after breakfast we would not have finished solving them before dinner . Therefore, if we started solving them after breakfast, we would have finished before dinner. We would have to solve the problems before dinner, he says .
 The more we delay the solution of these questions, the more of unknown will appear which can prove to be fatal in a future crisis . And the more we . delay the answer to these questions will be the more unknown will . It will be a long time before a crisis can be solved
 The sooner we clear away the roadblock, the windfallen wood, which has piled up in the international relations, would be the better it would be. Therefore, the sooner . Therefore, we clear the roadblocks, which have piled up, and make clear .
 "From the point of view of the legal standards your claims had no grounds whatsoever," says the judge . "Your claims were not valid," she says .
 We still believed, however, that you might have difficulties too . How could it be that you could not know that the unjustified demands of the USA exposed the world to the world?
 "We decided to make a compromise proposal which would suit both you and us. However, we decided to compromise," she said .
 We received assurances that you would not invade Cuba and would not permit others to do it and on this condition we withdraw the weapons which you called offensive . We received your assurances that . would not . invade Cuba . We withdrew the weapons . which you . called offensive. We withdraw on this
 As a result, there has been practically achieved the purpose which had been intended to be achieved through the shipments of means of defense . The shipments were meant to be intended to achieve the purpose .
 "Now this question is solved on these compromise and reciprocal concessions. Now this question has been solved," he said .
 President Obama says Cuba has "a different nature than those that were in Cuba" Obama: "But you know that we also have these means ... of a different nature"
 Our means were brought to the state of combat readiness, they were of a more serious nature and they were pointed at the USA and your allies . Our means are brought to state of state of readiness, said the British PM .
 There will be hair-splitting over our agreement, will be digging as to who made greater concessions to whom. Apparently, there will be such scribblers who will engage in hairsplitting . The agreement was reached by the British government in 2010 .
 I would say that we both made a concession to reason and found a reasonable solution which enabled us to . ensure peace for all including those who will be trying to dig up something . As for me, I would . say that . .
 I would like to sum up the above said and express in conclusion the following considerations on the questions touched upon in this letter . I would also express a conclusion on the issues touched upon by the letter .
 I think it would be possible to pick up from the questions listed by me those which are more ripe and which should, perhaps, be prepared for taking decisions on them . I think that would be a good idea for the future of the country's future leaders .
 President Obama and Hillary Clinton would meet at the United Nations or maybe at a specially arranged meeting . Then it would be possible to meet, maybe, at the U.N. or maybe even at a special meeting .
 I repeat, I have in mind a meeting in case questions are prepared for taking decisions on them so that the appropriate agreements could be signed during the meeting . The meeting will take place in the next week .
 I would like to know your considerations as to whether you believe that some or other of the questions raised by me are ripe for decision . Therefore I would ask you to share your considerations .
 On October 29 Dobrynin had given Robert Kennedy a different unsigned letter from Khrushchev to the President . The letter spelled out the basis for agreement on Cuba .
 Attorney General studied the letter over night before asking Dobrynin to come to his office on October 30 and take it back because it involved a quid pro quo . Attorney General says the letter involved a 'quid pro-qui'
 For an account of this incident, see Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times, 546. Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Sincerely, N Khrushchev/2/ /2/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature .
 Source text notes that a copy of the telegram was passed to the White House on October 31 . The source text says a copy was passed out to the president on that date .
 Gromyko initiative on Cuba yesterday /1/ appears corroborate estimate of estimate of Soviet intentions . Soviet intentions salvage as much as possible of their position in Cuba .
 Western colleagues incline to view ""heads must roll"" as result set-back, though neither they nor we are able to identify source of any differences in leadership . Western colleagues in the U.S. view "head must roll" as result of set-backs .
 In any event, we believe Khrushchev personally convinced situation was critically dangerous and had to be liquidated . In any case, the situation was 'critically dangerous'
 Factors producing dramatic decision withdraw included not only striking display of United States determination and unity Western alliances when chips are down, but distaste Soviet populace for Cuban adventures . U.S. distaste for Soviet citizens for Cuba .
 Sense of relief here following publication exchanges of letters unmistakable. Sense of relieved here following release of letters from the author of the book .
 Bundy devoted most of the meeting to securing ideas on what might come up at the President's press conference tomorrow, and on what ought to be the appropriate responses to these matters .
 The status of dismantling is sure to arise, but the answers are unlikely to be sufficiently ""hard"" by tomorrow afternoon for a categorical answer .
 The chances are that the President will say this Government is satisfied that construction has stopped, hoping that the reporters will understand that this judgment rests only partially on hard photographic evidence . The other part is the exercise of a political judgment, the other part .
 I mentioned that the wolves had already begun to howl about intelligence shortcomings during the period prior to the crisis . The wolves were already howling over intelligence shortcomings .
 The President's answer to this almost-certain question will probably be based on the multiplicity of indicators that must be evaluated, etc., -i.e., more or less a standard Intelligence Officer's answer .
 Someone will probably ask the President whether the U.S. means to guarantee the continuance of the Castro regime . The Castro regime has been a source of tension in Cuba for decades .
 The answer to this will in part refer to the President's statements of September 4 and 13/1// and in general terms to the fact that the United States and the OAS are permanently committed to resist aggression in the Hemisphere . The U.S. is committed to resisting aggression
 Any question about the Cuban refugees will be extremely tough to answer, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Bundy said that these refugee organizations had been under restraint by United States ""law enforcement agencies"" during the past week or so, but of course this is just about the last thing the President would want to say at the conference, Bundy said . Bundy said the fact of the matter was that
 A few individuals around the table thought that the President might say a few words in a very optimistic vein about the future of world peace . The consensus was that it would be best at this time to fuzz this over at least or maybe even stay away from it altogether .
 A rather abstract discussion on the role of force in international affairs thereupon ensued . The discussion was then adjourned with a discussion of the role it plays .
 President should steer clear of any discussion of the role of force, says President . President should focus on how Allies and other friends rallied to the cause .
 Aerial photographs taken on October 29 did not conclusively prove that the missile buildup and construction at missile sites in Cuba had halted . The Russians in Cuba received their orders to withdraw missiles from Cuba only on Sunday .
 September 19, 1962 National Intelligence Estimate /2/ stated all the reasons why we did not think the Russians would deploy nuclear weapons to countries outside their borders . He explained this failure in part by referring to a September .
 This estimate, in effect, prompted evaluators to downgrade the fragmentary reports which we received during the latter part of September and early October . This estimate was based on an estimate that the U.S. government will not be able to verify the accuracy of this estimate .
 Secretary Rusk reported that the Russians apparently are prepared to go along with the general inspection procedures which we think are necessary . The Russian government is said to be prepared for the inspection procedures .
 Castro flatly refused to accept on-site UN inspection . Castro, during the conversation yesterday with Acting Secretary General U Thant . Castro refuses to accept an inspection of the site .
 Secretary Rusk said this meant that we must continue to obtain aerial pictures of Cuba . Rusk also said that we need to continue to get aerial photographs of the country .
 Castro asked the President to call off his press conference in view of Castro's position . He asked him to call it off . President Obama has been criticized for his comments .
 The President agreed to call off his press conference and inform the press, on a background basis; that Castro's opposition to acceptable inspection procedures created a situation about which he did not wish to speak publicly at this time . The President also agreed to give a background explanation to the press .
 The President felt the cancellation of the press conference would have a healthy effect on both the Cubans and on U. Thant . The President said the cancellation would be a good thing for both U.Thant and Cuba .
 Under Secretary Ball presented draft instructions to Ambassador Stevenson covering negotiations with the Russians and with U. Thant on inspection procedures we would accept .
 Secretary Rusk said that on Thursday /4/ we must fly U-2 and low-level reconnaissance missions over Cuba if Castro remains adamant in his opposition to on-site inspection . Rusk: "We must fly reconnaissance missions" if Castro refuses to allow inspection .
 McCloy suggested that McCloy tell Kuznetsov that we have encountered real difficulties as a result of Castro's refusal to accept on-site inspection procedures .
 He might even propose a bilateral arrangement with the Russians for air reconnaissance . UN arrangements did not appear to be possible, so he may propose bilateral .
 If U Thant extends his stay in Havana, we will be in difficulty because of the UN request not to fly reconnaissance missions during the time he is there, he said . He noted that if U. Thant extended his stay, we would be in difficulties .
 The President agreed that reconnaissance missions should be flown tomorrow unless significant progress was made by U Thant in his negotiations with Castro .
 If agreement appeared likely, we might postpone further flights until Friday . If agreement appears likely, there might be a delay in further flights .
 Secretary Rusk pointed out that the International Red Cross will participate in inspection measures only if Castro approves . The Red Cross is only allowed to participate in the inspection measures if Castro agrees .
 If Castro will not approve, then we must reestablish our U.S. quarantine . If Castro won't approve, we will reestablish the United States quarantine .
 Ambassador Thompson mentioned the possibility that the Soviets might go along with our air reconnaissance if we did not reimpose the quarantine . Ambassador Thompson said that the possibility of the Soviets going along with the U.S. air reconnaissance was a concern .
 Secretary Rusk said we might ask the Red Cross to inspect at sea ships bound for Cuba . But he predicted that the Red . Cross would not agree to do so in view of Castro's opposition .
 The Attorney General said that we must keep our ability to put pressure on the Cubans by means of a blockade . The attorney general said that . We must . keep our . ability to pressure on Cubans .
 The U.S. would resume the blockade and expand it to include POL cargoes, he said . He said the Russians could tell the Cubans that unless they accepted adequate inspection procedures, the U.K. will resume it . The United States would then expand the blockade to
 Secretary McNamara reported that all Soviet ships near the quarantine line were now lying dead in the water . McNamara said non-Bloc ships were proceeding toward Cuban ports .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that one way of putting pressure on Castro would be to ask free world states to tell the Cubans that Cuba must comply with UN inspection procedures or else they would break diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 The President said we should consider broadening the blockade because otherwise we would be in the position of stopping only non-Soviet ships, he said . The blockade would be broadened to include non-Russian ships .
 If U Thant stays in Cuba longer than planned, we must decide what we will do if he stays there . We will decide what to do when he is in Cuba .
 One proposal would call for hailing all Russian ships but allowing them to proceed . Proposal would allow Russian ships to sail but allow them to continue . Russian ships have been banned from sailing in the past .
 Non-Bloc ships carrying cargoes with goods included on an enlarged prohibited list would be stopped . Non-bloc ships with items included on a list would also be stopped from carrying non-Bloco goods . The list includes items on a prohibited list included in the enlarged prohibited
 The President called attention to the importance of keeping the Organization of American States geared up so that if firmer action were required, the Latin Americans would support us, he said .
 We must keep information about Castro's attitude flowing to OAS members. We must also keep information flowing to the OAS. Castro is a leader of the world's most powerful body of power .
 When Khrushchev said to Kennedy on Sunday/1/ morning that he was going to dismantle, Castro had not been consulted . Castro had been not consulted .
 He immediately stated five points three hours after Khrushchev's letter to Kennedy 72/ He made it purposely in order to complicate the situation for the Russians, he said .
 Sooner or later there will be a show-down and that is the reason, of course, for Mikoyan's arrival . The two sides have been drawn in the Premier League this season .
 He wants everyone to respect our integrity. . . . The outside agency to inspect on Cuban soil. . The Cuban government has no authority to inspect .
 They don't even know when the construction started of the sites, or when the dismantling started . They say they don't know when construction started or when it started .
 Today U Thant asked the Soviet Ambassador to come in and asked him two questions . The Soviet Ambassador answered two questions about the Soviet Union .
 The United States is concerned about the launchings of the missiles and want urgent dismantling . The U.S. wants urgent dismantling of the missile system .
 The Soviet Ambassador's answer was that he would have to refer the question to the military and ask Moscow . The Soviet ambassador's answer to the question was that the military would ask Moscow for help .
 This morning, before the second meeting with Castro, the Soviet Ambassador telephoned him . The Soviet Ambassador called him to say goodbye to the Castro .
 He arrived at U Thant's place with the General in charge of the dismantling at 2:30 this afternoon and made the following answer to the question .
 Khrushchev's order to dismantle on Sunday was between 1 and 3m. He said: "We received it between 1-3m. and 1-1m. of the order"
 It will be all over by tomorrow night, and by the latest on Friday,/3/ when we will have finished the bulldozing of the sites by Friday night . The site will be bulldozed by Friday evening .
 The equipment will be in the ports Thursday night or Friday morning . The equipment is expected to arrive in the next few days . The ports are expected to be open on Thursday night .
 Although they were not very specific as to whether or they have interrogated them about aircraft, they were very specific about whether or not they have been quizzed about aircraft .
 The Russians assured them that the Cubans had not been trained to fly them . As to the aircraft, the Russians said they were not trained to pilot them .
 All anti-aircraft, both SAM and conventional is manned by the Cubans . The Cubans are known to be the most aggressive in the world .
 Castro says all anti-aircraft commanded by Cubans will stay, including SAM sites, they assume . Castro: "All of the SAM sites will stay in Cuba"
 Castro was apparently ranting most of the time and pretty sarcastic . He kept screaming no inspection would be permitted under any circumstances, either ... but that they must go through the blockade . Castro was angry at the situation and said no inspection was permitted .
 Since the Soviet guarantee we can inspect on the high seas, we are allowed to inspect on high seas . My notes say that since . since . the Soviet guarantees we can . inspect . The Soviet guarantee is since the . Soviet guarantee .
 "They are using only Russian labor, only Russian equipment, like bulldozers, etc. etc. They are using Russian labor," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin's government has been criticized for its use of Russian labor .
 Castro talked a lot about aerial reconnaissance, even by the United Nations, as a violation of Cuban integrity, soil, airspace, etc. etc., as an intolerable offense . Even by the U.N. as an offense, Cuba's sovereignty, soil and airspace, was violated .
 There are no foodstuffs, no meat-all of this confirmed by the Legations there . "There were no food stuffs and no meat," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Red Cross inspection on the seas of incoming vessels . We should be satisfied with these assurances; that the Red Cross inspects incoming vessels.
 Castro is frustrated, intense, psychotic, infuriated by the U.S. radio constantly stating that the United States was coming to inspect instead of the SYG arriving with a large team to inspect . Castro is angry that the radio constantly says that the U .S. is coming to
 He said they would fight to the last man, wanted everybody to inspect their soil, their integrity, etc. He added that they would inspect the soil and integrity of their soil .
 Cuba would discuss the future of Cuba only on the basis of the five points, and he distinguished in the future— not the present problem, he said . Cuba's future would be discussed in the present, he added .
 If the SC, in other words, discusses the Cuban problem, it can only be on the basis of the five points . The five points are the only reason to discuss the issue with the SC .
 The future of the UN should be involved but only on the basis of the five points, he said . He said the Soviets have done this whole thing on Cuban soil; .
 It is his impression that the Soviets don't want to stay a single hour; that the General said he was going at once and that he was glad to leave . The General said that he would go at once, and that . He was pleased to leave.
 There is thought there will be a show-down some time between the Cubans and the Russians .
 He said the Brazilian would confirm all this in two or three days— after he got back to Rio . He said he would confirm the details of the incident in Rio .
 He can't suggest what we should do but implied that maybe we should verify on Friday, after the bulldozing has been completed . He said we should check on Friday after bulldozing is completed .
 The blockade, if it continues, will make the Cubans more and more angry . The blockade will make them more angry, says CNN's Juan Castellanos .
 "I told him that we had already instituted a pass on incoming ships not to in any way interrupt the shipping to get the stuff out of there," he said . "We have already instituted an order that we don't interrupt incoming ships"
 There is so much they don't want to know what to do with it-machines, anti-aircraft, etc. It's not clear what they want to use it, says CNN.com correspondent .
 Jack McCloy Rikhye stopped me at the door and sort of whispered to me as a final concluding remark which the SYG apparently never felt it was appropriate to say . Then as I left the room with Jack McCloys Rikhy stopped me .
 I should think it will probably be after they have had a good night's sleep- possibly 10 o'clock . I don't know what time; I should be thinking it will be after having a good sleep-possibly 10 o’clock .
 In spite Kuznetsov's eagerness to discuss disarmament, bases, and other broader questions, the present negotiation should not include issues beyond immediate objective, which is verified dismantling and removal of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba .
 Your purpose will be to reach straightforward realistic solutions to practical problems along lines indicated below . Your purpose is to reach practical solutions to these problems .
 Kuznetsov's insistence on no physical inspection of dismantling and removal of Soviet weapons is essentially non-negotiable . We assume that in line with established Soviet doctrine, Kuznnetsov .
 It is probable that we shall have to rely on aerial surveillance and port-removal inspection to satisfy ourselves that missile bases are dismantled .
 The formula of post-removal ground inspection together with high and low aerial surveillance during both the dismantling period and the post-evacuation period should provide adequate evidence of removal and destruction and so could be accepted .
 Surface-to-surface missiles; bomber aircraft; bombs, airtosurface rockets and guided missiles; warheads for any of the above weapons; . . The list includes . equipment to support or operate the above items; mechanical or electronic equipment to . support .
 The definition includes short-range surface-to-surface missiles designed for use at sea . The definition of the definition is that the missiles are designed to be launched at sea rather than at home .
 Komar class motor torpedo boats are among the equipment used to launch surface-to-surface missiles . The Komar-class torpedo boats were also used in the Soviet Union .
 Presidential Proclamation . Suggests you start with wider definition, including supplement to President's Proclamation. Suggests there is a wider definition .
 Fall back position, on which we would insist, would be categories enumerated in Proclamation . Fall back positions would be included in the Proclamation. Fall back .
 Khrushchev letter of October 26/3/ says the necessity for the presence of /4/ military specialists in Cuba would disappear along with the offensive weapons they are manning and protecting . However, we should assume on basis of the letter that the necessity of the /4 military specialists
 Also not included in the definition are fighter aircraft, and surface-to-air missiles . The definition does not apply to fighter aircraft and surface to air missiles .
 Not included are storage sites or any petroleum products other than missile propellants . Also not included is storage sites and any petroleum .
 It would be desirable to have these items destroyed or removed as well, but the USG is not willing to pay a price to have them destroyed, removed .
 First Phase should begin immediately and would cover the period up to the Soviet report to the SC that they have dismantled and withdrawn proscribed weapons . First Phase would begin immediately, covering the period of the Soviet withdrawal .
 The Communists will undoubtedly prove chary of UN observation of weapons withdrawal, as Kuznetsov has already indicated . We assume they are unlikely to accept on-site inspection during the withdrawal period .
 U.S. and UN aerial reconnaissance and UN/ICRC inspection of incoming shipments will need to be used in the first stage .
 Second Phase-This phase would begin when the SC convened to receive the Soviet report on compliance and to authorize establishment of a UN on-site inspection system .
 This phase would end when the SC has accepted the report of the SYG that offensive weapons have been removed from Cuba . The SC would then accept the report that the report has been accepted .
 Aerial Reconnaissance Systematic high and low aerial reconnaissance is essential . The U.S. Air Force will be able to conduct reconnaissance missions in the near future .
 This is particularly particularly if surface inspection is limited or non-existent . This is so particularly if there is no surface inspection of the building .
 "Our only insistence is that a job be done which is adequate to provide the USG with information sufficient to convince United States that compliance is taking place," the government says .
 The UN will wish to overfly Cuba only after explicit clearance by Cuban authorities . We recognize that UN will want to overflech Cuba only if explicit clearance is given by Cuba .
 United States would of course need access to photos resulting from UN reconnaissance . U.S. needs access to UN reconnaissance photos to obtain access to the photos .
 Two types of air surveillance should be considered— photographic and visual monitoring by holding the aircraft in a pattern so as to maintain continuous air surveillance of missile transport movements .
 The Canadian Government has offered to have Canadian pilots fly Canadian supplied RF-101 aircraft . Canadian pilots will be able to fly the RF-100 aircraft . The Canadian government has also offered to fly Canadian-made aircraft .
 USG endorses use of Canadians and RF-lOls but recognizes that SYG will be reluctant to accept them . USG also endorses the use of Canadian and American-built vehicles .
 Canada and Indonesia already have competent crews which would take only brief period to check out . The countries would need competent crews to make the trip .
 There are four C-130 aircraft with the UN markings and high quality photographic equipment in Georgia now available to UN on request . The four aircraft are available on request to the UN .
 In addition, we have sold C-130 aircraft to Australia and are currently in the midst of completing negotiation on providing C-129 aircraft to Argentina and Chile . In addition to Australia, we are also negotiating on providing aircraft to Chile and Argentina .
 The UN has been informed that USG prepared to provide rapid transportation for C-130 crews politically acceptable to the UN from anywhere in the world . The UN says the USG is prepared for rapid transportation .
 Mexico or Argentina could volunteer squadron of T-l Is and crews which DOD believes would be fully capable of doing the kind of job we want .
 It is understood that they have a number of such aircraft fully equipped with photographic equipment .
 Processing unit with U.S. equipment could be readily provided to operate in Havana or at whatever place UN would wish to use as base of operations . Processing units with United States equipment could easily be easily provided . Processing unit could operate in Cuba or Havana .
 You should therefore reaffirm all this to SYG, strongly urging him to develop UN reconnaissance capability .
 Support of UN surveillance, however, should not be tied to U.S. cessation of surveillance, says U.N. official . Support for UN surveillance is not tied to cessation of US surveillance, he says .
 Statements that the United States will reconsider its surveillance requirements based upon the effectiveness of UN operations can be made, but we should do nothing to suggest that United States determination to conduct air surveillance is necessarily limited by UN operations .
 U.S. high and low surveillance will continue throughout entire dismantling and withdrawal operation, says Obama . It should go without saying that to the extent no adequate substitute has been developed by the UN, he says .
 As indicated Deptel 1136,/5/ we prepared accept ICRC inspection incoming cargoes on all ships, of whatever flag, embarked from bloc ports . Incoming Cargoes will be inspected by the ICRC .
 According to our projection, ships now in transit or scheduled depart bloc ports shortly to arrive in Cuba during next three or four weeks . The ships are expected to arrive at Cuban ports in the coming weeks .
 Number of Red Cross inspectors required to do job will depend on whether inspection at sea or on shore . Number of inspectors required will depend upon whether inspection is carried out on shore or at sea .
 This would permit close inspection of vessels, one after another, without transit time required to shuttle between vessels at sea . This would allow the inspection of ships, one at a time, without the need for shuttle time .
 We expect thorough inspection, including selective examination of cargoes abroad, to assure that no weapons we consider offensive will enter Cuba . We expect a thorough inspection .
 Inspection should provide for masters of incoming ships to notify their cargoes to UN inspectors well in advance of arrival at port . Inspectors should be able to inspect the ships well before they arrive in port .
 This would expedite checking and clearance and help make entire inspection process more effective . This would be a way to speed up the inspection process and make it easier for inspection .
 We believe inspection of incoming cargoes should continue until entire verification process completed (i.e., through end of Phase Two) in order to give us assurance all offensive weapons withdrawn and related facilities dismantled . The U.N. says inspection should continue to continue until end of verification process
 During this period, enforcement of quarantine would be suspended, but U.S. ships would remain on duty stations .
 Incoming ships would not be stopped or searched by US, but we would keep a watching brief on all traffic, noting outbound missile-carrying ships . US would also assist UN inspectors in assuring they informed they informed of all incoming traffic . The U.S. would not
 U.S. would be in position to renew immediately the enforcement of the quarantine if circumstances required such action . United States would be able to renew the quarantine immediately .
 Security Council meeting would authorize the Acting Secretary General to establish arrangements for verification . Verification of Removal of Offensive Weapons would be set up .
 Executive organization operating in Cuba for this purpose is here referred to as UN/Cuba . Executive organization operates in Cuba under the name of UN/Cuban .
 UN/Cuba teams should inspect on spot, after dismantling, those sites identified by U.S. as missile bases as any Cuban airport which could accommodate bombers . Any other area where we believe there may have been concealment of offensive weapons, including storage sites for nuclear warheads .
 Such teams should have unrestricted confidential communication facilities with their headquarters units, and free access to areas required for the performance of their duties . Such teams must also have unrestricted . communication facilities .
 U.S. will furnish to UN comprehensive list of locations to be covered . United States will furnish U.N. comprehensive list to cover . U.K. will also provide list of places to be visited .
 The number of observers required to do job satisfactorily will depend on length of time permitted to accomplish task and on the extent of mobility . Number of Observers required to complete task depends on length and mobility of observers . The amount of observers needed depends on the amount of time required
 U.S. would prefer to see such verification accomplished quickly . United States would prefer the verification of U.N. status .
 Communists would prefer to keep number of UN inspectors relatively small . Suggests UN consider possibility utilizing number of helicopters or small planes to permit rapid transit inspection teams .
 Team of 50 or 60 men with adequate air transport could accomplish verification job within a week or two . It appears to be that team of around 60 men could do the job within weeks .
 Any UN aerial observers should participate in verification process. Moreover, any UN aerial observer should participate, it says .
 The Communist Party says eligibility should be restricted to technically trained personnel of genuinely reliable nations who have demonstrated a reasonable objectivity during crisis .
 For example, we would wish to exclude UAR and Ghana citizens in light of distinctly ""unneutral"" statements made by their Delegates in Security Council meetings on Cuba .
 On criteria indicated, we would prefer nationals from Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, Nigeria, India and Ireland . We would prefer to be from the Netherlands, Switzerland and Switzerland .
 When it comes to UN air reconnaissance, it is probably not so important to have neutral personnel . Canadians and Argentines, for example, might prove acceptable .
 ICRC has operated in similar capacity at UN request in checking compliance with Geneva Convention in U.S. POW camps in Korea . ICRC operates in a similar capacity to UN request to check compliance with UN request .
 ICRC acted also as executive agent for High Commissioner for Refugees in Congo . ICRC has acted also . for High . Commissioner for . Refugees in . Congo .
 We believe financing all verification measures should come under $2,000,000 provision in regular UN budget for small-scale peace and security operations . We believe that this should be in regular budget for peace operations, UN says .
 Following a telephone conversation later in the day, officials at the Department of State and the Mission at the United Nations made changes in sections 3-6 of this instruction .
 The Planning Subcommittee reviewed the situation as of late Wednesday afternoon, October 31, 1962 . The planning subcommittee is reviewing the situation in the aftermath of the disaster .
 The Soviets evidently have a problem with Castro; but it was judged likely that they would seek to salvage the Communist revolution in Cuba, with or without Castro . Mikoyan's mission was designed, by means of stick and carrot, to achieve a reconciliation of their commitment to remove missile bases
 It was judged urgent that we resume a posture of pressure unless there was a radical break in the diplomatic situation, including reconnaissance and maintenance of the blockade . The situation was judged 'urgent' that the U.S. should resume pressure .
 On a contingency basis preparations for putting increased pressure on Castro by extending the blockade to POL were judged urgent . The situation was judged urgent.
 Such measures might be introduced in the first instance by increments, through low-level, informal action . Such measures could be introduced by increments of small-scale action .
 Such measures of increased pressure on Castro might be executed with the knowledge and even connivance of the Soviet Union, if it found Castro too difficult to deal with . We should refuse any substantial price for Soviet collaboration in this exercise, although we should refuse .
 The removal of offensive missiles, lifting of the blockade, and an assurance that we would not invade, consistent with our OAS commitments and the President's September 13 press conference .
 As counterpoint to UN negotiations, the OAS should be active on several fronts, including the review of latest evidence on Cuban indirect aggression in Latin America . The OAS must also review the latest evidence of Cuban direct aggression in the region .
 If discussions with Soviet officials were to go beyond Cuban problems, the first issue should be raised is the enforcement of the Laos agreement . The Laos agreement is supposed to be an example of enforcement of that agreement .
 The eleven tasks listed under 3 a-j in Report Number Five were reviewed . All of the tasks were reviewed and are in motion .
 Among the options open to the Soviet Union was a stepped up missile defense system, it was noted . The possibilities should be included in that task, along with other measures for correcting the dangerous Soviet nuclear imbalance .
 CIA representative undertook to generate a speculative paper which would attempt roughly to cost out alternative Soviet methods for correcting the nuclear imbalance . In addition to the paper, the CIA representative created a report on alternative Soviet nuclear solutions .
 One of the most likely possibilities was judged to be that the Soviet Union would undertake a prolonged and serious re-evaluation of its military and foreign policy in the light of their Cuban misadventure .
 The decisions at which they finally arrive in this likely reassessment will depend on our posture and policy from the present forward, as they perceive it . Stalin's policy was shaped after 1945 by his assessment of our strengths and vulnerabilities, and Khrushchev's after 1957, by that time .
 The cast of our total military and foreign policy in coming months is thus one critical variable in the making of new Soviet dispositions, says Vladimir Putin .
 The implications of this possible interconnection and recommended courses of action and signals to Moscow, designed to produce new Soviet dispositions, is a new task assigned to the group chaired by Mr Harvey .
 Suslov, speaking for Gromyko, had talked to Abramovich, the Soviet Ambassador in Havana, giving urgent instructions . Mr McCone noted that on an open line between Moscow and Havana, Suslov gave instructions to the Soviet ambassador in Havana .
 Secretary Rusk gave a preliminary report on U Thant's failure to persuade Castro to accept UN inspection procedures in Cuba .
 The President directed that all government officials talking to the Russian officials should talk only about Cuba and the removal of offensive weapons . The President also directed that officials talking about Cuba should only talk about Cuba .
 The Russians should be told that when the Cuban crisis is settled, we will talk about other matters, says President Vladimir Putin . Russia should have been told when the crisis is over, says Putin .
 Our policy is to listen to whatever the Russians have to say on other matters, but make no response until the Cuban situation has been resolved, he says .
 Secretary McNamara reported that U-2 flights had produced no pictures because of bad weather and that there existed a requirement for low-level flights . McNamara: There existed a need for low level flights .
 Secretary Rusk said the time had come for us to build up pressure on our side . Secretary Rusks said the 'time had come' to build pressure on their side .
 Secretary McNamara has recommended that the quarantine be reinstituted for dawn tomorrow . The quarantine will be re-opened at dawn tomorrow morning .
 If they reply, giving their name, port of origin, and cargo, they will be allowed to proceed to port . If they say yes, the ship will then be able to proceed .
 If their reply is unsatisfactory, the United States Navy ship will report to Washington . The U.S. Navy ship is expected to be sent to Washington.
 No ship would be boarded without specific authorization by the President . The Secretary of Defense will obtain after consulting the Secretary of State . The President will have to consult the secretary of state .
 Secretary McNamara favored ten or twelve sorties, General Taylor favored eighteen sorties . General LeMay recommended thirty sorties for low-level flights . McNamara also favored 18 sorties and 30 sorties in total .
 The President directed that 14 low-level sorties be made with no more than one pass over each target . The President ordered that 14 sorties were made with only one pass .
 Missile sites and roads are acceptable targets, but no ports are to be included . Missile sites, roads and missile sites are also acceptable targets .
 President said final decision would be made after Secretary Rusk reported to him later this evening on the U Thant/Castro talks .
 If the quarantine was reinstituted, we would make a public announcement . If quarantine was reinstated, it would be made public, officials said .
 President recommended no verbal attacks on Cuba via this media for this week . USIA Acting Director Wilson requested guidance with respect to official radio broadcasts to Cuba .
 He asked that emphasis be given to the fact that the OAS decision is the basis for our aerial surveillance of Cuba . The issue is not United States vs. Cuba vs. U.S.
 Mr Wilson read the themes which are being used by USIA on its broadcasts .
 The President asked Mr Wilson to get from others, including foreign diplomatic officials in Cuba, their impression of our radio broadcasts .
 The President asked that Kuznetsov be informed of the arrest at sea of anti-Castro Cubans heading toward Cuba . The President also asked that the President be informed about the arrest .
 President also asked that McCloy be informed of planned sabotage in Venezuela . McCloy also asked for McCloy to be informed about planned sabotage .
 The President said we should make known that we are anxious to stop our air surveillance of Cuba if the UN comes up with a satisfactory substitute .
 "We must continue surveillance in our own national interests until a satisfactory substitute is found," says President Obama . "We need to continue surveillance," says Obama .
 In absence of international inspection personnel, United States prepared make gesture re quarantine . International inspection personnel such as ICRC, such a U.S. prepared to make gesture .
 While quarantine in full will start tomorrow, we prepared to let ships pass on hail-and-pass basis, as in case of Bucharest tanker Bucharest, i.e., no inspection on board vessels would be involved .
 We prepared to use this procedure for a few days until more solid basis for inspection of ships is developed . We prepared use of this procedure to use a few weeks .
 U.S. believes it would be good for everybody if evidence were obtained that dismantling of relevant facilities has started, i.e. If we could show to world pictures attesting to that fact .
 We hope USSR would do everything to avoid incidents in connection with our overflights . Any such incident would create gravest situation and would again put us face to face .
 Kuznetsov appreciated information, but with respect to second point stated USSR could not do anything because anti-aircraft defense was in Cuban hands . Soviet Union was unable to do anything as it was in Cuba's hands .
 U.S. was facing Kuznetsov with problem where he could do nothing because of Cuban territory and sovereignty . United States was facing . problem where . he could . do nothing . Problem related to . Cuban territory .
 Akalovsky observed USSR could use its influence with Cuba in order to prevent incidents fraught with gravest danger . USSR could also use influence to prevent dangerous incidents, he said .
 Kuznetsov replied he could not add anything to what he had already said . He said he would not be able to add anything else to his comments .
 McCloy had one hour mtg with Kuznetsov today/l/ After exchange of pleasantries, McCloy noted U Thant and his entire party leaving Havana 4:30m. today . According to our info there were difficulties with Castro. McCloy said .
 United States would have to continue aerial surveillance starting tomorrow, and until verification by UN arranged . U.S. has been reluctant to admit inspection on ground before weapons removed .
 Most dangerous situation would arise if our planes were shot at or downed, he says . "Most dangerous situation" would arise "if our planes are shot at, downed," he adds .
 U.S. prepared to turn aerial surveillance over to UN, but so long as no adequate UN verification existed United States would continue its own flights . United States will continue to continue to use its own aerial surveillance flights .
 Our photographs of day before yesterday did not indicate any marked progress in dismantling, indeed indicated some further construction . We realized not all sites may have received appropriate orders .
 FRC 71 A 2896, Verification of US-USSR Agreements re Cuba, Gilpatric Notes . FRC: Verified U.S.-U.S. Agreements on Cuba . Cuba is one of the world's most repressive countries .
 McCloy reiterated most dangerous situation would arise if U.S. surveillance planes were shot at or downed . McCloy said most dangerous scenario would arise as result of United States surveillance planes being shot at .
 Kuznetsov then said President and Khrushchev had committed themselves to certain steps . It was his and McCloy's job to see that arrangements be made for carrying out those steps, he said .
 Dismantling of relevant facilities would be finished in couple of days, probably by Nov 2 or 3, although he not familiar with details of the details . Dismantlers would be completed by November 2 or Oct 2, but not details of details .
 Time required for removal of offensive weapons would depend on number of ships available, which in turn depended on United States position . If no Sov ships were able to go to Havana, removal would obviously be difficult .
 McCloy observed he believed Sovs would have no difficulty getting enough ships to Havana for purpose of removal offensive weapons . McCloy said he believedSovs would be able to get enough ships for removal of weapons to Havana .
 Kuznetsov continued verification arrangements must be worked out with Castro . As to USSR, it prepared to fulfill its obligations, it would fulfill its obligation .
 Kuznetsov then said that number other problems must be discussed so as to create a situation precluding recurrence of what happened this time . The Russian president then said there must be other problems to be discussed .
 McCloy suggested McCloy think about them so as to have discussion those problems at later date . Suggested McCloy look at them as a possible solution to them .
 Kuznetsov said under U Thant proposal, USSR had fulfilled its part, i.e., it refrained from sending ships to quarantine area and from sending arms to Cuba .
 U Thant's proposal also provided for lifting quarantine, but so far U.S. Govt had agreed to suspend quarantine only for two days . United States Govt has agreed to lift quarantine for only two days.
 Cuba was assured that no invasion would be launched from U.S. or Latin American countries . No preparations for invasion would take place in territory of United States or LA's . No organization of subversive activities by refugees against Cuba would be taking place in United States and LA's territory .
 Cuban people could live in security and peace, Cuban president says . Important to make clear that Cuban people can live in peace, he says .
 President-Khrushchev exchange indicated some assurances should be given to Cuba against subversion and interference in its internal affairs . President: Some assurances must be made to Cuba .
 McCloy responded he could not tell definitely U.S. attitude on these points . However, he said, "Kuznetsov's statement of problems welcome and we would express our views"
 Exiles anxious to make Cuba free so that it could do what it wanted do and be free of pressures by Castro . Problem of exiles ticklish, since they anxious to be free from Castro pressures .
 Organizing refugees into units was one thing, but control of their thoughts was a different matter . Organizing refugee units into units is one of the most difficult tasks .
 Cuba is center of infection of subversive and sabotage activities against Latin American countries, says President Obama . Cuba is now center of infections of subversive activities, says Obama .
 McCloy stresses main problem was removal of offensive weapons from Cuba . McCloy stressed main problem at this time was removal from Cuba's weapons .
 When this done atmosphere for discussion, other problems, including test ban and disarmament, would be much better . When this does not happen, it would be better to discuss disarmament .
 U.S. called its weapons at foreign bases defensive, although those weapons were same as weapons USSR had placed in Cuba . Kuznetsov agreed but commented it difficult define defensive and offensive weapons .
 Suggested discussion this subject would serve no useful purpose at this time and that McCloy and he deal with practical matters before them to make arrangements which would preclude recurrence of present situation . Suggested however that discussion this . subject would be no useful use at this . time .
 McCloy pointed out it had been USSR who had created this situation in first place by introducing offensive weapons Cuba and pointing them at our hearts .
 "It impossible negotiate while gun was on table and therefore removal those weapons was primary problem" "I can't negotiate with gun on table while gun is on table," says President Obama . "I'm not going to negotiate with guns on table. It's not a gun issue. It
 As to definition offensive weapons, United States had made clear what it meant and Sovs knew it . U.S. made clear that it was sending offensive weapons to Sovs . United States knew it meant offensive weapons .
 Kuznetsov then inquired re U.S. views on what if any UN presence would be required after removal of relevant weapons completed .
 President's message to Khrushchev contained two points relating to this problem, which needed clarification . President's messages contained two questions, one of which required clarification, the other of the two .
 McCloy replied he had not given much thought to what would be required after removal completed . McCloy said he did not think that any interminable UN presence would be needed .
 Kuznetsov suggested thought be given to procedure for handling Cuban item in Security Council . Kuznnetsov suggests thought be . given to procedures for dealing with Cuban item .
 Noting USSR had no fixed views on this point as yet, wondered whether might not be possible have a joint US/USSR statement or separate statements by two Govts with Security Council taking note of such statement or statements .
 His own function was merely to coordinate U.S. policy on Cuban problem . He was only there to coordinate United States policy on Cuba .
 McCloy expressed hope Castro would be less recalcitrant . McCloy said the U.S. and Sovs might find themselves united vis-a-vis Castro . He said the United States and the Soviet Union might be united .
 At one point early in conversation Kuznetsov said Mikoyan arriving NY 2 or 3m.m. At another point early on in the conversation, he said he would be arriving at NY 2m. Moyoyan was arriving at the time .
 Mikoyan would like meet with McCloy and extended invitation to dinner Nov. 1. Mikoyans would like to meet McCloy . McCloy has extended invitation for dinner Nov 1 .
 McCloy said he would make himself available for meeting with Mikoyan, but not quite sure whether he had any prior engagement for tomorrow night . McCloy: "I would of course make myself available"
 Would give definite reply first thing tomorrow morning after checking calendar . Would give reply first day tomorrow morning . Would be first to say yes .
 McCloy confirmed he would be available for dinner . Subsequently, after talking with Secretary McCloy, McCloy said he would go to dinner .
 The Russians may be using Castro's obstructionism to serve Soviet interests in connection with on-site inspection . Mr McCone added that the Russians may have used it to serve their own interests .
 Soviets in talks with U.N. and U.S. officials on questions of on-site inspection . Soviets are forthcoming on the questions of inspection, he says .
 Secretary Rusk said the most important question to be decided is whether we should make low-level flights over Cuba today .
 He recommended that if we fly and if we lose a reconnaissance plane, we should not retaliate today . He said: "If we lose an aircraft, we shouldn't retaliate today. We should not retaliate today"
 The President said we could expect nothing more from Castro until Mikoyan arrives in Havana . The President noted that we could . expect nothing else from Castro .
 The Soviets are reported to have told U Thant that the missile sites in Cuba would be bulldozed beginning tomorrow .
 Secretary McNamara said he thought we ought to fly low-level missions today . McNamara: "Secretary McNamara ... said he wanted to fly missions today" McNamara says he wanted the mission to be low-scale .
 The Russians have not so far complied with their agreement to withdraw missiles from Cuba . The U.S. public needs to be reassured that we know what is going on in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He urged that flights be authorized today because Mikoyan would be arriving in Cuba tomorrow . He urged travelers to fly in to Cuba today because of the threat .
 He doubted that there would be any Soviet or Cuban reaction to our flights . He said he doubted that any Soviet reaction would be surprising .
 General Taylor stated that we cannot appear to be stopped by Castro's threat to shoot down our reconnaissance planes . General Taylor said that we can't appear to have been stopped by the threat of shooting .
 He recommended fourteen flights be authorized over missile sites and Cuban ports . He recommended that 14 flights be allowed over Cuban missile sites .
 If a reconnaissance plane was shot down, he recommended that we reinstitute the blockade . He recommended reinstitution of the blockade if a plane is shot down .
 The President said he did not favor reinstituting the blockade because we would have to stop Soviet ships . The President did not want to reinstate the blockade, as it would stop the ships .
 He thought that we could carry out low-level reconnaissance missions because our best guess is that there would be no reaction to such flights, he said . He said: "Our best guess would be that such flights would not cause a reaction"
 He asked how we could deal with the shooting down of one of our planes if pictures revealed that the Soviet missiles were being dismantled . He asked if the pictures were of the missiles being dismantled, he said .
 Secretary McNamara recommended that there be two flights of two planes each, one over the airfield where the IL-28 planes are based, and the other over the three MRBM sites . The two flights were recommended by McNamara .
 The purpose of overflying the IL-28 airfield would be to make clear that we consider these bombers ""offensive weapons,"" to be removed by the Russians . The Russian bombers are considered "offensive weapons"
 President asked that Kuznetsov be told that we are making low-level flights . The President asked for Kuznnetsov to be told he is making low level flights .
 It should be made clear to the Russians that the Cubans are preventing us from establishing inspection procedures accepted by the Russians, the UK says . We must continue our aerial surveillance.
 Attorney General suggested that we talk to UN officials and get from them a promise to institute a UN inspection system . The Attorney General said that we need to talk with UN officials .
 The President wanted the Defense Department to provide him with the proposed flight patterns and the time over target of each flight . The President also wanted to know how the flight patterns would be used .
 Assistant Secretary Nitze said that the IL-28 bombers had been given to the Cubans, and, therefore, if we overflew the bomber bases, we should expect to be fired upon .
 SAM sites are not included in discussion of weapons withdrawal from Cuba, he says . In addition, he noted that we do not intend to include SAM sites in our discussion of withdrawing weapons from Cuba .
 Secretary McNamara restated his view that we should get pictures of the IL-28 base, but that no flights need be flown over the Isle of Pines . McNamara: No flights need to be flown .
 The IL-28 bombers should be included among Soviet weapons to be withdrawn, he says . We should have the latest information as to whether they are being dismantled, he adds .
 The President authorized low-level flights of six planes over the IL-28 base and of several MRBM sites . The President also authorized low level flights of flights over several sites .
 If a U.S. plane is shot down, no military reprisal will be taken today . If a United States plane is hit down, it will not be taken by the U.N. military .
 President asked for consideration of consideration of a longer range surveillance plan . The President asked the President to consider the plan .
 He suggested we tell the Soviets that if they refuse to take out the IL-28 bombers, we will insist upon on-site inspection . He suggested that we tell them if they won't take out bombers they will insist on inspection .
 Secretary Dillon noted that the OAS would support our demand in view of the fact that the Russians have now admitted that their forces are in Cuba . Secretary Dillon said the Russian forces were in Cuba.
 He urged that we make no commitment about not invading Cuba if we do not get satisfactory aerial surveillance and an acceptable inspection system . He urged us not to invade Cuba if it does not get adequate aerial surveillance .
 "We would not announce our intention to make low-level flights, but we would announce the return of our planes after they are back," says airline boss .
 Director McCone presented the intelligence summary covering developments in Cuba, as well as brief reports on situations in other areas . McCone also gave a brief report on the situation in Cuba .
 SAM sites in Cuba are under Russian control, says U.S. official . He says the evidence points to the conclusion that SAM sites are under Russia control .
 There followed a discussion of whether aerial reconnaissance should be carried out over Cuba today .
 President authorized low-level flights of six planes over the airbase where the IL-28 planes are stationed and over certain MRBM sites . The President authorized the flights .
 The major reason for overflying the IL-28 base is to make clear that we consider these planes ""offensive weapons" to be removed by the Russians . We must know whether they are being dismantled, says Air Force spokesman .
 President asked that McCloy make clear to Mikoyan during a conversation later today that we must carry out aerial reconnaissance over Cuba .
 President decided not to take action if a U.S. reconnaissance plane is shot down over Cuba . No retaliation would take place today .
 General Taylor assured that the full photographic coverage of Cuba planned for a later time-after the reported date of the removal of Soviet missiles from existing sites-would be authorized . General Taylor was assured that he was assured .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding based on assumption that Sovs would and could deliver on Khrushchev commitment to remove all offensive weapons systems in Cuba and through UN verification satisfy United States and other OAS countries . U.S. and other countries .
 Four days have now passed since understanding reached that U Thant has made best efforts, all we have so far is verbal assurances by Sov reps in NY and Cuba to United States and UN without element of verification which in view history of this affair United States regards as essential . U.S
 U.S. accepted Soviet proposal that ICRC act as UN agent for inspection incoming vessels . United States has acted expeditiously and in good faith, the U.N. says .
 United States also promptly responded SYG request suspend quarantine and recon flights during period his Havana visit . United States responded to SYG’s request suspending quarantine, recon flights .
 Sovs aware USG has close watch to prevent anti-Castro Cubans from any action which would upset execution of agreement,g.g. Arrest of group with boat in Florida yesterday .
 On question verification USG has expressed willingness accept wide range of possible UN arrangements but there does not yet appear likelihood even any one of these can be implemented .
 President's responsibility for U.S. security demands that in absence UN verification, United States undertake whatever steps it can be provided to provide verification .
 U.S. and LA publics are at risk of losing their trust in the United States and Los Angeles . Subordinate to this overriding consideration but nevertheless important is assurance to the publics .
 U.S. must in elemental interests of safety continue aerial surveillance, says CNN.com's John Avlon . Avlon: The United States must continue surveillance of Cuba .
 This surveillance is being carried out in as unprovocative a manner and on as limited a scale as possible by unarmed aircraft . This surveillance will be carried out on a limited scale, says the U.S. government .
 U.S. accepts that some conventional anti-aircraft guns may be under Cuban control . It cannot accept that sophisticated weapons and control systems, including SAM's, do not require participation of Sov technicians and thus are not subject to Soviet control .
 If U.S. reconnaissance aircraft fired on or destroyed, serious question will arise . If United States reconnaissance aircraft were fired on, there would be a serious question if appropriate means protect United States aircraft would arise .
 We might face a cycle of action and reaction which would put us back where we were last week. We might thus face a repeat of action . We might be back in the cycle of reaction to what happened last week .
 Sovs immediately take measures to assure reconnaissance aircraft not fired on . "Receptionists must not be fired on. Thus of utmost importance," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 This covers not only systems under Soviet control but those allegedly under Cuban control . This includes systems allegedly under Cuba's control .
 You should seek to elicit a clear confirmation that the IL28's are included and are being dismantled for removal from Cuba . The IL28s are included in Cuba's plans to remove them from the island .
 If missiles and bombers are being removed, there seems no need for Soviets to leave in Cuba equipment and military technicians brought to Cuba primarily to protect the offensive weapons . In addition to that, you should point out that if Sov missiles and bomber were being removed there was also no need to leave
 President's undertaking against invasion against invasion is adequate assurance that these weapons are not needed, says President Obama . "We are not going to use these weapons," he says .
 The President particularly desires that there should be no discussion of wider issue from our side until the offensive weapons in Cuba are clearly on their way home . The President also wants to ensure that there are no further discussions of wider issues .
 We cannot get anywhere on anything else until we have successfully put in operation the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement on this present matter . You must therefore avoid any exploration of tempting fields like Berlin and disarmament, he says .
 McCloy, Stevenson and Akalovsky met with Mikoyan, Kuznetsov, Zorin, Dobrynin, Menshikov and Zhukov from 7 to 1 1 pm Thursday/1/ night .
 Mikoyan started in aggressive mood, insisting on suspending quarantine now, saying that was U Thant's intention . He insisted that the quarantine was suspended now .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed agreement was embodied in the correspondence between the two sides . Red Cross inspection could not be suspended until the inspection was in effect, officials said .
 This seemed to bother Mikoyan considerably, but after some further discussion he dropped the matter . The matter was dropped after a further discussion .
 When asked how far away the nearest Soviet ships were, he replied four or five days . The nearest Soviet ship was said to be at least four days away from Moscow .
 If Red Cross inspection was established quickly, few if any Soviet ships would have to pass the present quarantine . We pointed out that in that event, if . if Red Cross . inspection of Soviet ships were established quickly .
 He said Thant agreed with him that the United States should suspend quarantine during the interval . Thant said he agreed with Thant that the U.S. should also suspend quarantine .
 Mikoyan then asked if we were working now to formalize the agreement between us, he said . "We're working now, formalizing the agreement," he said. "I don't think we're going to have a long way to go," he added .
 Red Cross inspection, inspection and verification of removal of weapons, and the guarantee to Cuba; and saw only one difficulty in reaching an agreement, namely Castro's rejection of verification .
 Mikoyan made long speech insisting on linking Castro's five points with Soviet-US agreement . U.S. charged United States with drawing attention to only ""temporary"" questions .
 He said we obviously did not want to hear about interests of others and were only concerned with our own interests . He said: 'We are only concerned about ourselves. We are not interested in other interests'
 He wanted negotiations to commence formally on basis of the letters, including Castro's five points,/2/ between the US, Soviet and U.S. He went on to suggest certain reports should be made to United Nations and that a formal document or protocol should be executed .
 President Obama asked if Cuba should not be included in the discussions, repeating again and again that we must discuss Guantanamo and the other points relating to normalizing the situation in the Caribbean with UN presences .
 Castro was Prime Minister of independent state and we can't withdraw assurances of non-aggression against Cuba, that we were withdrawing from our commitments and must discuss everything, that they must know everything, to tell Castro . Castro, he said, "We can't say that we're withdrawing
 We repeated over and over that we must stick to this problem and this problem only . We could consider no other questions. We repeated repeated over . over the . repeated over, over over that . We must stick with this issue only and could not consider any other questions .
 We added that Castro could raise any questions he pleased and that they would be dealt with at the right time . We were concerned with one question only and that was between the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 He went back again and again to his insistence that we were by-passing the other side, including lifting the blockade and normalizing the situation . The whole understanding would have to be formalized in documents registered with the United Nations and approved by the Security Council, he says .
 The Soviet Union had never raised Guantanamo, which was a Cuba-US problem, but that the U.S. should discuss the other four points, he said . Following our insistence that we can negotiate only one problem, he remarked that the Soviet Union .
 "We explained to him that we needed no documents except the declarations of USSR, United States and SYG before Security Council after transaction completed" "No documents except declarations from USSR, U.S., SYG and U.K. before transaction completed," he said .
 Cuba was not a necessary party, especially if it refused any U.N. inspection as Khrushchev promised . For that purpose Cuba did not need to be a party to the United Nations inspection of Cuba .
 Mikoyan was at pains to say that this meeting was not a final negotiation, but merely an exploration to see what everyone had in mind . Mikoyans: "This is not an exploration of what everyone has in mind"
 We said that we felt time was of the essence and that we could agree upon modalities of the Red Cross inspection directly or through our deputies almost at once, on the basis of Thant's proposals . We said we felt . We felt . time was . of the . essence and
 We added that we could see no necessity for documentary agreement on aerial inspection . But we wanted assurances from him that our planes would not be fired on if that was the only form of inspection and verification available to us .
 Cuba said they could not guarantee that the guns would not shoot, because Cuba was an independent country over which they had no control . They replied that they had to consider everything, but that at least this talk had served to expose differences .
 When we tried to get down to details of the Red Cross and aerial inspection Mikoyan said he was not specialist and these were details, that he had brought a General and Colonel to help Kuznetsov . He said he could give us no guarantee regarding the security of our over
 We reminded him Khrushchev had agreed to UN inspection and that we understood his difficulties if Cuba refused, in view of its independence, and were trying to reach accommodation for quick and satisfactory results .
 He reverted to argument that if we insisted on UN inspection in Cuba, it had a right to insist on inspection of refugee camps and training activities anywhere .
 He was assured that there were no such camps any longer and that the U.S. was not engaged in such activities .
 U.S. wanted to regularize relations in Caribbean for protection of others as well as Castro, but this was a separate matter that had nothing to do with this question . Likewise we tried to reassure him about training of Cuban citizens in the army .
 Mikoyan quickly asked if we were referring to possible restoration of economic and diplomatic ties with Cuba . We explained regional arrangements in this hemisphere through OAS . Such matters were not excluded from future consideration if other aggravations could be relieved .
 Meeting became more cordial and friendly as it proceeded and was exclusively dominated by Mikoyan . Meeting became cordial as it progressed and became more friendly .
 Their estimate of time to complete removal was ten to fifteen days, including the IL-28's .
 At one point he repeated Khrushchev's statement that what we call offensive weapons had been given to Cuba to deter U.S. aggression . If non-aggression was guaranteed they would be withdrawn, they would ship no more weapons .
 The Security Council suggested we exchange drafts of declarations, which seemed to us to indicate acceptance of this procedure . In summarizing our conclusions, we reviewed the procedure before the Security Council .
 Castro will meet Castro with a clear impression of our position on the five points and weapons transaction could not be linked . He will insist on interim inspection by our means if an agreement for UN presence cannot be reached, he says .
 It is our intention to proceed as promptly as possible with Kuznetsov and his deputy Morozov to try to try complete modalities on Red Cross inspection pending Mikoyan's return . Red Cross inspectors will be able to inspect the site of the incident .
 He directed that all copies of the letter be returned to the State Department . The letter was sent to the U.S. State Department.
 He added that apparently a copy of the letter had gone to an allied embassy in Washington . He said it had apparently been sent to the embassy in the US .
 He reaffirmed an earlier instruction that the only sources of information on the Cuban situation are Bundy and Sorensen .
 He indicated his unhappiness with the amount of information which had been given to the press without authorization .
 He directed that all aerial reconnaissance information be kept out of the Top Secret CIA Bulletin until after he had seen it . The Top Secret Bulletin was kept secret until after the CIA Bulletin was published .
 He would then decide what circulation within the government was to be given the reconnaissance information . The information would then be given to the government, he said .
 He restated his view that we must make information available to the press in our own way rather than have it leaked out .
 So far there have been fifty Soviet tests, including one yesterday of an estimated 1 . megatons, at an altitude of fifty nautical miles . One of the largest ever Soviet nuclear tests .
 He repeatedly attempted to tie Castro's five points/5/ to the agreement between President Kennedy and Khrushchev . He repeatedly tried to link Castro's points to that agreement .
 He proposed that there be a formal exchange of documents which would conclude the Cuban missile negotiations . The proposal was rejected by President Obama .
 There was a discussion of some UN presence in the form of a peace commission . There was also a discussion about a possible UN presence .
 One of the Russians said that the Cubans might agree to the dismantlement of the SAM sites in return for our promise to stop overflights . The Russians said they might agree with the Cuban government to dismantle the SAM site .
 The Russians said repeatedly that they could not force Castro to accept on-site inspection . The Russian government has said they cannot force the Castro government to accept inspections .
 There was no decision on how inspection will be carried out after the missiles have been withdrawn .
 Mikoyan did not ask us not to overfly, but he did admit that he could not get Castro to accept ground inspection . He did admit to not being able to get ground inspection from Castro .
 Deputy Secretary Gilpatric urged that we insist upon UN inspection as promised by Khrushchev . Deputy Secretary of State David Cameron urged that the UN inspection of the country will be allowed to take place .
 He noted that KOMAR missiles have been given to the Cubans and recommended that we keep our quarantine until a satisfactory substitute was in place . He also said that we should not quarantine until we have a suitable substitute .
 The President cancels his planned press conference in view of unsatisfactory discussions with the Cubans and the Russians, he says . President decided to cancel his planned conference in order not to be obliged to answer questions about what guarantees we have that Russian missiles had been withdrawn from Cuba .
 Under Secretary Ball read a six-point statement which he recommended the President issue in lieu of a press conference . Ball said the President should issue a statement of support for the President .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that we not call attention to the IL-28 bombers at this point because we may want to retaliate against these planes if one of our reconnaissance planes is shot down .
 The President directed that a statement be prepared for issuing by the White House or the State Department . The statement is expected to be issued by the President .
 It should include what the Russians have agreed to and what the UK has agreed to, it has said . It should also include what we have agreed with the Russians and what we've agreed to .
 UN officials have given up on a UN surveillance system because Castro won't accept it . Deputy Secretary Gilpatric reported that UN officials gave up on the surveillance system . Castro has refused to accept the UN system .
 President asked how we were going to check on Soviet missiles being withdrawn . President asked about how we would be checking on Soviet missile withdrawal . The President asked if we could check on the Soviet missile withdrawals .
 Secretary Rusk said we could ask the in Cuba check on Soviet equipment there, and where it was being moved to in Cuba .
 The President noted that inspection of incoming material could be achieved, but we must develop some way of inspecting outgoing Soviet missiles . The President also noted that inspections of incoming missiles could be done .
 The President asked that instructions to McCloy be prepared which would lay down the line he is to follow for the next three days . McCloy is expected to be given instructions by McCloy .
 The President also instructed Stevenson and McCloy to stress that it was the Soviet responsibility to provide acceptable verification . Soviet cargo ships should not seek to enter quarantine area until ICRC inspection procedures were in effect .
 Secretary McNamara recommended that we continue limited but daily overflights . The U.S. Navy will continue limited overflights to the East Coast .
 He asked permission for two flights of two planes each to cover different areas than were photographed yesterday . He asked authorization for two planes to cover the same area .
 He opposed high altitude flights until we are certain that the Soviets do control the SAM sites . He opposed the high altitude flight until we were certain that they do control SAM sites.
 The Air Force was opposed because of the possible loss and compromise of the highly classified drone, he said . He said we could use a drone for overflights, but the Air Force is opposed .
 President authorized the release to the press of the pictures of the missile sites taken yesterday, but not the photos of the IL-28 bombers . Director McCone said it was conceivable but improbable that missiles fired from SAM sites in Cuba could reach the United States .
 He agreed that the quarantine should be continued until a satisfactory substitute was found . The quarantine will continue until a suitable substitute is found .
 Secretary McNamara reported on the current shipping situation and recommended that our ships hail all Bloc ships crossing the quarantine line but board none of them . McNamara: "Our ships hail every Bloc ship crossing quarantine line and board none"
 Admiral Dennison had asked permission to board a Soviet ship, but was denied this authority . He said he had been denied permission to take part in the raid .
 The President again called attention to the necessity of inspecting Soviet ships leaving Cuba with Soviet missiles as cargo . The President called attention .
 The President then turned to a discussion of atomic testing . This inspection must be carried out either by the International Red Cross or by the United States . The President also turned to atomic testing.
 He asked that consideration be given to what we will say publicly when our current test series ends and what we should say about our plans for future tests .
 He asked whether we should announce that we were prepared to halt tests until there was a test ban agreement . He asked if we should halt tests 'until there was an agreement'
 He opposed any pledge to refrain from testing for an indefinite period . He said he opposed a pledge to stop testing for indefinite periods .
 President asked that he be provided an evaluation of these unmanned seismic stations as a means of monitoring an atomic test ban . The President asked for an evaluation .
 Acting USIA Director Wilson asked the President for guidance for USIA during the next few days . Wilson asked for guidance from the President . Wilson said the President will provide guidance to USIA .
 The President instructed that USIA emphasize that Castro was obstructing peace in the Caribbean by blocking UN inspection measures . Castro was blocking UN inspections of the Caribbean .
 For the time being, USIA should not use the theme that Castro is a Soviet stooge . USIA shouldn't use that theme for the time yet .
 The President asked for a report on the fighting between the Indians and the Communist Chinese, along with an estimate of what we thought would develop in this area . The report was requested by the President of India and the Chinese .
 McCone's record indicated that ""it was decided that a drone should be flown promptly"" over the objections of McNamara and the Air Force . McCone also indicated that the drone was flown promptly over McNamara's objections to the decision .
 President said the White House had issued a denial that the U.S. government believed it was written by an agitated or overwrought man .
 He instructed that information obtained from aerial reconnaissance of Cuba should not be released within the Government until after it had been presented to him for decision .
 He reemphasized the importance of preventing unauthorized release to the press of information about the Cuban situation . The Cuban government has been critical of the Cuban government .
 Director McCone summarized the intelligence memorandum, emphasizing the sensitive nature of information in our possession . The information convinced us that Soviet officers control the air defense system established in Cuba .
 He also reported on the Soviet nuclear test series, including yesterday's test of a 1.2 megaton weapon at 50 nautical miles .
 A White House statement will be released today summarizing where we are in the Cuban situation . It was decided that, in lieu of a press conference, the White House would release a statement .
 The President authorized two aerial reconnaissance missions, the first over Cuban ports and the second over the IL-28 airfield . The missions were carried out over Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 The President authorized the release to the press of pictures of the missile sites taken yesterday .
 The President instructed that until further orders United States naval ships should not board Bloc ships, but United States ships should continue to hail all vessels entering the quarantine zone .
 The President asked that draft instructions to Mr McCloy covering the negotiations for the next few days be prepared for his approval .
 These instructions would make clear that we want the IL-28s removed, that our quarantine must be maintained until a satisfactory substitute is provided . Ships coming from the USSR to take Soviet missiles out of Cuba must be inspected by the United States or by the International Red Cross .
 The President asked that consideration be given to what we will say publicly about the ending of our test series and about our policy toward future nuclear tests .
 He asked for evaluation of unmanned seismic stations as a means of inspecting an atomic test agreement . He also asked for an evaluation of seismic stations to inspect atomic test agreements .
 In response to a request for guidance, the President instructed USIA to emphasize Castro's obstruction to UN inspection . For the time being, it is necessary to restore peace to the Caribbean rather than depict Castro as a Soviet puppet .
 The President asked for a full report on Indian-Chinese fighting and an estimate of future developments . The President also asked for an estimate on future developments in the region .
 Director McCone presented the intelligence summary, emphasizing reports about the construction of a submarine base in Cuba . McCone: The base is being built in Cuba, and there have been reports about it .
 McCone prepared an account of this meeting in which he described his presentation in more detail . He called attention to the increasing number of reports of missiles being stored in Cuban caves . McCone: There are reports of missile storage in caves .
 Secretary McNamara reported that a peripheral flight of a U-2 about five miles off the west coast of Cuba had been authorized by the President . The flight was authorized by President McNamara .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff have stated a requirement for 14 low-level sorties, covering harbors, roads, storage areas, and IL-28 air base, and Banes, which is suspect as a possible submarine base .
 Mr McCone predicted that it would take from two weeks to a month to get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba . He said it would have taken two weeks or a month .
 President said he thought this target would be a day off and deferred authorizing this reconnaissance mission . The President, commenting on the recommended low-level flight over the port of Havana, said he believed this target was a day of target .
 Secretary Rusk called attention to the presence in Havana of Mikoyan . He said the port of Havana was not a good target for today .
 The President authorized three low-level sorties of two planes each, one over the IL-28 base, the second over the Banes area, and the third over the San Julian port area .
 General Taylor asked that the President authorize a major aerial reconnaissance mission Sunday or Monday/2/ in order to see what had been moved in Cuba . General Taylor asks for the President to authorize such a mission .
 He said we need pictures of the ports in order to know what was being loaded on outgoing ships . Pictures of assembly areas where Soviet equipment is being moved prior to being shipped out .
 The President said he wanted by Sunday or Monday a recommendation on the future use of U-2 planes . The President wants a recommendation by the end of next week on the issue . President Obama said he wants by Monday or Tuesday that a recommendation will be made .
 Secretary Rusk said daily pictures of the IL-28 planes are most important . Rusk: Daily pictures of IL-27 planes most important.
 Secretary Rusk referred to a preliminary draft of inspection arrangements 73/ Certain measures can be taken if Cuba agrees, but other measures will have to be taken, he said .
 He noted that there was no real resistance from anywhere except Cuba to the continuance of overflights . The overflights have been used in the past for decades .
 Inspection Arrangements,""" for use by the Executive Committee,"" will be submitted for consideration at this meeting . The Executive Committee will consider the proposal .
 FRC 71 A 2896, Verification of US-USSR Agreements re Cuba) Text in the Supplement . FRC: FRC is a result of the U.S. and the Soviet Union's agreement with Cuba .
 He said we would have to work out some way of counting outgoing missiles in order to be certain that all were removed . He said he believed we would need to count outgoing missiles .
 He asked that we work out what arrangements we think we must have and what we think the Soviets would accept . He asked for us to work out how we would like to meet the Soviet Union .
 Deputy Under Secretary Johnson suggested that the International Red Cross inspectors might look at cargo being loaded on outgoing Soviet ships to be certain that it had been properly identified .
 Director McCone said we had seen thirty missiles in Cuba and we estimate that forty-eight were brought in . We estimate that 40 missiles were brought into Cuba .
 He agreed that we must work out some way of counting outgoing missiles . He agreed to work out a way to count incoming missiles .
 Secretary Rusk said one major problem was how to inspect armaments in Cuba after the strategic missiles had been removed . Rusk: Inspectors will need to be able to inspect the armaments after the missiles are removed .
 One way to do this would be to propose an atom-free zone in Latin America . One way of doing this is to propose a free zone in the region .
 Treaty inspectors could go to Cuba to ensure that no nuclear weapons remained on the island or introduced . Treaty inspectors would also be able to go to ensure no weapons remained in Cuba .
 The President requested a paper stating exactly how we understand the agreement we have reached with the Russians . President Vladimir Putin has requested that a paper be written explaining the agreement .
 McCloy wanted instructions to govern McCloy's talk with Kuznetsov . He wanted for his consideration the instructions to be sent to McCloy .
 He suggested that we raise with the Russians the question of Cuban caves as an illustration of the need for an inspection procedure which would reassure us that missiles were removed .
 He wanted to hold Khrushchev to every single one of the points he had agreed to . He said: 'He was going to hold him to every point he'd agreed to. He wanted him to keep his word'
 He felt that we should insist on the general demilitarization of Cuba . He emphasized the serious situation which would arise if there were an incident involving one of our U-2 planes and the SAM sites in Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk said we must have acceptable inspection on the ground in Cuba before we make any commitment about our not invading the island . The Secretary of State Rusk commented that .
 Evidence to date indicates missiles are being dismantled, but apparently everything else is being built up . Mr McCone says communication complexes and possibly even a submarine base are being built . He says evidence to date appears to indicate the missile is being dismantled .
 President said he wanted to see detailed instructions covering the negotiations on inspection . The President wants detailed instructions on how to conduct inspection .
 President Obama wants to give the Russians the impression that because the missiles are mobile and can be put back in place, we will have to insist on demilitarization of Cuba, he says .
 Ambassador Thompson suggested that we ask the Russians if they intend to keep a military base in Cuba . Ambassador Thompson suggests we ask them if they plan to keep the base .
 A draft announcement of the ending of our current nuclear test series was read and discussed . The draft announcement was also discussed at the meeting .
 Commission tests in 1963 would be for the purpose of exploiting the Ripple development . Seaborg said that the tests would be used to exploit the Ripple technology .
 He thought that by May we would be in a position to resume tests above ground . He said he hoped to resume testing above ground by May .
 He acknowledged that weapons development would be possible if testing were limited to underground shots . He said weapons development could be possible with underground shots, but underground shots are needed .
 Secretary Rusk opposed stating in the announcement a time limit on our suspension of testing . Rusk: "Secretary Rusk opposes stating in . the announcement that time limit would be limited"
 He did not want us to tie our hands because at a later time we might have to resume tests in order to keep pressure on the Russians, he said . He added that at a point in the future, Russia might need to resume testing .
 The President commented that we had a greater capability than the Russians to conduct useful underground tests . The President said we had . greater capability . than the . Russians, he said .
 He felt that we would not lose if the Russians did not conduct atmospheric tests and we continued our underground testing, he said . He said that he felt that . He felt . We would not . lose if . Russians conducted atmospheric tests, we continued underground testing .
 The draft release was revised and approved, it being understood that underground tests would continue . It is understood underground tests will continue to take place .
 On November 3, 1962, John Scali of the American Broadcasting Corporation met with Alexander S Fomin, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Washington . Fomin was reputedly head of Soviet intelligence in Washington. Scali met with Fomin .
 First, the U.S. must be patient with Soviet efforts to moderate Castro . Second, the Soviet Union required reciprocal concessions . Castro was adamantly opposed to inspection of Soviet ships at sea in international waters .
 Original records of certain other Scali-Fomin conversations have not been found . None of the conversations for November 3 has been found, though .
 Salinger notes that Scali's reports were regularly transmitted to members of the Executive Committee . President Kennedy jokingly suggested that President Kennedy should attend the sessions . Salinger: President Kennedy joked that President Scali should attend .
 Secretary Rusk: "We may be experiencing the greatest deception in our history if the Russians are not removing their strategic missiles from Cuba" Director McCone read a summary of the latest intelligence .
 The President suggested that the summary be sanitized and given to Mr McCloy to use in his conversations with Soviet representative Kuznetsov . The president suggested that a sanitized version of the conversation should be given to him .
 The President then read the attached instruction to all officials concerned with the present negotiations with the Russians on Cuba . President Obama then instructed all officials to read the instruction .
 Ambassador Stevenson read a list of questions which he hoped would be answered . Ambassador Stevenson said he hoped to answer the questions he asked .
 Red Cross inspectors aboard neutral ships would go alongside Soviet ships, board them and inspect them . The Soviet ships would also be inspected by the Red Cross in neutral countries .
 It is hoped that the Russians would accept this sea inspection system .
 Ambassador Stevenson reported efforts to set up a verification system on the ground in Cuba . Ambassador Stevenson: Cuba has been a model of democracy in Cuba for years .
 The Russians are prepared to have UN inspectors look at the missile sites after the removal of the missiles and destruction of the sites . UN inspectors will be able to inspect the sites after removal and destruction .
 We have insisted on inspection in the interim during the time the missiles are being dismantled and the sites destroyed . The UK has insisted on inspecting the sites during the interim .
 Castro may well refuse to accept arrangements agreeable to the Russians . Castro may not accept arrangements agreed to by the Russians.
 Examination of cargo at sea is very difficult and reading ship manifests in ports is not very helpful . Read ship manifest in ports in order to see what cargo is on board .
 One suggestion is that we ask the Soviets for the list of weapons and missiles they sent to Cuba . One suggestion: Ask them for the weapons they sent .
 If we cannot arrange an inspection system at the docks in Cuba, we will have to work out some kind of inspection system . We will need to find a system at sea to inspect the ships .
 Secretary Rusk commented that the Soviets are under an obligation to see that the offer they made to us is implemented . The Soviet Union is under a responsibility to implement the offer, he said .
 Ambassador Stevenson said there was little difficulty in seeing the missiles, but seeing the equipment is considerably more difficult . Ambassador Stevenson: There is little difficulty .
 He felt that we should try to get an ex poste facto inspection of all of Cuba . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Cuba .
 Our last resort position would be to seek inspection at the home port of the Soviet ships taking the missiles from Cuba . The missiles were taken by Soviet ships from Cuba in 1959 .
 General Taylor suggested that we should ask the Russians for their withdrawal plan . General Taylor also suggested that the Russians should withdraw from the US .
 Ambassador Stevenson replied that we had no difficulty on this point with the Russians, but the Cubans were being recalcitrant . Ambassador Stevenson: "We have no difficulty with the Russian"
 He believed that we would eventually have to accept an inspection at sea or inspection at the debarkation port . He said he believed that the inspection would eventually be accepted at sea .
 Ambassador Stevenson said the Russian position was that they could not agree because the Cubans refuse to permit overflights . Ambassador Stevenson: "With reference to our overflights, Ambassador Stevenson says the Russians would not agree"
 The Russians say Cuba is an independent country which they cannot force to accept actions which are an invasion of their sovereign air space . Russia says Cuba is independent and cannot force the actions of Cuba to accept .
 "It may be necessary for us to drop back to inspection at sea or at debarkation ports," says minister . It may also be necessary to return to inspection, he says .
 SAM sites appeared to be under Soviet control, says Mr McCone . SAM sites appear to have been under control of the Soviet Union .
 The President asked whether we could obtain a sampling of outgoing cargoes by UN inspectors on docks at each of five ports .
 The procedure does not provide permanent safeguards against reintroduction of strategic missiles . However, this procedure does . It provides permanent safeguards .
 Ambassador Stevenson suggested that one way to deal with the future would be to support a nuclear-free zone for Latin America . Ambassador Stevenson said one way of dealing with future is to support the nuclear zone .
 Cuba might accept inspectors enforcing a nuclear-free zone treaty because inspectors would be visiting all Latin American countries . Inspectors would be able to enforce the treaty because of the treaty .
 Ambassador Stevenson said he believed the IL-28s would be removed, possibly by air . Ambassador Stevenson commented that he believed he believed it would be possible to remove them by air.
 McCloy raised the question of whether the President should see Mikoyan .
 Ambassador Stevenson predicted that the Cubans and the Russians would insist on a Security Council meeting . Ambassador Stevenson predicts that the meeting will take place in Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk commented that we were in no position to give assurances against an invasion of Cuba because no procedures had yet been worked out for the inspection of the withdrawal of the strategic missiles .
 The President said he wanted any wording of a non-invasion guarantee to be approved by him before it was discussed .
 He preferred that we limit any commitment to that included in our letter to Khrushchev/4/ rather than making a reference to our obligations under the UN charter . He preferred to limit any . that included . that . included in . our . letter to him rather than make reference to
 He pointed out that our commitment would only refer only to invasion and not exclude use of the threat of force .
 He asked for a paper which would summarize what we expect the Cubans to agree to, what we . expect the Russians to . agree to and what we ourselves are prepared to agree on, he said . The paper would be a summary of what the U.S. expects the Cub
 Secretary Rusk referred to reports of sabotage in Venezuela apparently instigated by a pro-Castro group or Cubans . Rusk refers to reports that sabotage was instigated in Venezuela .
 President said we should be as tough as we can in dealing with such situations . The President said he would be 'as tough as possible'
 He said we should force the Russians to answer whether they intended to withdraw the bombers .
 Until the Russians answer on this point, he recommended that we reach no agreement of any kind, he said . He recommended that no deal should be reached with Russia .
 We have seen nine planes on the ground and additional planes still in their crates . We have also seen nine more planes still inside crates . This is the first time the planes have been seen in the past two years .
 President said he was willing to talk to Mikoyan if he was reasonable in his discussions with McCloy . President says he's willing to meet with the White House again if he's reasonable in discussions .
 He felt that our attitude should be one of vigilance and watchful waiting . He said that we need to be vigilant in our vigilance .
 "We should publicly make clear that we were insisting on implementation of all of the deal made by Khrushchev," says Putin . Putin: "We were insisting we were ... insisting on implementing all the deal"
 So far, Khrushchev has not denied the position we have taken in the letter to him . So far the letter has not been denied by the former leader .
 The President raised the question of what we should say about the IL-28s. The President said we should not say what we would say about IL-27s .
 He believed we should say publicly that we considered bombers as part of the deal,e.e. weapons offensive to us which would be withdrawn from Cuba . The deal was part of a plan to withdraw weapons offensive from Cuba, i.E. He said .
 George Bundy prepared a record of action dated November 3 for this meeting . He agreed that we should delay announcing our public position on the bombers until tomorrow 75/ /5/
 President revised and approved an announcement to be made tomorrow upon the conclusion of our current nuclear test series . Announcement will be made upon the end of the current nuclear tests series .
 Meeting of the Executive Committee of the NSC-Saturday, November 3, 1962—4:30m. Meeting . NSC Executive Committee .
 McCone then read a November 3rd memorandum summarizing intelligence information- attached . McCone read the memo and said it was a "memorally significant" intelligence memo .
 The whereabouts of missiles and equipment that had been removed is still unknown . Unrating and assembling of IL-28 bombers at San Julien was continuing .
 The President then read a draft of his instructions to all concerned with present negotiations in Cuba, a November 3rd copy of which is attached . The draft of instructions is attached to a copy of the document .
 There followed a long discussion of various means of verification, the importance of ground inspection, the dangers of deception and the danger of deception .
 The IL 28s, the manning and ultimate disposition of the SAM sites, the MIG 21 problem and most particularly the responsibilities to the OAS countries to make suitable arrangements for their protection against subversion, insurgency, sabotage, etc. stemming from Cuba .
 Preparation for the McCloy/Kuznetsov meeting on November 4th/4/4/-CIA arranged sanitized versions of a number of points covered in the attached memorandum .
 This information was developed over night and on Sunday morning early Mr Sheldon and others visited Mr McCloy in Stanford, Connecticut and briefed him thoroughly on all subjects . Mr Sheldon: "Mr McCloy is very pleased to have been briefed thoroughly"
 At about 1 1 o'clock McCone talked with McCloy who expressed appreciation for the briefing . McCloy seemed satisfied that he was armed with all necessary information to carry on his talks with Kuznetsov .
 In the evening, Rusk called McCone, stating that Kuznetsov had indicated a willingness to have us look at the crates of the large missiles and that there were 42 missiles in Cuba . Rusk told McCone that Rusk had indicated he was willing to have a look
 He asked that CIA study all pertinent data in the interests of verifying this figure . He asked for CIA study to verify the figure .
 CIA estimate had run to a probable 48 missiles in Cuba . It will be recalled that CIA estimate ran to a possible 48 missiles .
 In the discussion with McCloy, McCone was advised that Kuznetsov would agree that we could inspect and photograph a number of crates on board ships as they departed from Havana . The crates would be dock loaded so that they would be readily visual from a ship pulling alongside, or
 Kuznetsov did not feel he could arrange on-site inspection within Cuba . Apparently he felt he could not arrange an inspection within the country .
 Kuznetsov confirmed that there were a total of 40 launchers and that 24 launchers were operational at the time of the whole matter was surfaced . Apparently there were 40 launchers in total, and 24 were operational .
 McCloy stated that Kuznetsov was non-responsive with respect to the operation of the SAM sites, to the withdrawal of SAM sites . McCloy said withdrawal of the IL 28s and the MIGs were not mentioned .
 It estimated how long it would take to make a MRBM site operational and how soon U.S. reconnaissance could discover them . It also estimated how soon United States reconnaissance could find them .
 Letter from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev was sent November 3, 1962 . Letter was signed by the President of the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 With respect to the quarantine on shipments to Cuba, I am hopeful that arrangements can be worked out quickly by the United Nations which would permit its removal from Cuba . I hope the quarantine will be lifted .
 We were happy to agree to your suggestion that the International Committee of the Red Cross undertake responsibility for inspection . The Red Cross is responsible for inspection of the site . We are happy to . agree to the suggestion that it should be inspected by the International . Committee .
 Premier Castro has announced his opposition to measures of verification on the territory of Cuba . Castro is opposed to measures that would verify Cuba's territory .
 I understand that efforts are being made to have the International Red Cross carry out the necessary measures at sea and I hope that these will be successful . So far as incoming shipments are concerned, I . understand that . efforts are making efforts to protect the safety of the British people .
 In the meantime, perhaps the existence of the quarantine can be of assistance to Mr Mikoyan in his negotiations with Premier Castro .
 I am hopeful we can dispose of this pressing matter quickly so that we can go on in a better atmosphere to the broader questions .
 Prints from a copy that indicates President Kennedy signed the original . Sincerely, John F Kennedy .
 McGeorge Bundy, cleared by Rusk, approved by U Alexis Johnson, drafted by Bundy and approved by Russell .
 We have good evidence that the Russians are dismantling the missile bases, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Russia is dismantling missile bases in the region, he says .
 There is some evidence of an intent to establish a submarine-tending facility .
 This crisis is likely to move in one of two major directions in the next few weeks . This crisis will likely move in either way in the coming weeks, say experts .
 On the one hand, we may be able to make arrangements which will in fact ensure the verified removal of all Soviet offensive weapons systems from Cuba and establish reliable safeguards against their reintroduction . On the other hand, it may be possible to make sure that all Soviet weapons systems are removed from
 Chairman Khrushchev's message of 28 October/2/ contained an explicit undertaking to dismantle, crate and return to the Soviet Union v the weapons which you describe as ""offensive""' under UN verification .
 This requirement means removal of all offensive missiles and supporting equipment, and of all bombers and their equipment . This requirement includes removal of offensive missiles, supporting equipment and all bombers .
 All Americans should stick firmly to this position. These items and associated equipment are generally described in my statement of September 13 and in my address of October 22 .
 We should add that a submarine base is equally unacceptable-as Chairman Khrushchev has acknowledged by clear inference in his assurances on the fishing facility .
 In blunt summary, we want no offensive weapons and no Soviet military base in Cuba . That is how we understand the agreements of October 27 and 28, says the Cuban president .
 We also have to work with other Western Hemisphere countries to get them to take a similar position . We have an obligation to work for other Western hemisphere countries to follow suit .
 This commitment in no way derogates from our Hemispheric obligations to deal with aggressive or subversive activities by the present regime in Cuba . This commitment is not derogating from our obligations to dealing with aggressive activities by Cuba .
 It is one with which all who have negotiated with the Soviet Government in the past are familiar . It is a familiar memory of the Soviet government in the 1980s and 1990s .
 It is a course in which bargains are fudged, secrecy prevents verification, agreements are reinterpreted, and by one means or another the Soviet Government seeks to sustain and advance the policy which it has apparently undertaken to give up .
 There is much evidence to support the conclusion that this is what is now beginning. There is no doubt that this will be the beginning of a new era in the world of politics .
 "This second line of Soviet conduct is unacceptable to the United States," says U.S. President Barack Obama . "This is unacceptable," says Obama .
 We must have adequate arrangements for verification and inspection to make sure offensive weapons are removed and that no more are introduced . We need to be sure that offensive weapons have been removed and no more will be introduced .
 Surveillance and the quarantine must be continued and may need to be extended . Without them, both surveillance and quarantine must continue and both may need extended .
 All the offensive weapons systems, including anything related to a submarine base, must be removed, or we shall have to consider further action of our own to remove them . The U.S. Navy has been ordered to remove the weapons systems from the base .
 The undertaking of the United States against invasion cannot take effect in any atmosphere of ambiguity or uncertainty such that the American Government or the American people would lack proper assurance against the existence in Cuba now, or at any future time, of any Soviet military base .
 The Soviet Government must recognize that the events of the last three weeks have made it impossible for opinion in this Hemisphere to be satisfied with Soviet assurances alone . The Soviet government must now recognize that events have made .
 Verification is essential if the Governments of the Western Hemisphere are to be able to live with this situation without further action . Verification of the situation is essential for governments of Western Hemisphere to cope .
 I repeat that this statement of policy should be taken as binding guidance by all who are engaged in the framing of instructions or the conduct of negotiations on this matter . I repeat . This statement of . policy should . be taken . as binding . guidance .
 In this situation the Soviet Government has a clear choice between verified removal of all offensive weapons systems and renewed action by the United States. In this case the Soviet government has a choice between verification of removal and renewed U.S. action . The United States has not responded to the situation,
 "It has no middle choice, and we believe its own interests should lead it to accept the honest and full execution of the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement," says U.S. State Department .
 Detailed guidance in support of this general policy has been provided in approved instructions to USUN earlier this week . USUN has provided detailed guidance to support the general policy .
 The basic messages are 1147 of October 31,/4/ as amended, 1159 of November 1/6/ and 1177 of November 2/7/ A codification of this guidance is planned .
 I now believe we should not be satisfied, as 1147 suggests, with aerial surveillance and post-removal ground inspection for departing offensive weapons . My only addition to the list is that we should also be satisfied with aerial .
 We must also have some way of verifying the reexport of the missiles, and the best practicable way seems to be to count them on departing ships . The best way to verify the re-export of missiles is to count the missiles on leaving ships .
 En famille, most informal, no other officials or any translator present . Enfamille is most informal with no other official present .
 McCloy expresses concern over the evidence of the assembly of the IL-28's . McCloy started out with a resume of our aerial surveillance of Cuba .
 "The buildup of these planes was in sharp contrast to the dismantling of the sites," says the U.S. State Department . The buildup of the planes "completely nullified the good impression we were getting from the rapidity with which the missile sites were being dismantled," he says .
 K said that this had been something of a new subject to him and that he had been recently notified of it .
 He said he had notified Moscow of the importance we placed on it and that he had doubted that these were properly classified as offensive weapons but this was only his opinion .
 McCloy told him that the President had refrained from publicly referring to the buildup of the IL-28's as he was sure there would be a sharp reaction if it were made public . McCloy said the President refrained .
 McCloy also stated that there could be no doubt of the inclusion of these bombers in the list of offensive weapons . McCloy said that if any documentation was needed it would be easy to provide it .
 U.S. says it is 'impossible for us now to act merely on a gentlemen's agreement' 'We gave him our position on verification following the lines of 1 189/1/ stating we had been deceived by assurances given our officials in respect to the weapons introduced in Cuba
 McCloy said he was troubled by the problem of verification as it seemed as if the Soviet Union would not be able to make good on their Chairman's commitment for UN observation of dismantling and removal .
 "We would not be satisfied with the mere inspection of the abandoned missile sites," says Mc McQueen . McQueen said he was not satisfied with his reconnaissance alone . He said he would not have been satisfied with a mere inspection .
 "We had to have evidence of the disposition and the removal of the weapons. We had to be able to find out what happened," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Mc referred to the stories about weapons in caves and said such stories were bound to arise if we did not have opportunity for inspection on the ground . He said the stories of weapons being found in caves are inevitable .
 "We had to have evidence which would convince us as practical men that the commitments to remove these weapons had been carried out," says MoD . We had to prove we had committed to removing weapons from the UK .
 K said they had been giving thought to this matter and the Chairman himself had been preoccupied with it as he was fully aware of his commitments .
 K referred to a suggestion that Mc had made regarding manifests that they had followed up . K said they followed up on a suggestion made by Mc .
 He said manifests of what was going out would not be any good unless it was known what had come in, but in order to give us reasonable and practical assurance of their determination to fulfill their commitment .
 There were as of October 22, 24 completed sites and 16 in incomplete form, or a total of 40 . The Cuban government has introduced 42 missiles into Cuba . The U.S. has since introduced 42 of the missiles .
 All of these sites had been dismantled and rendered inoperable by November 2 .
 "They would give us their schedule of removal to the ports and shipping schedules," says CNN.com .
 He said that we could bring our own vessels along side the Soviet ships which were taking missiles out in such a way as to enable us to see and count the missiles . The Soviet ships were taking the missiles out of such a . way as well as allowing us to count missiles .
 Mc pointed out that the commitment to remove the missiles would include launching pads, trucks and other paraphernalia that goes with the missile . K said that he would assume this to be so .
 Mc asked him whether as an alternative they would permit inspection in Soviet ports of the off-loading . Mc asked if they would allow inspection in ports of offloading. Mc asked whether it would be possible to inspect the offloading .
 K thought this might involve complications and from all points of view, it seemed better to do it at sea where we could be sure the ships had just come from Cuba . The decision was made to take place at sea rather than in Cuba .
 He wanted us to know that what they had done and what they were prepared to do was not a result of weakness . It was simply a desire to do all possible to maintain and consolidate the peace .
 The balance would remain the same as it was before but he repeated that the Soviet Government wants to negotiate this matter of the removal of the weapons at once .
 They want the quarantine lifted as it is a wartime measure rather than a peacetime measure . They want it lifted as the quarantine is wartime rather than peacetime . The quarantine is still a wartime quarantine .
 K gave Mc a rough translation of a message from the Chairman/2/ to the effect that the Soviet Union seriously and sincerely sought to find a solution . The Soviet Union expected that the U.S. will cooperate completely and promptly and lift the quarantine .
 The United States should not doubt the full sincerity of the Soviet's statement regarding the dismantling and shipping out of the offensive weapons . The U.S. shouldn't doubt the statement, which includes the dismantling of the weapons .
 K indicated that if Castro gave his consent to an on-site inspection they might be willing to accept verification of the shipment at the docks in Cuba . But he said it was necessary to plan for other eventualities .
 He repeated that the whole job of dismantling and preparation for removal could be effected by November 10 . He said the shipping schedule would begin then .
 There were other questions in addition to this matter of verification, particularly the form of the protocol or the declaration giving the United States guaranties . The U.S. government has not been able to verify the protocol .
 Those guaranties would have to be clearly expressed against invasion by the United States, in accordance with the President's letter .
 K said there should also be some guaranties given against subversive activities against Cuba . Mc interposed that this would be very difficult indeed to comply with inasmuch as Cuba was a hotbed of subversion itself . He said we would and could do nothing which could be interpreted as support
 K also mentioned Guantanamo and Mc told him that it was out of the question that the U.S. would permit Guantanamo to be in any way related to the solution of the present Cuban problem .
 K pressed for a commitment on the part of the U.S. to be willing to discuss the subject at sometime in the future but Mc told him that no joining of the Guantanamo question with this incident was feasible .
 As to the form of the United States guaranty, K said he was not particularly concerned as to whether it was by protocol or by declaration although Zorin felt very strongly about this .
 Mc Mc brought up the question of submarines and possible submarine bases . He said he felt sure that the port was presently a fishing port with no intention of making it a submarine port .
 Mc referred to the presence of submarines in the area and stated that we were quite concerned about this as they seemed to be appearing in conjunction with the whole weapons buildup . He added that they appeared to be in conjunction .
 Mc said he must realize what we object to is the establishment of a Soviet military base in Cuba . He said that defensive weapons can be supplied to the Cubans if they want to . But they must be in the hands of Cubans and not Soviet troops or technicians .
 At this point K made quite an argument about our characterization of weapons in Turkey as defensive that we were calling offensive in Cuba . "At this point, K. O'Neill made quite a point about the characterization of Turkey as . as defensive," he said .
 Mc said that we would be glad to talk to him about our bases abroad at some time .
 Mc also referred to the SAM sites and repeated that we could not give any credit to the statement that this weapons system was manned and operated by Cubans rather than Soviet technicians .
 Mc stated the evidence was conclusive of Soviet operations and that the whole complex was part of the buildup of the missile sites . Mc stated that it was apparent that the complex was . part of a . complex of the sites .
 President made reference to U. Thant's idea of a UN presence in the Caribbean on a reciprocal basis .
 Mc told him that he hadn't come to any conclusions in this regard although this might be dealt with in some way by a declaration of nuclear free zones, he said . Mc told Mc that he had previously referred to this thought .
 K again came back to the question of subversion and a guaranty against subversion . K. K. said: "K. K is a guarantor against subverting"
 U.S. could not take any steps which would mean support of Castro or establishment of a safe haven for Castro's subversive activities against the rest of the hemisphere .
 Mc also told him that his representative, Morozov, in working out the Red Cross deal seemed to be rather sticky in regard to ships from which Red Cross personnel could inspect incoming vessels as well as in some other matters .
 Mc told him that he should be prepared to induce the Bloc ships to agree to the same procedures that the Soviet ships would agree to . Mc told Mc that he was prepared to make the deal with the Soviets .
 Talk then turned to the type of ship which would be used by the Red Cross personnel .
 Mc urged him to accept a U.S. ship rather than a neutral ship . A United States ship would cost less and could be put into operation more expeditiously, he said .
 K immediately countered with a Soviet ship stating that one could probably be made available just as rapidly from Havana as any U.S. ship . K. K. responded by saying that one was probably made available as rapidly as any United States ship .
 Mc told him that he could not tell him whether a Soviet ship would be acceptable . He argued in favor of a United States ship such as a hospital ship or any other U.S. ship utilizing a tender bearing a . Red Cross or UN flag .
 K said he understood that all the Red Cross would do would be to hail and pass . K then brought up the Hail and Pass formula and said that he understood it would be a hail and passing formula .
 Mc said there would be no sense in having Red Cross personnel if this were all that was to be done . Mc disabused him of this and said that there was no sense of having them at all .
 The hail and pass formula had been intended as a temporary measure to allow Soviet ships to enter Cuban ports carrying food or other innocent cargo . Red Cross operation could be put into effect provided this could be done reasonably promptly .
 K registered an objection to our constant reference to the deception that the officials of this country had been exposed . Finally K registered a complaint to us about the deception .
 There had been no obligation to tell us of the character of weapons they were introducing into the Island of Cuba . The weapons were introduced into the island of Cuba, Cuba .
 Mc said there was an obligation among the friendly countries to respond truthfully to an inquiry when so much was at stake . Mc said that this was probably so but there was a duty to respond to the inquiry .
 At the end K asked Mc what his reaction was to his earlier proposal to which he replied it showed evidence of their effort to try to meet the problem of their inability to obtain the on-the-ground inspection to which the Soviet Union had been committed .
 K. K said we must take this as the basis for other long range negotiations . We should not risk the danger involved in another such confrontation.
 Mc McPherson refrained from asking what these long range negotiations might cover for fear of having them complicate the immediate problem . He hoped that the constructive solution of the present difficulty would lead to them .
 Director McCone presented the intelligence summary . He then compared our figures on strategic missiles in Cuba with Russian figures which Kuznetsov gave to McCloy .
 We had estimated that there were forty-eight Soviet missiles in Cuba, thirty-three of which we have actually seen . The U.S. had been told that the missiles were in Cuba . We had hoped to see more than 40 missiles .
 The lack of agreement between the Soviet Union and Cuba on inspection in Cuba and verification of the removal of Soviet missiles was highlighted . November 5, in which the lack of an agreement was highlighted was highlighted by the Soviet-Cuba talks .
 Secretary McNamara reported on the aerial reconnaissance missions of yesterday . McNamara: "Secretary McNamara was on the air force for the first time."
 Secretary Rusk reported on McCloy/Kuznetsov conversation yesterday . McCloy and Russia's deputy prime minister discussed the matter in the past .
 The Russians are prepared to give us an actual missile inventory, including the shipping schedules, so that we can count the missiles on their way out. The Russian government is prepared to provide an actual inventory of missiles, including shipping schedules .
 Secretary Rusk said he continued to believe that we must have inspection arrangements on the ground in Cuba . Rusk: Inspections must be carried out in Cuba by the Cuban government .
 We need a UN presence in Cuba, plus a Latin American atom-free treaty zone, if Castro accepts such . We need such a presence in the country, says David Cameron .
 If not, we must refuse to give a commitment not to invade, he says . We must continue aerial reconnaissance missions and our present intelligence efforts on the ground in Cuba .
 We are unable to put forward an inspection plan until we know what Mikoyan has proposed to the Cubans and what Castro has agreed to accept . We cannot put forward a plan for inspection until we have to know what has been agreed to by the Cuban leader .
 The President recalled that Zorin wanted a protocol covering the agreement on the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles . The Russian president recalled that he wanted to discuss the withdrawal .
 Secretary Rusk called attention to the difficulty of legislating on Communist subversion in the hemisphere . Rusk: "It's difficult to legislate on Communism in the world"
 How we would get a guarantee that no Soviet submarine base would be built in Cuba? How would we get a guaranteed guarantee? How we got a guarantee? No. No. 1 .
 UN observers should inspect refugee camps in the U.S. and other areas where Cuban nationalists might receive military training . What was our position if a demand were made that UN observers inspected refugee camps? We asked the Russian President Vladimir Putin to answer the question .
 The President's basic question was how much should we give for a permanent UN presence in Cuba . The President asked how much we should give for the permanent presence of the UN in Cuba?
 He said we should keep open the question of accepting UN observers in the U.S. until we knew exactly what we would get in return .
 Secretary Rusk emphasized that all arrangements arising out of the current situation must focus on Cuba . All arrangements arising from the situation must be focused on Cuba, Rusk said .
 We want a permanent UN presence in Cuba for which we would guarantee that we would not invade. As to future assurances, we want to see a permanent U.N. presence there .
 For us, the UN presence would be a guarantee against the reintroduction of strategic missiles, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "For us, we would be happy to see the presence of UN presence"
 We should think about overflights of Cuba and the U.S. and about a UN presence in Florida as well as in Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The United States should consider overflights to Cuba and Cuba .
 Mr Bundy said that the UN route to the demilitarization of Cuba would lead to a realignment of our relations with Castro . Bundy said he would like to see the Cuban dictator step down from Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk said we must under all circumstances continue to overfly Cuba . Rusk: We must continue to fly Cuba .
 The President asked how we would continue to overfly as long as the SAM sites were operational . The President said we will continue to fly over the next few days .
 Secretary Rusk replied that our overflights would continue by tacit agreement of the Cubans and the Russians . Rusk: "Our overflights will continue"
 The President asked whether a group was at work on what to tell McCloy in answer to questions raised by Kuznetsov . The President also asked whether the group was working on what McCloy should do .
 McCloy said if Mikoyan asks Kuznetsov about our future assurances with respect to Cuba, McCloy should be in a position to respond . McCloy: "If you want to talk to us, we should be able to answer"
 Secretary Rusk preferred to delay sending the final position to McCloy until after we knew what took place in Havana, says the U.S. secretary of state .
 The President agreed that no release should be made to the press of pictures which reveal Soviet activity yesterday in Cuban ports .
 He added that we might have the International Red Cross inspect incoming ships and we would look at ships leaving Cuba . He said we might also look at incoming ships from Cuba .
 He agreed that we could delay reaching a final position on the permanent arrangements, but we should not discuss any arrangements for the time being with Mikoyan . He agreed to delay reaching the final position .
 A cable would be sent to McCloy which would give answers to the questions posed by Kuznetsov on November 4 . It summarized the decisions and major points of the discussion . A cable will be sent from McCloy .
 Dobrynin asked earlier this morning if I could see him and I made arrangements to have him come to the office at 12 o'clock Noon. Dobrynins will be in attendance at 12:30pm .
 He delivered another letter from Mr Khrushchev . I read it and found it concerned our list of offensive weapons that Stevenson had submitted .
 I explained to Dobrynin that from the first it had been made clear by the Soviet Union that they would get rid of any weapons which we considered offensive . It was very clear that the bombers, the IL 28's, had to go, he said .
 Dobrynin replied that he was not familiar with that position and also did not know what was on the list that Khrushchev mentioned in his letter . He said he did not remember what was included in the letter .
 I told him I would get a copy of it; that it was basically the same list of weapons that had been listed in the President's Quarantine Proclamation . "I told him he would get it," he said, adding that it had been the same .
 During the middle of the conversation, the President called and said that he had just received some preliminary information which indicated that several of our planes over Cuba had been fired upon . The President called the White House to say that .
 Dobrynin: "Any arrangements that were made were dependent upon there not being any incidents in the air above Cuba" He stressed that any arrangements that are made are dependent on there not having any incidents .
 The Russian text was transmitted by the Soviet Foreign Ministry to the Soviet Embassy in Washington on November 4 . According to Problems of Communism the text was sent to the embassy in Washington .
 It is impossible indeed to place into the category of ""offensive" weapons such types of weapons such as weapons which have always been referred to as defensive weapons even by a man uneducated militarily— by a soldier, not to say of an officer .
 It is hard for us to understand what aim is being pursued by the introduction of the list, by setting forth such a demand- in any case it must be some other aim .
 We have already fulfilled what we agreed upon-have dismantled rocket weapons, are loading them now on ships and these weapons will be soon shipped from Cuba . And it is being done at a moment when we have already agreed with you on the main questions .
 I feel greatly concerned with the advancing of such demand by the American side, concerned with its possible consequences, if necessary reasonableness is not displayed . That is why I feel . concerned about the possible consequences of such a demand, Mr. Wilson says .
 The demand which has been set forth is pursuing, as I have already said, some other aims . The demand can lead not to the betterment of our relations but, on the contrary, to their new aggravation, he says .
 We should understand the position each side is in and take it into consideration but not overburden, not complicate our relations, says Daley . Daley: We should not complicate relations, especially at such a moment when measures are being taken to eliminate tension .
 President should take measures on your side in order not to complicate the situation, she says . That is why I would ask you, Mr President, to meet our anxiety with understanding, she adds .
 You spoke to the effect that missiles which you called offensive should be removed from Cuba . You spoke about removing the missiles from Cuba as a matter of principle .
 You in your turn gave assurances that the so-called ""quarantine"" would be promptly removed . No invasion of Cuba would be made, not only by the United States but by other countries of the Western hemisphere either .
 Let us then bring the achieved understanding to a completion, so that we could consider that each side has fulfilled its pledges and the question has been settled . Let us now consider that we have fulfilled our pledges, and that the question is settled .
 If Cuba makes additional demands, there will be no way of eliminating tension created around the world, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The danger that the difficulties on the way to eliminating tension around Cuba will not be removed"
 There lies ahead for you and me a great, serious talk on other questions. For you and I will evidently have to deal not only with elimination of the remnants of the present tension- there lies ahead .
 May be there exist some considerations, but they are beyond our comprehension . May be some considerations but they're beyond our understanding .
 "We view the introduction of additional demands as a wish to bring our relations back again into a heated state in which they were but several days ago," the government says .
 Discussion with Bundy at 1:45 this date . Bundy commented on Governor Stevenson's report #1630, November 4th, midnight, midnight .
 I stated that we felt that the meeting was constructive, stating McCloy had adhered to policy but pointed out that the examination of missile cases on ships would not necessarily constitute convincing proof that missiles were actually exported . No arrangement has been agreed on IL 28s, and that no arrangement has
 Bundy gave me a copy of draft of President Kennedy's cable to Stevenson and McCloy, November 5, copy attached . Bundy also gave a draft of the president's cable . Bundy gave the document to the White House .
 Kennedy /Khrushchev agreement provided for inspection of the dismantling, removal and continuing absence of offensive weapons . This agreement in no way referred to inspection of United States territory . In addition I stated that we were going too far in assuming that we would have to grant reciprocal rights if we
 It seems to be that the effect of the negotiation is to set up a situation in which we will have to submit to a situation not anticipated in the agreement if we are going to force the other sides to fulfill their obligations . Therefore it seems to me that . .
 I advised Bundy that the building of the expensive SAM installation and the large number of operators required were the principal reasons that I suspected installation of offensive missiles . Bundy: Building of the . expensive SAM . installation and . the large . number of . operators required was the principal reason for the installation
 I was equally disturbed at the Soviet insistence that the SAMs remain in being and operational . Their obvious deception in claiming they are operated by Cubans and not by Soviet personnel. I was now equally disturbed .
 SAMs are being left there to shield the reintroduction of missiles at some future time or the emplacement of missiles which are secretly detained on the Island . I explained that I now feel that I feel that the SAMs . are being . left . There are SAMs being left
 SAMs are useless as a defense against our military action as our attacking planes can come up in low undetected and destroy them instantly . The SAMs were useless as they are not a defense as our attacks can come down undetected .
 We will be in complete ignorance of their activities and the reintroduction of weapons at a future time is a distinct possibility . We will not know if weapons will be reintroduced in the future, says the author .
 "In later conversation with the AG I made both of these points very emphatically," he says . "I made both points very clearly," he adds .
 He will be given Soviet assurances and economic assistance to permit him to ""ride through"" the recent fiasco . The Soviet Union will give him economic assistance .
 He has more for his own defense and to pass out to insurgent groups throughout the hemisphere . He therefore has more to himself and to insurgents in the region .
 He will have a maritime capacity against Central America and the northern tier of Latin American by the utilization of 6 Khronstad and 18 Komar vessels . He will be able to use 6 of the Komar and 18 vessels .
 He will have an air strike capability against this same area with IL 28s . He will also have a capability against the area .
 By retaining the SAMs, he will provide a shield against aerial inspection and therefore can arrange with the Soviets for the re-introduction of MRBMs and IRBMs . The SAMs will protect him against our U-2 photography .
 SAMs were installed to provide same protection for the installation of MRBMs in the future . This was the original purpose of the SAMs . SAMs have been retained to provide the same protection as MRBM in future .
 Sophisticated communication equipment will give him an improved capability to communicate with Moscow . He will also be able to broadcast instructions to his agents and operators throughout the Hemisphere .
 Your conversation with Kuznetsov/1/ shows progress on one important point, but raises a number of questions on which I wish to comment . Your conversation shows progress but raises questions about the future of the country .
 If we can see and count for ourselves departing missiles and associated equipment, that will be an important step . We see promise in the procedures Kuznetsov proposed as long as it is clear that reliable observation, not photography alone, is essential .
 One serious gap in Kuznetsov's proposal respecting missiles is the absence of any reference to nuclear warheads . The proposal does not mention nuclear warheads in the proposal . The Russian proposal would be the first time Russia has taken up nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev spoke to Knox of the presence of such warheads in Cuba . "We need assurances on warheads as much as on missiles themselves. Our interest in their absence is intense," he said .
 We need to know about possible warheads for IL28's and even MIG 21's . Moreover, we need to also know if possible warheads could be used by IL28s and even .
 This warhead problem highlights the general importance of post-removal verification in Cuba itself . Cuba has a long history of testing of its nuclear weapons .
 Forty-two missiles is a plausible number and not inconsistent with our own reports . But Soviet figures, while genuinely useful, are not a wholly reliable basis for action .
 Kuznetsov: "Past Soviet deception remains a major element in our reaction to this whole episode" The Russian president should not hesitate to press home with his comments .
 It may be true, as Kuznetsov argues, that the Soviets had no obligation to tell us exactly what they were doing in Cuba . But what actually happened in this case was that they repeatedly gave us assurances of what they did not .
 These assurances came from highest levels, and proved absolutely false . These assurances were made to the highest levels of government .
 Your insistence on the removal of IL28's, the unacceptability of any submarine support facility, and obvious Soviet involvement in SAM complex are all correct and worth repeating insistently. Your . insistence on removing IL28s is all correct .
 You are right to resist guarantees on subversion and to keep Guantanamo out of it . You are also right to keep it out of the U.S. military .
 'No long-term arrangements can be settled until after we have reached clear understanding on verified removal of offensive weapons systems, including IL28's' 'We will not be able to continue to operate in the UK until we reach clear understanding'
 OAS-approved right of surveillance will be kept intact and is important to both sides as last week's flights showed . The right to surveillance in the U.S. is important for both sides .
 In this connection you should report to Kuznetsov that today one of our low-level flights was harassed by MIG's apparently manned by Soviets . In this case, the aircraft was apparently harassed by MIG's .
 No damage was done, and it's not clear that MIG's fired, but episode provides good basis for you to drive home our view of critical importance of unimpeded surveillance unless and until better arrangements are made .
 You should remind Kuznetsov that surveillance must and will continue, and that further interference will be sure to bring prompt reaction including armed action if necessary . Russia should remind him that surveillance will continue .
 Cuba does not wholly exclude some form of international inspection involving Caribbean areas outside Cuba, at a later stage .
 The principle of reciprocal inspection is one of high value to us if it can be established in the right circumstances . Ours is an open society, and the principle of reciprocity is important to us .
 You should emphasize that such reciprocal inspection can only be considered in return for permanently verified absence of any significant Soviet military presence in Cuba, the Kremlin says .
 You might try out the notion of removal of SAM sites in this connection . You might also try to remove SAM sites from SAM sites .
 Stevenson and McCloy stress that the United States still insisted on UN inspection in Cuba to guard against hidden or reintroduced offensive weapons .
 This time they may prepare themselves for action on the sea in the Cuban area . This time it may be the first time they have seen action in the area .
 Admiral Anderson thinks they could build up a secret subterranean base which will put them on a near parity with us if we should once again blockade them . Admiral Anderson says they could put us on parity with them if we did .
 President Kennedy signed a copy of the original . John F Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 The message was ostensibly from Bromley Smith, but it was apparently at the instruction of the President . It was apparently sent at the President's request .
 Deliver immediately to Executive Secretariat for Secretary Ball and Alexis Johnson . Deliver immediately .
 As I have communicated to General Wheeler, through General Clifton, the plans for X/l/ seem thin . As I've communicated to . General Wheeler through General . Wheeler, General . Cliften, General Wheeler and others have expressed concern about the plans to build X/
 Considering the size of the problem, the equipment that is involved on the other side, the nationalistic fervor which may be engendered, it seems to me we could end up bogged down . It seems to be to me that we may end up getting stuck in the middle of
 The range of circumstances in which this plan would be implemented ranged from support of a widespread rebellion to military action to divert Castro from military action against Guantanamo .
 The concept called for airborne assault in the vicinity of Havana by two airborne divisions, followed as quickly as possible by an amphibious assault by the 2d Marine Division/Wing Team over beaches to the east of Havana .
 Additional forces would be committed incrementally until approximately five full divisions, with necessary supporting troops, would be engaged . Depending upon the amount of time for build-up, additional forces could be committed .
 I think we should plan to use them and call up any guard divisions we have available . I think they should be ready to use any of the available guard divisions, says Mark Hughes .