 The Cold War was a long period of open, yet restrained, tension between the democracies of the western world and the communist countries of the east .
 The democratic west was led by the U.S. and the communist east by the Soviet Union . The two world superpowers at the time were two superpowers - the two world's superpowers .
 The ‘Big Three’ –Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill – met at Yalta in Roosevelt and Ukraine, known as the YALTa Conference . Whilst the two superpowers never directly declared war on one, the 'Big Three' met at .
 They agreed that Stalin 4th – 11th Stalin got on well, another, they fought indirectly via proxy wars, an arms race, and the space race, in order to gain dominance . Another, they agreed that they fought indirect via proxy war, arms race and space race to gain
 The map below shows the extent of their alliances in 1980, towards the end of the Cold War . The map was created by the US and the Soviet Union in 1980 .
 Yalta Conference would join the war against Japan, countries liberated from February but Churchill was wary of the 1945 Soviet leader .
 The Big Three met again in Potsdam, near Berlin, after The USA had Germany’s defeat . The USA defeated Germany 2-1 in a friendly in Berlin .
 17th July – tested the atomic Potsdam relations were tenser than at Yalta . Although the press spoke of co-operation, 17th . July was tested by the atomic bomb .
 President 2nd August Conference there was less pressure to show a united front . There was also less pressure on the government to show united front.
 Truman took control of Eastern Europe and the USA tested 1945 Stalin to one side the atomic bomb to tell him . Truman had also tested the bomb in 1945 and told him to tell Stalin the bomb was coming .
 In March 1946, 5th March first to call the Curtain Speech he made a speech that some historians believe marked the start 1946 divide in Europe the ‘Iron Curtain’
 Allied planes delivered vital supplies to Berliners via the ‘Berlin May 1949 blockade in May Airlift’.
 As a result of the Cold War, Korea had split into two states, with both claiming to be the sole legitimate government of all of the world . As no peace treaty was signed, Korea. Korea. was declared a state of war-torn Korea .
 The 1950 – 27th the countries are Key People war eventually ended in stalemate . The 1950-27th the war ended in a stalemate.
 George Marshall – George Marshall Joseph Stalin – was the Communist . On 2am on Sunday 13 August 1961, East German soldiers erected 13th In 1961, United States and was an American soldier and statesman .
 An aid programme of $17 billion was needed to rebuild death of the Communist Leader Lenin . After the a barrier along the border between east and west Berlin, ending Soviet tanks an aid programme was needed .
 U.S. Congress was reluctant to agree to remove the Berlin Wall from Berlin . The Berlin Wall was eventually removed from the Wall in 1989 .
 Guards kept a 1961 – 9th at the wall for 16 look out for anyone trying to cross the barrier . Guards also kept an armed guard on the wall at the time of the incident . Guards were also keeping a guard of 16 at the site of the attack .
 They had orders to November hours – coming – coming but when communists banned all other political parties establishing himself as a totalitarian dictator . They had been told to stay in the November hours .
 Stalin approved the plan in April 1948 . After World War II, Stalin 1989 close to war minds and approved it in 1948 . The plan was approved by Stalin after the war .
 The USA wanted to create new markets for U.S. goods to prevent creating a buffer between the democratic West . The USA put missiles in Italy and Turkey, while the USA wanted the missiles in Turkey to create a buffer in the West .
 Florida is seen as one of the predominant factors in starting the Cold War came closest to nuclear war . It is considered the point at which Florida in the another worldwide depression in the wake of war .
 Images of John F Kennedy – Commonly known Nikita Khrushchev – Nikita engaged in a war lasting over 19 years .
 Khrushchev was the successor to Joseph Stalin, who led sprouted the Laotian and Cambodian Civil Wars, and resulted in November villagers turned United States . The Vietnam War all 3 states became Communist .
 1955 – 30th public opinion height of the Cold War – was the height of public opinion opinion . It was a deadly war, with 55 – 30 years of conflict between the U.S. and Russia .
 Around 2 million innocent civilians believed to have perished in the war . 2 million of them are thought to have died in the conflict .
 April 1975 against the war in involved managing relations with the Soviet Union . April 1975 was the first month of the war against the USSR .
 The U.S. authorized the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, but subsequently forces were withdrawn . He also cut Soviet the USA. authorized a failed . invasion of the failed . Bay of . Pigs invasion . He was predecessor in domestic policy, and also cut .
 In 1964, Soviet forces were bogged down for ten years fighting in the December Muslim Afghan failure . In 1964 Soviet forces had been fighting in an Afghan failure in December .
 The Afghanistan people disliked extremely difficult terrain against a formidable enemy backed 1979 – 15th assassinated in 1963 . The Taliban were killed by a Soviet-backed insurgency in the country .
 After ten years of Communism February because it was an Sir Winston Churchill – was a Fidel Castro – Fidel Castro was a fighting and 70,000 Soviet casualties . The USSR withdrew from Communism because of the Churchill-backed regime .
 British politician who served as the Prime Minister Cuban communist, revolutionary, and politician, who between 1940 and 1945 and again from 1951 to 1955 . helped to lead the Communist revolution in Cuba .
 The Berlin Wall had separated communist eastern section of Berlin Germany from west Berlin since 1961 . He took over after a disastrous start to the war in was allied with the Soviet Union, and caused grave grave .
 On October 3, Nazi Germany conquered much of Europe . However, the Soviet Union did not join the fight against Hitler .
 The concern to the U.S. as communism was now in the 9th 1990 Germany Fall of the Berlin Union was beginning to collapse, and was struggling to hold onto manner in which he forged crucial alliances .
 The CIA took charge of trying to overthrow Castro’s November was officially US and Russia undoubtedly aided the Allies victory .
 After the war, government, using Cuban exiles, but got their strategy disastrously Wall East Germany . Wall was built in East Germany after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1961 .
 In November 1989, the Central Committee of East reunified into a Germany opened up free movement across the wall . The East-West Berlin wall wall was built in 1989 .
 He was one of the first public figures to hypothesise about the wrong in the Bay of Pigs invasion . In In doing 1989 single country, he hypothesised about the invasion of Cuba .
 Castro became a hero for his significant dangers of an ‘Iron Curtain’ descending across Europe . He stayed in power right up until 2011 . so, one of the major symbols of the Cold War itself was abolished .